{"id": "49023", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49023", "title": "Propulsion", "text": "Means of creating force leading to movement\nPropulsion is the generation of force by any combination of pushing or pulling to modify the translational motion of an object, which is typically a rigid body (or an articulated rigid body) but may also concern a fluid. The term is derived from two Latin words: \"pro\", meaning\" before\" or \"forward\"; and \"pellere\", meaning \"to drive\". \nA propulsion system consists of a source of mechanical power, and a \"propulsor\" (means of converting this power into propulsive force). \nPlucking a guitar string to induce a vibratory translation is technically a form of propulsion of the guitar string; this is not commonly depicted in this vocabulary, even though human muscles are considered to propel the fingertips. The motion of an object moving through a gravitational field is affected by the field, and within some frames of reference physicists speak of the gravitational field generating a force upon the object, but for deep theoretic reasons, physicists now consider the curved path of an object moving freely through space-time as shaped by gravity as a natural movement of the object, unaffected by a propulsive force (in this view, the falling apple is considered to be unpropelled, while the observer of the apple standing on the ground is considered to be propelled by the reactive force of the Earth's surface). \nBiological propulsion systems use an animal's muscles as the power source, and limbs such as wings, fins or legs as the propulsors. A technological system uses an engine or motor as the power source (commonly called a powerplant), and wheels and axles, propellers, or a propulsive nozzle to generate the force. Components such as clutches or gearboxes may be needed to connect the motor to axles, wheels, or propellers. A technological/biological system may use human, or trained animal, muscular work to power a mechanical device.\nInfluencing rotational motion is also technically a form of propulsion, but in speech, an automotive mechanic might prefer to describe the hot gasses in an engine cylinder as propelling the piston (translational motion), which \"drives\" the crankshaft (rotational motion), the crankshaft then \"drives\" the wheels (rotational motion), and the wheels propel the car forward (translational motion). In common speech, propulsion is associated with spatial displacement more strongly than locally contained forms of motion, such as rotation or vibration. As another example, internal stresses in a rotating baseball cause the surface of the baseball to travel along a sinusoidal or helical trajectory, which would not happen in the absence of these interior forces; these forces meet the technical definition of propulsion from Newtonian mechanics, but are not commonly spoken of in this language. \nVehicular propulsion.\nAir propulsion.\nAn aircraft propulsion system generally consists of an aircraft engine and some means to generate thrust, such as a propeller or a propulsive nozzle.\nAn aircraft propulsion system must achieve two things. First, the thrust from the propulsion system must balance the drag of the airplane when the airplane is cruising. And second, the thrust from the propulsion system must exceed the drag of the airplane for the airplane to accelerate. The greater the difference between the thrust and the drag, called the excess thrust, the faster the airplane will accelerate.\nSome aircraft, like airliners and cargo planes, spend most of their life in a cruise condition. For these airplanes, excess thrust is not as important as high engine efficiency and low fuel usage. Since thrust depends on both the amount of gas moved and the velocity, we can generate high thrust by accelerating a large mass of gas by a small amount, or by accelerating a small mass of gas by a large amount. Because of the aerodynamic efficiency of propellers and fans, it is more fuel efficient to accelerate a large mass by a small amount, which is why high-bypass turbofans and turboprops are commonly used on cargo planes and airliners.\nSome aircraft, like fighter planes or experimental high speed aircraft, require very high excess thrust to accelerate quickly and to overcome the high drag associated with high speeds. For these airplanes, engine efficiency is not as important as very high thrust. Modern combat aircraft usually have an afterburner added to a low bypass turbofan. Future hypersonic aircraft may use some type of ramjet or rocket propulsion.\nGround.\nGround propulsion is any mechanism for propelling solid objects along the ground, usually for the purposes of transportation. The propulsion system often consists of a combination of an engine or motor, a gearbox and wheel and axles in standard applications.\nThe development of the steam engine and internal combustion engine allowed for the development of rail vehicles and motor vehicles, all of which have some form of a powertrain. The electric motor allowed for quieter vehicles with lower emissions, and frequently higher engine efficiency.\nMaglev.\nMaglev (derived from magnetic levitation) is a system of transportation that uses magnetic levitation to suspend, guide and propel vehicles with magnets rather than using mechanical methods, such as wheels, axles and bearings. With maglev a vehicle is levitated a short distance away from a guide way using magnets to create both lift and thrust. Maglev vehicles are claimed to move more smoothly and quietly and to require less maintenance than wheeled mass transit systems. It is claimed that non-reliance on friction also means that acceleration and deceleration can far surpass that of existing forms of transport. The power needed for levitation is not a particularly large percentage of the overall energy consumption; most of the power used is needed to overcome air resistance (drag), as with any other high-speed form of transport.\nMarine.\nMarine propulsion is the mechanism or system used to generate thrust to move a ship or boat across water. While paddles and sails are still used on some smaller boats, most modern ships are propelled by mechanical systems consisting of a motor or engine turning a propeller, or less frequently, in jet drives, an impeller. Marine engineering is the discipline concerned with the design of marine propulsion systems.\nSteam engines were the first mechanical engines used in marine propulsion, but have mostly been replaced by two-stroke or four-stroke diesel engines, outboard motors, and gas turbine engines on faster ships. Nuclear reactors producing steam are used to propel warships and icebreakers, and there have been attempts to utilize them to power commercial vessels. Electric motors have been used on submarines and electric boats and have been proposed for energy-efficient propulsion. Recent development in liquified natural gas (LNG) fueled engines are gaining recognition for their low emissions and cost advantages.\nSpace.\nSpacecraft propulsion is any method used to accelerate spacecraft and artificial satellites. There are many different methods including pumps. Each method has drawbacks and advantages, and spacecraft propulsion is an active area of research. However, most spacecraft today are propelled by forcing a gas from the back/rear of the vehicle at very high speed through a supersonic de Laval nozzle. This sort of engine is called a rocket engine.\nAll current spacecraft use chemical rockets (bipropellant or solid-fuel) for launch, though some (such as the Pegasus rocket and SpaceShipOne) have used air-breathing engines on their first stage. Most satellites have simple reliable chemical thrusters (often monopropellant rockets) or resistojet rockets for orbital station-keeping and some use momentum wheels for attitude control. Soviet bloc satellites have used electric propulsion for decades, and newer Western geo-orbiting spacecraft are starting to use them for north\u2013south stationkeeping and orbit raising. Interplanetary vehicles mostly use chemical rockets as well, although a few have used ion thrusters and Hall-effect thrusters (two different types of electric propulsion) to great success.\nCable.\nA cable car is any of a variety of transportation systems relying on cables to pull vehicles along or lower them at a steady rate. The terminology also refers to the vehicles on these systems. The cable car vehicles are motor-less and engine-less and they are pulled by a cable that is rotated by a motor off-board.\nAnimal.\nAnimal locomotion, which is the act of self-propulsion by an animal, has many manifestations, including running, swimming, jumping and flying. Animals move for a variety of reasons, such as to find food, a mate, or a suitable microhabitat, and to escape predators. For many animals the ability to move is essential to survival and, as a result, selective pressures have shaped the locomotion methods and mechanisms employed by moving organisms. For example, migratory animals that travel vast distances (such as the Arctic tern) typically have a locomotion mechanism that costs very little energy per unit distance, whereas non-migratory animals that must frequently move quickly to escape predators (such as frogs) are likely to have costly but very fast locomotion. The study of animal locomotion is typically considered to be a sub-field of biomechanics.\nLocomotion requires energy to overcome friction, drag, inertia, and gravity, though in many circumstances some of these factors are negligible. In terrestrial environments gravity must be overcome, though the drag of air is much less of an issue. In aqueous environments however, friction (or drag) becomes the major challenge, with gravity being less of a concern. Although animals with natural buoyancy need not expend much energy maintaining vertical position, some will naturally sink and must expend energy to remain afloat. Drag may also present a problem in flight, and the aerodynamically efficient body shapes of birds highlight this point. Flight presents a different problem from movement in water however, as there is no way for a living organism to have lower density than air. Limbless organisms moving on land must often contend with surface friction, but do not usually need to expend significant energy to counteract gravity.\nNewton's third law of motion is widely used in the study of animal locomotion: if at rest, to move forward an animal must push something backward. Terrestrial animals must push the solid ground; swimming and flying animals must push against a fluid (either water or air). The effect of forces during locomotion on the design of the skeletal system is also important, as is the interaction between locomotion and muscle physiology, in determining how the structures and effectors of locomotion enable or limit animal movement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49024", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49024", "title": "Wolfram Mathematica", "text": "Computational software program\n \nWolfram Mathematica (also known as Mathematica) is a software system with built-in libraries for several areas of technical computing that allows machine learning, statistics, symbolic computation, data manipulation, network analysis, time series analysis, NLP, optimization, plotting functions and various types of data, implementation of algorithms, creation of user interfaces, and interfacing with programs written in other programming languages. It was conceived by Stephen Wolfram, and is developed by Wolfram Research of Champaign, Illinois. The Wolfram Language is the programming language used in \"Mathematica\". Mathematica 1.0 was released on June 23, 1988 in Champaign, Illinois and Santa Clara, California. Mathematica's Wolfram Language is fundamentally based on Lisp; for example, the Mathematica command Most is identically equal to the Lisp command butlast. \nNotebook interface.\nMathematica is split into two parts: the kernel and the front end. The kernel interprets expressions (Wolfram Language code) and returns result expressions, which can then be displayed by the front end.\nThe original front end, designed by Theodore Gray in 1988, consists of a notebook interface and allows the creation and editing of notebook documents that can contain code, plaintext, images, and graphics.\nCode development is also supported through support in a range of standard integrated development environment (IDE) including Eclipse, IntelliJ IDEA, Atom, Vim, Visual Studio Code and Git. The Mathematica Kernel also includes a command line front end.\nOther interfaces include JMath, based on GNU Readline and WolframScript which runs self-contained Mathematica programs (with arguments) from the UNIX command line.\nHigh-performance computing.\nCapabilities for high-performance computing were extended with the introduction of packed arrays in version 4 (1999) and sparse matrices (version 5, 2003), and by adopting the GNU Multiple Precision Arithmetic Library to evaluate high-precision arithmetic.\nVersion 5.2 (2005) added automatic multi-threading when computations are performed on multi-core computers. This release included CPU-specific optimized libraries. In addition Mathematica is supported by third party specialist acceleration hardware such as ClearSpeed.\nIn 2002, gridMathematica was introduced to allow user level parallel programming on heterogeneous clusters and multiprocessor systems and in 2008 parallel computing technology was included in all Mathematica licenses including support for grid technology such as Windows HPC Server 2008, Microsoft Compute Cluster Server and Sun Grid.\nSupport for CUDA and OpenCL GPU hardware was added in 2010.\nExtensions.\nAs of Version 14, there are 6,602 built-in functions and symbols in the Wolfram Language. Stephen Wolfram announced the launch of the Wolfram Function Repository in June 2019 as a way for the public Wolfram community to contribute functionality to the Wolfram Language. There are currently more than 3000 functions contributed as Resource Functions. In addition to the Wolfram Function Repository, there is a Wolfram Data Repository with computable data and the Wolfram Neural Net Repository for machine learning.\nWolfram Mathematica is the basis of the Combinatorica package, which adds discrete mathematics functionality in combinatorics and graph theory to the program.\nConnections to other applications, programming languages, and services.\nCommunication with other applications can be done using a protocol called Wolfram Symbolic Transfer Protocol (WSTP). It allows communication between the Wolfram Mathematica kernel and the front end and provides a general interface between the kernel and other applications.\nWolfram Research freely distributes a developer kit for linking applications written in the programming language C to the Mathematica kernel through WSTP using J/Link., a Java program that can ask Mathematica to perform computations. Similar functionality is achieved with .NET /Link, but with .NET programs instead of Java programs.\nOther languages that connect to Mathematica include Haskell, AppleScript, Racket, Visual Basic, Python, and Clojure.\nMathematica supports the generation and execution of Modelica models for systems modeling and connects with Wolfram System Modeler.\nLinks are also available to many third-party software packages and APIs.\nMathematica can also capture real-time data from a variety of sources and can read and write to public blockchains (Bitcoin, Ethereum, and ARK).\nIt supports import and export of over 220 data, image, video, sound, computer-aided design (CAD), geographic information systems (GIS), document, and biomedical formats.\nIn 2019, support was added for compiling Wolfram Language code to LLVM.\nVersion 12.3 of the Wolfram Language added support for Arduino.\nComputable data.\nMathematica is also integrated with Wolfram Alpha, an online answer engine that provides additional data, some of which is kept updated in real time, for users who use Mathematica with an internet connection. Some of the data sets include astronomical, chemical, geopolitical, language, biomedical, airplane, and weather data, in addition to mathematical data (such as knots and polyhedra).\nReception.\n\"BYTE\" in 1989 listed Mathematica as among the \"Distinction\" winners of the BYTE Awards, stating that it \"is another breakthrough Macintosh application ... it could enable you to absorb the algebra and calculus that seemed impossible to comprehend from a textbook\".\nMathematica has been criticized for being closed source. Wolfram Research claims keeping Mathematica closed source is central to its business model and the continuity of the software.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49026", "revid": "13266769", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49026", "title": "Expendable launch system", "text": "Launch system that uses a single use launch vehicle\nAn expendable launch system (or expendable launch vehicle/ELV) is a launch vehicle that can be launched only once, after which its components are destroyed during reentry or impact with Earth, or discarded in space. ELVs typically consist of several rocket stages that are discarded sequentially as their fuel is exhausted and the vehicle gains altitude and speed. As of 2024, fewer and fewer satellites and human spacecraft are launched on ELVs in favor of reusable launch vehicles. However, there are many instances where a ELV may still have a compelling use case over a reusable vehicle. ELVs are simpler in design than reusable launch systems and therefore may have a lower production cost. Furthermore, an ELV can use its entire fuel supply to accelerate its payload, offering greater payloads. ELVs are a proven technology in widespread use for many decades.\nCurrent operators.\nISRO.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, India initiated its own launch vehicle program in alignment with its geopolitical and economic considerations. In the 1960s\u20131970s, the country India started with a sounding rocket in the 1960s and 1970s and advanced its research to deliver the Satellite Launch Vehicle-3 and the more advanced Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV), complete with operational supporting infrastructure by the 1990s.\nUnited States.\nSeveral governmental agencies of the United States purchase ELV launches. NASA is a major customer with the Commercial Resupply Services and Commercial Crew Development programs, also launching scientific spacecraft. The vast majority of launch vehicles for its missions, from the Redstone missile to the Delta, Atlas, Titan and Saturn rocket families, have been expendable. As its flagship crewed exploration replacement for the partially reusable Space Shuttle, NASA's newest ELV, the Space Launch System flew successfully in November 2022 after delays of more than six years. It is planned to serve in a major role on crewed exploration programs going forward.\nThe United States Air Force is also an ELV customer, having designed the Titan, Atlas, and Delta families. The Atlas V from the 1994 Evolved ELV (EELV) program remains in active service, operated by United Launch Alliance. The National Security Space Launch (NSSL) competition has selected two EELV successors, the expendable Vulcan Centaur and partially reusable Falcon 9, to provide assured access to space.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49030", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49030", "title": "Jos\u00e9 Ramos-Horta", "text": "President of East Timor (2007\u20132012; since 2022)\nJos\u00e9 Manuel Ramos-Horta (; born 26 December 1949) is an East Timorese politician who has been the seventh president of East Timor since 2022, having previously been the fourth president from 2007 to 2012. He was a co-recipient of the 1996 Nobel Peace Prize, along with Carlos Filipe Ximenes Belo, for working \"towards a just and peaceful solution to the conflict in East Timor\".\nAs a founder and former member of Fretilin, Ramos-Horta served as the exiled spokesman for the East Timorese resistance during the Indonesian occupation of East Timor (1975\u20131999). While he continued to work with Fretilin, he resigned from the party in 1988, becoming an independent politician.\nAfter East Timor achieved independence in 2002, Ramos-Horta was appointed as the country's first foreign minister. He served in this position until his resignation on 25 June 2006, amidst political turmoil. On 26 June 2006, following the resignation of Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri, Ramos-Horta was appointed as acting prime minister by President Xanana Gusm\u00e3o. Two weeks later, on 10 July 2006, he was sworn in as the second prime minister of East Timor. He was elected as President in 2007. On 11 February 2008, he was shot during an assassination attempt.\nAfter leaving office as president in 2012, Ramos-Horta was appointed as the United Nations' Special Representative and Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) on 2 January 2013. He was re-elected to the presidency in 2022.\nEarly life.\nRamos-Horta was born in 1949 in Dili, the capital of East Timor. He is of Mesti\u00e7o ethnicity, born to a Portuguese father and Portuguese-Timorese mother. Both his father (Francisco Horta) and maternal grandfather (Ars\u00e9nio Jos\u00e9 Filipe) were deported to Timor by Portuguese authorities. He was educated in a Catholic mission in the small village of Soibada, later chosen by Fretilin as its headquarters after the Indonesian invasion. Of his eleven brothers and sisters, four were killed by the Indonesian military.\nRamos-Horta studied public international law at The Hague Academy of International Law in 1983 and at Antioch University in Yellow Springs, Ohio, where he completed an Individualized Master of Arts degree in Peace Studies with the major area of study being Public International Law and International Relations, awarded in December 1984. He was trained in human rights law at the International Institute of Human Rights in Strasbourg in 1983. He completed post-graduate courses in American foreign policy at Columbia University in 1983.\nPersonal life.\nHe has been a Senior Associate Member of the University of Oxford's St Antony's College since 1987 and speaks five languages fluently: Portuguese, English, French, Spanish, and the most commonly spoken East Timorese language, Tetum.\nRamos-Horta is divorced from Ana Pessoa Pinto, East Timor's Minister for State and Internal Administration, with whom he has a son, Loro Horta, who was born in exile in Mozambique.\nPolitical career.\nRamos-Horta was actively involved in the development of political awareness in Portuguese Timor, which caused him to be exiled for two years in 1970\u20131971 to Portuguese East Africa. His grandfather, before him, had also been exiled, from Portugal to the Azores Islands, then Cape Verde, Portuguese Guinea and finally to Portuguese Timor.\nA moderate in the emerging Timorese nationalist leadership, Ramos-Horta was appointed Foreign Minister in the \"Democratic Republic of East Timor\" government proclaimed by the pro-independence parties in November 1975. When appointed minister, Ramos-Horta was only 25 years old. Three days before the Indonesian troops invaded, Ramos-Horta left East Timor to plead the Timorese case before the UN.\nRamos-Horta arrived in New York to address the UN Security Council and urge them to take action in the face of the Indonesian occupation during which an estimated 102,000 East Timorese would die. Ramos-Horta was the Permanent Representative of Fretilin to the UN for the next ten years. His friends at that time mentioned that he arrived in the United States with a total of $25 in his pocket. His financial situation was often precarious during that period. He survived partly by the grace of Americans who admired his politics and his determination. Furthermore, he was obliged to travel worldwide to explain his party's position.\nIn 1993, the Rafto Prize was awarded to the people of East Timor. Foreign-minister-in-exile Ramos-Horta represented his nation at the prize ceremony. In May 1994, Philippine President Fidel Ramos (no relation), bowing to pressure from Jakarta, tried to ban an international conference on East Timor in Manila and blacklisted Ramos-Horta, with the Thai government following suit later that year by declaring him \"persona non grata\".\nIn December 1996, Ramos-Horta shared the Nobel Peace Prize with fellow Timorese Bishop Ximenes Belo. The Nobel Committee chose to honour the two laureates for their \"sustained efforts to hinder the oppression of a small people\", hoping that \"this award will spur efforts to find a diplomatic solution to the conflict of East Timor based on the people's right to self-determination\". On The InnerView, Ramos-Horta said that he utilises the Nobel Peace Prize as a vehicle to advocate on behalf of his country, as well as for the Palestinians and the people of Myanmar.\nThe Committee considered Ramos-Horta \"the leading international spokesman for East Timor's cause since 1975\".\nRamos-Horta played a leading role in negotiating the institutional foundations for independence. He led the Timorese delegation at an important joint workshop with UNTAET on 1 March 2000 to tease out a new strategy, and identify institutional needs. The outcome was an agreed blueprint for a joint administration with executive powers, including leaders of the National Congress for Timorese Reconstruction (CNRT). Further details were worked out in a conference in May 2000. The Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General in East Timor, S\u00e9rgio Vieira de Mello, presented the new blueprint to a donor conference in Lisbon, on 22 June 2000, and to the UN Security Council on 27 June 2000. On 12 July 2000, the NCC adopted a regulation establishing a Transitional Cabinet composed of four East Timorese and four UNTAET representatives. A further conference on the building of a new nation state was held on April 2001, organised by the International Institute of Asian Studies in Leiden and the Platform for Asian Studies in Amsterdam, in The Hague in the Netherlands. He attended with diplomat Pascoela Barreto. The revamped joint administration successfully laid the institutional foundations for independence, and on 27 September 2002, East Timor joined the United Nations. Ramos-Horta was its first Foreign Minister.\nPremiership (2006\u20132007).\nOn 3 June 2006, Ramos-Horta added the post of interim minister of defense to his portfolio as foreign minister, in the wake of the resignations of the previous minister. He resigned as both Foreign and Defence Minister on 25 June 2006, announcing, \"I do not wish to be associated with the present government or with any government involving Alkatiri.\" Prime Minister Alkatiri had been under pressure to resign his position in place of President Xanana Gusm\u00e3o, but in a 25 June meeting, leaders of the Fretilin party agreed to keep Alkatiri as prime minister; Ramos-Horta resigned immediately following this decision. Foreign Minister of Australia Alexander Downer expressed his personal disappointment at Ramos-Horta's resignation. Following Alkatiri's resignation on 26 June, Ramos-Horta withdrew his resignation to contest the prime ministership and served in the position on a temporary basis until a successor to Alkatiri was named. On 8 July 2006, Ramos-Horta himself was appointed prime minister by President Gusm\u00e3o. He was sworn in on 10 July.\nBefore his appointment as prime minister, Ramos-Horta was considered a possible candidate to succeed Kofi Annan as United Nations Secretary-General. He dropped out of the race in order to serve as East Timor's prime minister, but he has indicated that he might run for the UN position at some time in the future: \"I can wait five years if I am really interested in the job in 2012. I would be interested in that.\"\nFirst election to presidency (2007).\nIn an interview with Al Jazeera broadcast on 22 February 2007, Ramos-Horta said that he would run for president in the April 2007 election. On 25 February 2007, Ramos-Horta formally announced his candidacy. He received the support of Gusm\u00e3o, who was not running for re-election. In an interview with \"Global South Development Magazine\", Ramos-Horta revealed that Mahatma Gandhi was his greatest hero.\nIn the first round of the election, held on 9 April, Ramos-Horta took second place with 21.81% of the vote; he and Fretilin candidate Francisco Guterres, who took first place, then participated in the second round of the election in May. The full results of the runoff elections were made public by East Timor's National Electoral Committee spokeswoman, Maria Angelina Sarmento, on 11 May, and Ramos-Horta won with 69.18% of the vote.\nHe was inaugurated as President of East Timor in a ceremony at the parliament house in Dili on 20 May 2007. He had resigned as Prime Minister the day before and was succeeded by Estanislau da Silva.\nAssassination attempt.\nOn 11 February 2008, Ramos-Horta was shot in an assassination attempt. In the gun skirmish, one of his guards was wounded, and two rebel soldiers, including rebel leader Alfredo Reinado, were killed. Ramos-Horta was treated at an Australian Defence Force hospital in Dili operated by Aspen Medical, before being transferred to the Royal Darwin Hospital in Australia on board an Aspen Medical air ambulance for further treatment. Doctors thought that he had been shot two or three times with the most serious injury being to his right lung. His condition was listed as critical but stable. He was placed in an induced coma on full life support, and regained consciousness on 21 February. A message from Ramos-Horta, still recovering in Darwin, was broadcast on 12 March. In this message, he thanked his supporters and Australia and said that he had \"been very well looked after\". A spokesman said that his condition was improving and that he had started taking short daily walks for exercise.\nRamos-Horta was released from the Royal Darwin Hospital on 19 March, although he said that he would stay in Australia for physical therapy for \"a few more weeks\". He also said on this occasion that he had remained conscious following the shooting and \"remember[ed] every detail\", describing how he was taken for treatment. On 17 April, he returned to Dili from Darwin. He gave a press conference at the airport in which he urged the remaining rebels in the mountains to surrender.\n2012 bid for presidency.\nDuring the first round of the presidential elections of 2012, held on 17 March, Ramos-Horta, who was eligible for a second and final term as president, took third place with 19.43% of the vote behind the presidential candidates Francisco Guterres with 27.28% and Taur Matan Ruak 24.17% of the vote. He admitted defeat, and his term as president ended on 19 May, with the inauguration of Taur Matan Ruak as his successor.\nSecond election to presidency (2022).\nRamos-Horta came out of retirement as he stated that incumbent president Francisco \u201cLu-Olo\u201d Guterres had violated the constitution. He stated that if he won the presidential election, he would dissolve parliament and call for new elections. His campaign was supported by Xanana Gusm\u00e3o, who was dubbed the \"Kingmaker of Timor Leste\". Ramos-Horta ran on a platform of poverty reduction, increasing healthcare services for mothers and children, as well as increasing job creation. He also stated that he wanted to try and improve communication across the governing political parties for the purposes of increasing stability. In addition, he stated his intention on working with the government to address supply chain issues from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and Russian invasion of Ukraine. The runoff was between Ramos-Horta, and the incumbent Francisco Guterres. In the runoff Ramos-Horta received 62.10% of the vote and defeated Guterres in a landslide, who received 37.90% percent of the vote. Speaking to supporters in a rally, Ramos-Horta proclaimed: \"I have received this mandate from our people, from the nation in an overwhelming demonstration of our people's commitment to democracy.\" He added he had not spoken to Guterres personally after the win but had received an invitation from Guterres' office to discuss a handover of power following the election.\nThe United States Department of State congratulated Ramos-Horta on his election as Timor-Leste\u2019s next president and looked forward to strengthen the partnership between the United States and Timor-Leste. In a statement, they praised the election, stating; \"We commend Timorese authorities, including the Technical Secretariat for Electoral Administration and the National Elections Commission, for administering a free, fair, and transparent election and the hundreds of thousands of Timorese voters who cast their ballots peacefully.\u00a0Timor-Leste\u2019s election serves as an inspiration for democracy in Southeast Asia, the Indo-Pacific region, and the world. This achievement represents another milestone in Timor-Leste\u2019s tremendous work to build and strengthen its robust, vibrant democracy over its nearly 20-year history as an independent nation.\" His victory was also congratulated by the President of Portugal Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa giving \"the warmest congratulations on the election as president of the Republic of Timor-Leste\".\nRamos-Horta was sworn in as president of East Timor in a peaceful transfer of power on 20 May 2022; the 20th independence anniversary of East Timor.\nOther activities.\nFollowing the 2012 Guinea-Bissau coup d'\u00e9tat, he offered to mediate the conflict. He also served as the UN special envoy to the country.\nHe is the author of the book \"Words of Hope in Troubled Times\".\nRamos-Horta has served as Chairman of the Advisory Board for TheCommunity.com, a web site for peace and human rights, since 2000. In 2001 he gathered the post 9/11 statements of 28 Nobel Peace Prize Laureates on the web site, and has spearheaded other peace initiatives with his fellow Nobel Laureates.\nRamos-Horta supported the U.S. invasion and occupation of Iraq and condemned the anti-American tone of its detractors as \"hypocritical\". In the 1990s he had supported the cause of Kurdish people in Iraq.\nIn May 2009 Ramos-Horta stated that he would ask the International Criminal Court to investigate the ruling junta of Myanmar if they continue to detain fellow Nobel Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi. Ramos-Horta suggested that Suu Kyi\u2019s inability to express her frustration with the treatment of Rohingya Muslims was due to the fact that she lacked the political power to effect change.\nHowever, by August 2010, he had softened his views on Myanmar, warmly receiving the Myanmar Foreign Minister Nyan Win, and said that he wanted to improve relations and seek strong commercial ties with Myanmar.\nIn 2006, Ramos-Horta pledged his support for the International Simultaneous Policy (SIMPOL) which seeks to end the usual deadlock in tackling global issues.\nOn 5 August 2009, he attended the funeral of the former president of the Philippines Corazon Aquino. He was the only foreign head of state to attend. On 30 June 2010, he attended the inauguration of Benigno S. Aquino III, the 15th President of the Philippines. He was, again, the only head of state who attended the inauguration and the first dignitary to arrive in the Philippines for the inauguration.\nRamos-Horta is a Member of the Global Leadership Foundation, an organization which works to support democratic leadership, prevent and resolve conflict through mediation and promote good governance in the form of democratic institutions, open markets, human rights and the rule of law. It does so by making available, discreetly and in confidence, the experience of former leaders to today's national leaders. It is a not-for-profit organization composed of former heads of government, senior governmental and international organization officials who work closely with Heads of Government on governance-related issues of concern to them.\nIn August 2017, ten Nobel Peace Prize laureates, including Ramos-Horta, urged Saudi Arabia to stop the executions of 14 young people for participating in the 2011\u201312 Saudi Arabian protests.\nHe is also a television presenter of \"Horta Show\" in Radio-Televis\u00e3o Timor Leste.\nIn 2021 Ramos-Horta joined the judging committee for the Zayed Award for Human Fraternity, an annual award instituted \"to promote human fraternity values around the world and to fulfill the aspirations of the Document on Human Fraternity, co-signed by His Holiness Pope Francis and His Eminence the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar Professor Ahmed Al-Tayeb in 2019\". The first meeting of the committee was held in the Vatican with Pope Francis on 6 October 2021.\nAwards.\nNobel Prize.\nThe Roman Catholic bishop Ximenes Belo of East Timor and Ramos-Horta were jointly awarded the 1996 Nobel Peace Prize for their efforts.\nFilm depictions.\nThe 2000 documentary \"The Diplomat\", directed by Tom Zubrycki, follows Ramos-Horta in the period from 1998 to his return to East Timor in 2000. Ramos-Horta is played by Oscar Isaac in the 2009 film \"Balibo\". The film tells the story of the Balibo Five and the events preceding the Indonesian occupation of East Timor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49031", "revid": "18678905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49031", "title": "River Thames", "text": "River in southern England\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe River Thames ( ), known alternatively in parts as the River Isis, is a river that flows through southern England including London. At , it is the longest river entirely in England and the second-longest in the United Kingdom, after the River Severn.\nThe river rises at Thames Head in Gloucestershire and flows into the North Sea near Tilbury, Essex and Gravesend, Kent, via the Thames Estuary. From the west, it flows through Oxford (where it is sometimes called the Isis), Reading, Henley-on-Thames and Windsor. The Thames also drains the whole of Greater London.\nThe lower reaches of the river are called the Tideway, derived from its long tidal reach up to Teddington Lock. Its tidal section includes most of its London stretch and has a rise and fall of . From Oxford to the estuary, the Thames drops by . Running through some of the drier parts of mainland Britain and heavily abstracted for drinking water, the Thames' discharge is low considering its length and breadth: the Severn has a discharge almost twice as large on average despite having a smaller drainage basin. In Scotland, the Tay achieves more than double the Thames' average discharge from a drainage basin that is 60% smaller.\nAlong its course are 45 navigation locks with accompanying weirs. Its catchment area covers a large part of south-eastern and a small part of western England; the river is fed by at least 50 named tributaries. The river contains over 80\u00a0islands. With its waters varying from freshwater to almost seawater, the Thames supports a variety of wildlife and has a number of adjoining Sites of Special Scientific Interest, with the largest being in the North Kent Marshes and covering .\nName.\nBrittonic origin.\nAccording to Mallory and Adams, the Thames, from Middle English , is derived from the Brittonic name for the river, \"Tamesas\" (from the hypothesised *\"tam\u0113ssa\"), recorded in Latin as and yielding modern Welsh \"Thames\".\nThe name element \"Tam\" may have meant \"dark\" and can be compared to other cognates such as Slavic \u0442\u0435\u043c\u043d\u043e (Proto-Slavic *\"t\u012dm\u012dn\u016d\"), Lithuanian \"tamsi\" \"dark\", Latvian \"tumsa\" \"darkness\", Sanskrit \"tamas\" and Welsh \"tywyll\" \"darkness\" and Middle Irish \"teimen\" \"dark grey\". The origin is shared by many other river names in Britain, such as the River Tamar at the border of Devon and Cornwall, several rivers named Tame in the Midlands and North Yorkshire, the Tavy on Dartmoor, the Team of the North East, the Teifi and Teme of Wales, the Teviot in the Scottish Borders and a Thames tributary, the Thame.\nKenneth H. Jackson proposed that the name of the Thames is not Indo-European (and of unknown meaning), while Peter Kitson suggested that it is Indo-European, but originated before the Britons, and has a name indicating \"muddiness\" from a root \"*t\u0101-\", 'melt'.\nName history.\nEarly variants of the name include:\nIndirect evidence for the antiquity of the name \"Thames\" is provided by a Roman potsherd found at Oxford, bearing the inscription \"Tamesubugus fecit\" (Tamesubugus made [this]). It is believed that Tamesubugus' name was derived from that of the river. Tamese was referred to as a place, not a river in the Ravenna Cosmography (c.\u2009AD 700).\nThe river's name has always been pronounced with a simple \"t\" ; the Middle English spelling was typically and the Brittonic form \"Tamesis\". A similar spelling from 1210, \"Tamisiam\" (the accusative case of \"Tamisia\"; see ), is found in Magna Carta.\nThe Isis.\nThe Thames through Oxford is sometimes called the Isis. Historically, and especially in Victorian times, gazetteers and cartographers insisted that the entire river was correctly named the Isis from its source down to Dorchester on Thames and that only from this point, where the river meets the Thame and becomes the \"Thame-isis\" (supposedly subsequently abbreviated to Thames) should it be so called. Ordnance Survey maps still label the Thames as \"River Thames or Isis\" down to Dorchester. Since the early 20th century this distinction has been lost in common usage outside of Oxford, and some historians suggest the name \"Isis\" is nothing more than a truncation of \"Tamesis\", the Latin name for the Thames. Sculptures titled \"Tamesis\" and \"Isis\" by Anne Seymour Damer are located on the bridge at Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire (the original terracotta and plaster models were exhibited at the Royal Academy, London, in 1785. They are now (2018) on show at the River and Rowing Museum in Henley).\nName legacy.\nRichard Coates suggests that while the river as a whole was called the Thames, part of it, where it was too wide to ford, was called *\"(p)lowonida\". This gave the name to a settlement on its banks, which became known as Londinium, from the Indo-European roots *\"pleu-\" \"flow\" and *\"-nedi\" \"river\" meaning something like the flowing river or the wide flowing unfordable river.\nThe river gives its name to the Thames Valley, a region of England around the river between Oxford and West London; the Thames Gateway; and the overlapping Thames Estuary around the tidal Thames to the east of London and including the waterway itself. Thames Valley Police is a formal body that takes its name from the river, covering three counties. In non-administrative use, the river's name is used in those of Thames Valley University, Thames Water, Thames Television, publishing company Thames &amp; Hudson, Thameslink (north\u2013south rail service passing through central London) and South Thames College. An example of its use in the names of historic entities is the Thames Ironworks and Shipbuilding Company.\nHistory.\nMarks of human activity, in some cases dating back to Pre-Roman Britain, are visible at various points along the river. These include a variety of structures connected with use of the river, such as navigations, bridges and watermills, as well as prehistoric burial mounds.\nThe lower Thames in the Roman era was a shallow waterway winding through marshes. But centuries of human intervention have transformed it into a deep tidal canal flowing between 200 miles of solid walls; these defend a floodplain where 1.5 million people work and live.\nA major maritime route is formed for much of its length for shipping and supplies: through the Port of London for international trade, internally along its length and by its connection to the British canal system. The river's position has put it at the centre of many events in British history, leading to it being described by John Burns as \"liquid history\".\nTwo broad canals link the river to other rivers: the Kennet and Avon Canal (Reading to Bath) and the Grand Union Canal (London to the Midlands). The Grand Union effectively bypassed the earlier, narrow and winding Oxford Canal which remains open as a popular scenic recreational route. Three further cross-basin canals are disused but are in various stages of reconstruction: the Thames and Severn Canal (via Stroud), which operated until 1927 (to the west coast of England), the Wey and Arun Canal to Littlehampton, which operated until 1871 (to the south coast), and the Wilts &amp; Berks Canal.\nRowing and sailing clubs are common along the Thames, which is navigable to such vessels. Kayaking and canoeing also take place. Major annual events include the Henley Royal Regatta and the Boat Race, while the Thames has been used during two Summer Olympic Games: 1908 (rowing) and 1948 (rowing and canoeing). Safe headwaters and reaches are a summer venue for organised swimming, which is prohibited on safety grounds in a stretch centred on Central London.\nConversion of marshland.\nAfter the river took its present-day course, many of the banks of the Thames Estuary and the Thames Valley in London were partly covered in marshland, as was the adjoining Lower Lea Valley. Streams and rivers like the River Lea, Tyburn Brook and Bollo Brook drained into the river, while some islands, e.g. Thorney Island, formed over the ages. The northern tip of the ancient parish of Lambeth, for example, was marshland known as \"Lambeth Marshe\", but it was drained in the 18th century; the street names Lower Marsh and Upper Marsh preserve a memory.\nUntil the middle of the Victorian era, malaria was commonplace beside the River Thames, even in London, and was frequently lethal. Some cases continued to occur into the early 20th century. Draining of the marshes helped with its eradication, but the causes are complex and unclear.\nThe East End of London, also known simply as the East End, was the area of London east of the medieval walled City of London and north of the River Thames, although it is not defined by universally accepted formal boundaries; the River Lea can be considered another boundary. Most of the local riverside was also marshland. The land was drained and became farmland; it was built on after the Industrial Revolution.\nCanvey Island in southern Essex (area ; population 40,000) was once marshy, but is now a fully reclaimed island in the Thames estuary, separated from the mainland of south Essex by a network of creeks. Lying below sea level, it is prone to flooding at exceptional tides, but has nevertheless been inhabited since Roman times.\nCourse.\nThe usually quoted source of the Thames is at Thames Head (at grid reference ). This is about north of the village of Kemble in southern Gloucestershire, near the town of Cirencester, in the Cotswolds. However, Seven Springs near Cheltenham, where the Churn (which feeds into the Thames near Cricklade) rises, is also sometimes quoted as the Thames' source, as this location is farthest from the mouth and adds some to the river's length. At Seven Springs above the source is a stone with the Latin hexameter inscription \"Hic tuus o Tamesine pater septemgeminus fons\", which means \"Here, O Father Thames, [is] your sevenfold source\".\nThe springs at Seven Springs flow throughout the year, while those at Thames Head are seasonal (a winterbourne). With a length of , the Thames is the longest river entirely in England. (The longest river in the United Kingdom, the Severn, flows partly in Wales.) However, as the River Churn, sourced at Seven Springs, is longer than the section of the Thames from its traditional source at Thames Head to the confluence, the overall length of the Thames measured from Seven Springs, at , is greater than the Severn's length of . Thus, the \"Churn/Thames\" river may be regarded as the longest natural river in the United Kingdom. The stream from Seven Springs is joined at Coberley by a longer tributary which could further increase the length of the Thames, with its source in the grounds of the National Star College at Ullenwood.\nThe Thames flows through or alongside Ashton Keynes, Cricklade, Lechlade, Oxford, Abingdon-on-Thames, Wallingford, Goring-on-Thames and Streatley (at the Goring Gap), Pangbourne and Whitchurch-on-Thames, Reading, Wargrave, Henley-on-Thames, Marlow, Maidenhead, Windsor and Eton, Staines-upon-Thames and Egham, Chertsey, Shepperton, Weybridge, Sunbury-on-Thames, Walton-on-Thames, Molesey and Thames Ditton. The river was subject to minor redefining and widening of the main channel around Oxford, Abingdon and Marlow before 1850, when further cuts to ease navigation reduced distances further.\nMolesey faces Hampton, and in Greater London the Thames passes Hampton Court Palace, Surbiton, Kingston upon Thames, Teddington, Twickenham, Richmond (with a famous view of the Thames from Richmond Hill), Syon House, Kew, Brentford, Chiswick, Barnes, Hammersmith, Fulham, Putney, Wandsworth, Battersea and Chelsea. In central London, the river passes Pimlico and Vauxhall, and then forms one of the principal axes of the city, from the Palace of Westminster to the Tower of London. At this point, it historically formed the southern boundary of the medieval city, with Southwark, on the opposite bank, then being part of Surrey.\nBeyond central London, the river passes Bermondsey, Wapping, Shadwell, Limehouse, Rotherhithe, Millwall, Deptford, Greenwich, Cubitt Town, Blackwall, New Charlton and Silvertown, before flowing through the Thames Barrier, which protects central London from flooding by storm surges. Below the barrier, the river passes Woolwich, Thamesmead, Dagenham, Erith, Purfleet, Dartford, West Thurrock, Northfleet, Tilbury and Gravesend before entering the Thames Estuary near Southend-on-Sea.\nSea level.\nThe sea level in the Thames estuary is rising and the rate of rise is increasing.\nSediment cores up to 10 m deep collected by the British Geological Survey from the banks of the tidal River Thames contain geochemical information and fossils which provide a 10,000-year record of sea-level change.&lt;ref name=\" The application of \u03b413C, TOC, C/N geochemistry to reconstruct Holocene relative sea levels and paleoenvironments in the Thames Estuary, UK.\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Combined, this and other studies suggest that the Thames sea-level has risen more than 30 m during the Holocene at a rate of around 5\u20136\u00a0mm per year from 10,000 to 6,000 years ago. The rise of sea level dramatically reduced when the ice melt nearly concluded over the past 4,000 years. Since the beginning of the 20th century, rates of sea level rise range from 1.22\u00a0mm per year to 2.14\u00a0mm per year.\nCatchment area and discharge.\nThe Thames River Basin District, including the Medway catchment, covers an area of . The entire river basin is a mixture of urban and rural, with rural landscape predominating in the western part. The area is among the driest in the United Kingdom. Water resources consist of groundwater from aquifers and water taken from the Thames and its tributaries, much of it stored in large bank-side reservoirs.\nThe Thames itself provides two-thirds of London's drinking water, while groundwater supplies about 40 per cent of public water supplies in the overall catchment area. Groundwater is an important water source, especially in the drier months, so maintaining its quality and quantity is extremely important. Groundwater is vulnerable to surface pollution, especially in highly urbanised areas.\nNon-tidal section.\nBrooks, canals and rivers, within an area of , combine to form 38 main tributaries feeding the Thames between its source and Teddington Lock. This is the usual tidal limit; however, high spring tides can raise the head water level in the reach above Teddington and can occasionally reverse the river flow for a short time. In these circumstances, tidal effects can be observed upstream to the next lock beside Molesey weir, which is visible from the towpath and bridge beside Hampton Court Palace. Before Teddington Lock was built in 1810\u201312, the river was tidal at peak spring tides as far as Staines upon Thames.\nIn descending order, non-related tributaries of the non-tidal Thames, with river status, are the Churn, Leach, Cole, Ray, Coln, Windrush, Evenlode, Cherwell, Ock, Thame, Pang, Kennet, Loddon, Colne, Wey and Mole. In addition, there are occasional backwaters and artificial cuts that form islands, distributaries (most numerous in the case of the Colne), and man-made distributaries such as the Longford River. Three canals intersect this stretch: the Oxford Canal, Kennet and Avon Canal and Wey Navigation.\nIts longest artificial secondary channel (cut), the Jubilee River, was built between Maidenhead and Windsor for flood relief and completed in 2002.\nThe non-tidal section of the river is managed by the Environment Agency, which is responsible for managing the flow of water to help prevent and mitigate flooding, and providing for navigation: the volume and speed of water downstream is managed by adjusting the sluices at each of the weirs and, at peak high water, levels are generally dissipated over preferred flood plains adjacent to the river. Occasionally, flooding of inhabited areas is unavoidable and the agency issues flood warnings. Due to stiff penalties applicable on the non-tidal river, which is a drinking water source before treatment, sanitary sewer overflow from the many sewage treatment plants covering the upper Thames basin should be rare in the non-tidal Thames. However, storm sewage overflows are still common in almost all the main tributaries of the Thames despite claims by Thames Water to the contrary.\nTidal section.\nBelow Teddington Lock (about upstream of the Thames Estuary), the river is subject to tidal activity from the North Sea. Before the lock was installed, the river was tidal as far as Staines, about upstream. London, capital of Roman Britain, was established on two hills, now known as Cornhill and Ludgate Hill. These provided a firm base for a trading centre at the lowest possible point on the Thames.\nA river crossing was built at the site of London Bridge. London Bridge is now used as the basis for published tide tables giving the times of high tide. High tide reaches Putney about 30 minutes later than London Bridge, and Teddington about an hour later. The tidal stretch of the river is known as \"the Tideway\". Tide tables are published by the Port of London Authority and are available online.\nThe principal tributaries of the River Thames on the Tideway include the rivers Crane, Brent, Wandle, Ravensbourne (the final part of which is called Deptford Creek), Lea (the final part of which is called Bow Creek), Roding (Barking Creek), Darent and Ingrebourne. In London, the water is slightly brackish with sea salt, being a mix of sea and fresh water.\nThis part of the river is managed by the Port of London Authority. The flood threat here comes from high tides and strong winds from the North Sea, and the Thames Barrier was built in the 1980s to protect London from this risk.\nThe Nore is the sandbank that marks the mouth of the Thames Estuary, where the outflow from the Thames meets the North Sea. It is roughly halfway between Havengore Creek in Essex and Warden Point on the Isle of Sheppey in Kent. Until 1964 it marked the seaward limit of the Port of London Authority. As the sandbank was a major hazard for shipping coming in and out of London, in 1732 it received the world's first lightship. This became a major landmark, and was used as an assembly point for shipping. Today it is marked by Sea Reach No. 1 Buoy.\nIslands.\nThe River Thames contains over 80 islands ranging from the large estuarial marshlands of the Isle of Sheppey and Canvey Island to small tree-covered islets like Rose Isle in Oxfordshire and Headpile Eyot in Berkshire. They are found all the way from Fiddler's Island in Oxfordshire to the Isle of Sheppey in Kent. Some of the largest inland islands, for example Formosa Island near Cookham and Andersey Island at Abingdon, were created naturally when the course of the river divided into separate streams.\nIn the Oxford area the river splits into several streams across the floodplain (Seacourt Stream, Castle Mill Stream, Bulstake Stream and others), creating several islands (Fiddler's Island, Osney and others). Desborough Island, Ham Island at Old Windsor and Penton Hook Island were artificially created by lock cuts and navigation channels. Chiswick Eyot is a landmark on the Boat Race course, while Glover's Island forms the centre of a view from Richmond Hill.\nIslands of historical interest include Magna Carta Island at Runnymede, Fry's Island at Reading, and Pharaoh's Island near Shepperton. In more recent times Platts Eyot at Hampton was the place where Motor Torpedo Boats (MTB)s were built, Tagg's Island near Molesey was associated with the impresario Fred Karno and Eel Pie Island at Twickenham was the birthplace of the South East's R&amp;B music scene.\nWestminster Abbey and the Palace of Westminster (commonly known today as the Houses of Parliament) were built on Thorney Island, which used to be an eyot.\nGeology.\nResearchers have identified the River Thames as a discrete drainage line flowing as early as 58\u00a0million years ago, in the Thanetian stage of the late Palaeocene epoch. Until around 500,000 years ago, the Thames flowed on its existing course through what is now Oxfordshire, before turning to the north-east through Hertfordshire and East Anglia and reaching the North Sea near present-day Ipswich.\nAt this time the river-system headwaters lay in the English West Midlands and may, at times, have received drainage from the Berwyn Mountains in North Wales.\nIce age.\nAbout 450,000 years ago, in the most extreme Ice Age of the Pleistocene, the Anglian, the furthest southern extent of the ice sheet reached Hornchurch in east London, the Vale of St Albans, and the Finchley Gap.\nIt dammed the river in Hertfordshire, resulting in the formation of large ice lakes, which eventually burst their banks and caused the river to divert onto its present course through the area of present-day London.\nThe ice lobe which stopped at present-day Finchley deposited about 14 metres of boulder clay there. Its torrent of meltwater gushed through the Finchley Gap and south towards the new course of the Thames, and proceeded to carve out the Brent Valley in the process.\nThe Anglian ice advance resulted in a new course for the Thames through Berkshire and on into London, after which the river rejoined its original course in southern Essex, near the present River Blackwater estuary. Here it entered a substantial freshwater lake in the southern North Sea basin, south of what is called Doggerland. The overspill of this lake caused the formation of the Channel River and later the Dover Strait gap between present-day Britain and France. Subsequent development led to the continuation of the course that the river follows at the present day.\nMost of the bedrock of the Vale of Aylesbury comprises clay and chalk that formed at the end of the ice age and at one time was under the Proto-Thames. At this time the vast underground reserves of water formed that make the water table higher than average in the Vale of Aylesbury.\nAt the height of the last ice age, around 20,000 BC, Britain was connected to mainland Europe by a large expanse of land known as Doggerland in the southern North Sea Basin. At this time, the Thames' course did not continue to Doggerland but flowed southwards from the eastern Essex coast where it met the waters of the proto-Rhine\u2013Meuse\u2013Scheldt delta flowing from what are now the Netherlands and Belgium. These rivers formed a single river \u2013 the Channel River (\"Fleuve Manche\") \u2013 that passed through the Dover Strait and drained into the Atlantic Ocean in the western English Channel.\nUpon the valley sides of the Thames and some of its tributaries can be seen other terraces of brickearth, laid over and sometimes interlayered with the clays. These deposits were brought in by the winds during the periglacial periods, suggesting that wide, flat marshes were then part of the landscape, which the new rivers proceeded to cut into.\nThe steepness of some valley sides indicates very much lower mean sea levels caused by the glaciation locking up so much water upon the land masses, thus causing the river water to flow rapidly seaward and so erode its bed quickly downwards.\nThe original land surface was around above the current sea-level. The surface had sandy deposits from an ancient sea, laid over sedimentary clay (this is the blue London Clay). All the erosion down from this higher land surface, and the sorting action by these changes of water flow and direction, formed what is known as the Thames River Gravel Terraces. Sand and gravel was deposited near Beaconsfield and other places by the ancestral Thames. This sand and gravel is now being excavated.\nSince Roman times and perhaps earlier, the isostatic rebound from the weight of previous ice sheets, and its interplay with the eustatic change in sea level, have resulted in the old valley of the River Brent, together with that of the Thames, silting up again. Thus, along much of the Brent's present-day course, one can make out the water-meadows of rich alluvium, which is augmented by frequent floods.\nWildlife.\nVarious species of birds feed off the river or nest on it, some being found both at sea and inland. These include cormorant, black-headed gull and herring gull. The mute swan is a familiar sight on the river but the escaped black swan is more rare. The annual ceremony of Swan Upping is an old tradition of counting stocks.\nNon-native geese that can be seen include Canada geese, Egyptian geese and bar-headed geese, and ducks include the familiar native mallard, plus introduced Mandarin duck and wood duck. Other water birds to be found on the Thames include the great crested grebe, coot, moorhen, heron and kingfisher. Many types of British birds also live alongside the river, although they are not specific to the river habitat.\nThe Thames contains both sea water and fresh water, thus providing support for seawater and freshwater fish. However, many populations of fish are at risk and are being killed in tens of thousands because of pollutants leaking into the river from human activities. Salmon, which inhabit both environments, have been reintroduced and a succession of fish ladders have been built into weirs to enable them to travel upstream.\nOn 5 August 1993, the largest non-tidal salmon in recorded history was caught close to Boulters Lock in Maidenhead. The specimen weighed and measured in length. The eel is particularly associated with the Thames and there were formerly many eel traps. Freshwater fish of the Thames and its tributaries include brown trout, chub, dace, roach, barbel, perch, pike, bleak and flounder. Colonies of short-snouted seahorses as well as tope and starry smooth-hound sharks have also recently been discovered in the river. The Thames is also host to some invasive crustaceans, including the signal crayfish and the Chinese mitten crab.\nAquatic mammals are also known to inhabit the Thames. The population of grey and harbour seals numbers up to 700 in the Thames Estuary. These animals have been sighted as far upriver as Richmond. Bottlenose dolphins and harbour porpoises are also sighted in the Thames.\nOn 20 January 2006, a northern bottle-nosed whale was seen in the Thames as far upstream as Chelsea. This was extremely unusual: this whale is generally found in deep sea waters. Crowds gathered along the riverbanks to witness the spectacle but there was soon concern, as the animal came within yards of the banks, almost beaching, and crashed into an empty boat causing slight bleeding. About 12 hours later, the whale is believed to have been seen again near Greenwich, possibly heading back to sea. A rescue attempt lasted several hours, but the whale died on a barge. \"See River Thames whale\".\nOn 25 September 2018, a beluga whale was spotted off Gravesend, more than from its habitat in the Arctic. Nicknamed \"Benny the Beluga\", the male mammal was spotted over the course of three months throughout the Thames. Many researchers believed the animal appeared lost or 'in trouble.' It was last seen in the Cliffe area, east of Gravesend, and is believed to have left the Thames the following January.\nHuman history.\nThe River Thames has played several roles in human history: as an economic resource, a maritime route, a boundary, a fresh water source, a source of food and more recently a leisure facility. In 1929, John Burns, one-time MP for Battersea, responded to an American's unfavourable comparison of the Thames with the Mississippi by coining the expression \"The Thames is liquid history\".\nThere is evidence of human habitation living off the river along its length dating back to Neolithic times. The British Museum has a decorated bowl (3300\u20132700 BC), found in the river at Hedsor, Buckinghamshire, and a considerable amount of material was discovered during the excavations of Dorney Lake. A number of Bronze Age sites and artefacts have been discovered along the banks of the river including settlements at Lechlade, Cookham and Sunbury-on-Thames.\nSo extensive have the changes to this landscape been that what little evidence there is of man's presence before the ice came has inevitably shown signs of transportation here by water and reveals nothing specifically local. Likewise, later evidence of occupation, even since the arrival of the Romans, may lie next to the original banks of the Brent but have been buried under centuries of silt.\nRoman Britain.\nSome of the earliest written references to the Thames () occur in Julius Caesar's account of his second expedition to Britain in 54 BC, when the Thames presented a major obstacle and he encountered the Iron Age Belgic tribes (Catuvellauni and Atrebates) along the river. At the confluence of the Thames and Cherwell was the site of early settlements and the River Cherwell marked the boundary between the Dobunni tribe to the west and the Catuvellauni to the east (these were pre-Roman Celtic tribes). In the late 1980s a large Romano-British settlement was excavated on the edge of the village of Ashton Keynes in Wiltshire.\nStarting in AD\u00a043, under the Emperor\u00a0Claudius, the Romans occupied England and, recognising the river's strategic and economic importance, built fortifications along the Thames valley including a major camp at Dorchester. Cornhill and Ludgate Hill provided a defensible site near a point on the river both deep enough for the era's ships and narrow enough to be bridged; Londinium (London) grew up around the Walbrook on the north bank around the year 47. Boudica's Iceni razed the settlement in AD\u00a060 or 61, but it was soon rebuilt; and once the bridge was built, it grew to become the provincial capital of the island.\nThe next Roman bridges upstream were at Staines on the Devil's Highway between Londinium and Calleva (Silchester). Boats could be swept up to it on the rising tide, with no need for wind or muscle power.\nMiddle Ages.\nA Romano-British settlement grew up north of the confluence, partly because the site was naturally protected from attack on the east side by the River Cherwell and on the west by the River Thames. This settlement dominated the pottery trade in what is now central southern England, and pottery was distributed by boats on the Thames and its tributaries.\nCompetition for the use of the river created the centuries-old conflict between those who wanted to dam the river to build millraces and fish traps and those who wanted to travel and carry goods on it. Economic prosperity and the foundation of wealthy monasteries by the Anglo-Saxons attracted unwelcome visitors and by around AD 870 the Vikings were sweeping up the Thames on the tide and creating havoc as in their destruction of Chertsey Abbey.\nOnce King William had won total control of the strategically important Thames Valley, he went on to invade the rest of England. He had many castles built, including those at Wallingford, Rochester, Windsor and most importantly the Tower of London. Many details of Thames activity are recorded in the Domesday Book. The following centuries saw the conflict between king and barons coming to a head in AD 1215 when King John was forced to sign Magna Carta on an island in the Thames at Runnymede. Among a host of other things, this granted the barons the right of Navigation under Clause 23.\nAnother major consequence of John's reign was the completion of the multi-piered London Bridge, which acted as a barricade and barrage on the river, affecting the tidal flow upstream and increasing the likelihood of the river freezing over. In Tudor and Stuart times, various kings and queens built magnificent riverside palaces at Hampton Court, Kew, Richmond on Thames, Whitehall and Greenwich.\nAs early as the 1300s, the Thames was used to dispose of waste matter produced in the city of London, thus turning the river into an open sewer. In 1357, Edward III described the state of the river in a proclamation: \"... dung and other filth had accumulated in divers places upon the banks of the river with ... fumes and other abominable stenches arising therefrom.\"\nThe growth of the population of London greatly increased the amount of waste that entered the river, including human excrement, animal waste from slaughter houses, and waste from manufacturing processes. According to historian Peter Ackroyd, \"a public lavatory on London Bridge showered its contents directly onto the river below, and latrines were built over all the tributaries that issued into the Thames.\"\nEarly modern period.\nThe Stuart monarchs and the City of London organised pageants on the river, including \"London's Love to Prince Henry\" in May 1610, and a theatrical sea battle for the Wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Frederick V of the Palatinate in February 1613. During a series of cold winters the Thames froze over above London Bridge: in the first Frost Fair in 1607, a tent city was set up on the river, along with a number of amusements, including ice bowling. \nIn good conditions, barges travelled daily from Oxford to London carrying timber, wool, foodstuffs and livestock. The stone from the Cotswolds used to rebuild St Paul's Cathedral after the Great Fire in 1666 was brought all the way down from Radcot. The Thames provided the major route between the City of London and Westminster in the 16th and 17th centuries; the clannish guild of watermen ferried Londoners from landing to landing and tolerated no outside interference. In 1715, Thomas Doggett was so grateful to a local waterman for his efforts in ferrying him home, pulling against the tide, that he set up a rowing race for professional watermen known as \"Doggett's Coat and Badge\".\nBy the 18th century, the Thames was one of the world's busiest waterways, as London became the centre of the vast, mercantile British Empire, and progressively over the next century the docks expanded in the Isle of Dogs and beyond. Efforts were made to resolve the navigation conflicts upstream by building locks along the Thames. After temperatures began to rise again, starting in 1814, the river stopped freezing over. The building of a new London Bridge in 1825, with fewer piers (pillars) than the old, allowed the river to flow more freely and prevented it from freezing over in cold winters.\nThroughout early modern history the population of London and its industries discarded their rubbish in the river. This included the waste from slaughterhouses, fish markets, and tanneries. The buildup in household cesspools could sometimes overflow, especially when it rained, and was washed into London's streets and sewers which eventually led to the Thames. In the late 18th and 19th centuries people known as mudlarks scavenged in the river mud for a meagre living.\nVictorian era.\nIn the 19th century the quality of water in the Thames deteriorated further. The discharge of raw sewage into the Thames was formerly only common in the City of London, making its tideway a harbour for many harmful bacteria. Gasworks were built alongside the river, and their by-products leaked into the water, including spent lime, ammonia, cyanide, and carbolic acid. The river had an unnaturally warm temperature caused by chemical reactions in the water, which also removed the water's oxygen. Four serious cholera outbreaks killed tens of thousands of people between 1832 and 1865. Historians have attributed Prince Albert's death in 1861 to typhoid that had spread in the river's dirty waters beside Windsor Castle. Wells with water tables that mixed with tributaries (or the non-tidal Thames) faced such pollution with the widespread installation of the flush toilet in the 1850s. In the 'Great Stink' of 1858, pollution in the river reached such an extreme that sittings of the House of Commons at Westminster had to be abandoned. Chlorine-soaked drapes were hung in the windows of Parliament in an attempt to stave off the smell of the river, but to no avail.\nThere followed a concerted effort to contain the city's sewage by constructing massive sewer systems on the north and south river embankments, under the supervision of engineer Joseph Bazalgette. Meanwhile, there were similar huge projects to ensure the water supply: reservoirs and pumping stations were built on the river to the west of London, slowly helping the quality of water to improve.\nThe Victorian era was one of imaginative engineering. The coming of the railways added railway bridges to the earlier road bridges and also reduced commercial activity on the river. However, sporting and leisure use increased with the establishment of regattas such as Henley and the Boat Race. One of the worst river disasters in England was on 3 September 1878, when the crowded pleasure boat collided with the \"Bywell Castle\", killing over 640 people.\n20th century.\nThe growth of road transport, and the decline of the Empire in the years following 1914, reduced the economic prominence of the river. During the Second World War, the protection of certain Thames-side facilities, particularly docks and water treatment plants, was crucial to the munitions and water supply of the country. The river's defences included the Maunsell forts in the estuary, and the use of barrage balloons to counter German bombers using the reflectivity and shapes of the river to navigate during the Blitz.\nIn the post-war era, although the Port of London remains one of the UK's three main ports, most trade has moved downstream from central London. In the late 1950s, the discharge of methane gas in the depths of the river caused the water to bubble, and the toxins wore away at boats' propellers.\nThe decline of heavy industry and tanneries, reduced use of oil-pollutants and improved sewage treatment have led to much better water quality compared to the late 19th and early- to mid-20th centuries and aquatic life has returned to its formerly 'dead' stretches.\nAlongside the entire river runs the Thames Path, a National Route for walkers and cyclists.\nIn the early 1980s a pioneering flood control device, the Thames Barrier, was opened. It is closed to tides several times a year to prevent water damage to London's low-lying areas upstream (the 1928 Thames flood demonstrated the severity of this type of event).\nIn the late 1990s, the long Jubilee River was built as a wide \"naturalistic\" flood relief channel from Taplow to Eton to help reduce the flood risk in Maidenhead, Windsor and Eton, although it appears to have increased flooding in the villages immediately downstream.\n21st century.\nIn 2010, the Thames won the largest environmental award in the world: the $350,000 International Riverprize.\nIn August 2022, the first few miles of the river dried up due to the previous month's heatwave, and the source of the river temporarily moved five miles to beyond Somerford Keynes.\nThe active river.\nOne of the major resources provided by the Thames is the water distributed as drinking water by Thames Water, whose area of responsibility covers the length of the River Thames. The Thames Water Ring Main is the main distribution mechanism for water in London, with one major loop linking the Hampton, Walton, Ashford and Kempton Park Water Treatment Works with central London.\nIn the past, commercial activities on the Thames included fishing (particularly eel trapping), coppicing willows and osiers which provided wood and baskets, and the operation of watermills for flour and paper production and metal beating. These activities have largely disappeared.\nThe Thames is popular for a wide variety of riverside housing, including high-rise flats in central London and chalets on the banks and islands upstream. Some people live in houseboats, typically around Brentford and Tagg's Island.\nTransport and tourism.\nTidal river.\nIn London there are many sightseeing tours in tourist boats, past riverside attractions such as the Houses of Parliament and the Tower of London. There are also regular riverboat services co-ordinated by London River Services. London City Airport is situated on the Thames, in East London. Previously it was a dock.\nUpper river.\nThe leisure navigation and sporting activities on the river have given rise to a number of businesses including boatbuilding, marinas, ships chandlers and salvage services.\nIn summer, passenger services operate along the entire non-tidal river from Oxford to Teddington. The two largest operators are Salters Steamers and French Brothers. Salters operate services between Folly Bridge, Oxford and Staines. The whole journey takes four days and requires several changes of boat. French Brothers operate passenger services between Maidenhead and Hampton Court.\nAlong the course of the river a number of smaller private companies also offer river trips at Oxford, Wallingford, Reading and Hampton Court. Many companies also provide boat hire on the river.\nCable car.\nThe London Cable Car over the Thames from the Greenwich Peninsula to the Royal Docks has been in operation since the 2012 Summer Olympics.\nPolice and lifeboats.\nThe river is policed by five police forces. The Thames Division is the River Police arm of London's Metropolitan Police, while Surrey Police, Thames Valley Police, Essex Police and Kent Police have responsibilities on their parts of the river outside the metropolitan area. There is also a London Fire Brigade fire boat on the river. The river claims a number of lives each year.\nAs a result of the Marchioness disaster in 1989 when 51 people died, the Government asked the Maritime and Coastguard Agency, the Port of London Authority and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI) to work together to set up a dedicated Search and Rescue service for the tidal River Thames. As a result, there are four lifeboat stations on the River Thames: at Teddington, Chiswick, Tower (based at Victoria Embankment/Waterloo Bridge) and Gravesend.\nNavigation.\nThe Thames is maintained for navigation by powered craft from the estuary as far as Lechlade in Gloucestershire and for very small craft to Cricklade. The original towpath extends upstream from Putney Bridge as far as the connection with the now disused Thames and Severn Canal at Inglesham, one and a half miles upstream of the last boat lock near Lechlade. From Teddington Lock to the head of navigation, the navigation authority is the Environment Agency. Between the sea and Teddington Lock, the river forms part of the Port of London and navigation is administered by the Port of London Authority. Both the tidal river through London and the non-tidal river upstream are intensively used for leisure navigation.\nThe non-tidal River Thames is divided into reaches by the 45 locks. The locks are staffed for the greater part of the day, but can be operated by experienced users out of hours. This part of the Thames links to existing navigations at the River Wey Navigation, the River Kennet and the Oxford Canal. All craft using it must be licensed. The Environment Agency has patrol boats (named after tributaries of the Thames) and can enforce the limit strictly since river traffic usually has to pass through a lock at some stage. A speed limit of applies. There are pairs of transit markers at various points along the non-tidal river that can be used to check speed \u2013 a boat travelling legally taking a minute or more to pass between the two markers.\nThe tidal river is navigable to large ocean-going ships as far upstream as the Pool of London and London Bridge. Although London's upstream enclosed docks have closed and central London sees only the occasional visiting cruise ship or warship, the tidal river remains one of Britain's main ports. Around 60 active terminals cater for shipping of all types including ro-ro ferries, cruise liners and vessels carrying containers, vehicles, timber, grain, paper, crude oil, petroleum products, liquified petroleum gas etc. There is a regular traffic of aggregate or refuse vessels, operating from wharves in the west of London. The tidal Thames links to the canal network at the River Lea Navigation, the Regent's Canal at Limehouse Basin and the Grand Union Canal at Brentford.\nUpstream of Wandsworth Bridge a speed limit of is in force for powered craft to protect the riverbank environment and to provide safe conditions for rowers and other river users. There is no absolute speed limit on most of the Tideway downstream of Wandsworth Bridge, although boats are not allowed to create undue wash. Powered boats are limited to 12 knots between Lambeth Bridge and downstream of Tower Bridge, with some exceptions. Boats can be approved by the harbourmaster to travel at speeds of up to 30 knots from below Tower Bridge to past the Thames Barrier.\nManagement.\nThe administrative powers of the Thames Conservancy to control river traffic and manage flows have been taken on with some modifications by the Environment Agency and, in respect of the Tideway part of the river, such powers are split between the agency and the Port of London Authority.\nIn the Middle Ages the Crown exercised general jurisdiction over the Thames, one of the four royal rivers, and appointed water bailiffs to oversee the river upstream of Staines. The City of London exercised jurisdiction over the tidal Thames. However, navigation was increasingly impeded by weirs and mills, and in the 14th century the river probably ceased to be navigable for heavy traffic between Henley and Oxford. In the late 16th century the river seems to have been reopened for navigation from Henley to Burcot.\nThe first commission concerned with the management of the river was the Oxford-Burcot Commission, formed in 1605 to make the river navigable between Burcot and Oxford.\nIn 1751 the Thames Navigation Commission was formed to manage the whole non-tidal river above Staines. The City of London long claimed responsibility for the tidal river. A long running dispute between the City and the Crown over ownership of the river was not settled until 1857, when the Thames Conservancy was formed to manage the river from Staines downstream. In 1866 the functions of the Thames Navigation Commission were transferred to the Thames Conservancy, which thus had responsibility for the whole river.\nIn 1909 the powers of the Thames Conservancy over the tidal river, below Teddington, were transferred to the Port of London Authority.\nIn 1974 the Thames Conservancy became part of the new Thames Water Authority. When Thames Water was privatised in 1990, its river management functions were transferred to the National Rivers Authority, in 1996 subsumed into the Environment Agency.\nIn 2010, the Thames won the world's largest environmental award at the time, the $350,000 International Riverprize, presented at the International Riversymposium in Perth, WA in recognition of the substantial and sustained restoration of the river by many hundreds of organisations and individuals since the 1950s.\nAs a boundary.\nUntil enough crossings were established, the river presented a formidable barrier, with Belgic tribes and Anglo-Saxon kingdoms being defined by which side of the river they were on. When English counties were established their boundaries were partly determined by the Thames. On the northern bank were the ancient counties of Gloucestershire, Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Middlesex and Essex. On the southern bank were the counties of Wiltshire, Berkshire, Surrey and Kent.\nCounting bridges to the far bank or to an island connected to such, the Thames has 223. From source to mouth a channel can be found with 138 bridges, plus the temporary footbridge often added during Reading Festival. The river is heavily splayed in Ashton Keynes and Oxford. Where the river is wide 17 tunnels that have been built, many of which for rail or notable electricity cables. The crossings have changed the dynamics and made cross-river development and shared responsibilities more practicable. In 1965, upon the creation of Greater London, the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames incorporated the former 'Middlesex and Surrey' banks, Spelthorne moved from Middlesex to Surrey; and further changes in 1974 moved some of the boundaries away from the river. For example, some areas were transferred from Berkshire to Oxfordshire, and from Buckinghamshire to Berkshire. In many river sports and traditions \u2013 for example in rowing \u2013 the banks are referred to by their traditional county names.\nCrossings.\nMany of the present-day road bridges are on the site of earlier fords, ferries and wooden bridges. Swinford Bridge, known as the five pence toll bridge, replaced a ferry that in turn replaced a ford. The earliest known major crossings of the Thames by the Romans were at London Bridge and Staines Bridge. At Folly Bridge in Oxford the remains of an original Saxon structure can be seen, and medieval stone bridges such as Newbridge, Wallingford Bridge and Abingdon Bridge are still in use.\nKingston's growth is believed to stem from its having the only crossing between London Bridge and Staines until the beginning of the 18th century. During the 18th century, many stone and brick road bridges were built from new or to replace existing bridges both in London and along the length of the river. These included Putney Bridge, Westminster Bridge, Datchet Bridge, Windsor Bridge and Sonning Bridge.\nSeveral central London road bridges were built in the 19th century, most conspicuously Tower Bridge, the only Bascule bridge on the river, designed to allow ocean-going ships to pass beneath it. The most recent road bridges are the bypasses at Isis Bridge and Marlow By-pass Bridge and the motorway bridges, most notably the two on the M25 route: Queen Elizabeth II Bridge and M25 Runnymede Bridge.\nRailway development in the 19th century resulted in a spate of bridge building including Blackfriars Railway Bridge and Charing Cross (Hungerford) Railway Bridge in central London, and the railway bridges by Isambard Kingdom Brunel at Maidenhead Railway Bridge, Gatehampton Railway Bridge and Moulsford Railway Bridge.\nThe world's first underwater tunnel was Marc Brunel's Thames Tunnel built in 1843 and now used to carry the East London Line. The Tower Subway was the first railway under the Thames, which was followed by all the deep-level tube lines. Road tunnels were built in East London at the end of the 19th century, being the Blackwall Tunnel and the Rotherhithe Tunnel. The latest tunnels are the Dartford Crossings.\nMany foot crossings were established across the weirs that were built on the non-tidal river, and some of these remained when the locks were built \u2013 for example at Benson Lock. Others were replaced by a footbridge when the weir was removed as at Hart's Weir Footbridge. Around 2000, several footbridges were added along the Thames, either as part of the Thames Path or in commemoration of the millennium. These include Temple Footbridge, Bloomers Hole Footbridge, the Hungerford Footbridges and the Millennium Bridge, all of which have distinctive design characteristics.\nBefore bridges were built, the main means of crossing the river was by ferry. A significant number of ferries were provided specifically for navigation purposes. When the towpath changed sides, it was necessary to take the towing horse and its driver across the river. This was no longer necessary when barges were powered by steam. Some ferries still operate on the river. The Woolwich Ferry carries cars and passengers across the river in the Thames Gateway and links the North Circular and South Circular roads. Upstream are smaller pedestrian ferries, for example Hampton Ferry and Shepperton to Weybridge Ferry, the last being the only non-permanent crossing that remains on the Thames Path.\nHydro-power.\nWhilst the use of the river to drive water-mills has largely died out, there has been a recent trend to use the head of water provided by the river's existing weirs to drive small hydro-electric power plants, using Archimedes screw turbines. Operational schemes include:\nPollution.\nTreated and untreated sewage.\nTreated waste water from all the towns and villages in the Thames catchment flow into the Thames via sewage treatment plants. This includes all that from Swindon, Oxford, Berkshire and almost all of Surrey.\nHowever, untreated sewage still often enters the Thames during wet weather. When London's sewerage system was built, sewers were designed to overflow through discharge points along the river during heavy storms. Originally, this would happen once or twice a year; however, overflows now happen once a week on average. In 2013, over 55m tonnes of dilute raw sewage overflowed into the tidal Thames. These discharge events kill fish, leave raw sewage on the riverbanks, and decrease the water quality of the river. A 2022 investigation by the Environment Agency found \"widespread and serious non-compliance with the relevant regulations\". Thames Water has also published an interactive map showing discharges as they happen.\nTo reduce the release of this into the river, the Thames Tideway Scheme was constructed at a cost of \u00a35\u00a0billion. It was completed in February 2025 after delays and additional costs because of the COVID-19 Pandemic. This project collects sewage from the Greater London area before it overflows, channelling it down a 25\u00a0km (15\u00a0mi) tunnel underneath the tidal Thames, so that it can be treated at Beckton Sewage Treatment Works. The project is intended to reduce sewage discharges into the Thames in the Greater London area by 90%, dramatically increasing water quality. It is estimated that two million tonnes of sewage will still enter the Thames each year.\nMercury levels.\nMercury (Hg) is an environmentally persistent heavy metal which can be toxic to marine life and humans. Sixty sediment cores of 1 m in depth, spanning the entire tidal River Thames between Brentford and the Isle of Grain, have been analysed for total Hg. The sediment records show a clear rise and fall of Hg pollution through history. Mercury concentrations in the River Thames decrease downstream from London to the outer Estuary, with the total Hg levels ranging from 0.01 to 12.07\u00a0mg/kg, giving a mean of 2.10\u00a0mg/kg which is higher than many other UK and European river estuaries.\nThe most sedimentary-hosted Hg pollution in the Thames estuary occurs in the central London area between Vauxhall Bridge and Woolwich. The majority of sediment cores show a clear decrease in Hg concentrations close to the surface, which is attributed to an overall reduction in polluting activities as well as improved effectiveness of recent environmental legalisation and river management (e.g. Oslo-Paris convention).\nPlastic pollution.\nThe Thames has relatively high levels of plastic pollution, with an estimated 94,000 microplastics per second moving through some parts of the river. These microplastics come from the breakdown of larger items but also glitter and microbeads from cosmetics.\nOne study found one-fifth of macroplastics found in the river were from food packaging.\nSport.\nThere are several watersports prevalent on the Thames, with many clubs encouraging participation and organising racing and inter-club competitions.\nRowing.\nThe Thames is the historic heartland of rowing in the United Kingdom. There are over 200 clubs on the river, and over 8,000 members of British Rowing (over 40% of its membership). Most towns and districts of any size on the river have at least one club. Internationally attended centres are Oxford, Henley-on-Thames and events and clubs on the stretch of river from Chiswick to Putney.\nTwo rowing events on the River Thames are traditionally part of the wider English sporting calendar:\nThe University Boat Race (between Oxford and Cambridge) takes place in late March or early April, on the Championship Course from Putney to Mortlake in the west of London.\nHenley Royal Regatta takes place over five days at the start of July in the upstream town of Henley-on-Thames. Besides its sporting significance the regatta is an important date on the English social calendar alongside events like Royal Ascot and Wimbledon.\nOther significant or historic rowing events on the Thames include:\nOther regattas, head races and university bumping races are held along the Thames which are described under Rowing on the River Thames.\nSailing.\nSailing is practised on both the tidal and non-tidal reaches of the river. The highest club upstream is at Oxford. The most popular sailing craft used on the Thames are lasers, GP14s and Wayfarers. One sailing boat unique to the Thames is the Thames Rater, which is sailed around Raven's Ait.\nSkiffing.\nSkiffing has dwindled in favour of private motor boat ownership but is competed on the river in the summer months. Six clubs and a similar number of skiff regattas exist from the Skiff Club, Teddington upstream.\nPunting.\nUnlike the \"pleasure punting\" common on the Cherwell in Oxford and the Cam in Cambridge, punting on the Thames is competitive as well as recreational and uses narrower craft, typically based at the few skiff clubs.\nKayaking and canoeing.\nKayaking and canoeing are common, with sea kayakers using the tidal stretch for touring. Kayakers and canoeists use the tidal and non-tidal sections for training, racing and trips. Whitewater playboaters and slalom paddlers are catered for at weirs like those at Hurley Lock, Sunbury Lock and Boulter's Lock. At Teddington just before the tidal section of the river starts is Royal Canoe Club, said to be the oldest in the world and founded in 1866. Since 1950, almost every year at Easter, long distance canoeists have been competing in what is now known as the Devizes to Westminster International Canoe Race, which follows the course of the Kennet and Avon Canal, joins the River Thames at Reading and runs right up to a grand finish at Westminster Bridge.\nSwimming.\nIn 2006, British swimmer and environmental campaigner Lewis Pugh became the first person to swim the full length of the Thames from outside Kemble to Southend-on-Sea to draw attention to the severe drought in England which saw record temperatures indicative of a degree of global warming. The swim took him 21 days to complete. The official headwater of the river had stopped flowing due to the drought, forcing Pugh to run the first .\nSince June 2012, the Port of London Authority has made a by-law, which it enforces, that bans swimming between Putney Bridge and Crossness, Thamesmead (thus including all of central London), without obtaining prior permission, on the grounds that swimmers in that area of the river endanger not only themselves, due to the strong current of the river, but also other river users.\nOrganised swimming events take place at various points generally upstream of Hampton Court, including Windsor, Marlow and Henley. In 2011, comedian David Walliams swam the from Lechlade to Westminster Bridge and raised over \u00a31\u00a0million for charity.\nIn non-tidal stretches swimming was, and still is, a leisure and fitness activity among experienced swimmers where safe, deeper outer channels are used in times of low stream.\nMeanders.\nA Thames meander is a long-distance journey over all or part of the Thames by running, swimming or using any of the above means. It is often carried out as an athletic challenge in a competition or for a record attempt.\nThe Thames in the arts.\nVisual arts.\nThe River Thames has been a subject for artists, great and minor, over the centuries. Four major artists with works based on the Thames are Canaletto, J. M. W. Turner, Claude Monet and James Abbott McNeill Whistler. The 20th-century British artist Stanley Spencer produced many works at Cookham.\nJohn Kaufman's sculpture \"The Diver: Regeneration\" is sited in the Thames near Rainham.\nThe river and bridges are portrayed as being destroyed \u2013 together with much of London \u2013 in the film \"Independence Day 2\".\nAerial photography of the Thames between Rotherhithe and Woolwich (south bank) and Shadwell and Beckton (north bank) form the opening and closing credits of each episode of the soap opera \"EastEnders\".\nLiterature.\nThe Thames is mentioned in many works of literature including novels, diaries and poetry. It is the central theme in three in particular:\n\"Three Men in a Boat\" by Jerome K. Jerome, first published in 1889, is a humorous account of a boating holiday on the Thames between Kingston and Oxford. The book was intended initially to be a serious travel guide, with accounts of local history of places along the route, but the humorous elements eventually took over. The landscape and features of the Thames as described by Jerome are virtually unchanged, and the book's enduring popularity has meant that it has never been out of print since it was first published.\nCharles Dickens' \"Our Mutual Friend\" (written in the years 1864\u201365) describes the river in a grimmer light. It begins with a scavenger and his daughter pulling a dead man from the river near London Bridge, to salvage what the body might have in its pockets, and leads to its conclusion with the deaths of the villains drowned in Plashwater Lock upstream. The workings of the river and the influence of the tides are described with great accuracy. Dickens opens the novel with this sketch of the river, and the people who work on it:\n\"In these times of ours, though concerning the exact year there is no need to be precise, a boat of dirty and disreputable appearance, with two figures in it, floated on the Thames, between Southwark Bridge which is of iron, and London Bridge which is of stone, as an autumn evening was closing in.\"\n\"The figures in this boat were those of a strong man with ragged grizzled hair and a sun-browned face, and a girl of nineteen or twenty. The girl rowed, pulling a pair of sculls very easily; the man with the rudder-lines slack in his hands, and his hands loose in his waisteband, kept an eager look-out.\"\nKenneth Grahame's \"The Wind in the Willows\", written in 1908, is set in the middle to upper reaches of the river. It starts as a tale of anthropomorphic characters \"simply messing about in boats\" but develops into a more complex story combining elements of mysticism with adventure and reflection on Edwardian society. It is generally considered one of the most beloved works of children's literature and the illustrations by E.H.Shepard and Arthur Rackham feature the Thames and its surroundings.\nThe river almost inevitably features in many books set in London. Most of Dickens' other novels include some aspect of the Thames. \"Oliver Twist\" finishes in the slums and rookeries along its south bank. The Sherlock Holmes stories by Arthur Conan Doyle often visit riverside parts as in \"The Sign of Four\". In \"Heart of Darkness\" by Joseph Conrad, the serenity of the contemporary Thames is contrasted with the savagery of the Congo River, and with the wilderness of the Thames as it would have appeared to a Roman soldier posted to Britannia two thousand years before. Conrad also gives a description of the approach to London from the Thames Estuary in his essays \"\" (1906). Upriver, Henry James' \"Portrait of a Lady\" uses a large riverside mansion on the Thames as one of its key settings.\nLiterary non-fiction works include Samuel Pepys' diary, in which he recorded many events relating to the Thames including the Fire of London. He was disturbed while writing it in June 1667 by the sound of gunfire as Dutch warships broke through the Royal Navy on the Thames.\nIn poetry, William Wordsworth's sonnet On Westminster Bridge closes with the lines:\nNe'er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!\nThe river glideth at his own sweet will:\nDear God! the very houses seem asleep;\nAnd all that mighty heart is lying still!\nT. S. Eliot makes several references to the Thames in \"The Fire Sermon, Section III\" of \"The Waste Land\".\nThe \"Sweet Thames\" line is taken from Edmund Spenser's \"Prothalamion\" which presents a more idyllic image:\nAlong the shoare of silver streaming Themmes;\nWhose rutty banke, the which his river hemmes,\nWas paynted all with variable flowers.\nAnd all the meads adorn'd with daintie gemmes\nFit to deck maydens bowres\nAlso writing of the upper reaches is Matthew Arnold in \"The Scholar Gypsy\":\nCrossing the stripling Thames at Bab-lock-hythe\nTrailing in the cool stream thy fingers wet\nAs the slow punt swings round\nOh born in days when wits were fresh and clear\nAnd life ran gaily as the sparkling Thames;\nBefore this strange disease of modern life.\nWendy Cope's poem 'After the Lunch' is set on Waterloo Bridge, beginning:\nOn Waterloo Bridge, where we said our goodbyes,\nThe weather conditions bring tears to my eyes.\nI wipe them away with a black woolly glove,\nAnd try not to notice I've fallen in love.\nDylan Thomas mentions the Thames in his poem \"A Refusal to Mourn the Death, by Fire, of a Child in London\". \"London's Daughter\", the subject of the poem, lays \"Deep with the first dead...secret by the unmourning water of the riding Thames\".\nScience-fiction novels make liberal use of a futuristic Thames. The utopian \"News from Nowhere\" by William Morris is mainly the account of a journey through the Thames valley in a socialist future. The Thames features in H. G. Wells' \"The War of the Worlds\". The Thames also features prominently in Philip Pullman's \"His Dark Materials\" trilogy, as a communications artery for the waterborne Gyptian people of Oxford and the Fens, and as a prominent setting for his novel La Belle Sauvage.\nIn \"The Deptford Mice\" trilogy by Robin Jarvis, the Thames appears several times. In one book, rat characters swim through it to Deptford. Winner of the Nestl\u00e9 Children's Book Prize Gold Award \"I, Coriander\", by Sally Gardner is a fantasy novel in which the heroine lives on the banks of the Thames. Mark Wallington describes a journey up the Thames in a camping skiff, in his 1989 book \"Boogie up the River\".\nMany of the principal characters of the Rivers of London urban fantasy series by Ben Aaronovitch are genii locorum (local gods) associated with River Thames and its tributaries. This includes Father Thames, the original god of the Thames but now (in the books) confined to non-tidal reaches above Teddington Lock and Mama Thames the goddess of the tidal Thames below Teddington.\nMusic.\nThe Water Music composed by George Frideric Handel premiered on 17 July 1717, when King George I requested a concert on the River Thames. The concert was performed for King George I on his barge and he is said to have enjoyed it so much that he ordered the 50 exhausted musicians to play the suites three times on the trip.\nThe song 'Old Father Thames' was recorded by Peter Dawson at Abbey Road Studios in 1933 and by Gracie Fields five years later. Jessie Matthews sings \"My river\" in the 1938 film \"Sailing Along\", and the tune is the centrepiece of a major dance number near the end of the film.\nThe Sex Pistols played a concert on the \"Queen Elizabeth Riverboat\" on 7 June 1977, Queen Elizabeth II's Silver Jubilee year, while sailing down the river. The choral line \"(I) \"(liaised)\" live by the river\" in the song \"London Calling\" by the Clash refers to the River Thames.\nTwo songs by the Kinks feature the Thames as the setting of the first song's title and, for the second song, arguably in its mention of 'the river': \"Waterloo Sunset\" is about a couple's meetings on Waterloo Bridge, London and starts: \"Dirty old river, must you keep rolling, flowing into the night?\" and continues \"Terry meets Julie, Waterloo station\" and \"...but Terry and Julie cross over the river where they feel safe and sound...\". \"See My Friends\" continually refers to the singer's friends \"playing 'cross the river\" instead of the girl who \"just left\". Furthermore, Ray Davies as a solo artist refers to the River Thames in his \"London Song\".\nEwan MacColl's \"Sweet Thames, Flow Softly\", written in the early 1960s, is a tragic love ballad set on trip up the river (see Edmund Spenser's love poem's refrain above). Culture Club are travelling the River Thames in a riverboat in the video for \"Karma Chameleon\". English musician Imogen Heap wrote a song from the point of view of the River Thames entitled \"You Know Where To Find Me\". The song was released in 2012 on 18 October as the sixth single from her fourth album \"Sparks\".\nMajor flood events.\nLondon flood of 1928.\nThe 1928 Thames flood was a disastrous flood of the River Thames that affected much of riverside London on 7 January 1928, as well as places further downriver. Fourteen people were drowned in London and thousands were made homeless when flood waters poured over the top of the Thames Embankment and part of the Chelsea Embankment collapsed. It was the last major flood to affect central London, and, particularly following the disastrous North Sea flood of 1953, helped lead to the implementation of new flood-control measures that culminated in the construction of the Thames Barrier in the 1970s.\nThames Valley flood of 1947.\nThe 1947 Thames flood was overall the worst 20th-century flood of the River Thames, affecting much of the Thames Valley as well as elsewhere in England during the middle of March 1947 after a very severe winter.\nThe floods were caused by of rainfall (including snow); the peak flow was of water per day and the damage cost a total of \u00a312\u00a0million to repair.\nWar damage to some of the locks made matters worse.\nOther significant Thames floods since 1947 have occurred in 1968, 1993, 1998, 2000, 2003, 2006 and 2014.\nCanvey Island flood of 1953.\nOn the night of 31 January, the North Sea flood of 1953 devastated the island, taking the lives of 58 islanders and forcing the temporary evacuation of the 13,000 residents. Canvey is consequently protected by modern sea defences comprising of concrete seawall. Many of the victims were in the holiday bungalows of the eastern Newlands estate and perished as the water reached ceiling level. The small village area of the island is approximately above sea level and consequently escaped the effects of the flood.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49032", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49032", "title": "Thames river", "text": ""}
{"id": "49033", "revid": "5846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49033", "title": "Epigenetics", "text": "Study of DNA modifications that do not change its sequence\nEpigenetics is the study of changes in gene expression that occur without altering the DNA sequence. The Greek prefix \"epi-\" (\u1f10\u03c0\u03b9- \"over, outside of, around\") in \"epigenetics\" implies features that are \"on top of\" or \"in addition to\" the traditional DNA-sequence-based mechanism of inheritance. Epigenetics usually involves changes that persist through cell division, and affect the regulation of gene expression. Such effects on cellular and physiological traits may result from environmental factors, or be part of normal development. \nThe term also refers to the mechanism behind these changes: functionally relevant alterations to the genome that do not involve mutations in the nucleotide sequence. Examples of mechanisms that produce such changes are DNA methylation and histone modification, each of which alters how genes are expressed without altering the underlying DNA sequence. Further, non-coding RNA sequences have been shown to play a key role in the regulation of gene expression. Gene expression can be controlled through the action of repressor proteins that attach to silencer regions of the DNA. These epigenetic changes may last through cell divisions for the duration of the cell's life, and may also last for multiple generations, even though they do not involve changes in the underlying DNA sequence of the organism; instead, non-genetic factors cause the organism's genes to behave (or \"express themselves\") differently.\nOne example of an epigenetic change in eukaryotic biology is the process of cellular differentiation. During morphogenesis, totipotent stem cells become the various pluripotent cell lines of the embryo, which in turn become fully differentiated cells. In other words, as a single fertilized egg cell \u2013 the zygote \u2013 continues to divide, the resulting daughter cells develop into the different cell types in an organism, including neurons, muscle cells, epithelium, endothelium of blood vessels, etc., by activating some genes while inhibiting the expression of others.\nDefinitions.\nThe term \"epigenesis\" has a generic meaning of \"extra growth\" that has been used in English since the 17th century. In scientific publications, the term \"epigenetics\" started to appear in the 1930s (see Fig. on the right). However, its contemporary meaning emerged only in the 1990s. \nA definition of the concept of \"epigenetic trait\" as a \"stably heritable phenotype resulting from changes in a chromosome without alterations in the DNA sequence\" was formulated at a Cold Spring Harbor meeting in 2008, although alternate definitions that include non-heritable traits are still being used widely.\nWaddington's canalisation, 1940s.\nThe hypothesis of epigenetic changes affecting the expression of chromosomes was put forth by the Russian biologist Nikolai Koltsov. From the generic meaning, and the associated adjective \"epigenetic\", British embryologist C. H. Waddington coined the term \"epigenetics\" in 1942 as pertaining to \"epigenesis\", in parallel to Valentin Haecker's 'phenogenetics' (). \"Epigenesis\" in the context of the biology of that period referred to the differentiation of cells from their initial totipotent state during embryonic development.\nWhen Waddington coined the term, the physical nature of genes and their role in heredity was not known. He used it instead as a conceptual model of how genetic components might interact with their surroundings to produce a phenotype; he used the phrase \"epigenetic landscape\" as a metaphor for biological development. Waddington held that cell fates were established during development in a process he called canalisation much as a marble rolls down to the point of lowest local elevation. Waddington suggested visualising increasing irreversibility of cell type differentiation as ridges rising between the valleys where the marbles (analogous to cells) are travelling.\nIn recent times, Waddington's notion of the epigenetic landscape has been rigorously formalized in the context of the systems dynamics state approach to the study of cell-fate. Cell-fate determination is predicted to exhibit certain dynamics, such as attractor-convergence (the attractor can be an equilibrium point, limit cycle or strange attractor) or oscillatory.\nContemporary.\nIn 1990, Robin Holliday defined epigenetics as \"the study of the mechanisms of temporal and spatial control of gene activity during the development of complex organisms.\"\nMore recent usage of the word in biology follows stricter definitions. As defined by Arthur Riggs and colleagues, it is \"the study of mitotically and/or meiotically heritable changes in gene function that cannot be explained by changes in DNA sequence.\"\nThe term has also been used, however, to describe processes which have not been demonstrated to be heritable, such as some forms of histone modification. Consequently, there are attempts to redefine \"epigenetics\" in broader terms that would avoid the constraints of requiring heritability. For example, Adrian Bird defined epigenetics as \"the structural adaptation of chromosomal regions so as to register, signal or perpetuate altered activity states.\" This definition would be inclusive of transient modifications associated with DNA repair or cell-cycle phases as well as stable changes maintained across multiple cell generations, but exclude others such as templating of membrane architecture and prions unless they impinge on chromosome function. Such redefinitions however are not universally accepted and are still subject to debate. The NIH \"Roadmap Epigenomics Project\", which ran from 2008 to 2017, uses the following definition: \"For purposes of this program, epigenetics refers to both heritable changes in gene activity and expression (in the progeny of cells or of individuals) and also stable, long-term alterations in the transcriptional potential of a cell that are not necessarily heritable.\" In 2008, a consensus definition of the epigenetic trait, a \"stably heritable phenotype resulting from changes in a chromosome without alterations in the DNA sequence,\" was made at a Cold Spring Harbor meeting.\nThe similarity of the word to \"genetics\" has generated many parallel usages. The \"epigenome\" is a parallel to the word \"genome\", referring to the overall epigenetic state of a cell, and epigenomics refers to global analyses of epigenetic changes across the entire genome. The phrase \"genetic code\" has also been adapted \u2013 the \"epigenetic code\" has been used to describe the set of epigenetic features that create different phenotypes in different cells from the same underlying DNA sequence. Taken to its extreme, the \"epigenetic code\" could represent the total state of the cell, with the position of each molecule accounted for in an \"epigenomic map\", a diagrammatic representation of the gene expression, DNA methylation and histone modification status of a particular genomic region. More typically, the term is used in reference to systematic efforts to measure specific, relevant forms of epigenetic information such as the histone code or DNA methylation patterns.\nMechanisms.\nCovalent modification of either DNA (e.g. cytosine methylation and hydroxymethylation) or of histone proteins (e.g. lysine acetylation, lysine and arginine methylation, serine and threonine phosphorylation, and lysine ubiquitination and sumoylation) play central roles in many types of epigenetic inheritance. Therefore, the word \"epigenetics\" is sometimes used as a synonym for these processes. However, this can be misleading. Chromatin remodeling is not always inherited, and not all epigenetic inheritance involves chromatin remodeling. In 2019, a further lysine modification appeared in the scientific literature linking epigenetics modification to cell metabolism, i.e. lactylation.\nBecause the phenotype of a cell or individual is affected by which of its genes are transcribed, heritable transcription states can give rise to epigenetic effects. There are several layers of regulation of gene expression. One way that genes are regulated is through the remodeling of chromatin. Chromatin is the complex of DNA and the histone proteins with which it associates. If the way that DNA is wrapped around the histones changes, gene expression can change as well. Chromatin remodeling is accomplished through two main mechanisms:\nThere is frequently a reciprocal relationship between DNA methylation and histone lysine methylation. For instance, the methyl binding domain protein MBD1, attracted to and associating with methylated cytosine in a DNA CpG site, can also associate with H3K9 methyltransferase activity to methylate histone 3 at lysine 9. On the other hand, DNA maintenance methylation by DNMT1 appears to partly rely on recognition of histone methylation on the nucleosome present at the DNA site to carry out cytosine methylation on newly synthesized DNA. There is further crosstalk between DNA methylation carried out by DNMT3A and DNMT3B and histone methylation so that there is a correlation between the genome-wide distribution of DNA methylation and histone methylation.\nMechanisms of heritability of histone state are not well understood; however, much is known about the mechanism of heritability of DNA methylation state during cell division and differentiation. Heritability of methylation state depends on certain enzymes (such as DNMT1) that have a higher affinity for 5-methylcytosine than for cytosine. If this enzyme reaches a \"hemimethylated\" portion of DNA (where 5-methylcytosine is in only one of the two DNA strands) the enzyme will methylate the other half. However, it is now known that DNMT1 physically interacts with the protein UHRF1. UHRF1 has been recently recognized as essential for DNMT1-mediated maintenance of DNA methylation. UHRF1 is the protein that specifically recognizes hemi-methylated DNA, therefore bringing DNMT1 to its substrate to maintain DNA methylation.\nAlthough histone modifications occur throughout the entire sequence, the unstructured N-termini of histones (called histone tails) are particularly highly modified. These modifications include acetylation, methylation, ubiquitylation, phosphorylation, sumoylation, ribosylation and citrullination. Acetylation is the most highly studied of these modifications. For example, acetylation of the K14 and K9 lysines of the tail of histone H3 by histone acetyltransferase enzymes (HATs) is generally related to transcriptional competence (see Figure).\nOne mode of thinking is that this tendency of acetylation to be associated with \"active\" transcription is biophysical in nature. Because it normally has a positively charged nitrogen at its end, lysine can bind the negatively charged phosphates of the DNA backbone. The acetylation event converts the positively charged amine group on the side chain into a neutral amide linkage. This removes the positive charge, thus loosening the DNA from the histone. When this occurs, complexes like SWI/SNF and other transcriptional factors can bind to the DNA and allow transcription to occur. This is the \"cis\" model of the epigenetic function. In other words, changes to the histone tails have a direct effect on the DNA itself.\nAnother model of epigenetic function is the \"trans\" model. In this model, changes to the histone tails act indirectly on the DNA. For example, lysine acetylation may create a binding site for chromatin-modifying enzymes (or transcription machinery as well). This chromatin remodeler can then cause changes to the state of the chromatin. Indeed, a bromodomain \u2013 a protein domain that specifically binds acetyl-lysine \u2013 is found in many enzymes that help activate transcription, including the SWI/SNF complex. It may be that acetylation acts in this and the previous way to aid in transcriptional activation.\nThe idea that modifications act as docking modules for related factors is borne out by histone methylation as well. Methylation of lysine 9 of histone H3 has long been associated with constitutively transcriptionally silent chromatin (constitutive heterochromatin) (see bottom Figure). It has been determined that a chromodomain (a domain that specifically binds methyl-lysine) in the transcriptionally repressive protein HP1 recruits HP1 to K9 methylated regions. One example that seems to refute this biophysical model for methylation is that tri-methylation of histone H3 at lysine 4 is strongly associated with (and required for full) transcriptional activation (see top Figure). Tri-methylation, in this case, would introduce a fixed positive charge on the tail.\nIt has been shown that the histone lysine methyltransferase (KMT) is responsible for this methylation activity in the pattern of histones H3 &amp; H4. This enzyme utilizes a catalytically active site called the SET domain (Suppressor of variegation, Enhancer of Zeste, Trithorax). The SET domain is a 130-amino acid sequence involved in modulating gene activities. This domain has been demonstrated to bind to the histone tail and causes the methylation of the histone.\nDiffering histone modifications are likely to function in differing ways; acetylation at one position is likely to function differently from acetylation at another position. Also, multiple modifications may occur at the same time, and these modifications may work together to change the behavior of the nucleosome. The idea that multiple dynamic modifications regulate gene transcription in a systematic and reproducible way is called the histone code, although the idea that histone state can be read linearly as a digital information carrier has been largely debunked. One of the best-understood systems that orchestrate chromatin-based silencing is the SIR protein based silencing of the yeast hidden mating-type loci HML and HMR.\nDNA methylation.\nDNA methylation often occurs in repeated sequences, and helps to suppress the expression and movement of 'transposable elements': Because 5-methylcytosine can spontaneously deaminate to thymidine(replacing nitrogen by oxygen), CpG sites are frequently mutated and have become rare in the genome, except at CpG islands where they typically remain unmethylated. Epigenetic changes of this type thus have the potential to direct increased frequencies of permanent genetic mutation. DNA methylation patterns are known to be established and modified in response to environmental factors by a complex interplay of at least three independent DNA methyltransferases, DNMT1, DNMT3A, and DNMT3B, the loss of any of which is lethal in mice. DNMT1 is the most abundant methyltransferase in somatic cells, localizes to replication foci, has a 10\u201340-fold preference for hemimethylated DNA and interacts with the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA).\nBy preferentially modifying hemimethylated DNA, DNMT1 transfers patterns of methylation to a newly synthesized strand after DNA replication, and therefore is often referred to as the 'maintenance' methyltransferase. DNMT1 is essential for proper embryonic development, imprinting and X-inactivation. To emphasize the difference of this molecular mechanism of inheritance from the canonical Watson-Crick base-pairing mechanism of transmission of genetic information, the term 'Epigenetic templating' was introduced. Furthermore, in addition to the maintenance and transmission of methylated DNA states, the same principle could work in the maintenance and transmission of histone modifications and even cytoplasmic (structural) heritable states.\nRNA methylation.\nRNA methylation of N6-methyladenosine (m6A) as the most abundant eukaryotic RNA modification has recently been recognized as an important gene regulatory mechanism.\nIn 2011, it was demonstrated that the methylation of mRNA plays a critical role in human energy homeostasis. The obesity-associated FTO gene is shown to be able to demethylate N6-methyladenosine in RNA.\nHistone modifications.\nHistones H3 and H4 can also be manipulated through demethylation using histone lysine demethylase (KDM). This recently identified enzyme has a catalytically active site called the Jumonji domain (JmjC). The demethylation occurs when JmjC utilizes multiple cofactors to hydroxylate the methyl group, thereby removing it. JmjC is capable of demethylating mono-, di-, and tri-methylated substrates.\nChromosomal regions can adopt stable and heritable alternative states resulting in bistable gene expression without changes to the DNA sequence. Epigenetic control is often associated with alternative covalent modifications of histones. The stability and heritability of states of larger chromosomal regions are suggested to involve positive feedback where modified nucleosomes recruit enzymes that similarly modify nearby nucleosomes. A simplified stochastic model for this type of epigenetics is found here.\nIt has been suggested that chromatin-based transcriptional regulation could be mediated by the effect of small RNAs. Small interfering RNAs can modulate transcriptional gene expression via epigenetic modulation of targeted promoters.\nRNA transcripts.\nSometimes, a gene, once activated, transcribes a product that directly or indirectly sustains its own activity. For example, Hnf4 and MyoD enhance the transcription of many liver-specific and muscle-specific genes, respectively, including their own, through the transcription factor activity of the proteins they encode. RNA signalling includes differential recruitment of a hierarchy of generic chromatin modifying complexes and DNA methyltransferases to specific loci by RNAs during differentiation and development. Other epigenetic changes are mediated by the production of different splice forms of RNA, or by formation of double-stranded RNA (RNAi). Descendants of the cell in which the gene was turned on will inherit this activity, even if the original stimulus for gene-activation is no longer present. These genes are often turned on or off by signal transduction, although in some systems where syncytia or gap junctions are important, RNA may spread directly to other cells or nuclei by diffusion. A large amount of RNA and protein is contributed to the zygote by the mother during oogenesis or via nurse cells, resulting in maternal effect phenotypes. A smaller quantity of sperm RNA is transmitted from the father, but there is recent evidence that this epigenetic information can lead to visible changes in several generations of offspring.\nMicroRNAs.\nMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are members of non-coding RNAs that range in size from 17 to 25 nucleotides. miRNAs regulate a large variety of biological functions in plants and animals. So far, in 2013, about 2000 miRNAs have been discovered in humans and these can be found online in a miRNA database. Each miRNA expressed in a cell may target about 100 to 200 messenger RNAs(mRNAs) that it downregulates. Most of the downregulation of mRNAs occurs by causing the decay of the targeted mRNA, while some downregulation occurs at the level of translation into protein.\nIt appears that about 60% of human protein coding genes are regulated by miRNAs. Many miRNAs are epigenetically regulated. About 50% of miRNA genes are associated with CpG islands, that may be repressed by epigenetic methylation. Transcription from methylated CpG islands is strongly and heritably repressed. Other miRNAs are epigenetically regulated by either histone modifications or by combined DNA methylation and histone modification.\nsRNAs.\nsRNAs are small (50\u2013250 nucleotides), highly structured, non-coding RNA fragments found in bacteria. They control gene expression including virulence genes in pathogens and are viewed as new targets in the fight against drug-resistant bacteria. They play an important role in many biological processes, binding to mRNA and protein targets in prokaryotes. Their phylogenetic analyses, for example through sRNA\u2013mRNA target interactions or protein binding properties, are used to build comprehensive databases. sRNA-gene maps based on their targets in microbial genomes are also constructed.\nLong non-coding RNAs.\nNumerous investigations have demonstrated the pivotal involvement of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) in the regulation of gene expression and chromosomal modifications, thereby exerting significant control over cellular differentiation. These long non-coding RNAs also contribute to genomic imprinting and the inactivation of the X chromosome.\nIn invertebrates such as social insects of honey bees, long non-coding RNAs are detected as a possible epigenetic mechanism via allele-specific genes underlying aggression via reciprocal crosses.\nPrions.\nPrions are infectious forms of proteins. In general, proteins fold into discrete units that perform distinct cellular functions, but some proteins are also capable of forming an infectious conformational state known as a prion. Although often viewed in the context of infectious disease, prions are more loosely defined by their ability to catalytically convert other native state versions of the same protein to an infectious conformational state. It is in this latter sense that they can be viewed as epigenetic agents capable of inducing a phenotypic change without a modification of the genome.\nFungal prions are considered by some to be epigenetic because the infectious phenotype caused by the prion can be inherited without modification of the genome. PSI+ and URE3, discovered in yeast in 1965 and 1971, are the two best studied of this type of prion. Prions can have a phenotypic effect through the sequestration of protein in aggregates, thereby reducing that protein's activity. In PSI+ cells, the loss of the Sup35 protein (which is involved in termination of translation) causes ribosomes to have a higher rate of read-through of stop codons, an effect that results in suppression of nonsense mutations in other genes. The ability of Sup35 to form prions may be a conserved trait. It could confer an adaptive advantage by giving cells the ability to switch into a PSI+ state and express dormant genetic features normally terminated by stop codon mutations.\nPrion-based epigenetics has also been observed in \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\".\nMolecular basis.\nEpigenetic changes modify the activation of certain genes, but not the genetic code sequence of DNA. The microstructure (not code) of DNA itself or the associated chromatin proteins may be modified, causing activation or silencing. This mechanism enables differentiated cells in a multicellular organism to express only the genes that are necessary for their own activity. Epigenetic changes are preserved when cells divide. Most epigenetic changes only occur within the course of one individual organism's lifetime; however, these epigenetic changes can be transmitted to the organism's offspring through a process called transgenerational epigenetic inheritance. Moreover, if gene inactivation occurs in a sperm or egg cell that results in fertilization, this epigenetic modification may also be transferred to the next generation.\nSpecific epigenetic processes include paramutation, bookmarking, imprinting, gene silencing, X chromosome inactivation, position effect, DNA methylation reprogramming, transvection, maternal effects, the progress of carcinogenesis, many effects of teratogens, regulation of histone modifications and heterochromatin, and technical limitations affecting parthenogenesis and cloning.\nDNA damage.\nDNA damage can also cause epigenetic changes. DNA damage is very frequent, occurring on average about 60,000 times a day per cell of the human body (see DNA damage (naturally occurring)). These damages are largely repaired, however, epigenetic changes can still remain at the site of DNA repair. In particular, a double strand break in DNA can initiate unprogrammed epigenetic gene silencing both by causing DNA methylation as well as by promoting silencing types of histone modifications (chromatin remodeling - see next section). In addition, the enzyme Parp1 (poly(ADP)-ribose polymerase) and its product poly(ADP)-ribose (PAR) accumulate at sites of DNA damage as part of the repair process. This accumulation, in turn, directs recruitment and activation of the chromatin remodeling protein, ALC1, that can cause nucleosome remodeling. Nucleosome remodeling has been found to cause, for instance, epigenetic silencing of DNA repair gene MLH1. DNA damaging chemicals, such as benzene, hydroquinone, styrene, carbon tetrachloride and trichloroethylene, cause considerable hypomethylation of DNA, some through the activation of oxidative stress pathways.\nFoods are known to alter the epigenetics of rats on different diets. Some food components epigenetically increase the levels of DNA repair enzymes such as MGMT and MLH1 and p53. Other food components can reduce DNA damage, such as soy isoflavones. In one study, markers for oxidative stress, such as modified nucleotides that can result from DNA damage, were decreased by a 3-week diet supplemented with soy. A decrease in oxidative DNA damage was also observed 2 h after consumption of anthocyanin-rich bilberry (\"Vaccinium myrtillius\" L.) pomace extract.\nDNA repair.\nDamage to DNA is very common and is constantly being repaired. Epigenetic alterations can accompany DNA repair of oxidative damage or double-strand breaks. In human cells, oxidative DNA damage occurs about 10,000 times a day and DNA double-strand breaks occur about 10 to 50 times a cell cycle in somatic replicating cells (see DNA damage (naturally occurring)). The selective advantage of DNA repair is to allow the cell to survive in the face of DNA damage. The selective advantage of epigenetic alterations that occur with DNA repair is not clear.\nRepair of oxidative DNA damage can alter epigenetic markers.\nIn the steady state (with endogenous damages occurring and being repaired), there are about 2,400 oxidatively damaged guanines that form 8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) in the average mammalian cell DNA. 8-OHdG constitutes about 5% of the oxidative damages commonly present in DNA. The oxidized guanines do not occur randomly among all guanines in DNA. There is a sequence preference for the guanine at a methylated CpG site (a cytosine followed by guanine along its 5' \u2192 3' direction and where the cytosine is methylated (5-mCpG)). A 5-mCpG site has the lowest ionization potential for guanine oxidation.\nOxidized guanine has mispairing potential and is mutagenic. Oxoguanine glycosylase (OGG1) is the primary enzyme responsible for the excision of the oxidized guanine during DNA repair. OGG1 finds and binds to an 8-OHdG within a few seconds. However, OGG1 does not immediately excise 8-OHdG. In HeLa cells half maximum removal of 8-OHdG occurs in 30 minutes, and in irradiated mice, the 8-OHdGs induced in the mouse liver are removed with a half-life of 11 minutes.\nWhen OGG1 is present at an oxidized guanine within a methylated CpG site it recruits TET1 to the 8-OHdG lesion (see Figure). This allows TET1 to demethylate an adjacent methylated cytosine. Demethylation of cytosine is an epigenetic alteration.\nAs an example, when human mammary epithelial cells were treated with H2O2 for six hours, 8-OHdG increased about 3.5-fold in DNA and this caused about 80% demethylation of the 5-methylcytosines in the genome. Demethylation of CpGs in a gene promoter by TET enzyme activity increases transcription of the gene into messenger RNA. In cells treated with H2O2, one particular gene was examined, \"BACE1\". The methylation level of the \"BACE1\" CpG island was reduced (an epigenetic alteration) and this allowed about 6.5 fold increase of expression of \"BACE1\" messenger RNA.\nWhile six-hour incubation with H2O2 causes considerable demethylation of 5-mCpG sites, shorter times of H2O2 incubation appear to promote other epigenetic alterations. Treatment of cells with H2O2 for 30 minutes causes the mismatch repair protein heterodimer MSH2-MSH6 to recruit DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) to sites of some kinds of oxidative DNA damage. This could cause increased methylation of cytosines (epigenetic alterations) at these locations.\nJiang et al. treated HEK 293 cells with agents causing oxidative DNA damage, (potassium bromate (KBrO3) or potassium chromate (K2CrO4)). Base excision repair (BER) of oxidative damage occurred with the DNA repair enzyme polymerase beta localizing to oxidized guanines. Polymerase beta is the main human polymerase in short-patch BER of oxidative DNA damage. Jiang et al. also found that polymerase beta recruited the DNA methyltransferase protein DNMT3b to BER repair sites. They then evaluated the methylation pattern at the single nucleotide level in a small region of DNA including the promoter region and the early transcription region of the BRCA1 gene. Oxidative DNA damage from bromate modulated the DNA methylation pattern (caused epigenetic alterations) at CpG sites within the region of DNA studied. In untreated cells, CpGs located at \u2212189, \u2212134, \u221229, \u221219, +16, and +19 of the BRCA1 gene had methylated cytosines (where numbering is from the messenger RNA transcription start site, and negative numbers indicate nucleotides in the upstream promoter region). Bromate treatment-induced oxidation resulted in the loss of cytosine methylation at \u2212189, \u2212134, +16 and +19 while also leading to the formation of new methylation at the CpGs located at \u221280, \u221255, \u221221 and +8 after DNA repair was allowed.\nHomologous recombinational repair alters epigenetic markers.\nAt least four articles report the recruitment of DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) to sites of DNA double-strand breaks. During homologous recombinational repair (HR) of the double-strand break, the involvement of DNMT1 causes the two repaired strands of DNA to have different levels of methylated cytosines. One strand becomes frequently methylated at about 21 CpG sites downstream of the repaired double-strand break. The other DNA strand loses methylation at about six CpG sites that were previously methylated downstream of the double-strand break, as well as losing methylation at about five CpG sites that were previously methylated upstream of the double-strand break. When the chromosome is replicated, this gives rise to one daughter chromosome that is heavily methylated downstream of the previous break site and one that is unmethylated in the region both upstream and downstream of the previous break site. With respect to the gene that was broken by the double-strand break, half of the progeny cells express that gene at a high level and in the other half of the progeny cells expression of that gene is repressed. When clones of these cells were maintained for three years, the new methylation patterns were maintained over that time period.\nIn mice with a CRISPR-mediated homology-directed recombination insertion in their genome there were a large number of increased methylations of CpG sites within the double-strand break-associated insertion.\nNon-homologous end joining can cause some epigenetic marker alterations.\nNon-homologous end joining (NHEJ) repair of a double-strand break can cause a small number of demethylations of pre-existing cytosine DNA methylations downstream of the repaired double-strand break. Further work by Allen et al. showed that NHEJ of a DNA double-strand break in a cell could give rise to some progeny cells having repressed expression of the gene harboring the initial double-strand break and some progeny having high expression of that gene due to epigenetic alterations associated with NHEJ repair. The frequency of epigenetic alterations causing repression of a gene after an NHEJ repair of a DNA double-strand break in that gene may be about 0.9%.\nTechniques used to study epigenetics.\nEpigenetic research uses a wide range of molecular biological techniques to further understanding of epigenetic phenomena. These techniques include chromatin immunoprecipitation (together with its large-scale variants ChIP-on-chip and ChIP-Seq), fluorescent in situ hybridization, methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes, DNA adenine methyltransferase identification (DamID) and bisulfite sequencing. Furthermore, the use of bioinformatics methods has a role in computational epigenetics.\nChromatin Immunoprecipitation.\nChromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) has helped bridge the gap between DNA and epigenetic interactions. With the use of ChIP, researchers are able to make findings in regards to gene regulation, transcription mechanisms, and chromatin structure.\nFluorescent \"in situ\" hybridization.\nFluorescent \"in situ\" hybridization (FISH) is very important to understand epigenetic mechanisms. FISH can be used to find the location of genes on chromosomes, as well as finding noncoding RNAs. FISH is predominantly used for detecting chromosomal abnormalities in humans.\nMethylation-sensitive restriction enzymes.\nMethylation sensitive restriction enzymes paired with PCR is a way to evaluate methylation in DNA - specifically the CpG sites. If DNA is methylated, the restriction enzymes will not cleave the strand. Contrarily, if the DNA is not methylated, the enzymes will cleave the strand and it will be amplified by PCR.\nBisulfite sequencing.\nBisulfite sequencing is another way to evaluate DNA methylation. Cytosine will be changed to uracil from being treated with sodium bisulfite, whereas methylated cytosines will not be affected.\nNanopore sequencing.\nCertain sequencing methods, such as nanopore sequencing, allow sequencing of native DNA. Native (=unamplified) DNA retains the epigenetic modifications which would otherwise be lost during the amplification step. Nanopore basecaller models can distinguish between the signals obtained for epigenetically modified bases and unaltered based and provide an epigenetic profile in addition to the sequencing result.\nStructural inheritance.\nIn ciliates such as \"Tetrahymena\" and \"Paramecium\", genetically identical cells show heritable differences in the patterns of ciliary rows on their cell surface. Experimentally altered patterns can be transmitted to daughter cells. It seems existing structures act as templates for new structures. The mechanisms of such inheritance are unclear, but reasons exist to assume that multicellular organisms also use existing cell structures to assemble new ones.\nNucleosome positioning.\nEukaryotic genomes have numerous nucleosomes. Nucleosome position is not random, and determine the accessibility of DNA to regulatory proteins. Promoters active in different tissues have been shown to have different nucleosome positioning features. This determines differences in gene expression and cell differentiation. It has been shown that at least some nucleosomes are retained in sperm cells (where most but not all histones are replaced by protamines). Thus nucleosome positioning is to some degree inheritable. Recent studies have uncovered connections between nucleosome positioning and other epigenetic factors, such as DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation.\nHistone variants.\nDifferent histone variants are incorporated into specific regions of the genome non-randomly. Their differential biochemical characteristics can affect genome functions via their roles in gene regulation, and maintenance of chromosome structures.\nGenomic architecture.\nThe three-dimensional configuration of the genome (the 3D genome) is complex, dynamic and crucial for regulating genomic function and nuclear processes such as DNA replication, transcription and DNA-damage repair.\nFunctions and consequences.\nIn the brain.\nMemory.\nMemory formation and maintenance are due to epigenetic alterations that cause the required dynamic changes in gene transcription that create and renew memory in neurons.\nAn event can set off a chain of reactions that result in altered methylations of a large set of genes in neurons, which give a representation of the event, a memory.\nAreas of the brain important in the formation of memories include the hippocampus, medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), anterior cingulate cortex and amygdala, as shown in the diagram of the human brain in this section.\nWhen a strong memory is created, as in a rat subjected to contextual fear conditioning (CFC), one of the earliest events to occur is that more than 100 DNA double-strand breaks are formed by topoisomerase IIB in neurons of the hippocampus and the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). These double-strand breaks are at specific locations that allow activation of transcription of immediate early genes (IEGs) that are important in memory formation, allowing their expression in mRNA, with peak mRNA transcription at seven to ten minutes after CFC.\nTwo important IEGs in memory formation are \"EGR1\" and the alternative promoter variant of \"DNMT3A\", \"DNMT3A2\". EGR1 protein binds to DNA at its binding motifs, 5\u2032-GCGTGGGCG-3\u2032 or 5\u2032-GCGGGGGCGG-3', and there are about 12,000 genome locations at which EGR1 protein can bind. EGR1 protein binds to DNA in gene promoter and enhancer regions. EGR1 recruits the demethylating enzyme TET1 to an association, and brings TET1 to about 600 locations on the genome where TET1 can then demethylate and activate the associated genes.\nThe DNA methyltransferases DNMT3A1, DNMT3A2 and DNMT3B can all methylate cytosines (see image this section) at CpG sites in or near the promoters of genes. As shown by Manzo et al., these three DNA methyltransferases differ in their genomic binding locations and DNA methylation activity at different regulatory sites. Manzo et al. located 3,970 genome regions exclusively enriched for DNMT3A1, 3,838 regions for DNMT3A2 and 3,432 regions for DNMT3B. When DNMT3A2 is newly induced as an IEG (when neurons are activated), many new cytosine methylations occur, presumably in the target regions of DNMT3A2. Oliviera et al. found that the neuronal activity-inducible IEG levels of Dnmt3a2 in the hippocampus determined the ability to form long-term memories.\nRats form long-term associative memories after contextual fear conditioning (CFC). Duke et al. found that 24 hours after CFC in rats, in hippocampus neurons, 2,097 genes (9.17% of the genes in the rat genome) had altered methylation. When newly methylated cytosines are present in CpG sites in the promoter regions of genes, the genes are often repressed, and when newly demethylated cytosines are present the genes may be activated. After CFC, there were 1,048 genes with reduced mRNA expression and 564 genes with upregulated mRNA expression. Similarly, when mice undergo CFC, one hour later in the hippocampus region of the mouse brain there are 675 demethylated genes and 613 hypermethylated genes. However, memories do not remain in the hippocampus, but after four or five weeks the memories are stored in the anterior cingulate cortex. In the studies on mice after CFC, Halder et al. showed that four weeks after CFC there were at least 1,000 differentially methylated genes and more than 1,000 differentially expressed genes in the anterior cingulate cortex, while at the same time the altered methylations in the hippocampus were reversed.\nThe epigenetic alteration of methylation after a new memory is established creates a different pool of nuclear mRNAs. As reviewed by Bernstein, the epigenetically determined new mix of nuclear mRNAs are often packaged into neuronal granules, or messenger RNP, consisting of mRNA, small and large ribosomal subunits, translation initiation factors and RNA-binding proteins that regulate mRNA function. These neuronal granules are transported from the neuron nucleus and are directed, according to 3\u2032 untranslated regions of the mRNA in the granules (their \"zip codes\"), to neuronal dendrites. Roughly 2,500 mRNAs may be localized to the dendrites of hippocampal pyramidal neurons and perhaps 450 transcripts are in excitatory presynaptic nerve terminals (dendritic spines). The altered assortments of transcripts (dependent on epigenetic alterations in the neuron nucleus) have different sensitivities in response to signals, which is the basis of altered synaptic plasticity. Altered synaptic plasticity is often considered the neurochemical foundation of learning and memory.\nAging.\nEpigenetics play a major role in brain aging and age-related cognitive decline, with relevance to life extension.\nOther and general.\nIn adulthood, changes in the epigenome are important for various higher cognitive functions. Dysregulation of epigenetic mechanisms is implicated in neurodegenerative disorders and diseases. Epigenetic modifications in neurons are dynamic and reversible. Epigenetic regulation impacts neuronal action, affecting learning, memory, and other cognitive processes.\nEarly events, including during embryonic development, can influence development, cognition, and health outcomes through epigenetic mechanisms.\nEpigenetic mechanisms have been proposed as \"a potential molecular mechanism for effects of endogenous hormones on the organization of developing brain circuits\".\nNutrients could interact with the epigenome to \"protect or boost cognitive processes across the lifespan\".\nA review suggests neurobiological effects of physical exercise via epigenetics seem \"central to building an 'epigenetic memory' to influence long-term brain function and behavior\" and may even be heritable.\nWith the axo-ciliary synapse, there is communication between serotonergic axons and antenna-like primary cilia of CA1 pyramidal neurons that alters the neuron's epigenetic state in the nucleus via the signalling distinct from that at the plasma membrane (and longer-term).\nEpigenetics also play a major role in the brain evolution in and to humans.\nDevelopment.\nDevelopmental epigenetics can be divided into predetermined and probabilistic epigenesis. Predetermined epigenesis is a unidirectional movement from structural development in DNA to the functional maturation of the protein. \"Predetermined\" here means that development is scripted and predictable. Probabilistic epigenesis on the other hand is a bidirectional structure-function development with experiences and external molding development.\nSomatic epigenetic inheritance, particularly through DNA and histone covalent modifications and nucleosome repositioning, is very important in the development of multicellular eukaryotic organisms. The genome sequence is static (with some notable exceptions), but cells differentiate into many different types, which perform different functions, and respond differently to the environment and intercellular signaling. Thus, as individuals develop, morphogens activate or silence genes in an epigenetically heritable fashion, giving cells a memory. In mammals, most cells terminally differentiate, with only stem cells retaining the ability to differentiate into several cell types (\"totipotency\" and \"multipotency\"). In mammals, some stem cells continue producing newly differentiated cells throughout life, such as in neurogenesis, but mammals are not able to respond to loss of some tissues, for example, the inability to regenerate limbs, which some other animals are capable of. Epigenetic modifications regulate the transition from neural stem cells to glial progenitor cells (for example, differentiation into oligodendrocytes is regulated by the deacetylation and methylation of histones). Unlike animals, plant cells do not terminally differentiate, remaining totipotent with the ability to give rise to a new individual plant. While plants do utilize many of the same epigenetic mechanisms as animals, such as chromatin remodeling, it has been hypothesized that some kinds of plant cells do not use or require \"cellular memories\", resetting their gene expression patterns using positional information from the environment and surrounding cells to determine their fate.\nEpigenetic changes can occur in response to environmental exposure \u2013 for example, maternal dietary supplementation with genistein (250\u00a0mg/kg) have epigenetic changes affecting expression of the agouti gene, which affects their fur color, weight, and propensity to develop cancer. Ongoing research is focused on exploring the impact of other known teratogens, such as diabetic embryopathy, on methylation signatures.\nControversial results from one study suggested that traumatic experiences might produce an epigenetic signal that is capable of being passed to future generations. Mice were trained, using foot shocks, to fear a cherry blossom odor. The investigators reported that the mouse offspring had an increased aversion to this specific odor. They suggested epigenetic changes that increase gene expression, rather than in DNA itself, in a gene, M71, that governs the functioning of an odor receptor in the nose that responds specifically to this cherry blossom smell. There were physical changes that correlated with olfactory (smell) function in the brains of the trained mice and their descendants. Several criticisms were reported, including the study's low statistical power as evidence of some irregularity such as bias in reporting results. Due to limits of sample size, there is a probability that an effect will not be demonstrated to within statistical significance even if it exists. The criticism suggested that the probability that all the experiments reported would show positive results if an identical protocol was followed, assuming the claimed effects exist, is merely 0.4%. The authors also did not indicate which mice were siblings, and treated all of the mice as statistically independent. The original researchers pointed out negative results in the paper's appendix that the criticism omitted in its calculations, and undertook to track which mice were siblings in the future.\nTransgenerational.\nEpigenetic mechanisms were a necessary part of the evolutionary origin of cell differentiation. Although epigenetics in multicellular organisms is generally thought to be a mechanism involved in differentiation, with epigenetic patterns \"reset\" when organisms reproduce, there have been some observations of transgenerational epigenetic inheritance (e.g., the phenomenon of paramutation observed in maize). Although most of these multigenerational epigenetic traits are gradually lost over several generations, the possibility remains that multigenerational epigenetics could be another aspect to evolution and adaptation.\nAs mentioned above, some define epigenetics as heritable.\nA sequestered germ line or Weismann barrier is specific to animals, and epigenetic inheritance is more common in plants and microbes. Eva Jablonka, Marion J. Lamb and \u00c9tienne Danchin have argued that these effects may require enhancements to the standard conceptual framework of the modern synthesis and have called for an extended evolutionary synthesis. Other evolutionary biologists, such as John Maynard Smith, have incorporated epigenetic inheritance into population-genetics models or are openly skeptical of the extended evolutionary synthesis (Michael Lynch). Thomas Dickins and Qazi Rahman state that epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA methylation and histone modification are genetically inherited under the control of natural selection and therefore fit under the earlier \"modern synthesis\".\nTwo important ways in which epigenetic inheritance can differ from traditional genetic inheritance, with important consequences for evolution, are:\nIn plants, heritable DNA methylation mutations are 100,000 times more likely to occur compared to DNA mutations. An epigenetically inherited element such as the PSI+ system can act as a \"stop-gap\", good enough for short-term adaptation that allows the lineage to survive for long enough for mutation and/or recombination to genetically assimilate the adaptive phenotypic change. The existence of this possibility increases the evolvability of a species.\nMore than 100\u00a0cases of transgenerational epigenetic inheritance phenomena have been reported in a wide range of organisms, including prokaryotes, plants, and animals. For instance, mourning-cloak butterflies will change color through hormone changes in response to experimentation of varying temperatures.\nThe filamentous fungus \"Neurospora crassa\" is a prominent model system for understanding the control and function of cytosine methylation. In this organism, DNA methylation is associated with relics of a genome-defense system called RIP (repeat-induced point mutation) and silences gene expression by inhibiting transcription elongation.\nThe yeast prion PSI is generated by a conformational change of a translation termination factor, which is then inherited by daughter cells. This can provide a survival advantage under adverse conditions, exemplifying epigenetic regulation which enables unicellular organisms to respond rapidly to environmental stress. Prions can be viewed as epigenetic agents capable of inducing a phenotypic change without modification of the genome.\nDirect detection of epigenetic marks in microorganisms is possible with single molecule real time sequencing, in which polymerase sensitivity allows for measuring methylation and other modifications as a DNA molecule is being sequenced. Several projects have demonstrated the ability to collect genome-wide epigenetic data in bacteria.\nEpigenetics in bacteria.\nWhile epigenetics is of fundamental importance in eukaryotes, especially metazoans, it plays a different role in bacteria. Most importantly, eukaryotes use epigenetic mechanisms primarily to regulate gene expression which bacteria rarely do. However, bacteria make widespread use of postreplicative DNA methylation for the epigenetic control of DNA-protein interactions. Bacteria also use DNA adenine methylation (rather than DNA cytosine methylation) as an epigenetic signal. DNA adenine methylation is important in bacteria virulence in organisms such as \"Escherichia coli\", \"Salmonella, Vibrio, Yersinia, Haemophilus\", and \"Brucella\". In \"Alphaproteobacteria\", methylation of adenine regulates the cell cycle and couples gene transcription to DNA replication. In \"Gammaproteobacteria\", adenine methylation provides signals for DNA replication, chromosome segregation, mismatch repair, packaging of bacteriophage, transposase activity and regulation of gene expression. There exists a genetic switch controlling \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" (the pneumococcus) that allows the bacterium to randomly change its characteristics into six alternative states that could pave the way to improved vaccines. Each form is randomly generated by a phase variable methylation system. The ability of the pneumococcus to cause deadly infections is different in each of these six states. Similar systems exist in other bacterial genera. In Bacillota such as \"Clostridioides difficile,\" adenine methylation regulates sporulation, biofilm formation and host-adaptation.\nMedicine.\nEpigenetics has many and varied potential medical applications.\nTwins.\nDirect comparisons of identical twins constitute an optimal model for interrogating environmental epigenetics. In the case of humans with different environmental exposures, monozygotic (identical) twins were epigenetically indistinguishable during their early years, while older twins had remarkable differences in the overall content and genomic distribution of 5-methylcytosine DNA and histone acetylation. The twin pairs who had spent less of their lifetime together and/or had greater differences in their medical histories were those who showed the largest differences in their levels of 5-methylcytosine DNA and acetylation of histones H3 and H4.\nDizygotic (fraternal) and monozygotic (identical) twins show evidence of epigenetic influence in humans. DNA sequence differences that would be abundant in a singleton-based study do not interfere with the analysis. Environmental differences can produce long-term epigenetic effects, and different developmental monozygotic twin subtypes may be different with respect to their susceptibility to be discordant from an epigenetic point of view.\nA high-throughput study, which denotes technology that looks at extensive genetic markers, focused on epigenetic differences between monozygotic twins to compare global and locus-specific changes in DNA methylation and histone modifications in a sample of 40 monozygotic twin pairs. In this case, only healthy twin pairs were studied, but a wide range of ages was represented, between 3 and 74 years. One of the major conclusions from this study was that there is an age-dependent accumulation of epigenetic differences between the two siblings of twin pairs. This accumulation suggests the existence of epigenetic \"drift\". \"Epigenetic drift\" is the term given to epigenetic modifications as they occur as a direct function with age. While age is a known risk factor for many diseases, age-related methylation has been found to occur differentially at specific sites along the genome. Over time, this can result in measurable differences between biological and chronological age. Epigenetic changes have been found to be reflective of lifestyle and may act as functional biomarkers of disease before clinical threshold is reached.\nA more recent study, where 114 monozygotic twins and 80 dizygotic twins were analyzed for the DNA methylation status of around 6000 unique genomic regions, concluded that epigenetic similarity at the time of blastocyst splitting may also contribute to phenotypic similarities in monozygotic co-twins. This supports the notion that microenvironment at early stages of embryonic development can be quite important for the establishment of epigenetic marks. Congenital genetic disease is well understood and it is clear that epigenetics can play a role, for example, in the case of Angelman syndrome and Prader\u2013Willi syndrome. These are normal genetic diseases caused by gene deletions or inactivation of the genes but are unusually common because individuals are essentially hemizygous because of genomic imprinting, and therefore a single gene knock out is sufficient to cause the disease, where most cases would require both copies to be knocked out.\nGenomic imprinting.\nSome human disorders are associated with genomic imprinting, a phenomenon in mammals where the father and mother contribute different epigenetic patterns for specific genomic loci in their germ cells. The best-known case of imprinting in human disorders is that of Angelman syndrome and Prader\u2013Willi syndrome \u2013 both can be produced by the same genetic mutation, chromosome 15q partial deletion, and the particular syndrome that will develop depends on whether the mutation is inherited from the child's mother or from their father.\nIn the \u00d6verkalix study, paternal (but not maternal) grandsons of Swedish men who were exposed during preadolescence to famine in the 19th century were less likely to die of cardiovascular disease. If food was plentiful, then diabetes mortality in the grandchildren increased, suggesting that this was a transgenerational epigenetic inheritance. The opposite effect was observed for females \u2013 the paternal (but not maternal) granddaughters of women who experienced famine while in the womb (and therefore while their eggs were being formed) lived shorter lives on average.\nExamples of drugs altering gene expression from epigenetic events.\nThe use of beta-lactam antibiotics can alter glutamate receptor activity and the action of cyclosporine on multiple transcription factors. Additionally, lithium can impact autophagy of aberrant proteins, and opioid drugs via chronic use can increase the expression of genes associated with addictive phenotypes.\nParental nutrition, in utero exposure to stress or endocrine disrupting chemicals, male-induced maternal effects such as the attraction of differential mate quality, and maternal as well as paternal age, and offspring gender could all possibly influence whether a germline epimutation is ultimately expressed in offspring and the degree to which intergenerational inheritance remains stable throughout posterity. However, whether and to what extent epigenetic effects can be transmitted across generations remains unclear, particularly in humans.\nAddiction.\nAddiction is a disorder of the brain's reward system which arises through transcriptional and neuroepigenetic mechanisms and occurs over time from chronically high levels of exposure to an addictive stimulus (e.g., morphine, cocaine, sexual intercourse, gambling). Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance of addictive phenotypes has been noted to occur in preclinical studies. However, robust evidence in support of the persistence of epigenetic effects across multiple generations has yet to be established in humans; for example, an epigenetic effect of prenatal exposure to smoking that is observed in great-grandchildren who had not been exposed.\nResearch.\nThe two forms of heritable information, namely genetic and epigenetic, are collectively called dual inheritance. Members of the APOBEC/AID family of cytosine deaminases may concurrently influence genetic and epigenetic inheritance using similar molecular mechanisms, and may be a point of crosstalk between these conceptually compartmentalized processes.\nFluoroquinolone antibiotics induce epigenetic changes in mammalian cells through iron chelation. This leads to epigenetic effects through inhibition of \u03b1-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases that require iron as a co-factor.\nVarious pharmacological agents are applied for the production of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) or maintain the embryonic stem cell (ESC) phenotypic via epigenetic approach. Adult stem cells like bone marrow stem cells have also shown a potential to differentiate into cardiac competent cells when treated with G9a histone methyltransferase inhibitor BIX01294.\nCell plasticity, which is the adaptation of cells to stimuli without changes in their genetic code, requires epigenetic changes. These have been observed in cell plasticity in cancer cells during epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and also in immune cells, such as macrophages. Interestingly, metabolic changes underlie these adaptations, since various metabolites play crucial roles in the chemistry of epigenetic marks. This includes for instance alpha-ketoglutarate, which is required for histone demethylation, and acetyl-Coenzyme A, which is required for histone acetylation.\nEpigenome editing.\nEpigenetic regulation of gene expression that could be altered or used in epigenome editing are or include mRNA/lncRNA modification, DNA methylation modification and histone modification.\nCpG sites, SNPs and biological traits.\nMethylation is a widely characterized mechanism of genetic regulation that can determine biological traits. However, strong experimental evidences correlate methylation patterns in SNPs as an important additional feature for the classical activation/inhibition epigenetic dogma. Molecular interaction data, supported by colocalization analyses, identify multiple nuclear regulatory pathways, linking sequence variation to disturbances in DNA methylation and molecular and phenotypic variation.\n\"UBASH3B\" locus.\n\"UBASH3B\" encodes a protein with tyrosine phosphatase activity, which has been previously linked to advanced neoplasia. SNP rs7115089 was identified as influencing DNA methylation and expression of this locus, as well as and Body Mass Index (BMI). In fact, SNP rs7115089 is strongly associated with BMI and with genetic variants linked to other cardiovascular and metabolic traits in GWASs. New studies suggesting \"UBASH3B\" as a potential mediator of adiposity and cardiometabolic disease. In addition, animal models demonstrated that \"UBASH3B\" expression is an indicator of caloric restriction that may drive programmed susceptibility to obesity and it is associated with other measures of adiposity in human peripherical blood.\n\"NFKBIE\" locus.\nSNP rs730775 is located in the first intron of \"NFKBIE\" and is a \"cis\" eQTL for \"NFKBIE\" in whole blood. Nuclear factor (NF)-\u03baB inhibitor \u03b5 (NFKBIE) directly inhibits NF-\u03baB1 activity and is significantly co-expressed with NF-\u03baB1, also, it is associated with rheumatoid arthritis. Colocalization analysis supports that variants for the majority of the CpG sites in SNP rs730775 cause genetic variation at the \"NFKBIE\" locus which is suggestible linked to rheumatoid arthritis through \"trans\" acting regulation of DNA methylation by NF-\u03baB.\n\"FADS1\" locus.\nFatty acid desaturase 1 (FADS1) is a key enzyme in the metabolism of fatty acids. Moreover, rs174548 in the \"FADS1\" gene shows increased correlation with DNA methylation in people with high abundance of CD8+ T cells. SNP rs174548 is strongly associated with concentrations of arachidonic acid and other metabolites in fatty acid metabolism, blood eosinophil counts. and inflammatory diseases such as asthma. Interaction results indicated a correlation between rs174548 and asthma, providing new insights about fatty acid metabolism in CD8+ T cells with immune phenotypes.\nPseudoscience.\nAs epigenetics is in the early stages of development as a science and is surrounded by sensationalism in the public media, David Gorski and geneticist Adam Rutherford have advised caution against the proliferation of false and pseudoscientific conclusions by new age authors making unfounded suggestions that a person's genes and health can be manipulated by mind control. Misuse of the scientific term by quack authors has produced misinformation among the general public.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49035", "revid": "3747253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49035", "title": "Hereford", "text": "Cathedral city and the county town of Herefordshire, England\nHereford ( ) is a cathedral city and the county town of the ceremonial county of Herefordshire, England. It is on the banks of the River Wye and lies east of the border with Wales, north-west of Gloucester and south-west of Worcester. With a population of 61,900 in 2024, it is the largest settlement in Herefordshire.\nAn early town charter from 1189, granted by Richard I of England, describes it as \"Hereford in Wales\". Hereford has been recognised as a city since time immemorial, with the status being reconfirmed in October 2000. Hereford has been a civil parish since 2000.\nProducts from Hereford include cider, beer, leather goods, nickel alloys, poultry, chemicals and sausage rolls, as well as the Hereford breed of cattle.\nToponymy.\nThe Herefordshire edition of Cambridge County Geographies states \"a Welsh derivation of Hereford is more probable than a Saxon one\", but the name \"Hereford\" is also said to come from the Anglo-Saxon \"here\", an army or formation of soldiers, and the \"ford\", a place for crossing a river (cf. Herford, Westphalia, with the same Saxon etymology). If this is the origin it suggests that Hereford was a place where a body of armed men forded or crossed the Wye. The Welsh name for Hereford is \"Henffordd\", meaning \"old road\", and probably refers to the Roman road and Roman settlement at nearby Stretton Sugwas.\nHistory.\nHereford became the seat of Putta, Bishop of Hereford, some time between 676 and 688 AD, after which the settlement continued to grow due to its proximity to the border between Mercia and Wales, becoming the Saxon capital of West Mercia by the beginning of the 8th century.\nHostilities between the Anglo-Saxons and the Welsh came to a head with the Battle of Hereford in 760, in which the Britons freed themselves from the influence of the English. Hereford was again targeted by the Welsh during their conflict with the Anglo-Saxon King Edward the Confessor in 1056 when, supported by Viking allies, Gruffydd ap Llywelyn, King of Gwynedd and Powys, marched on the town and put it to the torch before returning home in triumph. Hereford had the only mint west of the Severn in the reign of Athelstan (924\u2013939), and it was to Hereford, then a border town, that Athelstan summoned the leading Welsh princes.\nThe present Hereford Cathedral dates from the early 12th century, as does the first bridge across the Wye. Former Bishops of Hereford include Saint Thomas de Cantilupe and Lord High Treasurer of England Thomas Charlton.\nHereford was home to a small but relatively important Jewish community until 1290, when Jews were expelled from England by Edward I. Jews from Worcester and Gloucester moved to Hereford after their expulsion in January 1275 by the Queen mother, Eleanor of Provence. The Bishops of Hereford campaigned against the presence of the community, including Cantilupe, and Richard Swinefield, who tried to stop social contact between Christians and Jews.\nThe city gave its name (translated to French) to two suburbs of Paris: Maisons-Alfort (population 54,600) and Alfortville (population 36,232), due to a manor built there by Peter of Aigueblanche, Bishop of Hereford, in the middle of the 13th century.\nA base for successive holders of the title Earl of Hereford, the city was once the site of Hereford Castle, which rivalled that of Windsor in size and scale. This was a base for repelling Welsh attacks and a secure stronghold for English kings, such as King Henry IV when on campaign in the Welsh Marches against Owain Glynd\u0175r. The castle was dismantled in the 18th century and landscaped into Castle Green.\nAfter the Battle of Mortimer's Cross in 1461, during the Wars of the Roses, the defeated Lancastrian leader Owen Tudor (grandfather of the future Henry VII of England) was taken to Hereford by Sir Roger Vaughan and executed in High Town. A plaque now marks the spot of the execution. Vaughan was later himself executed, under a flag of truce, by Owen's son Jasper.\nDuring the English Civil War, the city changed hands several times. On 30 September 1642, Parliamentarians led by Sir Robert Harley and Henry Grey, 1st Earl of Stamford occupied the city without opposition. In December they withdrew to Gloucester because of the presence in the area of a Royalist army under Lord Herbert. The city was again occupied briefly from 23 April to 18 May 1643 by Parliamentarians commanded by Sir William Waller, but it was in 1645 that the city saw most action. On 31 July 1645, a Scottish army of 14,000 under Alexander Leslie, 1st Earl of Leven besieged the city but met stiff resistance from its garrison and inhabitants. They withdrew on 1 September when they received news that a force led by King Charles was approaching. The city was finally taken for Parliament on 18 December 1645 by Colonel Birch and Colonel Morgan. King Charles showed his gratitude to the city of Hereford on 16 September 1645 by augmenting the city's coat of arms with the three lions of Richard I of England, ten Scottish Saltires signifying the ten defeated Scottish regiments, a very rare lion crest on top of the coat of arms signifying \"defender of the faith\" and the even rarer gold-barred peer's helm, found only on the arms of one other municipal authority: those of the City of London.\nNell Gwynne, actress and mistress of King Charles II, is said to have been born in Hereford in 1650 (although other towns and cities, notably Oxford, claim her as their own); Gwynn Street is named after her. Another famous actor born in Hereford is David Garrick (1717\u20131779).\nThe Bishop's Palace next to the cathedral was built in 1204 and is still in use today. Hereford Cathedral School is one of the oldest schools in England. The Harold Street Barracks were completed in 1856.\nDuring World War I in 1916, a fire at the Garrick Theatre killed eight young girls who had been performing at a charity concert.\nGovernance.\nThe main local government body covering Hereford is Herefordshire Council. Hereford has a city council, a parish council with city status, and has only limited powers.\nHistorically, Hereford has been the county town of Herefordshire. In 1974, Herefordshire was merged with Worcestershire to become part of the county of Hereford and Worcester and Hereford became a district of the new county. No successor parish was formed, so the former borough became unparished. Hereford had formed a historic borough and was reformed by the Municipal Corporations Act 1835. On 1 April 1998, the county of Hereford and Worcester was abolished; Herefordshire and Worcestershire were re-established as separate counties.\nHowever, the new Herefordshire was a unitary authority without any districts and so Hereford lost its district status (although, confusingly, the authority's full legal name is the County of Herefordshire District Council). Charter trustees were appointed to preserve mayoral traditions until a civil parish council could be set up, which happened on 1 April 2000 when the unparished area was parished as Hereford and Belmont Rural, part also went to the existing parish of Clehonger. Hereford is one of only eight civil parishes in England which have city status. It is based at Hereford Town Hall.\nHereford was the name of a parliamentary constituency that was centred in the city from 1295 to 2010, when it was renamed Hereford and South Herefordshire. The current Member of Parliament (MP) in the House of Commons is Jesse Norman of the Conservative Party. He has represented the constituency since May 2010.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nAs with all of the UK, Hereford experiences a maritime climate, with limited seasonal temperature ranges, and generally moderate rainfall throughout the year. The nearest Met Office weather station, for which 30-year averages are available, is Credenhill weather station, about north west of the city centre. Before 2001, the weather station at Preston Wynne (7 miles, 11\u00a0km to the north-east) provided the data.\nSince 2001, extremes at Hereford Credenhill have ranged from during July 2006, to as low as during December 2010.\nIn February 2020, many houses in Hereford were evacuated due to floods.\nDemography.\nIn 2021 the built-up area had a population of 60,475, the urban area had a population of 61,014, the agglomeration had a population of 63,346 and the parish had a population of 53,112.\nThe following statistics were recorded for the parish of Hereford at the 2021 Census:\nThe religious composition of Hereford at the 2021 Census was recorded as:\nTransport.\nRoads.\nHereford, as an ancient crossing over the River Wye, has long been important within the regional and national transport network. Today, the city is served by several major routes, including the A49, A438, A465 and A4103. The nearest motorway is the , which passes to the south of Ledbury.\nAlong the northern rim of the city, the A4103 is named \"Roman Road\", running in a straight line from east to west. Only one major route crosses the River Wye: the A49/Victoria Street, which is carried by Greyfriars Bridge.\nThe Hereford Link Road was completed in December 2017, costing around \u00a334,000,000 to build.\nIn 2017, Hereford was named \"Britain's second slowest city\", with an average traffic speed of 14.09\u00a0mph. Cambridge topped the list, whilst London came third with vehicles travelling at an average 14.59\u00a0mph.\nFuture.\nFollowing completion of the Hereford Link Road in December 2017, there are plans to add new homes, a university building and a transport hub to this area.\nPlans for a north\u2013south bypass were scrapped in February 2021.\nRailways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHereford railway station lies to the north of the city centre. It is a junction of two lines: the western terminus of the Cotswold Line and a through station on the Welsh Marches Line between Abergavenny and Leominster.\nServices are provided by three train operating companies:\nA second station, Hereford Barton, served the city between 1854 and 1893.\nBuses.\nSince the decision of First Midland Red to pull out of the city in 2015, the majority of local bus routes have been operated by Hereford bus and coach operator \"Yeomans Travel\". Longer routes include:\nCycling.\nCycling infrastructure in Hereford is maintained by Herefordshire Council and Sustrans.\nAn unbroken shared-use path for cyclists and pedestrians runs along the western rim of the city, from Newton Farm to Holmer. The Great Western Way route crosses the River Wye using Hunderton Bridge and follows the route of a disused railway line.\nNational Cycle Route 46 runs southbound from Hereford to Swansea. The route is signposted and unbroken; the next destination from Hereford en route is Kilpeck Castle. The route passes through Abergavenny and the Heads of the Valleys as it enters Wales. As of summer 2020, Sustrans proposes an extension to Route 46 running eastbound from Hereford to Worcester.\nNational Cycle Route 44 leaves Hereford to the southeast and runs as far as Rotherwas. The route is incomplete; once completed, Route 44 will run to Ludlow Castle to the north and Cinderford, Forest of Dean to the south. The nearest bike park is the Black Mountain Bike Park.\nMilitary associations.\nIn 1999, the British Army Special Air Service (SAS) moved from their base at Stirling Lines (formerly Bradbury Lines) in Hereford, their home since 1960, to a former Royal Air Force base RAF Credenhill in Credenhill that had been redeveloped and was designated as Stirling Lines in 2000. The clock tower on which the names of deceased SAS soldiers are inscribed was relocated.\nThe Anglican church of St Martin has part of its graveyard set aside as an SAS memorial, over twenty SAS soldiers are buried there. There is also a Wall of Remembrance displaying memorial plaques to some who could not be buried, including the 18 SAS men who lost their lives in the Sea King helicopter crash during the Falklands Campaign on 19 May 1982, and a sculpture and stained glass window dedicated to the SAS.\nOn 17 October 2017, \"Ascension\", a new sculpture and window honouring the Special Air Service Regiment in Hereford Cathedral, was dedicated by the then Bishop of Hereford.\nEconomy.\nIn 2005, Hereford was granted Fairtrade City status.\nMajor employers in the city include:\nHerefordshire is a centre for cider production as it contains many acres of orchards; many breweries and associated organisations exist here, along with other heavy and light industries.\nRegeneration.\nMany of the schools in Hereford have been rebuilt and improved. The Herefordshire and Ludlow College has also been rebuilt to a 21st-century standard. In September 2021 a new higher education institution NMITE (New Model Institute for Technology and Engineering) welcomed its first students who are undertaking an MEng Integrated Engineering.\nHereford benefitted from the PFI reconstruction schemes for NHS hospitals, with the former County Hospital site having \u00a360 million spent on a brand new, one-site hospital to replace the former three hospitals: the General, the Eye Hospital, and the County Hospital. The new Hereford County Hospital was the single largest investment in Herefordshire at that point. In 2015, further funds for more improvements at the hospital were granted.\nCurrent and future projects.\nA major regeneration project is taking place in Hereford city centre, formerly known as the Edgar Street Grid. This covers an area of around just north of the old city walls. Work started on 8 October 2012, and should take around 15 years to complete the whole project. The regeneration includes the rebuilding of the canal basin at the end of the currently disused Herefordshire and Gloucestershire Canal. The \u00a380 million phase 1 includes a supermarket, department store, multiplex cinema, shops, restaurants, and other facilities and opened in late Spring 2014.\nA proposed bypass has been drawn up to circle the city, which suffers from rush-hour traffic, with potential routes either to the east or west of the city. Both routes would connect with the recently completed Rotherwas Access Road, connecting the Rotherwas Industrial Estate to the A49. Rotherwas itself has recently been awarded Enterprise Zone status by the government; this is expected to boost the economy and bring in thousands of new jobs.\nA second railway station for Hereford has been discussed, which would be situated in Rotherwas as part of the Enterprise Zone.\nHereford is due to receive half of the 20,600 new homes expected to be built in the county by 2026, as part of the Regional Spatial Strategy.\nSport.\nHereford is the home of the football club Hereford FC, who play at Edgar Street in the National League North. They are a phoenix club that was set up in the wake of the demise of Hereford United Football Club in 2014. United were best known for beating Newcastle 2\u20131 in an FA Cup replay in January 1972, when they were still a non-league side and Newcastle were in the top division of English football. Other city clubs include Westfields, Hereford Pegasus and Hereford Lads Club, all of whom play in the Hellenic Football League.\nHereford Rugby Club announced plans in 2012 for a \u00a36 million move to a new home. Also based at the Rugby club are Hereford Stampede, who are an American football team who play in the BAFA National Leagues and made their full League debut in 2021.\nHereford Hockey Club is based at the Hereford City Sports Club, with teams entered into leagues in the West Hockey Association.\nThe city is home to Hereford Racecourse, a traditional National Hunt course to the north of the city centre which hosted around twenty meetings a year. The company who leased the site decided in 2012 that the site was not viable. What many thought to be the last meeting was held on 16 December 2012, however the course reopened for racing in October 2016.\nPublic leisure.\nHereford's public leisure facilities are managed by the not-for-profit trust HALO Leisure, which runs the Hereford Leisure Centre (which includes sports halls, gymnasium, squash courts, golf course and an outdoor athletics facility), and the Hereford Leisure Pool (which includes a gymnasium, full size swimming pool, leisure pool, diving pool, and learners' pool).\nClubs and societies.\nThe Hereford Rowing Club (along with the Kayak Club) uses the River Wye. The stretch of river is also used for other water sports.\nHereford has a nine pin skittle league, formed on 24 October 1902, and today consists of five divisions.\nEducation.\nUniversity.\nA new higher education institution, the New Model Institute for Technology and Engineering (NMITE), has been created in Hereford, which had its first intake of students in September 2021. It is envisioned as a seed institution for a future University of Hereford within a decade.\nColleges.\nHereford is home to five colleges, including:\nSchools.\nHereford's many secondary schools include:\nPrimary schools in the city include Hereford Cathedral Junior School, a co-educational independent school. Hereford Cathedral Junior School is, with Hereford Cathedral School, part of the ancient Hereford Cathedral Foundation dating back to 676. The Junior School was founded as an independent school in 1898. The city's other primary schools are: Lord Scudamore Academy, St James C of E, St Francis Xavier R.C, Trinity, Holmer C of E, Marlbrook, Riverside, St Martin's, Broadlands, Riverside, Hampton Dene and St Paul's C of E.\nHealth and social care.\nIn early 2008, Herefordshire Council and NHS Herefordshire became the first local authority and primary care trust to form a new kind of partnership.\nThe major hospital in Hereford is the Hereford County Hospital. Ambulance services are provided by the West Midlands Ambulance Service NHS Trust. The Midlands Air Ambulance charity provides air ambulance services across Herefordshire.\nA private national firm operates a hospital in Hereford.\nSociety and culture.\nAgriculture.\nFarming has played a major part in the history of the county of Herefordshire. For many years, the City of Hereford was the epicentre, playing host to the Cattle Market, a major market site.\nWith the 2001 foot-and-mouth outbreak, the market suffered with reduced trade. Established by Act of Parliament, the market had to be provided and so a Bill was introduced in 2003 to move the site to the outskirts of the city. The inner-city site would then be available for redevelopment, a process that has now finished.\nThe new Hereford Cattle Market opened its doors in August 2011 on the site just outside the city; it has already proved so successful that trading and business is up on the previous site's record.\nMusic.\nThe annual Three Choirs Festival, originating in the 18th century and one of the oldest music festivals in the British Isles, is held in Hereford every third year; the other venues are Gloucester and Worcester.\nThe hymn \"Hereford\" was written by Samuel Sebastian Wesley (1810\u20131876). He was an organist at Hereford Cathedral (1832\u20131835). This tune is often sung to the words 'O Thou who camest from above'.\nComposer Sir Edward Elgar lived at Plas Gwyn, Eign Hill, in Hereford between 1904 and 1911, writing some of his most famous works during that time. He is commemorated with a statue on the Cathedral Close. One of his Enigma Variations was inspired by a bulldog named Dan falling into the River Wye at Hereford, and the dog is similarly honoured with a wooden statue beside the river. Not long after moving into the city Elgar, despite not being a city council member, was offered but declined the office of mayor of the city. He visited the city as a conductor at the Three Choirs Festival, the last occasion in 1933 prior to his death.\nHereford is home to the Hereford Police Male Voice Choir who competed on the BBC TV show \"Last Choir Standing\", and the Railway Choir.\nA charity music school is based in Hereford.\nArt.\n\"H.Art\", or Herefordshire Art Week, is an annual county-wide exhibition held in September, displaying the work of local artists. Many places usually closed to the public are opened during this week, such as the Bishop's Palace at the cathedral.\nPolish-born sculptor Walenty Pytel has had studios in Hereford since 1963 after training at Hereford College of Art.\nThere is a statue of a bronze Hereford bull designed by Brian Alabaster ARBS in front of The Old House.\nLiterature.\nThe troops of the fictional commando squad Rainbow were based at RAF Hereford, as detailed in the novel \"Rainbow Six\".\nThe action of the fictional novels \"\" and \"The Last Dragonslayer\" by Jasper Fforde takes place in Hereford.\nPhil Rickman's \"Merrily Watkins\" series of supernatural and mystery novels is set in and around Hereford.\nMedia.\nThe local radio stations include Hits Radio Herefordshire &amp; Worcestershire (formerly known as \"Wyvern\"), which broadcasts on 97.6\u00a0MHz, 96.7\u00a0MHz and 102.8\u00a0MHz FM, Sunshine Radio on 106.2\u00a0MHz FM and BBC Hereford and Worcester, which broadcasts on 94.7\u00a0MHz FM. Hereford FC has its own on-line radio station, RadioHerefordFC, which covers all matches home and away.\nThe Hereford Times is the city's only remaining weekly local newspaper, as the \"Hereford Journal\" ceased publication on 11 June 2014 and the \"Hereford admag\" followed suit in September 2018.\nLocal TV content is currently provided by BBC Midlands Today and ITV News Central.\nEntertainment.\nThe city's main theatre and cultural venue is the Courtyard Centre for the Arts, which was opened in 1998, replacing the New Hereford Theatre.\nThere is a multi-screen Odeon cinema in the Old Market precinct.\nMFA Bowl (formerly known as TGS), home to a Ten Pin Bowling alley and Mini Golf course, is near the railway station.\nThere is a dedicated skatepark on Holmer Road.\n\"See \"\nTourism and attractions.\nHereford Cathedral dates from 1079 and contains the \"Mappa Mundi\", a medieval map of the world dating from the 13th century, which was restored in the late 20th century. It also has a chained library.\nThe Old House, Hereford is an historic black and white house in the centre of High Town in Hereford. It is now a museum about life in the Jacobean era of the 1600s when it was built.\nThe Hereford Museum and Art Gallery, housed in a Victorian Gothic building and opened in 1874, presents artefacts, fine art, and decorative art associated with the local area.\nThe Museum of Cider is in the city, with a shop, and an interactive guide to producing the drink. It is a registered Charity Trust founded in the early 1970s by people who wanted to record the past, and the disappearing traditional art of cider making that had been practised for generations on the farms in the \"Cider Counties\". Situated in an old cider factory, it opened in 1980 and 1981. In the spring/summer a cider festival is held, started in the mid-1980s, by the Friends of the Museum with the advice of Long Ashton Research Station near Bristol. It has a display of named cider apples and the apples are pressed in the old way. The museum holds in its Pomological Archive a number of records pertaining to apples and cider.\nThe Violette Szabo Museum is in Wormelow village, outside the city.\nHolme Lacy House, now a hotel for a national chain, was built near the city by John Scudamore in the 1500s. It has played host to famous historical figures in its time.\nFestivals.\nSeveral festivals are hosted in Hereford including the Beer on the Wye festival, the Hereford Food Festival, and the Three Choirs Festival.\nFreedom of the City.\nThe following people and military units have received the Freedom of the City of Hereford.\nMilitary units.\nSource:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49037", "revid": "599562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49037", "title": "Ecological selection", "text": ""}
{"id": "49039", "revid": "892079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49039", "title": "Artificial selection", "text": "Breeding used to develop desired characteristics"}
{"id": "49040", "revid": "44721228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49040", "title": "Magnus Maximus", "text": "Roman emperor from 383 to 388\nMagnus Maximus (; died 28 August 388) was Roman emperor in the West from 383 to 388. He usurped the throne from emperor Gratian.\nBorn in Gallaecia, he served as an officer in Britain under Theodosius the Elder during the Great Conspiracy. In 383, he was proclaimed emperor in Britannia, and in Gaul the next year, while Gratian's brother Valentinian II retained Italy, Pannonia, Hispania, and Africa. In 387, Maximus's ambitions led him to invade Italy, resulting in his defeat by Theodosius I at the Battle of Poetovio in 388. In the view of some historians, his death marked the end of direct imperial presence in Northern Gaul and Britannia.\nLife.\nBirth, army career.\nMaximus was born in Gallaecia, Hispania, on the estates of Count Theodosius (the Elder) of the Theodosian dynasty, to whom he claimed to be related. In their youth, Maximus and Theodosius I served together in Theodosius the Elder's army in Britannia. Maximus would become a distinguished general in the following years; as he would gain the support of his fellow soldiers and the admiration of the Romano-Britons whom he defended, which would lead to his eventual immortalisation in Welsh legend in the centuries following. He served under Count Theodosius in Africa in 373. Assigned to Britain in 380, he defeated an incursion of the Picts and Scots in 381. Historian Anthony Birley sees this as evidence that he had become the \"dux\" (commander) of the army in Britain.\nRebellion and bid for the throne.\nThe Western emperor Gratian had received a number of Alans into his bodyguard, and was accused of showing favouritism towards these foreigners at the expense of Roman citizens. In the spring of 383, the discontented Roman army proclaimed Maximus emperor in Gratian's place. Orosius, who wrote that Maximus was \"an energetic and able man and one worthy of the throne had he not risen to it by usurpation, contrary to his oath of allegiance,\" claimed that he was proclaimed emperor against his will, but Zosimus portrays him as inciting the troops to rebel against Gratian, as he was upset about Theodosius becoming emperor while he himself was not promoted. Stephen Williams and Gerard Friell preferred the latter version, based on the rapid success of the revolt.\nMaximus went to Gaul to pursue his imperial ambitions, taking with him at least part of the Roman garrison in Britannia. Although many sources such as J. B. Bury claim he took most of the Roman troops with him, the number of troops withdrawn from Britain is unknown. After five days of skirmishing near Paris he defeated Gratian, who fled the battlefield and was killed at Lyon on 25 August 383. Following negotiations between the remaining emperors, an accord seems to have been reached in 384 with Valentinian II and Theodosius I recognizing Maximus as \"Augustus\" in the West while Maximus acknowledged Valentinian's rule of Italy, Africa and Illyricum.\nAdministration.\nMaximus made his capital at Augusta Treverorum (Treves, Trier) in Gaul, and ruled Britain, Gaul, and Spain. He issued coinage and a number of edicts reorganising Gaul's system of provinces. Some historians believe Maximus may have founded the office of the \"Comes Britanniarum\" as well, although it was probably Stilicho who created the permanent office.\nMaximus was known as a persecutor of heretics. It was on his orders that Priscillian and six companions were executed for heresy, although the actual civil charges laid by Maximus were for the practice of magic. Prominent churchmen such as St. Ambrose and St. Martin of Tours protested against this involvement of the secular power in doctrinal matters, but the executions were carried out nonetheless. Maximus thereby not only established his credentials as an upholder of orthodoxy, but also strengthened his financial resources in the ensuing confiscations. The \"Gallic Chronicle\" of 452 describes the Priscillianists as \"Manichaeans\", a different Gnostic heresy already condemned in Roman law under Diocletian, and states that Magnus Maximus had them \"caught and exterminated with the greatest zeal\".\nIn a threatening letter addressed to Valentinian II, most likely composed between the spring of 384 and the summer of 387, Maximus complains of Valentinian's actions towards Ambrose and adherents of the Nicene Creed, writing: \"Can it be that Your Serenity, venerable to me, thinks that a religion which has once taken root in the minds of men, which God himself has established, can be uprooted?\" in response to \"the disturbance and convulsion of Catholic law.\"\nConversely, Maximus's edict of 387/388, which censured Christians at Rome for burning down a Jewish synagogue, was condemned by bishop Ambrose, who said people exclaimed, \"the emperor has become a Jew\".\nFinal conflicts and execution.\nIn 387 Maximus, with a combined mix of frustration, fueled by Justina\u2019s religious policy in Mediolanum in attempting to make Arianism coexist and even supersede Nicaean Christianity and the ambitions of his own mind for greater power within the Empire, launched a surprise invasion of Italy in 387. He managed to force emperor Valentinian II out of Mediolanum and the 16 year old emperor fled with his mother and court to Theodosius I, who treated them as honored guest, but gave them the cold shoulder for some time on the issue of restoring Valentinian\u2019s rule in Italy. After becoming smitten by and marrying Galla, the young daughter of Justina and sister of Valentinian II, the two emperors\u2019 subsequently invaded from the east; their armies, led by Richomeres and other generals, campaigned against Maximus in June\u2013August 388. Maximus was defeated in the Battle of Poetovio, and retreated to Aquileia. Meanwhile, the Franks under Marcomer had taken the opportunity to invade northern Gaul during this period of civil war, further weakening Maximus's position.\nAndragathius, \"magister equitum\" of Maximus and the killer of the Emperor Gratian, was defeated near Siscia, while Maximus's brother, Marcellinus, fell in battle at Poetovio. Maximus surrendered in Aquileia and, although he pleaded for mercy, was executed. The Senate passed a decree of \"Damnatio memoriae\" against him, but his mother and at least two daughters were spared. Theodosius's trusted general Arbogast strangled Maximus's son, Victor, at Trier in autumn of the same year.\nFate of family.\nMagnus Maximus is known to have had a wife, who is recorded as having sought spiritual counsel from St. Martin of Tours during his time at Trier. Her name and her fate after Maximus's downfall have not been preserved in definitive historical records (but see the Welsh tradition below). Unlike his son Victor, Maximus's unnamed mother and daughters were spared by Theodosius I; the daughters were sent to a relative and the mother was given a pension.\nOne of Maximus's daughters may have been married to Ennodius, proconsul Africae (395). Ennodius's grandson was Petronius Maximus, another ill-fated emperor, who ruled in Rome for only 77 days before he was stoned to death while fleeing from the Vandals on 24 May 455. Other descendants of Ennodius, and thus possibly of Maximus, included Anicius Olybrius, emperor in 472, but also several consuls and bishops such as St. Magnus Felix Ennodius (Bishop of Pavia c.\u2009514 \u2013 521). We also encounter an otherwise unrecorded daughter of Magnus Maximus, Sevira, on the Pillar of Eliseg (9th century), an early medieval inscribed stone in Wales, which claims that she married Vortigern, king of the Britons.\nRole in British and Breton history.\nMaximus's bid for imperial power in 383 coincides with the last date for evidence of a Roman military presence in the western Pennines and the fortress of Deva. Coins dated later than 383 have been found in excavations along Hadrian's Wall, suggesting that troops were not entirely stripped from it, as was once thought. In the \"De Excidio et Conquestu Britanniae\" written c.\u2009540, Gildas says that Maximus \"deprived\" Britain not only of its Roman troops, but also of its \"armed bands...governors and of the flower of her youth\", never to return.\nHaving left with the troops and senior administrators, and planning to continue as the ruler of Britain in the future, his practical course was to transfer local authority to local rulers. Welsh legend supports that this happened, with stories such as \"Breuddwyd Macsen Wledig\" (English: The Dream of Emperor Maximus), where he not only marries a wondrous British woman (thus making British descendants probable), but also gives her father sovereignty over Britain (thus formally transferring authority from Rome back to the Britons themselves).\nThe earliest Welsh genealogies give Maximus (referred to as \"Macsen/Maxen Wledig\", or \"Emperor Maximus\") the role of founding father of the dynasties of several medieval Welsh kingdoms, including those of Powys, Gwynedd and Gwent. He is given as the ancestor of a Welsh king on the Pillar of Eliseg, erected nearly 500 years after he left Britain, and he figures in lists of the Fifteen Tribes of Wales.\nAfter he became emperor of the West, Maximus returned to Britain to campaign against the Picts and Gaels (following Gaelic settlements in Wales and Scotland), probably in support of Rome's long-standing allies the Damnonii, Votadini, and Novantae (all located in modern Scotland). While there he likely made similar arrangements for a formal transfer of authority to local chiefs\u2014the later rulers of Galloway, home to the Novantae, claimed Maximus as the founder of their line, the same as did the Welsh kings.\nThe ninth century \"Historia Brittonum\" gives another account of Maximus and assigns him an important role:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The seventh emperor was Maximianus, He withdrew from Britain with all its military force, slew Gratianus the king of the Romans, and obtained the sovereignty of all Europe. Unwilling to send back his warlike companions to their wives, families, and possessions in Britain, he conferred upon them numerous districts from the lake on the summit of Mons Iovis, to the city called Cant Guic, and to the western Tumulus, that is Cruc Occident. These are the Armoric Britons, and they remain there to the present day. In consequence of their absence, Britain being overcome by foreign nations, the lawful heirs were cast out, till God interposed with his assistance.\nModern historians believe that this idea of mass British troop settlement in Brittany by Maximus may very well reflect some reality, as it accords with archaeological and other historical evidence and later Breton traditions.\nArmorica declared independence from the Roman Empire in 407, but contributed archers for Aetius's defence against Attila the Hun, and Riothamus, who may have ruled there as king, was subsequently mentioned in contemporary documents as an ally of Rome's against the Goths. Despite its continued usage of two distinct languages, Breton and Gallo, and extensive invasions and conquests by Franks and Vikings, Armorica retained considerable cultural cohesion into the 13th century.\nMaximus also established a military base in his native Gallaecia, which persisted as a cultural entity despite occupation by the Suebi in 409, see Kingdom of Galicia.\nAetius sent large numbers of Alans to both Armorica and Galicia following the defeat of Attila at the Battle of the Catalunian Plains. The Alans evidently assimilated quickly into the local Celtic cultures, contributing their own legends, e.g., to the Arthurian Cycle of romances.\nWelsh legend.\nLegendary versions of Maximus's career in which he marries the Welsh princess Elen may have circulated in popular tradition in Welsh-speaking areas from an early date. Although the story of Helen and Maximus's meeting is almost certainly fictional, there is some evidence for the basic claims. He is certainly given a prominent place in the earliest version of the Welsh Triads which are believed to date from c.\u20091100 and which reflect older traditions in some cases. Welsh poetry also frequently refers to Macsen as a figure of comparison with later Welsh leaders. These legends come down to us in two separate versions.\nGeoffrey of Monmouth.\nAccording to Geoffrey of Monmouth's fictional \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" (c.\u20091136), the basis for many English and Welsh legends, Maximianus, as he calls him, was a Roman senator, a nephew of Coel Hen through Coel's brother Ioelinus, and king of the Britons following the death of Octavius (Eudaf Hen). Geoffrey writes this came about because Octavius wanted to wed his daughter to just such a powerful half-Roman-half-Briton and to give the kingship of Britain, as a dowry, to that husband, so he sent a message to Rome offering his daughter to Maximian.\nCaradocus, the Duke of Cornwall, had suggested and supported the marriage between Octavius's daughter and Maximian. Maximian accepted the offer and left Rome for Britain. Geoffrey claims further that Maximian gathered an army as he sacked Frankish towns along the way. He invaded Clausentum (modern Southampton) unintentionally and nearly fought the army of the Britons under Conan Meriadoc before agreeing to a truce. Following further negotiations, Maximian was given the kingship of Britain and Octavius retired. Five years into his kingship, Magnus Maximus assembled a vast fleet and invaded Gaul, leaving Britain in the control of Caradocus. \nUpon reaching the kingdom of Armorica (historically, the region between the Loire and Seine rivers, later comprising Brittany, Normandy, Anjou, Maine and Touraine), he defeated the king and killed thousands of inhabitants. Before departing to Rome, he summoned Conanus, the rebellious nephew of Octavius, and asked him to rule as king of the land, which was renamed Brittany. Conan's men married native women after cutting out their tongues to preserve the purity of their language. Geoffrey of Monmouth presents this legend to explain the Welsh name for Brittany, Llydaw, as originating from \"lled-taw\" or \"half-silent\". Given that Conan was well established in genealogies as the founder of Brittany, this account is certainly connected to an older tradition than Geoffrey.\nFollowing the death of Caradocus, rule of Britain as regent passed to Dionotus, who \u2013 facing a foreign invasion \u2013 appealed to Maximus, who finally sent a man named Gracianus Municeps with two legions to stop the attack. He killed many thousands before the invaders fled to Ireland. Maximus died in Rome soon after and Dionotus became the official king of the Britons. Unfortunately, before he could begin his reign, Gracianus took hold of the crown and made himself king over Dionotus.\nWhile a broadly positive account of Maximian, the \"History\" concludes with the success of the barbarian invaders, and laments, \"Alas for the absence of so many warlike soldiers through the madness of Maximianus!\".\nThe Dream of Macsen Wledig.\nAlthough the \"Mabinogion\" tale \"The Dream of Macsen Wledig\" is written in later manuscripts than Geoffrey's version, the two accounts are so different that scholars agree the Dream cannot be based purely on Geoffrey's version. The Dream's account also seems to accord better with details in the Triads, so it perhaps reflects an earlier tradition.\nMacsen Wledig, the Emperor of Rome, dreams one night of a lovely maiden in a wonderful, far-off land. Awakening, he sends his men all over the earth in search of her. With much difficulty they find her in a rich castle in Wales, daughter of a chieftain based at Segontium (Caernarfon), and lead the Emperor to her. Everything he finds is exactly as in his dream. The maiden, whose name is Helen or Elen, accepts and loves him. Because Elen is found a virgin, Macsen gives her father sovereignty over the island of Britain and orders three castles built for his bride.\nIn Macsen's absence, a new emperor seizes power and warns him not to return. With the help of men from Britain led by Elen's brother Conanus (\"Welsh\": Cynan Meriadoc, \"Breton\": Conan Meriadeg), Macsen marches across Gaul and Italy and recaptures Rome. In gratitude to his British allies, Macsen rewards them with a portion of Gaul that becomes known as Brittany.\nCoel Hen.\nAccording to another legend, Maximus appointed Coel Hen, perhaps the legendary \"Old King Cole\", as governor of northern Britain, ruling from Eburacum (York). Following Maximus's departure for the continent, Coel became high king of northern Britain.\nOther links with Caernarfon.\nMagnus Maximus and Elen are traditionally given as the parents of Saint Peblig (or Publicus, named in the Calendar of the Church in Wales), to whom a church dedicated stands in Caernarfon. The church is built on an important early Christian site, itself built on a Roman Mithraeum or temple of Mithras, close to the Segontium Roman Fort. A Roman altar was found in one of the walls during 19th century restoration work. The present church dates mainly from the 14th century.\nThe medieval English king Edward I was influenced by the legendary dream of Macsen Wledig/Magnus Maximus. In the dream Maximus had seen a fort, \"the fairest that man ever saw\", within a city at the mouth of a river in a mountainous country and opposite an island. Edward interpreted this to mean Segontium was the city of Maximus's dream and drew on the imperial link when building Caernarfon Castle in 1283. It was apparently believed that Maximus died in Wales. According to the \"Flores Historiarum\", during the construction of the Castle and the nearby planned town, the body believed to be of Magnus Maximus was discovered entombed; King Edward ordered its reburial in a local church.\nLater literature.\nMagnus Maximus appears as a character in the Erik Hildinger\u2019s novel \"Fortuna at the Rudder\", first as general and then as a usurping emperor. The prominent place of Macsen in history, Welsh legend and in the Matter of Britain means he is often a character or referred to in historical and Arthurian fiction. Such stories include Stephen R. Lawhead's Pendragon Cycle, Mary Stewart's \"The Hollow Hills\", Jack Whyte's Camulod Chronicles, M J Trow's Britannia series, Nancy McKenzie's \"Queen of Camelot\" and Rudyard Kipling's \"Puck of Pook's Hill\". The popular Welsh folk song \"Yma o Hyd\", recorded by Dafydd Iwan in 1981, recalls Macsen Wledig and celebrates the continued survival of the Welsh people since his days.\nPrimary sources.\nHe is mentioned in a number of ancient and medieval sources:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49044", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49044", "title": "Bokononism", "text": ""}
{"id": "49045", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49045", "title": "Physical phemomenon", "text": ""}
{"id": "49048", "revid": "17722138", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49048", "title": "Sampler (needlework)", "text": "Textile artwork used to display skills and techniques\nA needlework sampler is a piece of embroidery or cross-stitching produced as a 'specimen of achievement', demonstration or a test of skill in needlework. It often includes the alphabet, figures, motifs, decorative borders and sometimes the name of the person who embroidered it and the date. The word \"sampler\" is derived from the Latin , which means 'example'.\nHistory.\nThe earliest sampler extant is a spot sampler, i.e. one having randomly scattered motifs, of the Nazca culture in Peru formerly in the Museum of Primitive Art, New York City. It is estimated to date from ca. 200 BCE \u2013300 CE and is worked in cotton and wool pattern darning on a woven cotton ground. It has seventy-four figures of birds, plants and mythological beings.\nCoptic sampler fragments of silk on linen in double running stitch and pattern darning have been found in Egyptian burial grounds of 400\u2013500 CE. These are pattern samplers having designs based on early Christian symbols.\nSamplers were known to be used by stitchers in Europe as early as the beginning of the 16th century, although none that early have been found. A collection of fifty (samplers) was listed in the 1509 inventory of the possessions of Queen Joanna (Juana I, 1479\u20131555) of Castile (Spain). They were described as stitchery and (drawn thread work), some in silk and others in gold thread. At the time of the inventory they were in the care of her chamberlain Diego de Rivera and his son Alonso, but they have all disappeared.\nEarly mentions of samplers in text include Skelton (1469-1529), and Shakespeare (1564-1616).\nThe oldest surviving European samplers were made in the 16th and 17th centuries. As there were few pre-printed patterns available for needleworkers, a stitched model was needed. Whenever a needleworker saw a new and interesting example of a stitching pattern, they would quickly sew a small sample of it onto a piece of cloth \u2013 their 'sampler'. The patterns were sewn randomly onto the fabric as a reference for future use, and the needleworker would collect extra stitches and patterns throughout their lifetime.\nThe first printed pattern book was published by Johann Sch\u00f6nsperger the Younger of Augsburg in 1523, but it was not easily obtainable and a sampler was the most common form of reference available to many women. Pattern books were widely copied and issued by other publishers. Some are still available in reprint today.\nThe earliest English dated surviving sampler, housed in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, was made by Jane Bostocke who included her name and the date 1598 in the inscription. Stitched with silk and metal thread on linen it has pictorial figures above with border and all-over patterns below. The inscription reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe museum has two other samplers believed to date from the 16th century, one from Germany with religious motifs and one from Italy with floral patterns and grotesques. Both are worked in silk and linen.\nThe oldest known embroidery sampler in the Netherlands is dated 1608.\nA sampler in the Museum of London has two cutwork bands stitched in silk, gold, and silver threads and thirteen bands of \"reticella\" whitework in white linen thread. The fourth band from the top has the initials E R, the royal arms of Queen Elizabeth I, and the maker's name SUSAN NEGABRI in bold letters. It is believed to date before the queen's death in 1603.\nBecause very few samplers from the 16th century have been found it is not possible to generalize about their style and appearance. By the middle of the 17th century, English, Dutch, and German samplers were being stitched on a narrow band of fabric wide. Hand-woven linen, bleached or unbleached, is the foundation material of early samplers. As fabric was very expensive, these samplers were totally covered with neat rows of stitches. They were known as band samplers and valued highly, often being mentioned in wills and passed down through the generations. These samplers were stitched using a variety of needlework styles, threads, and ornament. Many of them were exceedingly elaborate, incorporating subtly shaded colours, silk and metallic embroidery threads, and using stitches such as Hungarian, Florentine, tent, cross, long-armed cross, two-sided Italian cross, rice, running, Holbein, Algerian eye and buttonhole stitches. The samplers also incorporated small designs of flowers and animals, and geometric designs stitched using as many as 20 different colors of thread. Some were stitched partially or entirely in whitework.\nBand samplers were more decorative than the utilitarian random motif spot samplers, and stitchers finished them by adding their names, dates of completion, and sometimes teacher or school names. As the work of sampler making moved into schools in the late 17th and early 18th centuries design styles changed. Alphabets and verses were added along with pictorial elements such as architectural motifs, landscapes, and large potted plants. Educational themes included maps, multiplication tables, perpetual calendars, and acrostic puzzles. The earliest samplers from Barbados date from 1771 (held by the Royal School of Needlework), made by Martha Collymore, with another made by Jane Rollstone Alleyne in 1777 owned by the Victoria and Albert Museum. Both have a band following much earlier 17th-century sampler patterns, and are presumed to be created under the tutelage of the same teacher, using older reference materials from earlier generations of white colonisers on the island.\nBy the 18th century, samplers were a complete contrast to the scattered samples sewn earlier on. They became wider and more square, eventually with borders on all four sides. Samplers were mainly school exercises or mourning samplers during the 18th and 19th centuries, and were almost entirely worked in cross stitch.\nDesign styles were increasingly influenced by Berlin woolwork which became popular worldwide, due to the availability of patterns, initially emanating from Berlin, Germany. This style of needlework reached its height of popularity between the 1830s and 1870s. These samplers were stitched more to demonstrate knowledge than to preserve skill. The stitching of samplers was believed to be a sign of virtue, achievement and industry, and girls were taught the art from a young age.\nBerlin woolwork designs had naturalistic shading and more depth of perspective than the flat two-dimensional objects on traditional needlework. By mid-19th century adult needleworkers were devising long and narrow stitch samplers having geometric patterns done in woolwork. The Art Needlework movement and elimination of samplers from female education brought about the decline in traditional sampler making that continued into the 20th century.\nModern samplers.\nSamplers are widely stitched today. Designs range widely in style, from accurate reproductions of historic pieces to much more contemporary and modern styles. Popular topics include designs commemorating births and marriages, family trees, and maps.\nThe word \"sampler\" has been applied to different styles of needlework meant for display. However, the genre may broadly be said to include any needlework that serves as a personal reference for patterns, stitches, or designs to include in other pieces.\nMaterials used include aida cloth, evenweave, and linen fabrics, in cotton, linen, and man-made materials combined in more and more ways; and fibers from cotton floss to silk, rayon, viscose, and metallic.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49052", "revid": "4439790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49052", "title": "Physical phenomenon", "text": ""}
{"id": "49053", "revid": "50056326", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49053", "title": "Carlos Filipe Ximenes Belo", "text": "Roman Catholic bishop (born 1948)\nCarlos Filipe Ximenes Belo, SDB, commonly known as Carlos Belo or Ximenes Belo (born 3 February 1948) is an East Timorese prelate of the Catholic Church. He became a bishop in 1988 and served as the apostolic administrator of the Diocese of D\u00edli from 1988 to 2002. In 1996, he shared the Nobel Peace Prize with Jos\u00e9 Ramos-Horta for working \"towards a just and peaceful solution to the conflict in East Timor\". He is a professed member of the Salesians.\nEarly life and religious vocation.\nCarlos Filipe Ximenes Belo was the fifth child of Domingos Vaz Filipe and Ermelinda Baptista Filipe, born in the village of Wailakama, near Vemasse, on the north coast of Portuguese Timor. His father, a schoolteacher, died two years after Belo was born. He attended Catholic schools at Baucau and Ossu and then entered the minor seminary in Dare outside Dili, graduating in 1968. From 1969 until 1981, apart from periods of practical training in East Timor and Macau from 1974 to 1976, Belo studied philosophy at the Catholic University of Portugal and the Salesian Pontifical University.\nBelo took his final vows as a member of the Salesian Society on 6 October 1974 and was ordained a priest on 26 July 1980. He returned to East Timor in 1981, taking Indonesian citizenship as required since Indonesia had invaded East Timor following the Carnation Revolution. Belo became a teacher for 20 months and later director for two months at the Salesian College at Fatumaca.\nApostolic administrator.\nAfter Monsignor Martinho da Costa Lopes was removed as apostolic administrator in 1983, his position remained vacant until Belo was appointed titular bishop of Lorium and apostolic administrator of the Diocese of Dili, the senior official of the Catholic Church in East Timor, on 21 March 1988. On 19 June 1988, he was consecrated a bishop by the Apostolic Nuncio to Indonesia, Archbishop Francesco Canalini. He chose as his episcopal motto \"Caritas Veritatis-Veritas Caritatis\".\nBelo continued on Lopes' path and after five months of taking office he preached a sermon that denounced the Kraras massacre of 1983 and condemned the many Indonesian arrests. He undertook a program of overseas contacts to counter the world's ignorance of the violence in East Timor.\nIn February 1989 he wrote to the president of Portugal, the pope, and the secretary-general of the United Nations calling for the UN to sponsor and oversee a referendum on the future of East Timor and for international assistance for the East Timorese, who were \"dying as a people and a nation\". This appeal to the UN became public in April. He further antagonized Indonesian authorities when he gave sanctuary in his own home to youths escaping the Santa Cruz massacre in 1991 and endeavoured to expose how many were killed.\nBelo's labours on behalf of the East Timorese and in pursuit of peace and reconciliation were recognised when, along with Jos\u00e9 Ramos-Horta, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize on 10 December 1996. Belo capitalised upon this honour by meeting with a variety of world leaders, including US President Bill Clinton and Nelson Mandela of South Africa.\nFollowing East Timor's independence on 20 May 2002, Belo went to Portugal for several months of medical treatment. He later said he was \"suffering from both physical and mental fatigue that will require a long period of recuperation\". He and Bishop Bas\u00edlio do Nascimento, the administrator of another diocese in East Timor, met privately with the pope on 28 October 2002.\nPope John Paul II accepted his resignation as Apostolic Administrator of Dili on 26 November 2002. Nascimento was named to succeed him. The Vatican announcement did not explain his retirement at the age of 54, but cited the provision of canon law that allows a bishop to retire for grave reasons or health problems.\nLater activity.\nFollowing his resignation Belo travelled to Portugal where he said he underwent medical treatment for cancer.\nBy the beginning of 2004, there were repeated calls for him to return to East Timor to run for president. In May 2004 he told Portuguese state-run television RTP that he had \"decided to leave politics to politicians\".\nBelo started working in the Diocese of Maputo in Mozambique in June 2004 and described his role as \"assistant parish priest\": \"I do pastoral work by teaching catechism to children, giving retreats to young people. I have descended from the top to the bottom.\" He told an interviewer that he had left D\u00edli because the new political situation required new leadership that could undertake the work of reconciliation without the associations he had with earlier battles. He said he had chosen Mozambique because he did not think he could learn another language and that he had consulted his Salesian superior and Cardinal Crescenzio Sepe, who headed the Curia department responsible for missionary territory. He planned to stay for a year. In 2024 \"The New York Times\" reported that Belo was \"said to be working as a priest in Mozambique\".\nOther awards.\nIn 1995, he received the John Humphrey Freedom Award from the Canadian human rights group Rights &amp; Democracy.\nOn 3 August 1988 he received the Grand Cross of the Order of Liberty from the government of Portugal.\nIn 2004 he was awarded an honorary doctorate by CEU Cardinal Herrera University.\nHe was named the Lusophonic Personality of the Year 2010 by the of the Lisbon Academy of Sciences.\nSexual abuse allegations.\nOn 28 September 2022, \"De Groene Amsterdammer\", a Dutch magazine, reported that two men alleged Belo sexually abused them and others as children in East Timor. The magazine's research indicated that Belo sexually abused male children before and during his tenure as a bishop, both in Fatumaca and D\u00edli. The next day a Vatican spokesperson confirmed that Church officials had imposed disciplinary sanctions against Belo in 2020 less than a year after receiving allegations in 2019 about his behavior in East Timor years earlier. These included restrictions on Belo's movements and the exercise of his ministry as well as prohibiting him from having contact with children. He was also forbidden to have any contact with East Timor. The Vatican \"modified and reinforced\" its disciplinary actions in 2021. Its spokesman said that Belo accepted these rules in both years.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49054", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49054", "title": "T\u00fapac Katari Guerrilla Army", "text": "The T\u00fapac Katari Guerrilla Army \"(Ej\u00e9rcito Guerrillero T\u00fapac Katari)\" was a guerrilla movement in Bolivia. Albeit of indigenist inspiration, the movement had a multiracial membership. The organization descended directly from the original revolutionaries trained by Che Guevara in the 1960s. Their objective was to fight for social equality in Bolivia and amongst its indigenous population. They carried out their first attack on July 5, 1991, destroying an electric power pylon in El Alto, a major city which adjoins La Paz, Bolivia's administrative capital. Most of the group's attacks have been similarly small-scale and they had confined their activities largely to Bolivia. The group suffered a major setback in a crackdown in 1992, when much of its leadership was neutralized through incarceration.\nThe group was named after T\u00fapac Katari, a colonial-era indigenous revolutionary. One of their former members, \u00c1lvaro Garc\u00eda Linera, has served as the vice-president of Bolivia."}
{"id": "49055", "revid": "1123", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49055", "title": "Pseudo-random number generator", "text": ""}
{"id": "49056", "revid": "8351", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49056", "title": "Formarians", "text": ""}
{"id": "49057", "revid": "50651859", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49057", "title": "Henry Barnes (traffic engineer)", "text": "American traffic engineer (1906\u20131968)\nHenry A. Barnes (December 16, 1906 \u2013 September 16, 1968) was an American traffic engineer and commissioner who served in many cities, including Flint, Michigan; Denver, Colorado; Baltimore, Maryland; and New York City. Barnes was responsible for many innovations in traffic engineering, including synchronized traffic signals, actuated traffic signals (signals whose timing varies based on the presence of automobiles and pedestrians), and bus lanes. \nBarnes Dance.\nIn traffic signal operation, a Barnes Dance or Barnes Shuffle is a period during which all motor vehicle traffic is stopped and pedestrians given exclusive right of way, allowing them to cross in every direction at the same time. It was first used in Kansas City and Vancouver in the late 1940s and subsequently adopted in other cities such as Denver, New York, San Diego, Baltimore, and Washington, D.C. Barnes stated that he did not invent the concept but promoted its widespread use. The phrase originated from City Hall reporter, John Buchanan, who wrote, \"Barnes has made people so happy, they're dancing in the street.\"\nTraffic Engineer and Commissioner.\nFlint, Michigan.\nBarnes served in Flint until 1947.\nDenver.\nDenver city's first professional traffic engineer from 1947 to 1953, where he oversaw the conversion of Denver Tramways to bus and trolley coach.\nBaltimore.\nBarnes came to Baltimore in 1953 for a one-month job as consultant traffic engineer, but Mayor Thomas D'Alesandro, Jr. (father of Nancy Pelosi) was so impressed he hired Barnes as traffic commissioner. At Baltimore, Barnes installed a traffic-control computer that was, in 1957, the largest of its kind in the world. He had the pedestal honoring Johns Hopkins moved to Charles and 33rd Street; previously it had been responsible for a number of fatalities. Barnes asked the mayor for a raise from $18,000 to 20,000 and took the traffic commissioner position at New York City when the request was turned down.\nNew York City.\nBarnes was appointed traffic commissioner to New York City on January 15, 1962, by Mayor Robert F. Wagner, and kept on by Mayor John V. Lindsay. In 1962, Barnes fought with domineering city planner Robert Moses and killed the planned elevated Lower Manhattan Expressway. In 1963, he had an idea for expanding the Long Island Expressway capacity in Queens by adding three more lanes in each direction plus a second, four-lane deck above it. The upper deck would have no exits and run inbound in the morning and outbound in the evening. The \"semi-actuated signal\" that allows pedestrians to influence the change of traffic lights was another idea of Barnes, thought to have been introduced in 1964. With regards to the city's traffic signals, Barnes declared to repaint all of the traffic signals throughout the city of New York in the early 1960s. Prior to the early 1960s, traffic signals throughout the city were originally dark olive green. They were repainted yellow in the early 1960s. He was also involved in the completion of converting major avenues to one-way in New York City, a project started in 1949. He reportedly suggested solving Manhattan's traffic problems by making all avenues one-way, north. Barnes endorsed the use of seat belts, built municipal parking garages and implemented widespread use of parking meters.\nRecognition.\nBarnes was featured in \"Life Magazine\" November 13, 1964, edition \u2013 \"New York's traffic jam doctor\". He also appeared as a \"Mystery Guest #1\" on the television show \"What's My Line?\" which first aired on February 18, 1962. Barnes was also featured in \"Popular Mechanics Magazine\" in January 1953.\nThe Theodore M. Matson Memorial Award was bestowed on him in 1968.\nHis autobiography, \"The Man with the Red and Green Eyes\", was dedicated to his wife, Hazel M. Barnes (September 1, 1909 - September 20, 1992).\nDeath.\nBarnes died in September 1968 at age 61, suffering a heart attack on the job.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49058", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49058", "title": "Centrifugal Governor", "text": ""}
{"id": "49060", "revid": "44721228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49060", "title": "Trainer", "text": "Trainer may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "49062", "revid": "45417033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49062", "title": "Moral absolutism", "text": "Metaethical position that some actions are intrinsically right or wrong\nMoral absolutism is a metaethical view that some or even all actions are intrinsically right or wrong, regardless of context or consequence.\nComparison with other ethical theories.\nMoral absolutism is not the same as moral universalism. Universalism holds merely that what is right or wrong is independent of custom or opinion (as opposed to moral relativism), but not necessarily that what is right or wrong is sometimes independent of context or consequences (as in absolutism). Louis Pojman gives the following definitions to distinguish the two positions of moral absolutism and objectivism:\nEthical theories which place strong emphasis on rights and duty, such as the deontological ethics of Immanuel Kant, are often forms of moral absolutism, as are many religious moral codes.\nReligion.\nOne can adhere to moral absolutism in a strictly secular context, exemplified by the many variations of deontological moral rationalism. However, many religions, especially ones which define divine commandments, also adhere to moral absolutist positions. Therefore, to followers of such religions, the moral system is absolute, perfect and unchanging. Some secular philosophies also take a morally absolutist position, asserting that the absolute laws of morality are inherent in the nature of people, the nature of life in general, or the Universe itself.\nThomas Aquinas never explicitly addresses the Euthyphro dilemma, but draws a distinction between what is good or evil in itself and what is good or evil because of God's commands, with unchangeable moral standards forming the bulk of natural law. Thus he contends that not even God can change the Ten Commandments, adding, however, that God \"can\" change what individuals deserve in particular cases, in what might look like special dispensations to murder or steal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49063", "revid": "19372301", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49063", "title": "Airco", "text": "British aircraft manufacturer\nThe Aircraft Manufacturing Company Limited (Airco) was an early British aircraft manufacturer. Established during 1912, it grew rapidly during the First World War, referring to itself as the largest aircraft company in the world by 1918.\nAirco produced many thousands of aircraft for both the British and Allied military air wings throughout the war, including fighters, trainers and bombers. The majority of the company's aircraft were designed in-house by Airco's chief designer Geoffrey de Havilland.\nAirco established the first airline in the United Kingdom, Aircraft Transport and Travel Limited, which operated as a subsidiary of Airco. On 25 August 1919, it commenced the world's first regular daily international service.\nFollowing the end of the war, the company's fortunes rapidly turned sour. The interwar period was unfavourable for aircraft manufacturers largely due to a glut of surplus aircraft from the war, while a lack of interest in aviation on the part of the British government also hampered its prospects. Airco quickly became unprofitable; during 1920, the firm was sold to Birmingham Small Arms Company, after which its operations were liquidated later that same year. Numerous assets and personnel formerly belonging to the company were integrated into the newly established de Havilland Aircraft Company.\nOrigins and de Havilland.\nDuring 1912, Airco was established by newspaper proprietor and industrialist George Holt Thomas. The firm was initially based at The Hyde in Hendon, north London, England. Starting in August 1914, the aviator William Taylor Birchenough worked as a test pilot for Airco. That same year, learning that Geoffrey de Havilland, who was then at the Royal Aircraft Factory in Farnborough, might be available, Holt Thomas invited him to join Airco as its chief designer. De Havilland's Airco designs would prove decisive to the company, which would eventually provide around 30 per cent of all trainers, fighters and bombers used by Britain and the United States during the First World War. De Havilland's designs for Airco were all marked with his initials \"DH\".\nWartime production.\nAirco would design and produce numerous aircraft during the wartime years. Its DH.2, a pusher configuration fighter introduced during 1916, contributed to ending the \"Fokker scourge\" of 1915. While early air combat over the Western Front had indicated the need for a single-seat fighter with forward-firing armament, there was no dominant approach to applying armaments to fighters at the time. As no means of firing forward through the propeller of a tractor aeroplane was available to the British, Geoffrey de Havilland designed the DH.2 as a smaller, single-seat development of the earlier two-seat DH.1 pusher design. A total of 453 DH.2s were produced by Airco.\nAnother design produced by de Havilland was the DH.6, which was specifically designed as a military trainer; as this role was normally performed by obsolete service types at the time, it was an unconventional choice to develop a dedicated trainer. The DH.6 possessed relatively gentle flying characteristics, being described as being probably the most \"forgiving\" aircraft of its time, allowing itself to be flown \"crab wise\" in improperly banked turns and able to maintain sustained flight at speeds as low as . At least 2,282 DH.6s were built in the UK during wartime.\nThe DH.4 was a two-seat combat aircraft, intended to perform both aerial reconnaissance and day bomber missions. By the end of production, a total of 1,449 aircraft (from orders for 1,700 aircraft) were constructed in Britain for the Royal Flying Corps (RFC) and the Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS). Production of the DH.4 was performed by a variety of companies beyond Airco themselves; these included F.W. Berwick and Co, Glendower Aircraft Company, Palladium Autocars, Vulcan Motor and Engineering, and the Westland Aircraft Work. Overseas, SABCA of Belgium produced a further 15 DH.4s during 1926. In the United States, several different manufacturers, including the Boeing Airplane Corporation, Dayton-Wright Airplane Company, the Fisher Body Corporation, and the Standard Aircraft Corporation produced an Americanised variant of the DH.4, featuring over 1,000 modifications from the original British design, to equip the American air services.\nDuring 1916, the DH.9 was designed as a successor to the DH.4, reusing both its wings and tail unit while adopting a modified fuselage that moved the pilot closer to the gunner/observer and away from the engine and fuel tank, which facilitated communication and was viewed as being a more optimal fighting configuration. However, While the DH.9 was deemed to be suitable for daytime bombing operations, it was found to be incapable of effective nighttime bombing due to the pilot's view being obstructed and visibility via the bombsight being unsuitable. The DH.9's performance in action over the Western Front was typically deemed to have been a disaster; heavy losses of the type were quickly incurred, attributed to both its poor performance and to engine failures, despite the prior derating of its engine to reduce the failure rate.\nBy December 1918, Holt Thomas claimed in an advertisement that Airco was the largest aircraft company in the world, being engaged in the construction of aeroplanes, engines and propellers in large numbers, as well as a number of airships and flying boats. The engines being built included licensed production of Gnome and Le Rhone rotary engines. The company's works at Hendon employed between 7,000 and 8,000 people and had the latest metal-working machinery, in addition to extensive testing equipment, including a materials testing laboratory and a wind tunnel. At one stage, Airco was reportedly completing one new aircraft every 45 minutes on average. During 1920, the aviation periodical Flight Magazine reported that, during the period from August 1914 to November 1918, the D.H. Airco aircraft manufactured in both Britain and the United States had comprised approximately 30 per cent of the total output of aeroplanes of these two allies.\nFollowing the Armistice of 11 November 1918 and the end of the conflict, many of the wartime DH.4s and DH.9s, along with the improved DH.9A, served for many years with the newly created Royal Air Force. These aircraft also formed the basis of early de Havilland-designed airliners, including the company's DH.16 and DH.18 types which were operated by Aircraft Transport and Travel Limited, the first airline established in the United Kingdom, which was also owned by George Holt Thomas.\nAirline operations and the first daily international flights.\nAirco decided to enter into the early airline business, established a dedicated subsidiary, Aircraft Transport and Travel (AT&amp;T), for this purpose. On 25 August 1919, the firm commenced the world's first regular daily international service, between Hounslow Heath Aerodrome and Le Bourget Aerodrome, France. A number of DH.16s were used for this service.\nIn addition to operating the London-to-Paris service, AT&amp;T also launched other routes, including one between Croydon Airport and Amsterdam, on behalf of the Dutch airline KLM. On 17 May 1920, an AT&amp;T DH.16 (G-EALU) performed the first KLM service between London and Amsterdam.\nSale to BSA and liquidation.\nFollowing the cessation of hostilities, the large number of war-surplus machines, sharp fluctuations in business confidence, and the government's failure, unlike those of USA and France, to provide any form of support, Airco became unprofitable. Thomas endeavoured to sell Airco to a car manufacturer. Airco and BSA, parent company of Daimler, announced on 1 March 1920 that Airco had amalgamated with Birmingham Small Arms Company.\nWithin days BSA discovered Airco was in a far more serious financial state than Thomas had revealed. Thomas was immediately removed from his new seat on the BSA board and all BSA's new acquisitions were placed in liquidation. As a result of the financial situation that it inherited, BSA was unable to issue a dividend to shareholders for the following four years. With help from Thomas, de Havilland bought the group's assets he needed to form the de Havilland Aircraft Company during 1920.\nAircraft Transport and Travel had been allowed to continue to operate until December 1920. BSA then bought Aircraft Transport and Travel's aircraft from the liquidator and, in early 1921, combined it with Daimler Air Hire, which it had established in 1919, to form Daimler Airway under Daimler Hire's manager Frank Searle.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49064", "revid": "28224396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49064", "title": "People's Party for Freedom and Democracy", "text": "Political party in the Netherlands\nThe People's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( , VVD) is a centre-right conservative-liberal political party in the Netherlands. The VVD promotes individual freedom, private enterprise, economic liberalism and pragmatic governance.\nEstablished in 1948 through the merger of the Freedom Party and the Committee for Liberal Reconstruction, the VVD has evolved into an influential force in Dutch politics, advocating for a market-oriented economy, fiscal discipline, and personal autonomy. The party combines classical liberal principles\u2014such as free enterprise and limited government intervention\u2014with socially progressive stances, positioning itself as a modern liberal movement within the European context\nThe VVD has played a key role in shaping Dutch policy, particularly in taxation, entrepreneurship, and European integration. It has led coalition governments and produced leaders such as Mark Rutte, who led the party from 2006 to 2023, and served as Prime Minister of the Netherlands from 2010 to 2024. Under Rutte\u2019s leadership, the VVD steered the Netherlands through economic recovery following the global financial crisis, implemented structural reforms, and navigated debates on immigration, climate change, and international security. The party maintains a pro-European stance while emphasising national interests and responsible budgeting.\nSince 2023, the party leader has been Dilan Ye\u015filg\u00f6z, the former Minister of Justice and Security. The VVD remains a significant player in Dutch politics, balancing its liberal economic agenda with responses to challenges such as sustainability, housing shortages, and geopolitical uncertainty.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nIn 1947, the Freedom Party led by Dirk Stikker and the Committee-Oud led by Pieter Oud started negotiations with the goal of a merger. The conservative liberal Freedom Party was a continuation of the Liberal State Party, but was disappointed with only six seats in the 1946 general election. The Committee-Oud was a group of former members of the social liberal Free-thinking Democratic League (VDB), who had been dissatisfied with the social-democratic character of the Labour Party (PvdA), in which the VDB had merged with the Social Democratic Workers' Party as part of the breakthrough movement. As a result, the part was founded on 24 January 1948.\n1948\u20131963: Oud.\nBetween 1948 and 1952, the VVD took part in the broad cabinets led by the Labour Party Prime Minister Willem Drees. The party was a junior partner with only eight seats to the Catholic People's Party (KVP) and Labour Party, which both had around thirty seats (out of 100). The Drees cabinets laid the foundation for the welfare state and decolonisation of the Dutch East Indies. \nIn the general election of 1952 the VVD gained one seat, but did not join the government. In the general election of 1956 it increased its total, receiving thirteen seats, but was stayed out of government during the cabinet formation, until the general election of 1959, which was held early because of a cabinet crisis. This time it gained nineteen seats, and the party entered government alongside the Protestant Anti-Revolutionary Party (ARP), the Christian Historical Union (CHU) and the KVP.\n1963\u20131971: Toxopeus and Geertsema.\nIn 1963, Oud retired from politics, and was succeeded by the Minister of the Interior Edzo Toxopeus. With Toxopeus as its leader, the VVD lost three seats in the 1963 election, but remained in government after the 1963 cabinet formation. In 1962, a substantial group of disillusioned VVD members founded the Liberal Democratic Centre (, LDC) which was intended to introduce a more twentieth-century liberal direction to the classical liberal VVD.\nIn 1966, frustrated with their hopeless efforts, left-wing LDC members joined a new political party, the Democrats 66 (D66). In 1965, there also occurred a conflict between VVD Ministers and their counterparts from the KVP and ARP in the Marijnen cabinet. The cabinet fell; without an election taking place, it was replaced by a KVP\u2013ARP\u2013PvdA cabinet under Jo Cals, which itself fell during the Night of Schmelzer the following year. In the subsequent 1967 election the VVD remained relatively stable and entered the De Jong cabinet.\nDuring this period the VVD had loose ties with other liberal organisations; together, these formed the neutral pillar. They included the liberal papers \"Nieuwe Rotterdamsche Courant\" and \"Algemeen Handelsblad\", the broadcaster AVRO and the employers' organisation VNO.\n1971\u20131994.\nIn the Dutch general election of 1971, the VVD lost one seat and the cabinet lost its majority. A new cabinet was formed by the Christian democratic parties, the VVD and the Democratic Socialists '70 (an offshoot of the Labour Party). This cabinet collapsed after a few months. Meanwhile, the charismatic young MP Hans Wiegel had attracted considerable attention, and he became the new leader of the VVD. In 1971, he became the new parliamentary leader, and he was appointed lead candidate in 1972. With Wiegel as its head, the party oriented itself towards a new political course, aiming to reform the welfare state and to cut taxes. Wiegel did not shrink from conflict with the Labour Party and the trade unions. With this new course came new electoral support: working-class and middle-class voters who, because of individualisation and depillarisation, were more easy to attract.\nThe new course proved electorally profitable for the VVD: in the heavily polarised general election of 1972 the party gained six seats. The VVD was kept out of government by the social democratic and Christian democratic Den Uyl cabinet. Although the ties between the VVD and other organisations within the neutral pillar became ever looser, the number of neutral organisations friendly to the VVD grew. The TROS and later Veronica, new broadcasters which entered the Dutch public broadcasting system, were friendly towards the VVD. In 1977, the VVD again won six more seats, bringing its total to twenty-eight seats. When lengthy coalition talks between the social democrats and Christian democrats eventually led to a final break between the two parties, the VVD formed a cabinet with the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA), with a majority of only two seats.\nIn the general election of 1981, the VVD lost two seats and its partner the CDA lost even more. The cabinet lost its majority and CDA, Labour and D66 formed the Second Van Agt cabinet, which fell after only a few months. In 1982, Hans Wiegel left Parliament to become Queen's Commissioner in Friesland and was succeeded by Ed Nijpels. In the general election of 1982 Nijpels' VVD gained ten seats, bringing its total up to 36. It formed the First Lubbers cabinet with the CDA. The cabinet began a programme of radical reform of the welfare state, which is still in place today. The VVD lost nine seats in the 1986 election, but the cabinet nonetheless retained its majority. The losses were blamed on Nijpels, who stood down as leader of the VVD; Joris Voorhoeve succeeded him in 1986. In 1989 the CDA\u2013VVD cabinet fell over a minor issue, and the VVD lost five seats in the subsequent election, retaining only twenty-two in total. The VVD was kept out of government; Voorhoeve stood down and was succeeded by Frits Bolkestein.\n1994\u20132006.\nBolkestein's VVD was one of the winners of the general election of 1994: the party gained nine seats. It formed an unprecedented government with the Labour Party (PvdA) and the social liberal Democrats 66. The so-called \"purple cabinet\" led by Wim Kok was the first Dutch government without any Christian parties since 1918. Like many of his predecessors, Bolkestein remained in parliament. His political style was characterised as \"opposition to one's own government. This style was very successful and the VVD gained another seven seats in the 1998 election, becoming the second largest party in parliament with thirty-eight seats. The VVD formed a second Purple cabinet with the Labour Party and D66. Bolkestein left Dutch politics in 1999 to become European Commissioner. He was replaced by the more technocratic and social liberal Hans Dijkstal.\nIn the heavily polarised Dutch general election of 2002, dominated by the rise and murder of Pim Fortuyn, the VVD lost fourteen seats, leaving only twenty-four. The VVD nonetheless entered a cabinet with the Christian Democratic Appeal and the Pim Fortuyn List (LPF). Dijkstal stood down and was replaced by the popular former Minister of Finance Gerrit Zalm. After a few months, Zalm \"pulled the plug\" on the First Balkenende cabinet, after infighting between LPF ministers Eduard Bomhoff and Herman Heinsbroek.\nIn the subsequent general election of 2003, the VVD with Gerrit Zalm as lead candidate gained four seats, making a total of twenty-eight. The party had expected to do much better, having adopted most of Fortuyn's proposals on immigration and integration. The VVD unwillingly entered the Second Balkenende cabinet with Zalm returning as Minister of Finance and as Deputy Prime Minister. On 2 September 2004, Geert Wilders, a Member of the House of Representatives, left the party after a dispute with parliamentary leader Van Aartsen. He chose to continue as an Independent in the House of Representatives. On 27 November 2004 Zalm was succeeded as party leader by the parliamentary leader in the House Jozias van Aartsen.\n2006\u20132023: Rutte.\nIn 2006, the party lost a considerable number of seats in the municipal elections, prompting parliamentary leader Van Aartsen to step down. Willibrord van Beek was subsequently appointed parliamentary leader \"ad interim\". In the subsequent party leadership election Mark Rutte was elected as the leader, defeating Rita Verdonk and Jelleke Veenendaal.\nThe general election of 2006 did not start off well for the VVD: Mark Rutte was criticised by his own parliamentary party for being invisible in the campaign, and he was unable to break the attention away from the duel between then-Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende of the Christian democrats and Wouter Bos of the Labour Party. However, the VVD's campaign started relatively late. The election polls showed losses for the VVD; the former VVD deputy Prime Minister Hans Wiegel blamed a poor VVD campaign for this, caused by the heavily contested VVD leadership run-off between Mark Rutte and Rita Verdonk earlier in the year. Verdonk had her eyes on the deputy-minister post, while cabinet posts are normally decided upon by the political leader of the VVD. \nOn election day, the party received enough votes for twenty-two seats, a loss of six seats. When the official election results were announced on Monday 27 November 2006, preferential votes became known as well, showing that Rita Verdonk, the second candidate on the list, had obtained more votes than the VVD's lead candidate, Mark Rutte. Rutte had received 553,200 votes, while Verdonk had received 620,555. This led Verdonk to call for a party commission that would investigate the party leadership position, as a consequence of the situation of her obtaining more votes in the general election than Rutte, creating a short-lived crisis in the party. A crisis was averted when Rutte called for an ultimatum on his leadership, which Verdonk had to reconcile to, by rejecting her proposal for a party commission. During 2007, signs of VVD infighting continued to play in the media. In June 2007, the former VVD minister Dekker presented a report on the previous election, showing that the VVD lacked clear leadership roles, however the report did not single out individuals for blame for the party's losses.\nAfter Verdonk renewed her criticism of the party in September 2007, she was expelled from the parliamentary faction, and subsequently relinquished her membership of the party, after reconciliation attempts had proven futile. Verdonk started her own political movement, Proud of the Netherlands, subsequently. In opinion polls held after Verdonk's exit, the VVD was set to lose close to ten parliamentary seats in the next election.\nAfter the 2010 general election the VVD became the largest party with 31 seats and was the senior party in a centre-right minority First Rutte cabinet with the Christian Democratic Appeal supported by the Party for Freedom (PVV) of Geert Wilders to obtain a majority. Rutte was sworn in as Prime Minister on 21 October 2010. Not only was it the first time that the VVD had led a government, but it was the first liberal-led government in 92 years. However, on 21 April 2012, after failed negotiations with the PVV on renewed budget cuts, the government became unstable and Mark Rutte deemed it likely that a new election would be held in 2012. On election day, 12 September 2012, the VVD remained the largest party in parliament, winning 41 seats, a gain of 10 seats.\nAfter the 2012 general election, the VVD entered into a ruling coalition with the Labour Party as its junior coalition partner. This coalition lasted a full term, but lost its majority at the 2017 election; the VVD itself lost eight seats, though remained the largest party with 33. Rutte became Prime Minister again, forming a centre-right green cabinet with the Christian Democratic Appeal, Democrats 66 and the Christian Union. In March 2021, VVD was the winner of the general election, securing 34 out of 150 seats. Prime Minister Mark Rutte, in power since 2010, formed his fourth VVD-led coalition.\n2023\u2013present: Ye\u015filg\u00f6z.\nAfter the fourth Rutte cabinet broke down due to disagreements over migration policy, a new election was called for 22 November 2023. Rutte announced that he would step down as leader of the VVD. Dilan Ye\u015filg\u00f6z became the new leader of the party in August 2023 after running unopposed in the leadership election. \nFollowing the 2023 general election, the VVD was reduced to 24 seats in the House of Representatives. It entered formation talks with the Party for Freedom, the election winner, and the new parties New Social Contract and Farmer\u2013Citizen Movement, leading to the right-wing Schoof cabinet.\nIdeology and policies.\nThe VVD is described as conservative-liberal, liberal-conservative, and conservative. It was also described as classical liberal and libertarian by sources between 2006 and 2012.\nThe VVD describes itself as a party founded on a liberal philosophy. Traditionally, the party is the most ardent supporter of 'free markets' of all Dutch political parties, promoting political, economic liberalism, classical liberalism, cultural liberalism. In contrast to this, it has helped build the welfare state since 1945. After 1971, the party became more populist, although some conservative liberal elements remain.\nLiberal Manifesto.\nThe principles of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy were outlined in the \"Liberal Manifesto\" () and latterly the election programmes. The Liberal Manifesto was a general outlook on the direction of the party would like to mirror itself and is an extension of the party's foundational principles. The election programmes are more oriented to practical politics, for example, winning the elections on-the-day and by any means possible. The last Liberal Manifesto of the VVD was published in September 2005. It developed a broad outline around the themes of democracy, security, freedom and citizenship, along with a vision of the future of party's internal structure. Below some of the points from the Manifesto are presented:\nMigration.\nThe VVD has supported the free movement of goods and people within the European single market, and it has historically opposed limits to labor migration. Since the early 2020s, the party has argued in favor of reducing the reliance of the Dutch economy on unskilled foreign labor.\nPolicy overview.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRepresentation.\nRepresentation in EU institutions.\nIn the European Committee of the Regions, VVD sits in the Renew Europe CoR Group, with two full and four alternate members for the 2025\u20132030 mandate. Arthur van Dijk is a bureau member of the Renew Europe CoR group and Martijn van Gruijthuijsen is coordinator for the European Parliament Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs (ECON).\nElectorate.\nHistorically, the VVD electorate consisted mainly of secular middle-class and upper-class voters, with a strong support from entrepreneurs. Under the leadership of Wiegel, the VVD started to expand its appeal to working class voters.\nOrganisation.\nLeadership.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOrganisational structure.\nThe highest organ of the VVD is the General Assembly, in which all members present have a single vote. It convenes usually twice every year. It appoints the party board and decides on the party programme.\nThe order of the First Chamber, Second Chamber and European Parliament candidates list is decided by a referendum under all members voting by internet, phone or mail. If contested, the lead candidate of a candidates lists is appointed in a separate referendum in advance. Since 2002 the General Assembly can call for a referendum on other subjects too.\nAbout 90 members elected by the members in meetings of the regional branches form the Party Council, which advises the Party Board in the months that the General Assembly does not convene. This is an important forum within the party. The party board handles the daily affairs of the party.\nLinked organisations.\nThe independent youth organisation that has a partnership agreement with the VVD is the Youth Organisation Freedom and Democracy (, JOVD), which is a member of the Liberal Youth Movement of the European Union and the International Federation of Liberal and Radical Youth.\nThe education institute of the VVD is the \"Haya van Someren Foundation\". The Telders Foundation is the party's scientific institute and publishes the magazine \"Liberaal Reveil\" every two months. The party published the magazine \"Liber\" bi-monthly.\nInternational organisations.\nThe VVD is a member of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party and Liberal International.\nThe VVD participates in the Netherlands Institute for Multiparty Democracy, a democracy assistance organisation of seven Dutch political parties.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49066", "revid": "44162369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49066", "title": "Labour Party (Netherlands)", "text": "Dutch social democratic political party\nThe Labour Party ( , PvdA or P van de A ) is a social democratic political party in the Netherlands.\nThe party was founded in 1946 as a merger of the Social Democratic Workers' Party, the Free-thinking Democratic League and the Christian Democratic Union. Prime Ministers from the Labour Party have been Willem Drees (1948\u20131958), Joop den Uyl (1973\u20131977) and Wim Kok (1994\u20132002). From 2012 to 2017, the PvdA formed the second-largest party in parliament and was the secondary partner in the Second Rutte cabinet with the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy.\nThe party fell to nine seats in the House of Representatives at the 2017 general election, making it the seventh-largest faction in the chamber\u2014its worst showing ever. However, the party rebounded with a first-place finish in the 2019 European Parliament election in the Netherlands, winning six of 26 seats, with 19% of the vote. The party is a member of the European Party of European Socialists and the global Progressive Alliance. In the European Parliament, where the Labour Party has four seats, it is part of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats.\nHistory.\nEarly years (1946\u20131965).\nDuring the German occupation of the Netherlands in World War II, a group of prominent Dutchmen of all democratic political ideologies were interned as hostages in Kamp Sint-Michielsgestel by the German occupation authorities. They came to the consensus that the pre-war fragmentation of Dutch political life, known as \"Pillarisation\", should be overcome after the war in a so-called Breakthrough. These people formed the Dutch People's Movement (NVB) immediately after the war ended in 1945. The new movement promoted the foundation of the Labour Party on 9 February 1946 through a merger of three pre-war parties, namely the Social Democratic Workers' Party (SDAP), the social liberal Free-thinking Democratic League (VDB) and the progressive Protestant Christian Democratic Union (CDU). They were joined by individuals from Catholic resistance group Christofoor, as well as some of the more progressive members of the Protestant Christian Historical Union (CHU). The founding convention was chaired by NVB member Willem Banning.\nDespite its ambitions to force a breakthrough, the electorate returned to their pillars. Lead by Willem Drees in the 1946 general election, it won 29 seats, two less than its predecessors had won in 1937. During the 1946 cabinet formation, the first Beel cabinet was formed with the Catholic People's Party (KVP) and the PvdA (Roman/Red). In 1948, some of the left-liberal members, led by former VDB leader Pieter Oud, left the PvdA after concluding it had become too socialist for their liking. Together with the Freedom Party, they formed the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD), a conservative liberal party.\nBetween 1948 and 1958, the PvdA led centre-left coalition governments with the KVP, and combinations of VVD, ARP and CHU, with the PvdA's Willem Drees as prime minister. The KVP and the PvdA together had a large majority in parliament. Under his leadership the Netherlands recovered from the war and began to build its welfare state, and Indonesia became independent.\nAfter the cabinet crisis of 1958, the PvdA was replaced by the VVD. The PvdA was in opposition until 1965. The electoral support of PvdA voters began to decline.\n1965\u20131989.\nIn 1965, a conflict in the centre-right cabinet made continuation of the government impossible. The three confessional parties turned toward the PvdA. Together they formed the Cals cabinet, with KVP leader Jo Cals as prime minister. This cabinet too was short-lived and conflict-ridden. The conflicts culminated in the fall of the Cals cabinet over economic policy.\nMeanwhile, a younger generation was attempting to gain control of the PvdA. A group of young PvdA members, calling themselves the New Left, changed the party. The New Left believed the party should become oriented towards the new social movements, adopting their anti-parliamentary strategies and their issues, such as women's liberation, environmental conservation and Third World development. Prominent New Left members were Jan Nagel, Andr\u00e9 van der Louw and Bram Peper. One of their early victories followed the fall of the Cals cabinet. The party Congress adopted a motion that made it impossible for the PvdA to govern with the KVP and its Protestant allies. In response to the growing power of the New Left group, a group of older, centrist party members, led by Willem Drees' son, Willem Drees Jr., founded the New Right. They split in 1970, after it was clear that they had lost the conflict with the New Left, and founded a new moderate social democratic party, Democratic Socialists '70 (DS'70).\nUnder the New Left, the PvdA started a strategy of polarisation, striving for a cabinet based on a progressive majority in parliament. In order to form that cabinet, the PvdA allied itself with smaller progressive parties such as the Democrats '66 (D'66) and the Political Party of Radicals (PPR). The alliance was called the Progressive Accord (PAK). In the 1971 and 1972 general elections, these three parties promised to form a cabinet with a radical common programme after the elections. They were unable to gain a majority in either election. In 1971, they were kept out of cabinet, and the party of former PvdA members, DS'70, became a coalition partner in the First Biesheuvel cabinet.\nIn the 1972 elections, neither the PvdA and its allies nor the KVP and its allies were able to gain a majority. The two sides were forced to work together. Joop den Uyl, the leader of the PvdA, led the cabinet. The cabinet was an extra-parliamentary cabinet composed of members of the three progressive parties, the KVP and the ARP. The cabinet attempted to radically reform government, society and the economy, and a wide range of progressive social reforms were enacted during its time in office, such as significant increases in welfare payments and the indexation of benefits and the minimum wage to the cost of living.\nThe PvdA also faced economic decline and was riddled with personal and ideological conflicts. The relationship between Prime Minister Den Uyl and the KVP Deputy Prime Minister Dries Van Agt was particularly problematic. These conflict culminated when the cabinet fell just before the 1977 general election. The PvdA came first in that election, but the ideological and personal conflict between Van Agt and Den Uyl prevented the formation of a new centre-left cabinet. After very long cabinet formation talks, the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA), itself a new Christian democratic political formation composed of KVP, CHU and ARP, formed a government, based on a very narrow majority, with the VVD. The PvdA was left in opposition.\nIn the 1981 general election, the incumbent CDA\u2013VVD cabinet lost its majority. The CDA remained the largest party, but it was forced to co-operate with the PvdA and D'66 (the PPR had left the alliance, after losing in the 1977 election). In the new cabinet led by Van Agt, Den Uyl returned to cabinet as Deputy Prime Minister. The personal and ideological conflict between Van Agt and Den Uyl culminated in the fall of the cabinet just months after it was formed. The VVD and the CDA together had a majority in the 1982 general election and retained this in the 1986 general election. The PvdA was left in opposition. During this period the party began to reform. Den Uyl retired from politics in 1986, appointing former trade union leader Wim Kok as his successor.\n1989\u20132010.\nAfter the 1989 general election, the PvdA returned to cabinet together with the CDA. Kok became Deputy Prime Minister to CDA leader Ruud Lubbers. The PvdA accepted the major economic reforms of the previous Lubbers cabinets, including privatisation of public enterprises and reform of the welfare state. They continued these policies in this cabinet. The cabinet faced heavy protest from the unions and saw major political conflict within the PvdA itself.\nIn the 1994 general election, the PvdA\u2013CDA coalition lost its majority in parliament; the PvdA, however, emerged as the biggest party. Kok formed a government together with the conservative liberal VVD and social liberal D66. This so-called purple government was a political novelty, because it was the first since 1918 without any ministers from the CDA or its predecessors. The First Kok cabinet continued the Lubbers-era economic reforms, but combined this with a progressive outlook on ethical questions and promises of political reform. Kok became a very popular Prime Minister; he was not a partisan figure but combined successful technocratic policies with the charisma of a national leader. In the 1998 general election, the cabinet was rewarded for its stewardship of the economy. The PvdA and the VVD increased their seat counts, at the expense of D66; the Second Kok cabinet was formed.\nKok retired from politics, leaving the leadership of the party to his preferred successor Ad Melkert. The PvdA was expected to perform very well in the 2002 general election; however, the political rise of Pim Fortuyn frustrated these hopes. The PvdA lost the 2002 election, and the party's parliamentary representation fell from 45 seats to 23. The loss was blamed on the uncharismatic new leader Melkert, the perceived arrogance of the PvdA and the inability to answer the right-wing populist issues Fortuyn raised, especially immigration and integration. Melkert resigned as party leader and was replaced by Jeltje van Nieuwenhoven. The PvdA was kept out of cabinet. The government formed by CDA, VVD and the Pim Fortuyn List (LPF) fell after a very short period.\nMeanwhile, Wouter Bos, Undersecretary in the Second Kok cabinet, was elected leader of the PvdA in a ballot among PvdA members, being elected closely to Jouke de Vries. He started to democratise the party organisation and began an ideological reorientation. In the 2003 general election, Wouter Bos managed to regain almost all seats lost in the previous election, and the PvdA was once again the second largest party in the Netherlands, only slightly smaller than the CDA. Personal and ideological conflicts between Bos and the CDA leader Jan Peter Balkenende prevented the formation of a CDA\u2013PvdA cabinet. Instead, the PvdA was kept out of government by the formation of cabinet of the CDA, the VVD, and D66, the latter being former allies of PvdA. In the 2006 municipal elections, the renewed PvdA performed very well. The PvdA became by far the largest party nationally, while the three governing parties lost a considerable number of seats in municipal councils.\nThe PvdA lost the race for Prime Minister to the CDA after suffering a loss of nine seats in the 2006 general election. The PvdA now held only 33 seats, losing many votes to the Socialist Party (SP). The PvdA had previously distanced themselves from the idea of a voting bloc on the left. It did, however, join the fourth Balkenende cabinet on 22 February 2007, in which Wouter Bos became minister of Finance. In the aftermath of the lost elections, the entire party executive stepped down on 26 April 2007. On Saturday 20 February 2010, the Labour Party withdrew from the government after arguments over the Dutch role in Afghanistan.\n2010\u20132023.\nThe then-mayor of Amsterdam, Job Cohen, took Wouter Bos' place as leader of the PvdA following the latter quitting politics. In the 2010 general election, the PvdA won 30 seats, a loss of three, and was narrowly overtaken by the VVD. After the election, a 'purple-plus coalition' was considered, which would have required the participation of GroenLinks, in addition to the VVD, PvdA and D66 \u2013 but talks broke down and the PvdA entered opposition.\nCohen resigned as leader in February 2012. Diederik Samsom was subsequently elected the party leader. In the 2012 general election, the Labour Party won 38 seats, a gain of eight, defying initial predictions that the Socialist Party would overtake it. Following the election the party entered a governing coalition with the VVD under Mark Rutte, with Labour's Lodewijk Asscher becoming Deputy Prime Minister.\nIn December 2016, Samson was defeated by Lodewijk Asscher in a party leadership election. In the 2017 general election, the PvdA suffered the biggest defeat in Dutch electoral history, receiving only 5.7% of the votes and losing 29 of its 38 seats. Asscher did not resign from his post, claiming the defeat was his predecessor's responsibility. The party experienced a degree of revival in 2019, obtaining the most votes in that year's European Parliament election. This marked the first time the PvdA had finished first in a national election since 1998.\nAhead of the 2021 general election, Asscher resigned from the party leadership due to his part in the childcare benefits scandal. He was replaced as leader and lead candidate by Lilianne Ploumen, who became the party's first permanent female leader. Following the election, the PvdA participated unsuccessfully in the 2021 Dutch cabinet formation in conjunction with GroenLinks. Ploumen later left, claiming she was unsuited for the leadership. Ploumen was replaced as parliamentary leader by Attje Kuiken.\nCo-operation with GroenLinks (2023\u2013).\nFollowing the 2023 Senate election in 30 May 2023, PvdA and GroenLinks deepened their co-operation by forming a joint parliamentary group in the senate, becoming the second-largest group behind the Farmer\u2013Citizen Movement.\nOn 17 July 2023, the party and GroenLinks announced that they would contest the 2023 general election with a common policy programme and joint electoral list. With Frans Timmermans as lead candidate, the joint parliamentary group became the second largest with 25 seats, but did not become part of the coalition. On 12 June 2025, members of the PvdA voted in favour of another joint list for the general elections of 2025, as well as a merger with GroenLinks into a new party in 2026.\nIdeology.\nThe PvdA began as a traditional social democratic party, committed to building a welfare state. During the 1970s, it included new issues in its programme such as environmental conservation, Third World development and women's liberation. During the 1990s it moderated its programme to include Third Way economic and social positions, including reform of the welfare state and privatisation of public enterprise. The party adopted a new programme of principles in 2005, expressing a centre-left ideology. Its core issues are employment, social security and welfare as well as investing in public education, health care and public safety.\nOrganisation.\nLeadership.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOrganisational structure.\nThe highest organ of the PvdA is the Congress, formed by delegates from the municipal branches. It convenes once every year. It appoints the party board, decides the order of candidates on electoral lists for the Senate, House of Representatives and European Parliament and has the final say over the party programme. Since 2002, a referendum of all members has partially replaced the Congress. Both the lead candidate of the House of Representatives candidate list, who is the political leader of the party, and the party chairman, who leads the party organisation, are selected by such a referendum. In 2002, Wouter Bos won the PvdA leadership election.\nMembership.\nAs of 2025, PvdA has 47,869 members. They are organised in over 500 municipal branches.\nLinked organisations.\n\"Rood\" is the party periodical. It appears eight times a year. The Young Socialists is the youth organisation of the PvdA. It is a member of Young European Socialists and the International Union of Socialist Youth. They publish the periodical \"Lava\".\nThe scientific institute (or think tank) of the PvdA is the Wiardi Beckman Foundation. It publishes the periodical \"Socialisme &amp; Democratie\". The PvdA participates in the Netherlands Institute for Multiparty Democracy, a democracy assistance organisation of seven Dutch political parties.\nPillarised organisations.\nDuring the period of strong pillarisation the PvdA had strong links with the social democratic broadcasting organisation VARA Broadcasting Association, the Dutch Association of Trade Unions, and the paper \"Het Vrije Volk\".\nInternational affiliation.\nThe PvdA is a full member of the Party of European Socialists and was formerly an observer member of the Socialist International until December 2014, having previously downgraded their membership in December 2012. The PvdA joined the Progressive Alliance, a new international network for social democratic political parties, at its founding event on 22 May 2013.\nRelationships to other parties.\nHistorically, the PvdA has co-operated in cabinets with the Christian democratic Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA), Political Party of Radicals (PPR), Catholic People's Party (KVP), Anti-Revolutionary Party (ARP), Christian Historical Union (CHU) and ChristianUnion (CU) parties and the liberal parties Democrats 66 (D66) and People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD). Between 1971 and 1977, PvdA was allied with D66 and the PPR. After 1977 until 1989, it was closely allied to D66. Since 2003, the relationship between the PvdA and D66 has considerably worsened, at first because PvdA was in opposition to the Second Balkenende cabinet, in which D66 had co-operated.\nDuring the governance of the second and third Balkenende cabinet, the Socialist Party and GreenLeft were calling for closer cooperation with the PvdA, calling to form a shadow government against the Balkenende cabinet, PvdA leader Bos held this off.\nThe PvdA has strong ties with GreenLeft. In the 2021 Dutch cabinet formation, the parties unsuccessfully combined. Prominent members including Frans Timmermans and Marjolein Moorman have called for a deepened collaboration. A merger has also been discussed. The Wiardi Beckman Foundation has voiced its opposition to this.\nDespite the fact that the two parties (PvdA and GroenLinks) separately participate in a European Political Group, Groenlinks as a member of Greens\u2013European Free Alliance and PvdA as a member of the Party of European Socialists, the parties campaigned together as GroenLinks-PvdA for the 2024 European Parliament election.\nElection results.\nHouse of Representatives.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEuropean Parliament.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49067", "revid": "24013162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49067", "title": "PvdA", "text": ""}
{"id": "49068", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49068", "title": "ISAAC", "text": ""}
{"id": "49069", "revid": "17270035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49069", "title": "Pope Eugene IV", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1431 to 1447\nPope Eugene IV (; ; 1383 \u2013 23 February 1447), born Gabriele Condulmer, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 11 March 1431 to his death in February 1447. Condulmer was a Venetian, and a nephew of Pope Gregory XII. In 1431, he was elected pope. \nHis tenure was marked by conflict: first with the Colonna, relatives of his predecessor Pope Martin V; and later with the Conciliar movement. In 1434, after a complaint by bishop of the Canary Islands Fernando Calvetos, Eugene IV issued the bull \"Creator Omnium\", rescinding any recognition of Portugal's right to conquer the islands, and rescinding any right to Christianize their native populations. Eugene also resisted slavery: he excommunicated anyone who had enslaved newly-converted Christians, such penalty to remain in place until the enslaved were restored to their liberty and possessions. Eugene initially sought to protect the Jews, and was quite active against a rampant societal anti-semitism\u2014he issued decrees protecting their rights, opposing forced baptisms, and permitting wider economic activity. In 1442, however, he promulgated the bull \"Dudum ad nostram audientiam\", which was later used as the legal basis for the creation of Jewish ghettos in Europe. In 1443, Eugene decided to take a neutral position on territorial disputes between Castile and Portugal and regarding rights claimed along the coast of Africa. \nHe is the most recent pope to take the pontifical name \"Eugene\".\nEarly life.\nCondulmer was born in Venice to a rich merchant family. His father was Angelo Condulmer, who founded the Ospizio di Sant'Agnesina for orphaned girls in 1383 and his mother was Bariola Correr. He had a sister, , mother of the future Pope Paul II. Gabriel is said to have received his earliest education under the supervision of his maternal uncle, Angelo Correr, Bishop of Castello (1380\u20131390). He and several friends established an Augustianian community of Canons Regular of San Giorgio in Alga in his native city in 1400, and received papal approval in November 1404. \nOn 30 December 1407, at the age of twenty-four, Gabriel was appointed Bishop of Siena by his maternal uncle, Pope Gregory XII. He was below the minimum age for consecration as a bishop, and therefore his uncle granted him a dispensation; next day, he was granted possession of the diocese, even before the necessary bulls had been prepared. In Siena, the political leaders objected to a bishop who was not only young but also a foreigner. Therefore, in 1408 he resigned the appointment, becoming instead a cleric of the Apostolic Camera (Treasury) and a protonotary apostolic. He was named a cardinal by Pope Gregory XII in the consistory of 9 May 1408, and appointed Cardinal Priest of the titular church of San Clemente.\nOn 7 February 1420, Condulmer was named papal legate at Picenum in the March of Ancona. He was transferred to Bologna in August 1423. Pope Martin V named him Cardinal Priest of the Basilica of Santa Maria in Trastevere in 1427.\nPapacy.\nPope Martin V (Colonna) died of an apoplectic stroke on 20 February 1431. The conclave to elect his successor was held at the church and convent of Santa Maria sopra Minerva, and began on 1 March 1431. Fourteen cardinals, led by Giordano Orsini, Bishop of Albano, participated.\nCondulmer was quickly elected, and crowned as Eugene IV on the steps of St. Peter's Basilica by Cardinal Alfonso Carrillo de Albornoz, on 11 March 1431. By a written agreement made before his election, and ratified on 12 March 1431 as pope, Eugene pledged to distribute to the cardinals one-half of all the revenues of the Church and promised to consult with them on all questions of importance, both spiritual and temporal. \nPope Eugene made his first appointments of cardinals on 19 September 1431. They were his nephew, the Venetian Francesco Condulmer, who was granted the titular church of San Clemente; and the Roman Angelotto Fusco, the bishop of Cava and longtime friend of Eugene, who was granted the title of San Marco.\nHe was described as tall, thin, with a winning countenance, although many of his troubles were owing to his own want of tact, which tended to alienate others. Upon assuming the papal chair, Eugene IV took violent measures against the numerous Colonna relatives of his predecessor Martin V (who had rewarded them with castles and lands). This at once involved him in a serious contest with the powerful house of Colonna that nominally supported the local rights of Rome against the interests of the Papacy. A truce was soon arranged.\nConciliar reform.\nBy far the most important feature of Eugene IV's pontificate was the great struggle between the Pope and the Council of Basel (1431\u20131439), the final embodiment of the Conciliar movement. On 23 July 1431, his legate Giuliano Cesarini opened the council, which had been convoked by Martin V. Canon Beaup\u00e8re of Besan\u00e7on, who had been sent from Basel to Rome, gave the pope an unfavourable and exaggerated account of the temper of the people of Basel and its environs. Distrustful of its purposes and emboldened by the small attendance, the Pope issued a bull on 18 December 1431 that dissolved the council and called a new one to meet in eighteen months at Bologna. He gave as his reason that it would be easier for the delegates from the eastern churches to assemble there with the European prelates. The council resisted this expression of papal prerogative. Eugene IV's action gave some weight to the contention that the Curia was opposed to any authentic measures of reform. The council refused to dissolve; instead they renewed the resolutions by which the Council of Constance had declared a council superior to the Pope and ordered Eugene IV to appear at Basel. A compromise was arranged by the Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund, who had been crowned emperor at Rome on 31 May 1433. The first version of Eugene's recognition of the legitimacy of the council was signed on 1 August 1433, and subscribed by three cardinals. By its terms, the Pope recalled his bull of dissolution, and, reserving all the rights of the Holy See, acknowledged the council as ecumenical. In the amended version, signed on 15 December 1433, he withheld his approval of the initial decrees of the Council which had contained canons exalting conciliar authority above that of the pope.\nProblems in the Papal States and Rome.\nThese concessions also were due to the invasion of the Papal States by the former Papal condottiero Niccol\u00f2 Fortebraccio and the troops of Filippo Maria Visconti led by Niccol\u00f2 Piccinino in retaliation for Eugene's support of Florence and Venice against Milan (see also Wars in Lombardy). This situation led also to establishment of an insurrectionary republic at Rome controlled by the Colonna family. On 4 June 1434, disguised in the robes of a Benedictine monk, Eugene was rowed down the center of the Tiber, pelted by stones from either bank, to a Florentine vessel waiting to receive him at Ostia. Ferdinand Gregorovius remarks that Eugene IV, \"having lost the authority of the State by his own ineptitude, resolved[,] like so many of his predecessors, on flight.\" On 12 June, his ship reached Pisa, and in October he reached Florence. \nThe city of Rome was restored to obedience by Giovanni Vitelleschi, the militant Bishop of Recanati, in October 1434. In August 1435 a peace treaty was signed at Ferrara by the various belligerents. Pope Eugenius made Vitelleschi archbishop of Florence on 12 October 1435. Vitelleschi held the post until Eugenius made him a cardinal on 9 August 1437.\nThe people of Rome sent a delegation to Florence in January 1436, begging the pope and the curia to return to Rome, and promising obedience and quiet. The Pope, however, rejected their overture. On 25 March 1436, Pope Eugenius consecrated the cathedral of Florence, and then, in April 1436, moved to Bologna, which had recently been conquered for the papacy. His condottieri Francesco I Sforza and Vitelleschi in the meantime reconquered much of the Papal States with extreme violence and destructive force. Traditional Papal enemies such as the Prefetti di Vico were destroyed, while the Colonna were reduced to obedience after the destruction of their stronghold in Palestrina in 1437. The massive fortress was preserved, however, until Lorenzo Colonna attempted to return in 1438, when it too was destroyed on orders from Vitelleschi.\nPoggio Bracciolini, the Tuscan humanist, wrote: \"Seldom has the rule of any other pope produced equal devastation in the provinces of the Roman Church. The country scourged by war, the depopulated and ruined towns, the devastated fields, the roads infested by robbers, more than fifty places partly destroyed, partly sacked by soldiery, have suffered from every species of revenge.\"\nRecovery of power and of Rome.\nMeanwhile, the struggle with the council sitting at Basel broke out anew. Eugene IV convened a rival council at Ferrara on 8 January 1438, through his legate Cardinal Niccol\u00f2 Albergati, Bishop of Bologna, with forty prelates in attendance. The pope also excommunicated the prelates assembled at Basel. On 14 January 1438, he moved the papal court to Ferrara, where he remained for a year. On 15 February 1438, he issued the bull \"Cum In Sacro\", declaring the council at Ferrara an ecumenical council, and commanding the prelates at Basel to appear at Ferrara within a month.\nKing Charles VII of France had forbidden members of the clergy in his kingdom from attending the counsel in Ferrara, and introduced the decrees of the Council of Basel, with slight changes, into France through the Pragmatic Sanction of Bourges (7 July 1438). The King of England and the Duke of Burgundy, who felt that the council was partial to France, decided not to recognize the council at Basel. Castile, Aragon, Milan, and Bavaria withdrew support.\nThe Council of Basel, in its Session XXXI, suspended Pope Eugene on 24 January 1438. There were 16 bishops present at this session. Of the 16, nine were Savoyards, six Aragonese, and one Frenchman. Several secular powers, seeing the advantage to their own interests in having a weak pope and an unsteady council at odds with each other, wrote to the council, advising them to go no further in their efforts to depose Eugene. Mandell Creighton remarks, \"The quarrel of the Pope and the Council now ceased to attract the attention of Europe; it had degenerated into a squabble in which both parties were regarded with something approaching contempt.\"\nThe Council of Basel then purported to formally depose Eugene as a heretic on 25 June 1439. The business of electing a new pope was complicated by the fact that there was only one cardinal at Basel, Louis Aleman. The Council decided to appoint an electoral committee, composed of thirty-two electors, who were selected by a nominating committee. The conclave began on 30 October 1439. On 5 November, the council elected the ambitious Duke Amadeus VIII of Savoy, as antipope; he took the name Felix V. \nThe Diet of Mainz was summoned by the new Emperor Frederick III to hear the claims of both Eugene and Felix. Eugene was represented by Nicholas of Cusa and Juan de Torquemada. The diet was not impressed by the ecclesiastical claims of either party, and announced that it would support whichever party would summon a new general council to enact much needed reforms in the church; it deprived the Pope of most of his rights in the Empire (26 March 1439) and announced a new diet to meet in Frankfurt in 1440.\nThe council of Ferrara was transferred to Florence on 10 January 1439, as a result of an outbreak of the plague. A union with the Eastern Orthodox Church was effected on 6 July 1439, with the bull \"Laetentur caeli\", which, as the result of political necessities, proved but a temporary bolster to the papacy's prestige. This union was followed by others of even less stability. Eugene IV signed an agreement with the Armenians on 22 November 1439, and with a part of the Jacobites of Syria in 1443, and in 1445 he received some of the Nestorians and the Maronites. He did his best to stem the Turkish advance, pledging one-fifth of the papal income to a crusade which set out in 1443, but which was overwhelmingly defeated at the Battle of Varna. Cardinal Cesarini, the papal legate, perished in the rout.\nIn Florence, on 18 December 1439, Pope Eugene held a consistory for the appointment of new cardinals, his third. Seventeen cardinals were named, and they received their titles on 8 January 1440.\nPope Eugene decreed on 26 April 1441 that his Council was to be transferred from Florence to Rome.\nEugene's rival, Felix V, in the meantime obtained scant recognition, even in the Holy Roman Empire. Eventually Emperor Frederick III moved toward acceptance of Eugene. One of the king's ablest advisers, the humanist Aeneas Sylvius Piccolomini, who was later to be Pope Pius II, made peace with Eugene in 1442. The Pope's recognition of the claim to Naples of King Alfonso V of Aragon (in the treaty of Terracina, approved by Eugene at Siena somewhat later) led to withdrawal of the last important Italian support from the Council of Basel. In 1442 Eugene, Alfonso and Visconti sent Niccol\u00f2 Piccinino to reconquer the March of Ancona from Francesco Sforza; but the defeat of the allied army at the Battle of Montolmo pushed the Pope to reconcile with Sforza.\nSo enabled, Eugene IV made a formal entry into Rome on 28 September 1443, after an exile of nearly ten years. At the Piazza Colonna he was greeted by the shouts of the crowd, \"Long live the church! Down with the new taxes and those who invented them.\"\nHis protests against the Pragmatic Sanction of Bourges were ineffectual, but by means of the Concordat of the Princes, negotiated by Aeneas Silvius Piccolomini, the secretary of Frederick III, with the electors in February 1447, the whole of Germany declared against the antipope. This agreement was completed only after Eugene's death.\nSlavery.\nChristianity had gained many converts in the Canary Islands by the early 1430s. However, the ownership of the lands had been the subject of dispute between the Crown of Castile and the Kingdom of Portugal. The lack of effective control had resulted in periodic raids on the islands to procure slaves. As early as the Council of Koblenz in 922, the capture of Christians as slaves by other Christians had been condemned.\nActing on a complaint by Fernando Calvetos, bishop of the islands, Pope Eugene IV issued a papal bull, \"Creator Omnium\", on 17 December 1434, annulling previous permission granted to Portugal to conquer those islands rescinding any right to Christianize the natives of the island. Eugene excommunicated anyone who enslaved newly converted Christians, the penalty to stand until the captives were restored to their liberty and possessions. In 1434, Eugene issued the bull \"Regimini Gregis Dominici\", forbidding the enslavement of Christian Canarians, and followed this with an order to suspend further conquest in order to allow the Franciscans to continue their work peacefully.\nPortuguese soldiers continued to raid the islands in 1435, and Eugene issued a further edict \"Sicut Dudum\" that prohibited wars being waged against the islands and affirming the ban on enslavement. Eugene condemned the enslavement of the peoples of the newly colonized Canary Islands and, under pain of excommunication, ordered all such slaves to be immediately set free. Eugene went on to say that, \"If this is not done when the fifteen days have passed, they incur the sentence of excommunication by the act itself, from which they cannot be absolved, except at the point of death, even by the Holy See, or by any Spanish bishop, or by the aforementioned Ferdinand, unless they have first given freedom to these captive persons and restored their goods.\" \nEugene tempered \"Sicut Dudum\" in September 1436 with the issuance of a papal bull in response to complaints made by King Edward of Portugal that allowed the Portuguese to conquer any unconverted parts of the Canary Islands. According to Raiswell (1997), any Christian would be protected by the earlier edict, but the un-baptized were implicitly allowed to be enslaved.\nFollowing the arrival of the first African captives in Lisbon in 1441, Prince Henry asked Eugene to designate Portugal's raids along the West African coast as a crusade, a consequence of which would be the legitimization of enslavement for captives taken during the crusade. On 19 December 1442, Eugene replied by issuing the bull \"Illius qui se pro divini\", in which he granted full remission of sins to members of the Order of Christ and those enrolled under their banner who took part in any expeditions against the Saracens and enemies of Christianity. In 1443, in the bull \"Rex regum\", the Pope took a neutral position on territorial disputes between Portugal and Castile regarding rights claimed in Africa.\nRichard Raiswell interprets the bulls of Eugene as helping in some way the development of thought which perceived the enslavement of Africans by the Portuguese and later Europeans \"as dealing a blow for Christendom\". Joel S Panzer views \"Sicut Dudum\" as a significant condemnation of slavery, issued sixty years before the Europeans found the New World.\nJews.\nEugene initially favored the Jews, issuing decrees protecting their rights, opposing forced baptisms, and permitting wider economic activities. However, political considerations, particularly pressure from the Council of Basel and his desire to secure Spanish loyalty, led him to issue the hostile bull \"Dudum ad nostram\" in 1442, which severely restricted Jewish life. Ultimately, this bull was not enforced during his lifetime, and shortly before his death, Eugene IV reaffirmed his opposition to forced conversions in Spain, suggesting a return to his earlier, more tolerant stance.\nDeath and legacy.\nAlthough his pontificate had been so stormy and unhappy that he is said to have regretted on his deathbed that he ever left his monastery, Eugene IV's victory over the Council of Basel and his efforts on behalf of church unity nevertheless contributed greatly to the breakdown of the conciliar movement and restored the papacy to a semblance of the dominant position it had held before the Western Schism (1378\u20131417). This victory had been gained, however, by making concessions to the princes of Europe. Thereafter, the papacy had to depend more for its revenues on the Papal States.\nEugene was dignified in demeanour, but inexperienced and vacillating in action and excitable in temper. Bitter in his hatred of heresy, he nevertheless displayed great kindness to the poor. He laboured to reform the monastic orders, especially the Franciscans, and was never guilty of nepotism. Although austere in his private life, he was a sincere friend of art and learning, and in 1431 he re-established the university at Rome. He also consecrated Florence Cathedral on 25 March 1436.\nEugene died in Rome on 23 February 1447, and was buried at Saint Peter's by the tomb of Pope Eugene III. Later his tomb was transferred to San Salvatore in Lauro, a parish church on the other bank of the Tiber River.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49070", "revid": "40359180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49070", "title": "Avalanche chess", "text": "Chess variant\nAvalanche chess is a chess variant designed by Ralph Betza in 1977. After moving one of their own pieces, a player \"must\" move one of the opponent's pawns forward one square.\nGame rules.\nRules are as normal chess except that after making a legal move, a player \"must\" move one of the opponent's pawns exactly one square straight forward (i.e. towards the player) to complete the turn, if possible. Otherwise, that part of the turn is skipped. Capturing with an opponent's pawn is not permitted. If an opponent's pawn is moved to promotion, then the opponent chooses to what piece it promotes; if the promotion gives check, the opponent wins the game. If every legal pawn move forward gives check, then the opponent wins immediately, even if the player checked or mated the opponent previously that same turn. There is no \"en passant\" capture."}
{"id": "49071", "revid": "50875845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49071", "title": "Oceanus", "text": "Ancient Greek god of the earth-encircling river, Oceanos\nIn Greek mythology, Oceanus or Okeanos was one of the Titans, the children of Uranus (Sky) and Gaia (Earth), the brother and husband of the Titaness Tethys, and the father of the river gods and the Oceanids, as well as being the great river which encircled the entire world.\nEtymology.\nAccording to M. L. West, the etymology of Oceanus is \"obscure\" and \"cannot be explained from Greek\". The use by Pherecydes of Syros of the form () for the name lends support for the name being a loanword. However, according to West, no \"very convincing\" foreign models have been found. A Semitic derivation has been suggested by several scholars, while R. S. P. Beekes has suggested a loanword from the Aegean Pre-Greek non-Indo-European substrate. Nevertheless, Michael Janda sees possible Indo-European connections.\nGenealogy.\nOceanus was the eldest of the Titan offspring of Uranus (Sky) and Gaia (Earth). Hesiod lists his Titan siblings as Coeus, Crius, Hyperion, Iapetus, Theia, Rhea, Themis, Mnemosyne, Phoebe, Tethys, and Cronus. Oceanus married his sister Tethys, and was by her the father of numerous sons, the river gods, and numerous daughters, the Oceanids.\nAccording to Hesiod, there were three thousand (i.e. innumerable) river gods. These included: Achelous, the god of the Achelous River, the largest river in Greece, who gave his daughter in marriage to Alcmaeon and was defeated by Heracles in a wrestling contest for the right to marry Deianira; Alpheus, who fell in love with the nymph Arethusa and pursued her to Syracuse where she was transformed into a spring by Artemis; and Scamander who fought on the side of the Trojans during the Trojan War and got offended when Achilles polluted his waters with a large number of Trojan corpses, overflowed his banks nearly drowning Achilles.\nAccording to Hesiod, there were also three thousand Oceanids. These included: Metis, Zeus's first wife, whom Zeus impregnated with Athena and then swallowed; Eurynome, Zeus's third wife, and mother of the Charites; Doris, the wife of Nereus and mother of the Nereids; Callirhoe, the wife of Chrysaor and mother of Geryon; Clymene, the wife of Iapetus, and mother of Atlas, Menoetius, Prometheus, and Epimetheus; Perseis, wife of Helios and mother of Circe and Aeetes; Idyia, wife of Aeetes and mother of Medea; and Styx, the great river of the underworld river, and the wife of Pallas and mother of Zelus, Nike, Kratos, and Bia.\nAccording to Epimenides's \"Theogony\", Oceanus was the father, by Gaia, of the Harpies. Oceanus was also said to be the father, by Gaia, of Triptolemus. Nonnus, in his poem \"Dionysiaca\", described \"the lakes\" as \"liquid daughters cut off from Oceanos\". He was said to have fathered the Cercopes on one of his daughters, Theia.\nPrimeval father?\nPassages in a section of the \"Iliad\" called the Deception of Zeus, suggest the possibility that Homer knew a tradition in which Oceanus and Tethys (rather than Uranus and Gaia, as in Hesiod) were the primeval parents of the gods. Twice Homer has Hera describe the pair as \"Oceanus, from whom the gods are sprung, and mother Tethys\". According to M. L. West, these lines suggests a myth in which Oceanus and Tethys are the \"first parents of the whole race of gods.\" However, as Timothy Gantz points out, \"mother\" could simply refer to the fact that Tethys was Hera's foster mother for a time, as Hera tells us in the lines immediately following, while the reference to Oceanus as the genesis of the gods \"might be simply a formulaic epithet indicating the numberless rivers and springs descended from Okeanos\" (compare with \"Iliad\" https://). But, in a later \"Iliad\" passage, Hypnos also describes Oceanus as \"\"genesis\" for all\", which, according to Gantz, is hard to understand as meaning other than that, for Homer, Oceanus was the father of the Titans.\nPlato, in his \"Timaeus\", provides a genealogy (probably Orphic) which perhaps reflected an attempt to reconcile this apparent divergence between Homer and Hesiod, in which Uranus and Gaia are the parents of Oceanus and Tethys, and Oceanus and Tethys are the parents of Cronus and Rhea and the other Titans, as well as Phorcys. In his \"Cratylus\", Plato quotes Orpheus as saying that Oceanus and Tethys were \"the first to marry\", possibly also reflecting an Orphic theogony in which Oceanus and Tethys, rather than Uranus and Gaia, were the primeval parents. Plato's apparent inclusion of Phorcys as a Titan (being the brother of Cronus and Rhea), and the mythographer Apollodorus's inclusion of Dione, the mother of Aphrodite by Zeus, as a thirteenth Titan, suggests an Orphic tradition in which the Titan offspring of Oceanus and Tethys consisted of Hesiod's twelve Titans, with Phorcys and Dione taking the place of Oceanus and Tethys.\nAccording to Epimenides, the first two beings, Night and Aer, produced Tartarus, who in turn produced two Titans (possibly Oceanus and Tethys) from whom came the world egg.\nMythology.\nWhen Cronus, the youngest of the Titans, overthrew his father Uranus, thereby becoming the ruler of the cosmos, according to Hesiod, none of the other Titans participated in the attack on Uranus. However, according to the mythographer Apollodorus, all the Titans\u2014except Oceanus\u2014attacked Uranus. Proclus, in his commentary on Plato's \"Timaeus\", quotes several lines of a poem (probably Orphic) which has an angry Oceanus brooding aloud as to whether he should join Cronus and the other Titans in the attack on Uranus. And, according to Proclus, Oceanus did not in fact take part in the attack.\nOceanus seemingly also did not join the Titans in the \"Titanomachy\", the great war between Cronus and his fellow Titans, and Zeus and his fellow Olympians, for control of the cosmos; and following the war, although Cronus and the other Titans were imprisoned, Oceanus certainly seems to have remained free. In Hesiod, Oceanus sends his daughter Styx, with her children Zelus (Envy), Nike (Victory), Cratos (Power), and Bia (Force), to fight on Zeus's side against the Titans, And in the \"Iliad\", Hera says that during the war she was sent to Oceanus and Tethys for safekeeping.\nSometime after the war, Aeschylus's \"Prometheus Bound\", has Oceanus visit his nephew the enchained Prometheus, who is being punished by Zeus for his theft of fire. Oceanus arrives riding a winged steed, saying that he is sympathetic to Prometheus's plight and wishes to help him if he can. But Prometheus mocks Oceanus, asking him: \"How did you summon courage to quit the stream that bears your name and the rock-roofed caves you yourself have made ...\" Oceanus advises Prometheus to humble himself before the new ruler Zeus, and so avoid making his situation any worse. But Prometheus replies: \"I envy you because you have escaped blame for having dared to share with me in my troubles.\"\nAccording to Pherecydes, while Heracles was travelling in Helios's golden cup, on his way to Erytheia to fetch the cattle of Geryon, Oceanus challenged Heracles by sending high waves rocking the cup, but Heracles threatened to shoot Oceanus with his bow, and Oceanus in fear stopped.\nGeography.\nAlthough sometimes treated as a person (such as Oceanus visiting Prometheus in Aeschylus's \"Prometheus Bound\", see above) Oceanus is more usually considered to be a place, that is, as the great world-encircling river. Twice Hesiod calls Oceanus \"the perfect river\" (\"\u03c4\u03b5\u03bb\u03ae\u03b5\u03bd\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2 \u03c0\u03bf\u03c4\u03b1\u03bc\u03bf\u1fd6\u03bf\"), and Homer refers to the \"stream of the river Oceanus\" (\"\u03c0\u03bf\u03c4\u03b1\u03bc\u03bf\u1fd6\u03bf \u03bb\u03af\u03c0\u03b5\u03bd \u1fe5\u03cc\u03bf\u03bd \u1f68\u03ba\u03b5\u03b1\u03bd\u03bf\u1fd6\u03bf\"). Both Hesiod and Homer call Oceanus \"backflowing\" (\"\u1f00\u03c8\u03bf\u03c1\u03c1\u03cc\u03bf\u03c5\"), since, as the great stream encircles the earth, it flows back into itself. Hesiod also calls Oceanus \"deep-swirling\" (\"\u03b2\u03b1\u03b8\u03c5\u03b4\u03af\u03bd\u03b7\u03c2\"), while Homer calls him \"deep-flowing\" (\"\u03b2\u03b1\u03b8\u03c5\u03c1\u03c1\u03cc\u03bf\u03c5\"). Homer says that Oceanus \"bounds the Earth\", and Oceanus was depicted on the shield of Achilles, encircling its rim, and so also on the shield of Heracles.\nBoth Hesiod and Homer locate Oceanus at the ends of the earth, near Tartarus, in the \"Theogony\", or near Elysium, in the \"Iliad\", and in the \"Odyssey\", has to be crossed in order to reach the \"dank house of Hades\". And for both Hesiod and Homer, Oceanus seems to have marked a boundary beyond which the cosmos became more fantastical. The \"Theogony\" has such fabulous creatures as the Hesperides, with their golden apples, the three-headed giant Geryon, and the snake-haired Gorgons, all residing \"beyond glorious Ocean\". While Homer located such exotic tribes as the Cimmerians, the Aethiopians, and the Pygmies as living nearby Oceanus.\nIn Homer, Helios the sun, rises from Oceanus in the east, and at the end of the day sinks back into Oceanus in the west, and the stars bathe in the \"stream of Ocean\". According to later sources, after setting, Helios sails back along Oceanus during the night from west to east.\nJust as Oceanus the god was the father of the river gods, Oceanus the river was said to be the source of all other rivers, and in fact all sources of water, both salt and fresh. According to Homer, from Oceanus \"all rivers flow and every sea, and all the springs and deep wells\". Being the source of rivers and springs would seem logically to require that Oceanus was himself a freshwater river, and so different from the salt sea, and in fact Hesiod seems to distinguish between Oceanus and Pontus, the personification of the sea. However elsewhere the distinction between fresh and salt water seems not to apply. For example, in Hesiod Nereus and Thaumus, both sons of Pontus, marry daughters of Oceanus, and in Homer (who makes no mention of Pontus), Thetis, the daughter of Nereus, and Eurynome the daughter of Oceanus, live together. In any case, Oceanus can also to be identified with the sea.\nThe concept of the surrounding Ocean, as expressed by Homer and Hesiod, remained in common use throughout antiquity. The Roman geographer Pomponius Mela said that the inhabited earth \"is entirely surrounded by the Ocean, from which it receives four seas\". These four seas were the Caspian Sea, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Gulf, and the Mediterranean Sea. However increasing knowledge of the seas led to modifications in this view. The Greek geographer Ptolemy identified various different oceans. One of these, the Western Ocean (the Atlantic Ocean) was often called simply \"'the Ocean\"', for instance by Julius Caesar.\nIconography.\nOceanus is represented, identified by inscription, as part of an illustration of the wedding of Peleus and Thetis on the early sixth century BC Attic black-figure \"Erskine\" dinos by Sophilos (British Museum 1971.111\u20131.1). Oceanus appears near the end of a long procession of gods and goddesses arriving at the palace of Peleus for the wedding. Oceanus follows a chariot driven by Athena and containing Artemis. Oceanus has bull horns, holds a snake in his left hand and a fish in his right, and has the body of a fish from the waist down. He is closely followed by Tethys and Eileithyia, with Hephaestus following on his mule ending the procession.\nOceanus also appears, as part of a very similar procession of Peleus and Thetis's wedding guests, on another early sixth century BC Attic black-figure pot, the Fran\u00e7ois Vase (Florence 4209). As in Sophilos's dinos, Oceanus appears at the end of the long procession, following after the last chariot, with Hephaestus on his mule bringing up the rear. Although little remains of Oceanus, he was apparently shown here with a bull's head. The similarity in the order of the wedding guests on these two vases, as well as on the fragments a second Sophilos vase (Athens Akr 587), suggests the possibility of a literary source.\nOceanus is depicted (labeled) as one of the gods fighting the Giants in the Gigantomachy frieze of the second century BC Pergamon Altar. Oceanus stands half nude, facing right, battling a giant falling to the right. Nearby Oceanus are fragments of a figure thought to be Tethys: a part of a chiton below Oceanus's left arm and a hand clutching a large tree branch visible behind Oceanus's head.\nIn Hellenistic and Roman mosaics, this Titan was often depicted as having the upper body of a muscular man with a long beard and horns (often represented as the claws of a crab) and the lower body of a serpent (\"cfr.\" Typhon). In Roman mosaics, such as that from Bardo, he might carry a steering-oar and cradle a ship.\nCosmography.\nOceanus appears in Hellenic cosmography as well as myth. Cartographers continued to represent the encircling equatorial stream much as it had appeared on Achilles's shield.\nHerodotus was skeptical about the physical existence of Oceanus and rejected the reasoning\u2014proposed by some of his coevals\u2014according to which the uncommon phenomenon of the summerly Nile flood was caused by the river's connection to the mighty Oceanus. Speaking about the Oceanus myth itself he declared: \nAs for the writer who attributes the phenomenon to the ocean, his account is involved in such obscurity that it is impossible to disprove it by argument. For my part I know of no river called Ocean, and I think that Homer, or one of the earlier poets, invented the name, and introduced it into his poetry.\nSome scholars believe that Oceanus originally represented all bodies of salt water, including the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean, the two largest bodies known to the ancient Greeks. However, as geography became more accurate, Oceanus came to represent the stranger, more unknown waters of the Atlantic Ocean (also called the \"Ocean Sea\"), while the newcomer of a later generation, Poseidon, ruled over the Mediterranean Sea.\nLate attestations for an equation with the Black Sea abound, the cause being\u00a0\u2013 as it appears\u00a0\u2013 Odysseus's travel to the Cimmerians whose fatherland, lying beyond the Oceanus, is described as a country divested from sunlight. In the fourth century BC, Hecataeus of Abdera writes that the Oceanus of the Hyperboreans is neither the Arctic nor Western Ocean, but the sea located to the north of the ancient Greek world, namely the Black Sea, called \"the most admirable of all seas\" by Herodotus, labelled the \"immense sea\" by Pomponius Mela and by Dionysius Periegetes, and which is named \"Mare majus\" on medieval geographic maps. Apollonius of Rhodes, similarly, calls the lower Danube the \"K\u00e9ras Okeano\u00edo\" (\"Gulf\" or \"Horn of Oceanus\").\nHecataeus of Abdera also refers to a holy island, sacred to the Pelasgian (and later, Greek) Apollo, situated in the westernmost part of the \"Okean\u00f3s Potam\u00f3s\", and called in different times Leuke or Leukos, Alba, Fidonisi or Isle of Snakes. It was on Leuke, in one version of his legend, that the hero Achilles, in a hilly tumulus, was buried (which is erroneously connected to the modern town of Kiliya, at the Danube delta). \"Accion\" (\"ocean\"), in the fourth century AD Gaulish Latin of Avienius's \"Ora maritima\", was applied to great lakes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49072", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49072", "title": "Francis Galton", "text": "British eugenist, polymath, and behavioural geneticist (1822\u20131911)\nSir Francis Galton (; 16 February 1822\u00a0\u2013 17 January 1911) was an English polymath and the originator of eugenics during the Victorian era; his ideas later became the basis of behavioural genetics.\nGalton produced over 340 papers and books. He also developed the statistical concept of correlation and widely promoted regression toward the mean. He was the first to apply statistical methods to the study of human differences and inheritance of intelligence, and introduced the use of questionnaires and surveys for collecting data on human communities, which he needed for genealogical and biographical works and for his anthropometric studies. He popularised the phrase \"nature versus nurture\". His book \"Hereditary Genius\" (1869) was the first social scientific attempt to study genius and greatness.\nAs an investigator of the human mind, he founded psychometrics and differential psychology, as well as the lexical hypothesis of personality. He devised a method for classifying fingerprints that proved useful in forensic science. He also conducted research on the power of prayer, concluding it had none due to its null effects on the longevity of those prayed for. His quest for the scientific principles of diverse phenomena extended even to the optimal method for making tea. As the initiator of scientific meteorology, he devised the first weather map, proposed a theory of anticyclones, and was the first to establish a complete record of short-term climatic phenomena on a European scale. He also invented the Galton whistle for testing differential hearing ability. Galton was knighted in 1909 for his contributions to science. He was Charles Darwin's half-cousin.\nIn recent years, he has received significant criticism for being a proponent of social Darwinism, eugenics, and biological racism; indeed he was a pioneer of eugenics, coining the term itself in 1883.\nGalton is credited with popularizing the phrase \"nature versus nurture\" to frame the academic discussion regarding the relative influence of heredity and environment on human ability and social advancement.\nEarly life.\nGalton was born at \"The Larches\", a large house in the Sparkbrook area of Birmingham, England, built on the site of \"Fair Hill\", the former home of Joseph Priestley, which the botanist William Withering had renamed. He was Charles Darwin's half-cousin, sharing the common grandparent Erasmus Darwin. His father was Samuel Tertius Galton, son of Samuel Galton Jr. He was also a cousin of Douglas Strutt Galton. The Galtons were Quaker gun-manufacturers and bankers, while the Darwins were involved in medicine and science.\nBoth the Galton and Darwin families included Fellows of the Royal Society and members who loved to invent in their spare time. Both Erasmus Darwin and Samuel Galton were founding members of the Lunar Society of Birmingham, which included Matthew Boulton, James Watt, Josiah Wedgwood, Joseph Priestley and Richard Lovell Edgeworth. Both families were known for their literary talent. Erasmus Darwin composed lengthy technical treatises in verse. Galton's aunt Mary Anne Galton wrote on aesthetics and religion, and her autobiography detailed the environment of her childhood populated by Lunar Society members.\nGalton was a child prodigy\u00a0\u2013 he was reading by the age of two; at age five he knew some Greek, Latin and long division, and by the age of six he had moved on to adult books, including Shakespeare for pleasure, and poetry, which he quoted at length. Galton attended King Edward's School, Birmingham, but chafed at the narrow classical curriculum and left at 16. His parents pressed him to enter the medical profession, and he studied for two years at Birmingham General Hospital and King's College London Medical School. He followed this up with mathematical studies at Trinity College, Cambridge, from 1840 to early 1844.\nAccording to the records of the United Grand Lodge of England, it was in February 1844 that Galton became a freemason at the \"Scientific\" lodge, held at the Red Lion Inn in Cambridge, progressing through the three masonic degrees: Apprentice, 5 February 1844; Fellow Craft, 11 March 1844; Master Mason, 13 May 1844. A note in the record states: \"Francis Galton Trinity College student, gained his certificate 13 March 1845\". One of Galton's masonic certificates from \"Scientific\" lodge can be found among his papers at University College, London.\nA nervous breakdown prevented Galton's intent to try for honours. He elected instead to take a \"poll\" (pass) B.A. degree, like his half-cousin Charles Darwin. (Following the Cambridge custom, he was awarded an M.A. without further study, in 1847.) He briefly resumed his medical studies but the death of his father in 1844 left him emotionally destitute, though financially independent, and he terminated his medical studies entirely, turning to foreign travel, sport and technical invention.\nIn his early years Galton was an enthusiastic traveller, and made a solo trip through Eastern Europe to Istanbul, before going up to Cambridge. In 1845 and 1846, he went to Egypt and travelled up the Nile to Khartoum in the Sudan, and from there to Beirut, Damascus and down to Jordan.\nIn 1850 he joined the Royal Geographical Society, and over the next two years mounted a long and difficult expedition into then little-known South West Africa (now Namibia). He wrote a book on his experience, \"Narrative of an Explorer in Tropical South Africa\". He was awarded the Royal Geographical Society's Founder's Medal in 1853 and the Silver Medal of the French Geographical Society for his pioneering cartographic survey of the region. This established his reputation as a geographer and explorer. He proceeded to write the best-selling \"The Art of Travel\", a handbook of practical advice for the Victorian on the move, which went through many editions and is still in print.\nCareer.\nEarly scientific career.\nGalton was a polymath who made important contributions in many fields, including meteorology (the anticyclone and the first popular weather maps), statistics (regression and correlation), psychology (synaesthesia), biology (the nature and mechanism of heredity), and criminology (fingerprints). Much of this was influenced by his penchant for counting and measuring. Galton prepared the first weather map published in \"The Times\" (1 April 1875, showing the weather from the previous day, 31 March), now a standard feature in newspapers worldwide.\nHe became very active in the British Association for the Advancement of Science, presenting many papers on a wide variety of topics at its meetings from 1858 to 1899. He was the general secretary from 1863 to 1867, president of the Geographical section in 1867 and 1872, and president of the Anthropological Section in 1877 and 1885. He was active on the council of the Royal Geographical Society for over forty years, in various committees of the Royal Society, and on the Meteorological Council.\nJames McKeen Cattell, a student of Wilhelm Wundt who had been reading Galton's articles, decided he wanted to study under him. He eventually built a professional relationship with Galton, measuring subjects and working together on research.\nIn 1888, Galton established a lab in the science galleries of the South Kensington Museum. In Galton's lab, participants could be measured to gain knowledge of their strengths and weaknesses. Galton also used these data for his own research. He would typically charge people a small fee for his services.\nHeredity and eugenics.\nThe publication by his cousin Charles Darwin of \"The Origin of Species\" in 1859 was an event that changed Galton's life. He came to be gripped by the work, especially the first chapter on \"Variation under Domestication\", concerning animal breeding.\nGalton devoted much of the rest of his life to exploring variation in human populations and its implications, at which Darwin had only hinted in \"The Origin of Species\", although he returned to it in his 1871 book \"The Descent of Man\", drawing on his cousin's work in the intervening period. Galton established a research program which embraced multiple aspects of human variation, from mental characteristics to height; from facial images to fingerprint patterns. This required inventing novel measures of traits, devising large-scale collection of data using those measures, and in the end, the discovery of new statistical techniques for describing and understanding the data.\nGalton was interested at first in the question of whether human ability was hereditary, and proposed to count the number of the relatives of various degrees of eminent men. If the qualities were hereditary, he reasoned, there should be more eminent men among the relatives than among the general population. To test this, he invented the methods of historiometry. Galton obtained extensive data from a broad range of biographical sources which he tabulated and compared in various ways. This pioneering work was described in detail in his book \"Hereditary Genius\" in 1869. Here he showed, among other things, that the numbers of eminent relatives dropped off when going from the first degree to the second degree relatives, and from the second degree to the third. He took this as evidence of the inheritance of abilities.\nGalton recognised the limitations of his methods in these two works, and believed the question could be better studied by comparisons of twins. His method envisaged testing to see if twins who were similar at birth diverged in dissimilar environments, and whether twins dissimilar at birth converged when reared in similar environments. He again used the method of questionnaires to gather various sorts of data, which were tabulated and described in a paper \"The history of twins\" in 1875. In so doing he anticipated the modern field of behaviour genetics, which relies heavily on twin studies. He concluded that the evidence favoured nature rather than nurture. He also proposed adoption studies, including trans-racial adoption studies, to separate the effects of heredity and environment.\nGalton recognised that cultural circumstances influenced the capability of a civilisation's citizens, and their reproductive success. In \"Hereditary Genius\", he envisaged a situation conducive to resilient and enduring civilisation as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The best form of civilization in respect to the improvement of the race, would be one in which society was not costly; where incomes were chiefly derived from professional sources, and not much through inheritance; where every lad had a chance of showing his abilities, and, if highly gifted, was enabled to achieve a first-class education and entrance into professional life, by the liberal help of the exhibitions and scholarships which he had gained in his early youth; where marriage was held in as high honor as in ancient Jewish times; where the pride of race was encouraged (of course I do not refer to the nonsensical sentiment of the present day, that goes under that name); where the weak could find a welcome and a refuge in celibate monasteries or sisterhoods, and lastly, where the better sort of emigrants and refugees from other lands were invited and welcomed, and their descendants naturalized.\nGalton invented the term \"eugenics\" in 1883 and set down many of his observations and conclusions in a book, \"Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its Development\". In the book's introduction, he wrote: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[This book's] intention is to touch on various topics more or less connected with that of the cultivation of race, or, as we might call it, with \"eugenic\"1 questions, and to present the results of several of my own separate investigations.1 This is, with questions bearing on what is termed in Greek, \"eugenes\", namely, good in stock, hereditarily endowed with noble qualities. This, and the allied words, \"eugeneia\", etc., are equally applicable to men, brutes, and plants. We greatly want a brief word to express the science of improving stock, which is by no means confined to questions of judicious mating, but which, especially in the case of man, takes cognizance of all influences that tend in however remote a degree to give the more suitable races or strains of blood a better chance of prevailing speedily over the less suitable than they otherwise would have had. The word \"eugenics\" would sufficiently express the idea; it is at least a neater word and a more generalized one than \"viriculture\", which I once ventured to use.\nHe believed that a scheme of 'marks' for family merit should be defined, and early marriage between families of high rank be encouraged via provision of monetary incentives. He pointed out some of the tendencies in British society, such as the late marriages of eminent people, and the paucity of their children, which he thought were \"dysgenic\". He advocated encouraging eugenic marriages by supplying able couples with incentives to have children. On 29 October 1901, Galton chose to address eugenic issues when he delivered the second Huxley lecture at the Royal Anthropological Institute.\n\"The Eugenics Review\", the journal of the Eugenics Education Society, commenced publication in 1909. Galton, the Honorary President of the society, wrote the foreword for the first volume. The First International Congress of Eugenics was held in July 1912. Winston Churchill and Carls Elliot were among the attendees.\nModel for population stability.\nGalton's formulation of regression and its link to the bivariate normal distribution can be traced to his attempts at developing a mathematical model for population stability. Although Galton's first attempt to study Darwinian questions, \"Hereditary Genius\", generated little enthusiasm at the time, the text led to his further studies in the 1870s concerning the inheritance of physical traits. This text contains some crude notions of the concept of regression, described in a qualitative matter. For example, he wrote of dogs: \"If a man breeds from strong, well-shaped dogs, but of mixed pedigree, the puppies will be sometimes, but rarely, the equals of their parents. They will commonly be of a mongrel, nondescript type, because ancestral peculiarities are apt to crop out in the offspring.\"\nThis notion created a problem for Galton, as he could not reconcile the tendency of a population to maintain a normal distribution of traits from generation to generation with the notion of inheritance. It seemed that a large number of factors operated independently on offspring, leading to the normal distribution of a trait in each generation. However, this provided no explanation as to how a parent can have a significant impact on his offspring, which was the basis of inheritance.\nGalton's solution to this problem was presented in his Presidential Address at the September 1885 meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, for he was serving at the time as President of Section H: Anthropology. The address was published in \"Nature\", and Galton further developed the theory in \"Regression toward mediocrity in hereditary stature\" and \"Hereditary Stature\". An elaboration of this theory was published in 1889 in \"Natural Inheritance\". There were three key developments that helped Galton develop this theory: the development of the law of error in 1874\u20131875, the formulation of an empirical law of reversion in 1877, and the development of a mathematical framework encompassing regression using human population data during 1885.\nGalton's development of the law of regression to the mean, or reversion, was due to insights from the Galton board ('bean machine') and his studies of sweet peas. While Galton had previously invented the quincunx prior to February 1874, the 1877 version of the quincunx had a new feature that helped Galton demonstrate that a normal mixture of normal distributions is also normal. Galton demonstrated this using a new version of quincunx, adding chutes to the apparatus to represent reversion. When the pellets passed through the curved chutes (representing reversion) and then the pins (representing family variability), the result was a stable population. On Friday 19 February 1877, Galton gave a lecture entitled \"Typical Laws of Heredity\" at the Royal Institution in London. In this lecture, he posited that there must be a counteracting force to maintain population stability. However, this model required a much larger degree of intergenerational natural selection than was plausible.\nIn 1875, Galton began growing sweet peas, and addressed the Royal Institution on his findings on 9 February 1877. He found that each group of progeny seeds followed a normal curve, and the curves were equally disperse. Each group was not centred on the parent's weight, but rather at a weight closer to the population average. Galton called this reversion, as every progeny group was distributed at a value that was closer to the population average than the parent. The deviation from the population average was in the same direction, but the magnitude of the deviation was only one-third as large. In doing so, he demonstrated that there was variability among each of the families, yet the families combined to produce a stable, normally distributed population. When he addressed the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1885, he said of his investigation of sweet peas, \"I was then blind to what I now perceive to be the simple explanation of the phenomenon.\"\nGalton was able to further his notion of regression by collecting and analysing data on human stature. Galton asked for help of mathematician J. Hamilton Dickson in investigating the geometric relationship of the data. He determined that the regression coefficient did not ensure population stability by chance, but rather that the regression coefficient, conditional variance, and population variance, were interdependent quantities related by a simple equation. Thus Galton identified that the linearity of regression was not coincidental but rather was a necessary consequence of population stability.\nThe model for population stability resulted in Galton's formulation of the Law of Ancestral Heredity. This law, which was published in \"Natural Inheritance\", states that the two parents of an offspring jointly contribute one half of an offspring's heritage, while the other, more-removed ancestors constitute a smaller proportion of the offspring's heritage. Galton viewed reversion as a spring, that when stretched, would return the distribution of traits back to the normal distribution. He concluded that evolution would have to occur via discontinuous steps, as reversion would neutralise any incremental steps. When Mendel's principles were rediscovered in 1900, this resulted in a fierce battle between the followers of Galton's Law of Ancestral Heredity, the biometricians, and those who advocated Mendel's principles.\nEmpirical test of pangenesis and Lamarckism.\nGalton conducted wide-ranging inquiries into heredity which led him to challenge Charles Darwin's hypothesis of pangenesis. Darwin had proposed as part of this model that certain particles, which he called \"gemmules\" moved throughout the body and were also responsible for the inheritance of acquired characteristics. Galton, in consultation with Darwin, set out to see if they were transported in the blood. In a long series of experiments in 1869 to 1871, he transfused the blood between dissimilar breeds of rabbits, and examined the features of their offspring. He found no evidence of characters transmitted in the transfused blood.\nDarwin challenged the validity of Galton's experiment, giving his reasons in an article published in \"Nature\" where he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNow, in the chapter on Pangenesis in my \"Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication\" I have not said one word about the blood, or about any fluid proper to any circulating system. It is, indeed, obvious that the presence of gemmules in the blood can form no necessary part of my hypothesis; for I refer in illustration of it to the lowest animals, such as the Protozoa, which do not possess blood or any vessels; and I refer to plants in which the fluid, when present in the vessels, cannot be considered as true blood. The fundamental laws of growth, reproduction, inheritance, &amp;c., are so closely similar throughout the whole organic kingdom, that the means by which the gemmules (assuming for the moment their existence) are diffused through the body, would probably be the same in all beings; therefore the means can hardly be diffusion through the blood. Nevertheless, when I first heard of Mr. Galton's experiments, I did not sufficiently reflect on the subject, and saw not the difficulty of believing in the presence of gemmules in the blood.\nGalton explicitly rejected the idea of the inheritance of acquired characteristics (Lamarckism), and was an early proponent of \"hard heredity\" through selection alone. He came close to rediscovering Mendel's particulate theory of inheritance, but was prevented from making the final breakthrough in this regard because of his focus on continuous, rather than discrete, traits (now regarded as polygenic traits). He went on to found the biometric approach to the study of heredity, distinguished by its use of statistical techniques to study continuous traits and population-scale aspects of heredity.\nThis approach was later taken up enthusiastically by Karl Pearson and W. F. R. Weldon; together, they founded the highly influential journal \"Biometrika\" in 1901. (R. A. Fisher would later show how the biometrical approach could be reconciled with the Mendelian approach.) The statistical techniques that Galton developed (correlation and regression\u2014see below) and phenomena he established (regression to the mean) formed the basis of the biometric approach and are now essential tools in all social sciences.\n1884 International Health Exhibition.\nAnthropometric Laboratory.\nIn 1884, London hosted the International Health Exhibition. This exhibition placed much emphasis on highlighting Victorian developments in sanitation and public health, and allowed the nation to display its advanced public health outreach, compared to other countries at the time. Francis Galton took advantage of this opportunity to set up his anthropometric laboratory. He stated that the purpose of this laboratory was to \"show the public the simplicity of the instruments and methods by which the chief physical characteristics of man may be measured and recorded.\" The laboratory was an interactive walk-through in which physical characteristics such as height, weight, and eyesight, would be measured for each subject after payment of an admission fee. Upon entering the laboratory, a subject would visit the following stations in order.\nFirst, they would fill in a form with personal and family history (age, birthplace, marital status, residence, and occupation), then visit stations that recorded hair and eye colour, followed by the keenness, colour-sense, and depth perception of sight. Next, they would examine the keenness, or relative acuteness, of hearing and highest audible note of their hearing followed by an examination of their sense of touch. However, because the surrounding area was noisy, the apparatus intended to measure hearing was rendered ineffective by the noise and echoes in the building. Their breathing capacity would also be measured, as well as their ability to throw a punch. The next stations would examine strength of both pulling and squeezing with both hands. Lastly, subjects' heights in various positions (sitting, standing, etc.) as well as arm span and weight would be measured.\nOne excluded characteristic of interest was the size of the head. Galton notes in his analysis that this omission was mostly for practical reasons. For instance, it would not be very accurate and additionally it would require much time for women to disassemble and reassemble their hair and bonnets. The patrons would then be given a souvenir containing all their biological data, while Galton would also keep a copy for future statistical research.\nAlthough the laboratory did not employ any revolutionary measurement techniques, it was unique because of the simple logistics of constructing such a demonstration within a limited space, and because of the speed and efficiency with which all the necessary data were gathered. The laboratory itself was a see-through (lattice-walled) fenced off gallery measuring 36 feet long by 6 feet long. To collect data efficiently, Galton had to make the process as simple as possible for people to understand. As a result, subjects were taken through the laboratory in pairs so that explanations could be given to two at a time, also in the hope that one of the two would confidently take the initiative to go through all the tests first, encouraging the other. With this design, the total time spent in the exhibit was fourteen minutes for each pair.\nGalton states that the measurements of human characteristics are useful for two reasons. First, he states that measuring physical characteristics is useful in order to ensure, on a more domestic level, that children are developing properly. A useful example he gives for the practicality of these domestic measurements is regularly checking a child's eyesight, in order to correct any deficiencies early on. The second use for the data from his anthropometric laboratory is for statistical studies. He comments on the usefulness of the collected data to compare attributes across occupations, residences, races, etc. The exhibit at the health exhibition allowed Galton to collect a large amount of raw data from which to conduct further comparative studies. He had 9,337 respondents, each measured in 17 categories, creating a rather comprehensive statistical database.\nAfter the conclusion of the International Health Exhibition, Galton used these data to confirm in humans his theory of linear regression, posed after studying sweet peas. The accumulation of this human data allowed him to observe the correlation between forearm length and height, head width and head breadth, and head length and height. With these observations he was able to write \"Co-relations and their Measurements, chiefly from Anthropometric Data\". In this publication, Galton defined what co-relation as a phenomenon that occurs when \"the variation of the one [variable] is accompanied on the average by more or less variation of the other, and in the same direction.\"\nStatistical innovation and psychological theory.\nHistoriometry.\nThe method used in \"Hereditary Genius\" has been described as the first example of historiometry. To bolster these results, and to attempt to make a distinction between 'nature' and 'nurture' (he was the first to apply this phrase to the topic), he devised a questionnaire that he sent out to 190 Fellows of the Royal Society. He tabulated characteristics of their families, such as birth order and the occupation and race of their parents. He attempted to discover whether their interest in science was 'innate' or due to the encouragements of others. The studies were published as a book, \"English men of science: their nature and nurture\", in 1874. In the end, it promoted the nature versus nurture question, though it did not settle it, and provided some fascinating data on the sociology of scientists of the time.\nThe lexical hypothesis.\nGalton was the first scientist to recognise what is now known as the lexical hypothesis. This is the idea that the most salient and socially relevant personality differences in people's lives will eventually become encoded into language. The hypothesis further suggests that by sampling language, it is possible to derive a comprehensive taxonomy of human personality traits.\nThe questionnaire.\nGalton's inquiries into the mind involved detailed recording of people's subjective accounts of whether and how their minds dealt with phenomena such as mental imagery. To better elicit this information, he pioneered the use of the questionnaire. In one study, he asked his fellow members of the Royal Society of London to describe mental images that they experienced. In another, he collected in-depth surveys from eminent scientists for a work examining the effects of nature and nurture on the propensity toward scientific thinking.\nVariance and standard deviation.\nCore to any statistical analysis is the concept that measurements vary: they have both a central tendency, or mean, and a spread around this central value, or variance. In the late 1860s, Galton conceived of a measure to quantify normal variation: the standard deviation.\nGalton was a keen observer. In 1906, visiting a livestock fair, he stumbled upon an intriguing contest. An ox was on display, and the villagers were invited to guess the animal's weight after it was slaughtered and dressed. Nearly 800 participated, and Galton was able to study their individual entries after the event. Galton stated that \"the middlemost estimate expresses the \"vox populi\", every other estimate being condemned as too low or too high by a majority of the voters\", and reported this value (the median, in terminology he himself had introduced, but chose not to use on this occasion) as 1,207 pounds. To his surprise, this was within 0.8% of the weight measured by the judges. Soon afterwards, in response to an enquiry, he reported the mean of the guesses as 1,197 pounds, but did not comment on its improved accuracy. Recent archival research has found some slips in transmitting Galton's calculations to the original article in \"Nature\": the median was actually 1,208 pounds, and the dressed weight of the ox 1,197 pounds, so the mean estimate had zero error. James Surowiecki uses this weight-judging competition as his opening example: had he known the true result, his conclusion on the wisdom of the crowd would no doubt have been more strongly expressed.\nThe same year, Galton suggested in a letter to the journal \"Nature\" a better method of cutting a round cake by avoiding making radial incisions.\nExperimental derivation of the normal distribution.\nStudying variation, Galton invented the Galton board, a pachinko-like device also known as the bean machine, as a tool for demonstrating the law of error and the normal distribution.\nBivariate normal distribution.\nHe also discovered the properties of the bivariate normal distribution and its relationship to correlation and regression analysis.\nCorrelation and regression.\nIn 1846, the French physicist Auguste Bravais (1811\u20131863) first developed what would become the correlation coefficient. After examining forearm and height measurements, Galton independently rediscovered the concept of correlation in 1888 and demonstrated its application in the study of heredity, anthropology, and psychology. Galton's later statistical study of the probability of extinction of surnames led to the concept of Galton\u2013Watson stochastic processes.\nGalton invented the use of the regression line and for the choice of r (for reversion or regression) to represent the correlation coefficient.\nIn the 1870s and 1880s he was a pioneer in the use of normal theory to fit histograms and ogives to actual tabulated data, much of which he collected himself: for instance large samples of sibling and parental height. Consideration of the results from these empirical studies led to his further insights into evolution, natural selection, and regression to the mean.\nRegression toward the mean.\nGalton was the first to describe and explain the common phenomenon of regression toward the mean, which he first observed in his experiments on the size of the seeds of successive generations of sweet peas.\nThe conditions under which regression toward the mean occurs depend on the way the term is mathematically defined. Galton first observed the phenomenon in the context of simple linear regression of data points. Galton developed the following model: pellets fall through a \"quincunx\" or \"bean machine\" forming a normal distribution centred directly under their entrance point. These pellets could then be released down into a second gallery (corresponding to a second measurement occasion). Galton then asked the reverse question \"from where did these pellets come?\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The answer was not \"on average directly above\". Rather it was \"on average, more towards the middle\", for the simple reason that there were more pellets above it towards the middle that could wander left than there were in the left extreme that could wander to the right, inwards.\nTheories of perception.\nGalton went beyond measurement and summary to attempt to explain the phenomena he observed. Among such developments, he proposed an early theory of ranges of sound and hearing, and collected large quantities of anthropometric data from the public through his popular and long-running Anthropometric Laboratory, which he established in 1884, and where he studied over 9,000 people. It was not until 1985 that these data were analysed in their entirety.\nHe made a beauty map of Britain, based on a secret grading of the local women on a scale from attractive to repulsive. The lowest point was in Aberdeen.\nDifferential psychology.\nGalton's study of human abilities ultimately led to the foundation of differential psychology and the formulation of the first mental tests. He was interested in measuring humans in every way possible. This included measuring their ability to make sensory discrimination which he assumed was linked to intellectual prowess. Galton suggested that individual differences in general ability are reflected in performance on relatively simple sensory capacities and in speed of reaction to a stimulus, variables that could be objectively measured by tests of sensory discrimination and reaction\ntime. He also measured how quickly people reacted which he later linked to internal wiring which ultimately limited intelligence ability. Throughout his research Galton assumed that people who reacted faster were more intelligent than others.\nComposite photography.\nGalton also devised a technique called \"composite portraiture\" (produced by superimposing multiple photographic portraits of individuals' faces registered on their eyes) to create an average face (see averageness). In the 1990s, a hundred years after his discovery, much psychological research has examined the attractiveness of these faces, an aspect that Galton had remarked on in his original lecture. Others, including Sigmund Freud in his work on dreams, picked up Galton's suggestion that these composites might represent a useful metaphor for an Ideal type or a concept of a \"natural kind\" (see Eleanor Rosch)\u2014such as Jewish men, criminals, patients with tuberculosis, etc.\u2014onto the same photographic plate, thereby yielding a blended whole, or \"composite\", that he hoped could generalise the facial appearance of his subject into an \"average\" or \"central type\". (See also entry \"Modern physiognomy\" under Physiognomy).\nThis work began in the 1880s while the Jewish scholar Joseph Jacobs studied anthropology and statistics with Francis Galton. Jacobs asked Galton to create a composite photograph of a Jewish type. One of Jacobs' first publications that used Galton's composite imagery was \"The Jewish Type, and Galton's Composite Photographs\", \"Photographic News\", 29, (24 April 1885): 268\u2013269.\nGalton hoped his technique would aid medical diagnosis, and even criminology through the identification of typical criminal faces. However, his technique did not prove useful and fell into disuse, although after much work on it including by photographers Lewis Hine, John L. Lovell and Arthur Batut.\nFingerprints.\nThe method of identifying criminals by their fingerprints had been introduced in the 1860s by Sir William James Herschel in India, and their potential use in forensic work was first proposed by Dr Henry Faulds in 1880. Galton was introduced to the field by his half-cousin Charles Darwin, who was a friend of Faulds, and he went on to create the first scientific footing for the study (which assisted its acceptance by the courts) although Galton did not ever give credit that the original idea was not his.\nIn a Royal Institution paper in 1888 and three books (\"Finger Prints\", 1892; \"Decipherment of Blurred Finger Prints\", 1893; and \"Fingerprint Directories\", 1895), Galton estimated the probability of two persons having the same fingerprint and studied the heritability and racial differences in fingerprints. He wrote about the technique (inadvertently sparking a controversy between Herschel and Faulds that was to last until 1917), identifying common pattern in fingerprints and devising a classification system that survives to this day. He described and classified them into eight broad categories: 1: plain arch, 2: tented arch, 3: simple loop, 4: central pocket loop, 5: double loop, 6: lateral pocket loop, 7: plain whorl, and 8: accidental.\nViews.\nIn 1873, Galton wrote a letter to \"The Times\" titled \"Africa for the Chinese\", where he argued that the Chinese, as a race capable of high civilisation and only temporarily stunted by the recent failures of Chinese dynasties, should be encouraged to immigrate to Africa and displace the inferior aboriginal blacks.\nAccording to an editorial in \"Nature\": \"Galton also constructed a racial hierarchy, in which white people were considered superior. He wrote that the average intellectual standard of the negro race is some two grades below our own (the Anglo Saxon).\" According to the \"Encyclopedia of Genocide\", Galton bordered on the justification of genocide when he stated: \"There exists a sentiment, for the most part quite unreasonable, against the gradual extinction of an inferior race.\"\nIn an effort to reach a wider audience, Galton worked on a novel entitled \"Kantsaywhere\" from May until December 1910. The novel described a utopia organised by a eugenic religion, designed to breed fitter and smarter humans. His unpublished notebooks show that this was an expansion of material he had been composing since at least 1901. He offered it to Methuen for publication, but they showed little enthusiasm. Galton wrote to his niece that it should be either \"smothered or superseded\". His niece appears to have burnt most of the novel, offended by the love scenes, but large fragments survived, and it was published online by University College, London.\nPersonal life.\nIn January 1853, Galton met Louisa Jane Butler (1822\u20131897); they married on 1 August 1853. Their marriage of 43 years ended with the death of Galton's wife. They had no children.\nGalton, \"On his own estimation he was a supremely intelligent man and felt that we should encourage the survival of the fittest.\" Later in life, Galton proposed a connection between genius and insanity based on his own experience:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Men who leave their mark on the world are very often those who, being gifted and full of nervous power, are at the same time haunted and driven by a dominant idea, and are therefore within a measurable distance of insanity. Attestations and descriptions of Galton's character were made by Beatrice Webb, James Arthur Harris, and Karl Pearson. He also corresponded with Beatrix Lucia Catherine Tollemache.\nGalton is buried in the family tomb in the churchyard of St Michael and All Angels, in the village of Claverdon, Warwickshire.\nAwards and influence.\nOver the course of his career Galton received many awards, including the Copley Medal of the Royal Society (1910). He received in 1853 the Founder's Medal, the highest award of the Royal Geographical Society, for his explorations and map-making of southwest Africa. He was elected a member of the Athenaeum Club in 1855 and made a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1860. His autobiography also lists:\nGalton was knighted in 1909:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The KING has also been pleased, by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, bearing date the 26th June, 1909, to confer the dignity of a Knight of the said United Kingdom upon:\nFrancis Galton, Esq., Sc.D., F.R.S., Honorary Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge\u2014\u200a\nHis statistical heir Karl Pearson, first holder of the Galton Chair of Eugenics at University College, London (now Galton Chair of Genetics), wrote a three-volume biography of Galton, in four parts, after his death.\nThe flowering plant genus \"Galtonia\" was named after Galton.\nUniversity College London has in the twenty-first century been involved in a historical inquiry into its role as the institutional birthplace of eugenics. Galton established a laboratory at UCL in 1904. Some students and staff have called on the university to rename its Galton lecture theatre, with journalist Angela Saini stating, \"Galton's seductive promise was of a bold new world filled only with beautiful, intelligent, productive people. The scientists in its thrall claimed this could be achieved by controlling reproduction, policing borders to prevent certain types of immigrants, and locking away \"undesirables\", including disabled people.\"\nIn June 2020, University College London (UCL) announced the renaming of a lecture theatre named after Galton because of his connection with eugenics.\nPublished works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCollections.\nAfter Galton's death in 1911, his archive donated to University College London by his executors. The Galton Papers include material about Galton's personal life and family, correspondence, and papers relating to his scientific work. Material was subsequently added to the collection to through gifts from Galton's nephew and other family members, and via purchases made through Karl Pearson and other members of the Galton Laboratory. Galton's personal library was incorporated into the library of the Galton Laboratory; these books are also held at University College London.\nUniversity College London also holds the papers of Galton's prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Karl Pearson, the records of the Galton Laboratory, and successors to the Galton Professor role including J.B.S. Haldane and L.S. Penrose.\nThe Royal Geographical Society holds material relating to Galton including photographs, correspondence and a telescope he used in expeditions.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49073", "revid": "51035546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49073", "title": "Pablo Casals", "text": "Catalan cellist and conductor (1876\u20131973)\nPau Casals i Defill\u00f3 (Catalan: ; 29 December 1876\u00a0\u2013 22 October 1973), also known in English as Pablo Casals, was a Catalan and Puerto Rican cellist, composer, and conductor, born in Spain. He made many recordings throughout his career of solo, chamber, and orchestral music, including some as conductor, but he is perhaps best remembered for the recordings he made of the Cello Suites by Bach. He was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1963 by President John F. Kennedy (though the ceremony was presided over by Lyndon B. Johnson).\nBiography.\nChildhood and early years.\nCasals was born in El Vendrell, Catalonia, Spain. His father, Carles Casals i Ribes, was a parish organist and choirmaster. He gave Casals instruction in piano, songwriting, violin, and organ. He was also a very strict disciplinarian. When Casals was young, his father would pull the piano out from the wall and have him and his brother, Artur, stand behind it and name the notes and the scales that his father was playing. At the age of four, Casals could play the violin, piano and flute; at the age of six he played the violin well enough to perform a solo in public. His first encounter with a cello-like instrument was from witnessing a local travelling Catalan musician, who played a cello-strung broom handle. Upon request, his father built him a crude cello, using a gourd as a sound-box. When Casals was 11 years old, he first heard the real cello performed by a group of traveling musicians, and decided to dedicate himself to the instrument.\nHis mother, Do\u00f1a Pilar Defill\u00f3 de Casals, was born in Mayag\u00fcez, Puerto Rico, to parents who were Catalan immigrants in Puerto Rico. In 1888, she took her son to Barcelona, where he was enrolled in the Escola Municipal de M\u00fasica. There he studied cello, theory, and piano. In 1890, when he was 13, he found a tattered copy of Bach's six cello suites in a second-hand music store in Barcelona. He spent the next 13 years practicing them every day before he would perform them in public for the first time. Casals would later make his own version of the six suites. He made prodigious progress as a cellist; on 23 February 1891 he gave a solo recital in Barcelona at the age of fourteen. He graduated from the \"Escola\" with honours five years later.\nYouth and studies.\nIn 1893, Spanish composer Isaac Alb\u00e9niz heard him playing in a trio in a caf\u00e9 and gave him a letter of introduction to the Count Guillermo Morphy, the private secretary to Mar\u00eda Cristina, the Queen Regent of Spain. Casals was asked to play at informal concerts in the palace, and was granted a royal stipend to study composition at the Madrid Royal Conservatory in Madrid with V\u00edctor Mirecki. He also played in the newly organised Quartet Society.\nIn 1895, he traveled to Paris, where, having lost his stipend, he earned a living by playing second cello in the theatre orchestra of the \"Folies Marigny\". In 1896, he returned to Spain and received an appointment to the faculty of the Escola Municipal de M\u00fasica in Barcelona. He was also appointed principal cellist in the orchestra of Barcelona's opera house, the Liceu. In 1897, he appeared as soloist with the Madrid Symphony Orchestra, and was awarded the Order of Carlos III from the Queen. \nInternational career.\nIn 1899, Casals played at The Crystal Palace in London, and later for Queen Victoria at Osborne House, her summer residence, accompanied by Ernest Walker. On 12 November, and 17 December 1899, he appeared as a soloist at the Lamoureux Concerts in Paris, to great public and critical acclaim. He toured Spain and the Netherlands with the pianist Harold Bauer from 1900 to 1901; in 1901/02, he made his first tour of the United States; and in 1903 toured South America.\nOn 15 January 1904, Casals was invited to play at the White House for President Theodore Roosevelt. On 9 March of that year, he made his debut at Carnegie Hall in New York, playing Richard Strauss's \"Don Quixote\" under the baton of the composer. In 1906, he became associated with the talented young Portuguese cellist Guilhermina Suggia, who studied with him and began to appear in concerts as Mme. P. Casals-Suggia, although they were not legally married. Their relationship ended in 1912.\n\"The New York Times\" of 9 April 1911 announced that Casals would perform at the London Musical Festival to be held at the Queen's Hall on the second day of the Festival (23 May). The piece chosen was Haydn's Cello Concerto in D and Casals would later join Fritz Kreisler for Brahms's Double Concerto for Violin and Cello.\nIn 1914, Casals married the American socialite and singer Susan Metcalfe; they were separated in 1928, but did not divorce until 1957.\nAlthough Casals made his first recordings in 1915 (a series for Columbia), he would not release another recording until 1926 (on the Victor label).\nBack in Paris, Casals organized a trio with the pianist Alfred Cortot and the violinist Jacques Thibaud; they played concerts from 1906 to 1933, and made recordings from 1926 to 1929. Casals also became interested in conducting, and in 1919 he organized, in Barcelona, the Pau Casals Orchestra and led its first concert on 13 October 1920. With the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936, the Orquestra Pau Casals ceased its activities.\nCasals was an ardent supporter of the Spanish Republican government, and after its defeat vowed not to return to Spain until democracy was restored. Casals performed at the Gran Teatre del Liceu on 19 October 1938, possibly his last performance in Spain before his exile.\nIn the last weeks of 1936, he stayed in Prades, a small village in France near the Spanish border, where Casals would settle in 1939, in Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es-Orientales, an historically Catalan region. Between 1939 and 1942 he made sporadic appearances as a cellist in the unoccupied zone of southern France and in Switzerland. He was mocked by the Francoist press, which wrote articles deriding him as \"a donkey\", and was fined one million pesetas for his political views. So fierce was his opposition to Francoist Spain that he refused to appear in countries that recognized the Spanish government. He made a notable exception when he took part in a concert of chamber music in the White House on 13 November 1961, at the invitation of President John F. Kennedy, whom he admired. On 6 December 1963, Casals was awarded the U.S. Presidential Medal of Freedom.\nThroughout most of his professional career, he played on a cello that was labeled and attributed to \"Carlo Tononi ... 1733\" but after he had been playing it for 50 years it was discovered to have been created by the Venetian luthier Matteo Goffriller around 1700. Casals acquired it in 1913. He also played another cello by Goffriller dated 1710, and a Tononi from 1730.\nPrades Festivals.\nIn 1950, he resumed his career as conductor and cellist at the Prades Festival in Conflent, organized in commemoration of the bicentenary of the death of Johann Sebastian Bach; Casals agreed to participate on condition that all proceeds were to go to a refugee hospital in nearby Perpignan.\nPuerto Rico.\nCasals traveled extensively to Puerto Rico in 1955, inaugurating the annual Casals Festival the next year. In 1955, Casals married as his second wife long-time associate Francesca Vidal i Puig, who died that same year. In 1957, at age 80, Casals married 20-year-old Marta Monta\u00f1ez y Martinez. He is said to have dismissed concerns that marriage to someone 60 years his junior might be hazardous by saying, \"I look at it this way: if she dies, she dies.\" Pau and Marta made their permanent residence in the town of Ceiba, and lived in a house called \"El Pessebre\" (The Manger). He made an impact in the Puerto Rican music scene by founding the Puerto Rico Symphony Orchestra in 1958, and the Conservatory of Music of Puerto Rico in 1959.\nLater years.\nCasals appeared in the 1958 documentary film \"Windjammer\". In the 1960s, Casals gave many master classes throughout the world in places such as Gstaad, Zermatt, Tuscany, Berkeley, and Marlboro. Several of these master classes were televised.\nOn 13 November 1961, he performed in the East Room at the White House by invitation of President Kennedy at a dinner given in honor of the Governor of Puerto Rico, Luis Mu\u00f1oz Mar\u00edn. This performance was recorded and released as an album.\nCasals was also a composer. Perhaps his most effective work is \"La Sardana\", for an ensemble of cellos, which he composed in 1926. His oratorio \"El Pessebre\" was performed for the first time in Acapulco, Mexico, on 17 December 1960. He also presented it to the United Nations during their anniversary in 1963. He was initiated as an honorary member of the Epsilon Iota chapter of Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia music fraternity at Florida State University in 1963. He was later awarded the fraternity's Charles E. Lutton Man of Music Award in 1973.\nOne of his last compositions was the \"Hymn of the United Nations\". He conducted its first performance in a special concert at the United Nations on 24 October 1971, two months before his 95th birthday. On that day, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, U Thant, awarded Casals the U.N. Peace Medal in recognition of his stance for peace, justice and freedom. Casals accepted the medal and made his famous \"I Am a Catalan\" speech, where he stated that Catalonia had the first democratic parliament, long before England did.\nIn 1973, invited by his friend Isaac Stern, Casals arrived at Jerusalem to conduct the youth orchestra and the Jerusalem Symphony Orchestra.\nThe Jerusalem Music Center in Mishkenot Sha'ananim was inaugurated by Casals shortly before his death. The concert he conducted with the youth orchestra at the Jerusalem Khan Theater was the last concert he conducted.\nCasals's memoirs were taken down by Albert E. Kahn, and published as \"Joys and Sorrows: Pablo Casals, His Own Story\" (1970).\nDeath.\nCasals died on October 22, 1973 at Auxilio Mutuo Hospital in Hato Rey, Puerto Rico, at the age of 96, from complications of a heart attack he had had three weeks earlier. He was buried at Puerto Rico Memorial Cemetery in Carolina, Puerto Rico. He did not live to see the end of the Francoist State, which occurred two years later, but he was posthumously honoured by the Spanish government under King Juan Carlos I which in 1976 issued a commemorative postage stamp depicting Casals, in honour of the centenary of his birth. In 1979 his remains were interred in his hometown of El Vendrell, Tarragona. In 1989, Casals was posthumously awarded a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.\nLegacy.\nIn 1959, American writer Max Eastman wrote of Casals:He is by common consent the greatest cellist that ever lived. Fritz Kreisler went farther and described him as \"the greatest man who ever drew a bow.\"\nThe southern part of the highway C-32 in Catalonia, Spain, is named Autopista de Pau Casals.\nThe International Pau Casals Cello Competition is held in Kronberg and Frankfurt am Main, Germany, under the auspices of the Kronberg Academy once every four years, starting in 2000, to discover and further the careers of the future cello elite, and is supported by the Pau Casals Foundation, under the patronage of his widow, Marta Casals Istomin. One of the prizes is the use of one of the Gofriller cellos owned by Casals. The first top prize was awarded in 2000 to Claudio Boh\u00f3rquez.\nAustralian radio broadcaster Phillip Adams often fondly recalls Casals's 80th birthday press conference where, after complaining at length about the troubles of the world, he paused to conclude with the observation: \"The situation is hopeless. We must take the next step\".\nIn Puerto Rico, the Casals Festival is still celebrated annually. There is also a museum dedicated to the life of Casals located in Old San Juan. On 3 October 2009, Sala Sinf\u00f3nica Pau Casals, a symphony hall named in Casals's honour, opened in San Juan, Puerto Rico. The $34 million building, designed by Rodolfo Fernandez, is the latest addition to the Centro de Bellas Artes complex. It is the new home of the Puerto Rico Symphony Orchestra.\nPrades, France, is home to another Pau Casals Museum located inside the public library. Many of the artist's memorabilia and precious documents are there: photos, concert outfits, authentic letters, original scores of the Pessebre, interview soundtracks, films, paintings, a cello, and his first piano.\nIn Tokyo, the Casals Hall, designed by Arata Isozaki, opened in 1987 as a venue for chamber music. Pau Casals Elementary School in Chicago is named in his honor. I.S. 181 in the Bronx is also named after Casals.\nCasals's motet \"\", composed in 1932, is frequently performed today.\nIn Pablo Larra\u00edn's 2016 film \"Jackie\", Casals is played by Roland Pidoux.\nIn 2019, Casal's album \"Bach Six Cello Suites\" was selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the National Recording Registry as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49076", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49076", "title": "Airspeed Ltd.", "text": "Defunct British aircraft manufacturer\nAirspeed Limited was established in 1931 to build aeroplanes in York, England, by A. H. Tiltman and Nevil Shute Norway (the aeronautical engineer and novelist, who used his forenames as his pen-name). The other directors were A. E. Hewitt, Lord Grimthorpe and Alan Cobham. Amy Johnson was also one of the initial subscribers for shares.\nFoundation.\nAirspeed Ltd. was founded by Nevil Shute Norway (later to become a novelist as Nevil Shute) and designer Hessell Tiltman. In his autobiography, \"\", Norway gives an account of the founding of the company and of the processes that led to the development and mass production of the Airspeed Oxford. He received the Fellowship of the Royal Aeronautical Society for his innovative fitting of a retractable undercarriage to an aircraft.\nEarly operations.\nThe AS.1 Tern, the first British high-performance glider (sailplane), was built to get publicity and attract more capital by setting British gliding records. A glider could be designed and built in two or three months while the design office and workshop were being set up in half of an empty bus garage on Piccadilly in York. Shute flew the Tern's first test flight.\nIn 1932 Airspeed produced the AS.4 Ferry, a three-engined, ten-passenger biplane designed specifically for Sir Alan Cobham.\nIn March 1933 the firm moved to Portsmouth where the City Council gave generous terms for a factory building constructed to Airspeed's requirements at the local airport. The first Airspeed Courier was flown from there in 1933, followed by the first of a twin-engined development of the Courier, the Airspeed Envoy, in 1934. Both the Courier and the Envoy were made in small numbers. In the same year, a long-range racing version of the Envoy, the AS.8 Viceroy, was developed for the England-Australia MacRobertson Air Race.\nIn August 1934, Airspeed (1934) Limited made a public issue of shares, in association with the Tyneside ship builder Swan Hunter &amp; Wigham Richardson Limited.\nIn 1934 six Couriers had been sold to an operating company for a hire purchase deposit of \u00a35 each. Nevil Shute Norway wrote that they could come back to Airspeed and as an \"obsolescent type\" might not be so easy to sell again. He got a reputation as being \"unscrupulous\" for resisting the auditors' attempt to write them down on the books because, with growing talk of war, civil aircraft of any size would sell immediately. As the six were worth nearly twenty thousand pounds, writing them down to half that would add \u00a310,000 to their loss, making the firm's proposed share issue a very unattractive investment. Shute could see from his office the four hundred workers in the workshop with families depending on them. In 1936 most of the unsold Couriers and Envoys were sold and found their way to the Spanish Civil War. The demonstration Envoy was sold to the Spanish Nationalists for \u00a36000, paid for in cash. In 1935, the sole Airspeed Viceroy was nearly sold to Ethiopia for use against Italian forces.\nIn 1934 Shute negotiated a licensing agreement with Fokker. In 1935, Airspeed signed a manufacturing licensing agreement for the Douglas DC-2 and several Fokker types, with Fokker to be a consultant for seven years. Airspeed considered making the Fokker D.XVII fighter for Greece, which wanted to buy from Britain for currency reasons. Shute and a Fokker representative \"who was well accustomed to methods of business in the Balkans\", spent three weeks in Athens but did not close the deal. After a year, the drift to war, and their Air Ministry contracts, meant that the Dutch could not go to the Airspeed factory or attend board meetings.\nWolseley engine.\nAll Airspeed aeroplanes under manufacture or development in 1936 were to use the Wolseley Scorpio, a radial engine of about which was under development by Nuffield. The project was abandoned in September 1936 after the expenditure of about two hundred thousand pounds when Lord Nuffield got the fixed price I.T.P. (Intention to Proceed) contract papers, which would have required re-orientation of their offices with an army of chartered accountants) and decided to deal only with the War Office and the Admiralty, not the Air Ministry.\nNorway thought that it was a very advanced engine at a low price, so its loss was a major disaster for Airspeed. \nSecond World War.\nIn June, 1940, formal announcement was made that de Havilland had completed negotiations for the purchase from Swan, Hunter and Wigham Richardson, Ltd., of their holding of Airspeed ordinary shares. Airspeed retained its identity as a separate company though as a wholly owned subsidiary of de Havilland.\nAround 1943 in order to reduce the risk from Luftwaffe bombing, a new dispersed design office was opened at Fairmile Manor in Cobham, Surrey; little is known of this establishment and nothing survives there today.\nAirspeed's most productive period was during the Second World War. The AS.10 Oxford had a production run exceeding 8,500. 3,800 AS51 and AS58 Horsa military gliders were built for the Royal Air Force and its allies. Many of these were used as part of the D-Day landings, and later for the Operation Market Garden.\nPostwar operations.\nThe company reverted to the company name of Airspeed Limited on 25 January 1944. Postwar it converted over 150 surplus ex-RAF Oxford aircraft as AS65 Consuls for the commercial market. Airspeed went on to produce the superbly streamlined pressurised twin-engined piston airliner called the AS57 Ambassador. This served successfully for some years with British European Airways as their \"Elizabethan Class\". In 1951 Airspeed Limited was fully merged with de Havilland who then cancelled further development of the Ambassador, although the Ambassador fleet continued in service with smaller airlines such as Dan-Air until 1971. \nThe original York factory was demolished in November 2015.\nGlider (sailplane); built to get publicity by breaking British gliding records (Two built; plus parts for third, which were sold)\nThree-engine biplane transport aircraft, four built\nSingle-engine low-wing monoplane passenger transport with retractable undercarriage of conventional configuration, 16 built\nTwo-engine development of the Courier, 60 built\nVariant of Envoy, adapted for long-range flight. One aircraft was built\nLarger two-engine development of Envoy, built in large numbers in the Second World War.\nProjected licence production of Fokker F.XXII, none built.\nProjected licence production of Fokker F.XXXVI, none built.\nProjected licence production of Fokker C.X, none built.\nSingle-engine single-seat biplane target drone aircraft, seven built.\nFour-engine high-wing monoplane maritime patrol aircraft prototype. Two aircraft were ordered; one was completed\nSingle-engine two-seater low-wing monoplane trainer aircraft with retractable undercarriage of conventional configuration. Two aircraft were built\nLarge troop-carrying glider; 2,245 built including seven prototypes.\nTwo-engine high-wing piston engine airliner, 23 built\nVariant of Horsa with openable nose section for front loading; 1,561 built.\nCivilian conversion of wartime Oxford; 161 were converted in 1946-48.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
{"id": "49077", "revid": "3755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49077", "title": "Zak McCracken", "text": ""}
{"id": "49078", "revid": "3755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49078", "title": "Zak McKracken", "text": ""}
{"id": "49080", "revid": "39276444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49080", "title": "Georg Ohm", "text": "German mathematician and physicist (1789\u20131854)\nGeorg Simon Ohm (; ; 16 March 1789 \u2013 6 July 1854) was a German mathematician and physicist. As a school teacher, Ohm began his research with the new electrochemical cell, invented by Italian scientist Alessandro Volta. Using equipment of his own creation, Ohm found that there is a direct proportionality between the potential difference (voltage) applied across a conductor and the resultant electric current; this relation is known as Ohm's law.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nGeorg Simon Ohm was born into a Protestant family in Erlangen, Brandenburg-Bayreuth (then part of the Holy Roman Empire), son to locksmith Johann Wolfgang Ohm, and Maria Elizabeth Beck, daughter of a tailor in Erlangen. Although his parents had not been formally educated, Ohm's father was a respected man who had educated himself to a high level and was able to give his sons an excellent education through his own teachings. Of the seven children of the family only three survived to adulthood: Georg Simon, his younger brother Martin, who later became a well-known mathematician, and his sister Elizabeth Barbara. His mother died when he was ten.\nFrom early childhood, Georg and Martin were taught by their father who brought them to a high standard in mathematics, physics, chemistry and philosophy. Georg Simon attended Erlangen Gymnasium from age eleven to fifteen where he received little in the area of scientific training, which sharply contrasted with the inspired instruction that both Georg and Martin received from their father. This characteristic made the Ohms bear a resemblance to the Bernoulli family, as noted by Karl Christian von Langsdorf, a professor at the University of Erlangen.\nLife in university.\nGeorg Ohm's father, concerned that his son was wasting his educational opportunity, sent Ohm to Switzerland. There, in September 1806, Ohm accepted a position as a mathematics teacher in a school in Gottstadt bei Nidau.\nKarl Christian von Langsdorf left the University of Erlangen in early 1809 to take up a post in the University of Heidelberg. Ohm wanted to restart his mathematical studies with Langsdorf in Heidelberg. Langsdorf, however, advised Ohm to pursue mathematical studies on his own, and suggested that Ohm read works of Euler, Laplace and Lacroix. Rather reluctantly Ohm took his advice but he left his teaching post in Gottstatt Monastery in March 1809 to become a private tutor in Neuch\u00e2tel. For two years he carried out his duties as a tutor while he followed Langsdorf's advice and continued his private study of mathematics. Then in April 1811 he returned to the University of Erlangen.\nTeaching career.\nOhm's own studies prepared him for his doctorate which he received from the University of Erlangen on October 25, 1811. He immediately joined the faculty there as a lecturer in mathematics but left after three semesters because of unpromising prospects. He could not survive on his salary as a lecturer. The Bavarian government offered him a post as a teacher of mathematics and physics at a poor quality school in Bamberg which Ohm accepted in January 1813. Unhappy with his job, Georg began writing an elementary textbook on geometry as a way to prove his abilities. That school was closed in February 1816. The Bavarian government then sent Ohm to an overcrowded school in Bamberg to help out with the teaching of mathematics.\nAfter his assignment in Bamberg, Ohm sent his completed manuscript to King Wilhelm III of Prussia. The King was satisfied with Ohm's book, and offered Ohm a position at the Jesuit Gymnasium of Cologne on 11 September 1817. This school had a reputation for good science education and Ohm was required to teach physics in addition to mathematics. The physics laboratory was well equipped, allowing Ohm to begin experiments in physics. As the son of a locksmith, Ohm had some practical experience with mechanical devices.\nOhm published (\"The Galvanic Circuit Investigated Mathematically\") in 1827. Ohm's college did not appreciate his work and Ohm resigned from his position. He then made an application to, and was employed by, the Polytechnic School of Nuremberg. Ohm arrived at the Polytechnic School of Nuremberg in 1833, and in 1852 he became a professor of experimental physics at the University of Munich.\nIn 1849, Ohm published (\"Molecular Physics\"). In the preface of this work he stated he hoped to write a second and third volume \"and if God gives me length of days for it, a fourth\". However, on finding that an original discovery recorded in it was being anticipated by a Swedish scientist he did not publish it, stating: \"The episode has given a fresh and deep sense for my mind to the saying 'Man proposes, and God disposes'. The project that gave the first impetus to my inquiry has been dissipated into mist, and a new one, undesigned by me, has been accomplished in its place.\"\nOhm died in Munich in 1854, and is buried in the Alter S\u00fcdfriedhof. A collection of his family letters would be compiled in a German book, which shows that he used to sign some of his letters with the expression \"Gott befohlen, G S Ohm,\" meaning \"Commended to God\".\nDiscovery of Ohm's law.\nOhm's law first appeared in the famous book (\"The Galvanic Circuit Investigated Mathematically\") (1827) in which he gave his complete theory of electricity. In this work, he stated his law for electromotive force acting between the extremities of any part of a circuit is the product of the strength of the current, and the resistance of that part of the circuit.\nThe book begins with the mathematical background necessary for an understanding of the rest of the work. While his work greatly influenced the theory and applications of current electricity, it was coldly received at that time. Ohm presents his theory as one of contiguous action, a theory which opposed the concept of action at a distance. Ohm believed that the communication of electricity occurred between \"contiguous particles\" which is the term he himself used. The paper is concerned with this idea, and in particular with illustrating the differences in this scientific approach of Ohm's and the approaches of Joseph Fourier and Claude-Louis Navier.\nA study of the conceptual framework used by Ohm in producing Ohm's law has been presented by Thomas Archibald. The work of Ohm marked the early beginning of the subject of circuit theory, although this did not become an important field until the end of the century.\nOhm's acoustic law.\nOhm's acoustic law, sometimes called the acoustic phase law or simply Ohm's law, states that a musical sound is perceived by the ear as a set of a number of constituent pure harmonic tones. It is well known to be not quite true.\nStudy and publications.\nHis first paper in 1825 examined the decrease in the electromagnetic force produced by a wire as the length of the wire increased. In 1826, he gave a description of conduction in circuits modelled on Fourier's study of heat conduction. This paper continued Ohm's deduction of results from experimental evidence and, particularly in the second, he was able to propose laws which went a long way to explaining results of others working on galvanic electricity. The most important was his pamphlet published in Berlin in 1827, with the title \"Die galvanische Kette mathematisch bearbeitet\". This work, the germ of which had appeared during the two preceding years in the journals of Schweigger and Poggendorff, has exerted an important influence on the development of the theory and applications of electric current. Ohm's name has been incorporated in the terminology of electrical science in Ohm's Law (which he first published in \"Die galvanische Kette\"...), the proportionality of current and voltage in a resistor, and adopted as the SI unit of resistance, the ohm (symbol \u03a9).\nAlthough Ohm's work strongly influenced theory, at first it was received with little enthusiasm. However, his work was eventually recognized by the Royal Society with its award of the Copley Medal in 1841. He became a foreign member of the Royal Society in 1842, and in 1845 he became a full member of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities. At some extent, Charles Wheatstone drew attention to the definitions which Ohm had introduced in the field of physics.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49082", "revid": "43283345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49082", "title": "Supermodel", "text": "Highly paid fashion model\nA supermodel is a highly paid fashion model who has a worldwide reputation and background in \"haute couture\" and commercial modeling. The term became popular in the 1990s.\nSupermodels usually work for prominent fashion designers and clothing brands. They may have multimillion-dollar contracts, endorsements, and campaigns. Supermodels have branded themselves as household names and worldwide recognition is associated with their modeling careers. They have been on the covers of leading fashion magazines. Claudia Schiffer stated in 2007 that, \"In order to become a supermodel one must be on all the covers all over the world at the same time so that people can recognise the girls.\"\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nAn early use of the term \"supermodel\" appeared in 1891, in an interview with artist Henry Stacy Marks for \"The Strand Magazine\", in which Marks told journalist Harry How, \"A good many models are addicted to drink, and, after sitting a while, will suddenly go to sleep. Then I have had what I call the 'super' model. You know the sort of man; he goes in for theatrical effect\u00a0...\" On 6 October 1942, a writer named Judith Cass had used the term \"super model\" for her article in the \"Chicago Tribune\", which headlined \"Super Models Are Signed for Fashion Show\". Later in 1943, an agent named Clyde Matthew Dessner used the term in a \"how-to\" book about modeling, entitled \"So You Want to Be a Model!\", in which Dessner wrote, \"She will be a super-model, but the girl in her will be like the girl in you\u2014quite ordinary, but ambitious and eager for personal development.\" According to \"Model: The Ugly Business of Beautiful Women\" by Michael Gross, the term \"supermodel\" was first used by Dessner in the 1940s. In 1949, \"Cosmopolitan\" magazine referred to Anita Colby, the highest paid model at the time, as a \"super model\": \"She's been super model, super movie saleswoman, and top brass at Selznick and Paramount.\" On 18 October 1959, Vancouver's \"Chinatown News\" described Susan Chew as a \"super model\".\nThe term \"supermodel\" had also been used several times in the media in the 1960s and 1970s. In 1965, the encyclopedic guide \"American Jurisprudence Trials\" used the term \"super model\" (\"...at issue was patient's belief that her husband was having an affair with a super model\"). On 21 March 1967, \"The New York Times\" referred to Twiggy as a supermodel; the February 1968 article of \"Glamour\" listed all 19 \"supermodels\"; \"The Chicago Daily Defender\" wrote \"New York Designer Turns Super Model\" in January 1970; \"The Washington Post\" and the \"Mansfield News Journal\" used the term in 1971; and in 1974, both the \"Chicago Tribune\" and \"The Advocate\" used the term \"supermodel\" in their articles. American \"Vogue\" used the term \"super-model\" to describe Jean Shrimpton in the 15 October 1965 edition, and \"supermodel\" on the cover page to describe Margaux Hemingway in the 1 September 1975 edition. Hemingway was again described as a \"supermodel\" in the 25 July 1977 edition of \"Time\". \"Jet\" also described Beverly Johnson as a \"supermodel\" in the 22 December 1977 edition.\nModel Janice Dickinson has incorrectly stated that she coined the term \"supermodel\" in 1979, as a compound of Superman and model. During an interview with \"Entertainment Tonight\", Dickinson stated that her agent, Monique Pilar of Elite Model Management, asked her, \"Janice, who do you think you are, Superman?\" She replied, \"No\u00a0... I'm a supermodel, honey, and you will refer to me as a supermodel and you will start a supermodel division.\" Dickinson also claims to have been the first supermodel.\nLisa Fonssagrives is widely considered to have been the world's first supermodel, with a career that began in the 1930s. She was in most of the major fashion magazines and general interest magazines from the 1930s to the 1950s, including \"Town &amp; Country\", \"Life\", \"Vogue\", the original \"Vanity Fair\", \"Harper's Bazaar\", and \"Time\". Evelyn Nesbit (with a career launched around 1900) and Dorian Leigh (her career launched in 1944) have also been called the world's first supermodel, as well as Jean Shrimpton (early 1960s), and Gia Carangi (late 1970s).\nDutch-born model Wilhelmina Cooper holds the record for most covers on American \"Vogue\", appearing 27 or 28 times throughout the 1950s and 1960s. Cooper would go on to found Wilhelmina Models modeling and talent agency in 1967.\n1960s\u20131970s.\nIn February 1968, an article in \"Glamour\" described 19 models as \"supermodels\": Cheryl Tiegs, Veruschka, Lisa Palmer, Peggy Moffitt, Sue Murray, Twiggy, Sunny Harnett, Marisa Berenson, Gretchen Harris, Heide Wiedeck, Iris Bianchi, Hiroko Matsumoto, Anne de Zogheb, Kathy Carpenter, Jean Shrimpton, Jean Patchett, Benedetta Barzini, Claudia Duxbury and Agneta Frieberg.\nIn the 1970s is when many consider the origination of the supermodel, some models becoming more prominent as their names became more recognizable to the general public by commercial endorsements, magazine covers,posters, securing large sums of money for cosmetic contracts, TV appearances and movie roles. \"Sports Illustrated\" editor Jule Campbell abandoned then-current modeling trends for its fledgling \"Sports Illustrated\" Swimsuit Issue by photographing \"bigger and healthier\" California models, and captioning the photographs with their names, turning many of them into household names and establishing the swimsuit issue as a cornerstone of supermodel status.\nIn 1973, Lauren Hutton became the first model to receive a contract from a cosmetics company, when Revlon hired her to sell their Ultima line. She has also appeared on the cover of \"Vogue\" 26 times. Naomi Sims is considered to be the first black supermodel. Donyale Luna, Beverly Johnson and Iman have also been referred to as the first black supermodel.\nIn 1975, Margaux Hemingway landed a then-unprecedented million-dollar contract as the face of Faberg\u00e9's Babe perfume and the same year, appeared on the cover of \"Time\" magazine, labelled as one of the \"New Beauties\", giving further name recognition to fashion models.\nChristie Brinkley has the distinction of having the longest running cosmetics contract of any model in history when she represented CoverGirl for twenty five years.\nAnna Bayle, a Filipino-born model who rose to prominence in the 1970s, has been cited as one of the first Southeast Asian supermodels.\nDonyale Luna was the first black model to appear in British \"Vogue\", in March 1966. Naomi Sims, who is sometimes regarded as the first black supermodel, became the first African American to feature on the cover of \"Ladies' Home Journal\", in 1968. The first African American model to be on the cover of American \"Vogue\" was Beverly Johnson in 1974. Pat Cleveland, another prominent African-American model, has also been described as one of the first black supermodels, in particular by former editor-at-large for American \"Vogue\" Andr\u00e9 Leon Talley, in an article for the June 1980 issue of \"Ebony\" magazine, and again in his 2003 memoir.\n1980s.\nIn October 1981, \"Life\" cited Shelley Hack, Lauren Hutton, and Iman for Revlon, Margaux Hemingway for Faberg\u00e9, Karen Graham for Est\u00e9e Lauder, Cristina Ferrare for Max Factor, and Cheryl Tiegs for CoverGirl by proclaiming them the \"million dollar faces\" of the beauty industry. These supermodels negotiated previously unheard of lucrative and exclusive deals with the giant cosmetics companies, were instantly recognizable, and their names became well known to the general public.\nIn the early 1980s, In\u00e8s de La Fressange was the first model to sign an exclusive modeling contract with an haute couture fashion house, Chanel. During the early 1980s, fashion designers began advertising on television and billboards. Catwalk regulars like Gia Carangi, Tiegs, Christie Brinkley, Kim Alexis, Paulina Porizkova, Yasmin Le Bon, Kathy Ireland, Brooke Shields, and Elle Macpherson began to endorse products with their names, as well as their faces, through the marketing of brands, such as Diet Pepsi and Ford trucks. In 1980, 14-year-old Shields was the youngest fashion model ever to appear on the cover of \"Vogue\". Later that same year, Shields appeared in controversial print and TV ads for Calvin Klein jeans. The TV ad included her saying the famous tagline, \"You want to know what comes between me and my Calvins? Nothing.\" Brooke Shields' ads would help catapult Klein's career to super-designer status.\nAs the models began to embrace old-style glamour, they were starting to replace film stars as symbols of luxury and wealth. In this regard, supermodels were viewed not so much as individuals but as images.\n1990s.\nBy the 1990s, the supermodel became increasingly prominent in the media. The title became tantamount to superstar, to signify a supermodel's fame having risen simply from \"personality\". Supermodels did talk shows, were cited in gossip columns, partied at the trendiest nightspots, landed movie roles, inspired franchises, dated or married film stars, and earned themselves millions. Fame empowered them to take charge of their careers, to market themselves, and to command higher fees.\nThe new era began in 1990, with the era-defining British \"Vogue\" cover of Cindy Crawford, Christy Turlington, Linda Evangelista, Naomi Campbell, and Tatjana Patitz, photographed by Peter Lindbergh, which created such an impression on the fashion world that they came to embody the term \"supermodel\". Each model had gradually attained fame since the mid-1980s and was now among the industry's top stars. Selected by Lindbergh for the January cover of \"Vogue\", the cover inspired singer George Michael to cast the same five models in the music video for his song, \"Freedom! '90\", directed by David Fincher. The other photograph that captured this new generation of fashion models is the black and white nude of Crawford, Patitz, Campbell and Stephanie Seymour taken by Herb Ritts that originally ran in the May 1989 issue of \"Rolling Stone\", until a variation of this image which included Turlington was released in the 1990s, only after a contract exclusively binding her to Calvin Klein expired - thereby publicly revealing the now iconic image \"Stephanie, Cindy, Christy, Tatjana, Naomi, Hollywood 1989.\" Lindbergh's and Ritts' group images helped each model attain worldwide fame by sharing covers of all the international editions of \"Vogue\", walking the catwalks for the world's top designers, and becoming known by their first names alone.\nToday, Campbell, Crawford, Evangelista, Patitz and Turlington are regarded as the \"Original Supermodels\", but the term has been used to describe the pioneering supermodels before them that paved the way and started the path to prominence, both publicly and professionally, such as Lauren Hutton, Beverly Johnson, Cheryl Tiegs, Christie Brinkley, Pat Cleveland and others.\nIn 1991, Turlington signed a contract with Maybelline that paid her $800,000 for twelve days' work each year. Four years later, Claudia Schiffer reportedly earned $12 million for her various modeling assignments. Authorities, ranging from Karl Lagerfeld to \"Time\", had declared the supermodels more glamorous than movie stars.\nCampbell, Evangelista and Turlington became known as \"The Trinity\", a term first used by photographer Steven Meisel and noted by journalist Michael Gross. Evangelista was known as the \"Chameleon\", for her ability to transform her look and reinvent herself. Turlington was known as the \"insurance model\", saying \"clients know that if they hire me, nothing will go wrong\". Campbell was the first black model to appear on the front covers of \"Time\", French \"Vogue\", British \"Vogue\", and the September issue of American \"Vogue\", traditionally the biggest and most important issue of the year.\nCampbell, Crawford, Evangelista, Turlington and Patitz were the original group to be regarded as \"The Big Five\" supermodels of the 1990s. The term \"The Big Five\" was later used to describe Campbell, Crawford, Evangelista, Turlington and Claudia Schiffer, and with the addition of Kate Moss, they became known as \"the Big Six\". It was Linda Evangelista, Tatjana Patitz, Naomi Campbell, Christy Turlington, and Kate Moss who appeared together in the highest budgeted advertising campaign of all time, starring the original supermodels (US$4.5 million in 1992, adjusted for inflation in 2021, US$8.5 million)) and resulted in a now iconic television commercial for the Vauxhall Corsa automobile.\nIn the 2006 book \"In Vogue: The Illustrated History of the World's Most Famous Fashion Magazine\" (Rizzoli), the editors cite the \"original supermodels\" and Schiffer when quoting \"Vogue\" Magazine Editor-In-Chief, Anna Wintour, who said, \"Those girls were so fabulous for fashion and totally reflected that time\u00a0... [They] were like movie stars.\" The editors name famous models from previous decades, but explain that, \"None of them attained the fame and worldwide renown bestowed on Linda Evangelista, Christy Turlington, Cindy Crawford, Naomi Campbell, Tatjana Patitz, Stephanie Seymour, Claudia Schiffer, Yasmeen Ghauri, and Karen Mulder, in the late 1980s and early 1990s. These models burst out beyond the pages of the magazines. Many became the faces of cosmetics brands and perfumes, had their own television programs and physical-fitness videos, and their own lines of lingerie\u00a0... Their lives, activities, influences, and images were the subjects of all types of sociological and historical analysis.\" Tyra Banks had begun her career as a model, booking a record-breaking 25 shows in 1991, during her breakout year. She achieved Supermodel status, and rivaled Naomi Campbell as the top Black model in the world.\nIn the mid-1990s, the initial era of the supermodel ended and a new era for the supermodel began driven by heroin chic. By the late 1990s, actresses, pop singers, and other entertainment celebrities began gradually replacing models on fashion magazine covers and ad campaigns. The pendulum of limelight left many models in anonymity. A popular \"conspiracy theory\" explaining the supermodel's disappearance is that designers and fashion editors grew weary of the \"I won't get out of bed for less than $10,000 a day\" attitude and made sure no small group of models would ever again have the power of the Big Six.\nCharles Gandee, associate editor at \"Vogue\", has said that high prices and poor attitudes contributed less to the decline of the supermodel. As clothes became less flashy, designers turned to models who were less glamorous, so they wouldn't overpower the clothing. Whereas many supermodels of the previous era were American-born, their accents making for an easier transition to stardom, the majority of models began coming from non-English speaking countries and cultures, making the crossover to mainstream spokesperson and cover star difficult. However, the term continued to be applied to notable models such as Kristen McMenamy, Stella Tennant, Laetitia Casta, Eva Herzigov\u00e1, Carla Bruni, Tatiana Sorokko, Yasmin Le Bon, Amber Valletta, Shalom Harlow, Nadja Auermann, Helena Christensen, Patricia Vel\u00e1squez, Adriana Karembeu, Valeria Mazza and later, Milla Jovovich.\n2000s and present day.\nEmerging in the late 1990s, Gisele B\u00fcndchen became the first in a wave of Brazilian models to gain popularity in the industry and with the public. With numerous covers of \"Vogue\" under her belt, including an issue that dubbed her the \"Return of the \"Sexy\" Model\", B\u00fcndchen was credited with ending the \"heroin chic\" era of models. Following in her footsteps by signing contracts with Victoria's Secret, fellow Brazilians Adriana Lima and Alessandra Ambrosio rose to prominence; however, they were unable to cross over into the world of TV, movies and talk shows as easily as their predecessors, due to their foreign accents. Not to mention other big stars of 00s era such as Carmen Kass, Karol\u00edna Kurkov\u00e1, Isabeli Fontana, Natalia Vodianova and Natasha Poly, which also dominated the runways and ad campaigns along with B\u00fcndchen et al.\nSeveral seasons later, they were followed by Eastern Europeans, barely into their teens, pale, and \"bordering on anorexic. They were too young to become movie stars or date celebrities; too skeletal to bag Victoria's Secret contracts; and a lack of English didn't bode well for a broad media career\". The opportunities for superstardom were waning in the modeling world, and models like Heidi Klum and Tyra Banks took to television with reality shows like \"Project Runway\" and \"Germany's Next Topmodel\", and \"America's Next Top Model\", respectively, to not only remain relevant but establish themselves as media moguls.\nContrary to the fashion industry's celebrity trend of the previous decade, lingerie retailer Victoria's Secret continues to groom and launch young talents into supermodel status, awarding their high-profile \"Angels\" multi-year, multimillion-dollar contracts.\nAmerican \"Vogue\" dubbed ten models (Doutzen Kroes, Agyness Deyn, Hilary Rhoda, Raquel Zimmermann, Coco Rocha, Lily Donaldson, Chanel Iman, Sasha Pivovarova, Caroline Trentini and Jessica Stam) as the new crop of supermodels in their May 2007 cover story, while the likes of Christie Brinkley, Christy Turlington, and Linda Evangelista returned to reclaim prominent contracts from celebrities and younger models.\nThe rise of social media and so-called \"nepotism babies\" has seen a shift in the world of modelling from the late 2010s onwards. This means that many of today's 'supermodels' arguably took a rise to fame and were given the opportunities as they have due to their rich and famous families. Examples of these models are Kendall Jenner, Cara Delevingne, Bella Hadid, Gigi Hadid and Kaia Gerber. Despite the controversy surrounding these models and arguments that they only got their fame due to their families, they have proven to be some of the most successful models of today. In 2021, Kendall Jenner was named as the highest-paid supermodel, earning $40 million. The Hadid sisters weren't far behind, with Bella and Gigi earning $19 million and $20 million respectively.\nMale supermodels.\nIn addition to the models stated previously, a top-grossing part of the industry that tends to be overlooked is the male side of modeling. Even though women are predominantly known in the modeling industry, men also appear in advertisements for clothing, cologne, sports wear and other such accessories.\nModeling is one of the only industries that sees a gender gap leaning towards women. Women earn up to 75% more than men in the modeling industry. The highest paid models in the world in 2022, the American female model Kendall Jenner earned $40 million while the American male model Sean O\u2019Pry earned $1.5 million, only 3% of what Jenner is making. Historically, the menswear sector has gotten less financial support than the womenswear industry. In addition to that, there is only 1 male designer for every 20 female designers. Overall, the demand for female models is much greater than that for male models. Some also attribute the pay difference to the lengthier career of male models compared to female models due to the fashion industry's dismissive attitude towards older women.\nStudy has shown that there has been an annual 17.4% increase in men's clothing online from 2010 to 2015. The men's apparel segment amounts to US$568.9 billion in 2023 and the market is expected to grow annually by 2.9%. Compared to 2014, the men's apparel market in 2023 has grown by 28%. According to Euromonitor, demand for men's clothing has even been growing 0.2% faster than that of women's. In recent years, there have also been separate men's fashion weeks in Paris, Milan, New York, and London. Studies have shown that this can be attributed to more men being found to begin to care more about fashion and beauty and the social media savvy male models / celebrities, like Lucky Blue Smith, Jason Morgan, and David Gandy.\nDiversity and inclusion in the male modeling industry.\nSterling St. Jacques is considered the first black male supermodel. St. Jacques was featured in \"Vogue\" and photographed by Horst P. Horst in the 1970s. His modeling career took off after he was discovered by Hubert de Givenchy to dance down the runway at a fashion show in 1976. In 1976, St. Jacques told \"Sepia\" magazine: \"I think it\u2019s a mistake that many black male models have felt the need to put forward a macho image like that because the fashion market is too limited to have much success using it. I've shown that black men can be macho-looking while at the same time have grace and smoothness. I'm proud to make black people see they can be doing this kind of work.\"\nIn 1994, Polo's sports ad shot by Bruce Weber featured Tyson Beckford, a black masculine male model. Beckford later admitted during an interview in 2014 that, \"There's a huge lack of strong African American images in fashion.\" Beckford also noted that, \"I am happy that Ralph Lauren have used guys who look similar like me after.\"\nIn the summer of 2011, the Vancouver model Godfrey Gao also became Louis Vuitton, the luxury brand's first Asian model.\nIn 2016, IMG Models launched its Brawn division which aimed to elevate the careers of plus-size male models. The first model hired under the new division is Zach Miko. Three years in, IMG has 7 models under the Brawn division.\nIn October 2022, Steven Green, the Kansas City born fashion photographer, starred in Rihanna\u2019s Savage X Fenty\u2019s men underwear campaign as a plus-size model. Green reflected that, \"he was not confident being his size and shirtless on the internet, but the positive feedback he got was inspiring to him.\"\nMale model requirements.\nUsually, the mass majority (not all) of agencies that sign on fashion/runway male models favor a height range consisting of to . The more strict agencies set a minimum height of .\n1990s.\nIn 1993, Italian model Fabio Lanzoni was the highest paid male model worldwide, receiving several million dollars a year doing advertisements for high-end brands like Versace.\nMilind Soman quickly became a supermodel in India and was one of the most popular supermodels of the world in the 90s, successfully transitioning to films and television later in life.\nTyson Beckford is known for posing in a number of ads for Ralph Lauren's Polo sport cologne line. Since 1990, he has been the face of Gucci and Tommy Hilfiger, won Model of the year on VH1 Fashion award, and he has also appeared in Calvin Klein's campaign. Another Calvin Klein model is Mark Wahlberg. Many new underwear models 30 years later still look to his campaign poses today.\nTim Boyce was the first openly gay high fashion male supermodel of the 1990s and is credited for increasing the profile of gay celebrities, appearing on the cover of \"Out\" magazine as well as campaigns for Giorgio Armani and Gianfranco Ferre.\n2000s.\nIn 2000s, Bruno Santos, a Brazilian model, became notorious for being the only male model selected to carry out two campaigns simultaneously for two competing fashion houses: Versace and Giorgio Armani. This earned him the nickname \"Gisele B\u00fcndchen in pants\".\nFormer professional soccer player David Beckham is noted as the Underwear Model of the Century. He has modeled for worldwide ads for H&amp;M, Adidas, Calvin Klein, Burger King, Sainsbury's, and Breitling. British model David Gandy was described as achieving \"icon status\" by ABC News when they featured him on \"Nightline\", stating, \"As the face of Dolce &amp; Gabbana and Lucky Jeans, Gandy is arguably one of the most successful male models ever, but he's a bit modest about that \"supermodel\" title.\"\n2010s.\nVogue.com ranked the \"Top 10 Male Models of All Time\" in September 2014; the list included Tyson Beckford, David Gandy, Brad Kroenig, Sean O'Pry, Jon Kortajarena, Marcus Schenkenberg, Mathias Lauridsen, Mark Vanderloo, Noah Mills, and Evandro Soldati. In 2013, \"Forbes\" named O'Pry the highest-paid male model.\nSupermodels today.\nVarious magazines and websites, including various international versions of: Elle, Harper's Bazaar, and Vogue, have attributed the 'supermodel' title to a selection of models.\nThe male models include: David Gandy, Jon Kortajarena, Mathias Lauridsen, Alton Mason, and Simon Nessman.\nThe female models include: Vittoria Ceretti, Imaan Hammam, Cong He, Felice Noordhoff, Blanca Padilla, Anja Rubik, Mika Schneider, Luz Pavon, FeiFei Sun, Mona Tougaard, and Rianne Van Rompaey.\nPlus-size.\nSince 2000, there has been an emergence of models known as female \"plus-size\" top models, including Robyn Lawley, Crystal Renn, Precious Lee, Ashley Graham, Candice Huffine, Tara Lynn, Whitney Thompson, Katya Zharkova, Denise Bidot, Sophie Dahl, Jennie Runk and Natalie Laughlin. These models have been in Catwalks, magazines, and Billboards for brands known worldwide like \"Vogue\", \"Glamour\", Levi's, Forever 21, Cover Girl cosmetics, Saks Fifth Avenue, GQ Magazine, and Chanel. Graham had widespread amount of news coverage worldwide after \"Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue\" had her as one of the three covers of the 2016 edition.\nIn-between size.\nCamille Kostek, an \"in-between size\" or \"middle model\", landed a solo cover of the \"Sports Illustrated\" Swimsuit Issue in 2019 despite not being on the extreme end of the spectrum as runway size (0\u20132) or plus-size (10 up). Recalling her difficulty breaking out she has stated, \"I was told that it was too bad that I wasn't a size 10. That plus-size is a big market right now and it's too bad I wasn't measuring bigger. My size (4/6) is considered an \"in-between size,\" meaning I'm not a straight model nor plus model, I'm right in the middle.\" Regardless, she has walked the runways of New York Fashion Week and Miami Beach Swim Week.\nPerception.\nPerception of the supermodel as an industry has been frequent inside and outside the fashion press, from complaints that women desiring this status become unhealthily thin to charges of racism of dominant racial groups of the home countries in the first decade of the twenty-first century, where the \"supermodel\" generally has to conform to the native majority's standard of beauty, for example Northern European standards in United States or Indian standards in India.\nAccording to fashion writer Guy Trebay of \"The New York Times\", in 2007, the \"android\" look was popular, a vacant stare and thin body serving, according to some fashion industry conventions, to set off the couture. This had not always been the case. In the 1970s in North America, black, heavier and \"ethnic\" models dominated the runways but social changes in the 1980s to the early 2000s persuaded the power players in the fashion industry to shun suggestions of \"otherness\".\nHowever, since the latter part of the first decade of the twenty-first century, an increasing level of racial diversity has been noted among supermodels in the American fashion scene, catering to the growing East Asian markets, including Japanese model Tao Okamoto and Chinese models Fei Fei Sun and Liu Wen. Due to the rising importance of social media and social movements such as third wave body positivity, the range of diversity within the industry expanded to diversity in sizes, genders and social media visibility.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49084", "revid": "46628330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49084", "title": "Glans penis", "text": "End of the penis\nIn male human anatomy, the glans penis or penile glans, commonly referred to as the glans, (; from Latin \"glans\" meaning \"acorn\") is the bulbous structure at the distal end of the human penis that is the human male's most sensitive erogenous zone and primary anatomical source of sexual pleasure. The glans penis is part of the male reproductive organs of humans and most other mammals where it may appear smooth, spiny, elongated or divided. It is externally lined with mucosal tissue, which creates a smooth texture and glossy appearance. In humans, the glans is located over the distal end of the corpora cavernosa and is a continuation of the corpus spongiosum of the penis. At the tip is the urinary meatus and the base forms the corona glandis. An elastic band of tissue, the frenulum, runs across its ventral surface. In men who are not circumcised, it is completely or partially covered by a fold of skin called the foreskin. In adults, the foreskin can generally be retracted over and past the glans manually or sometimes automatically during an erection.\nThe glans penis develops as the terminal end of the genital tubercle during the embryonic development of the male fetus. The tubercle is present in the embryos of both sexes as an outgrowth in the caudal region that later develops into a primordial phallus. Exposure to male hormones (androgens) initiates the tubercle's development into a penis making the glans penis anatomically homologous to the clitoral glans in females. \nThe glans is commonly known as the \"head\" or the \"tip\" of the penis, and colloquially referred to in British English and Irish English as the \"bellend\".\nStructure.\nThe glans penis is a body of spongy erectile tissue that is moulded on the rounded ends of the two corpora cavernosa penis, extending farther on their upper than on their lower surfaces. It is the expanded cap of the corpus spongiosum, a sponge-like region that surrounds the male urethra within the penis maintaining it as a viable channel for ejaculation. The glans is covered by a stratified squamous epithelium and a dense layer of connective tissue equivalent to the dermis of typical skin. The papillary layer of the dermis blends into the dense connective tissue forming the tunica albuginea of the corpus spongiosum behind the glans. The external lining with mucosal tissue is responsible for its typical smooth texture and appearance.\nThe increase of arterial flow during erection fills the erectile tissue with blood causing the glans to grow in size and sensitivity. While the penis is rigid when erect, the glans itself remains slightly softer. The soft cushiony texture of the glans absorbs impact during rigorous instances of copulation. The proportional size of the glans penis can vary among males. While the shape of the glans is typically acorn-like, in some men it might be wider in circumference than the shaft, giving the penis a mushroom-like appearance, while in others it might be narrower and more akin to a probe in shape.\nThe reason for the shape of the glans is uncertain. Some researchers have suggested that it evolved to become acorn-, mushroom- or cone-shaped so that, during copulation, it acts to remove any semen from previous sex partners. However, that is not supported when looking at primate relatives which have different mating behaviors. \nAt the summit of the glans is the slit-like vertical external urethral orifice, called the urinary meatus, through which urine, semen and pre-ejaculatory fluid exit the penis. The circumference of the base of the glans forms a rounded projecting border, the corona glandis, overhanging a deep retroglandular groove known as the \"coronal sulcus\". Behind the corona is the neck of the penis, which separates the glans and the penile shaft. Ventrally, the two glans wings merge on the midline forming the septum glandis and a triangle or a V-shaped area under it. The frenulum is the highly vascularized elastic band of tissue located on the underside of the glans that connects the foreskin to the head of the penis. The frenulum is supple enough to allow the retraction of the foreskin over the glans and pull it back when the erection is gone. In flaccid state, it tightens to narrow the foreskin opening.\nInnervation.\nThe glans and the frenulum are innervated by the bilateral dorsal nerve of the penis and the perineal nerve, both divisions of the pudendal nerve. Branches of the dorsal nerve extend through the glans ventrolaterally displaying a three-dimensional innervation pattern. The main branches form smaller bundles of nerves that expand outwards into the tissue of the glans. The rich innervation of the glans penis reveals its function as a primary anatomical source of male sexual pleasure. Yang &amp; Bradley argue; \"the distinct pattern of innervation of the glans emphasizes its role as a sensory structure\". While Yang &amp; Bradley's (1998) report \"showed no areas in the glans to be more densely innervated than others.\", Halata &amp; Munger (1986) report that the density of several nerve terminals is greatest in the corona glandis. \nHalata &amp; Spathe (1997) reported: \"The glans penis contains a predominance of free nerve endings, numerous genital end bulbs and rarely Pacinian and Ruffinian corpuscles. Merkel nerve endings and Meissner's corpuscles (mechanoreceptors typically found in thick glabrous skin) are not present\". The genital end bulbs, which are present throughout the glans, are most numerous in the corona and near the frenulum. Simple, Pacinian and Ruffinian corpuscles are identified predominantly in the corona glandis. The most numerous nerve terminals are free nerve endings present in almost every dermal papilla of the glans, as well as scattered throughout the deeper dermis. \nBlood supply.\nThe glans penis receives blood from the internal pudental artery through its branch, the dorsal artery of the penis, which also supplies the foreskin, and the penile shaft. Behind the corona, the terminal branches of the dorsal arteries anastomose with the axial arteries through perforating branches before they end in the glans. Branches of the dorsal artery curve around each side of the distal shaft to enter the glans and the frenulum ventrally. Venous drainage of the penis begins at the base of the glans. Small tributaries deriving from the corona form a venous plexus at the neck of the penis, known as the retro-coronal, or retro-balanic, plexus. Smaller paired venules run into the frenulum and the glans from its ventral surface. The deep dorsal vein, one of the two dorsal veins of the penis, serves as a common vessel receiving blood drained from the glans and the two corpora cavernosa through the circumflex veins that surround them.\nForeskin.\nThe glans is completely or partially covered by a double-layered fold of skin, known as the foreskin. In adults, glans exposure can be easily achieved by manual retraction of the foreskin and sometimes automatically during erection. The degree of automatic foreskin retraction varies considerably depending on the foreskin length. The foreskin can be characterized as long when the preputial orifice extends beyond the glans during erection, or medium when the orifice is located around the meatus. The primary purpose of the foreskin is considered to be the covering of the glans and the urinary meatus, while also maintaining the mucosa in a moist environment. \nForeskin rectractability gradually increases with age. In infancy the foreskin is fused to the glans. It remains non-retractable in early childhood and it continues to be tight during preadolescence. The skin begins to loosen up significantly during puberty allowing the glans to be completely exposed when needed. By the age of eighteen, most boys will have a fully retractable foreskin.\nIn some cases, for cultural, medical, or prophylactic reasons, some men undergo circumcision or were circumcised as infants, a procedure in which the foreskin is partially or completely removed from the penis. The glans of circumcised men remains fully exposed and dry. Several studies have suggested that, generally, the glans of both circumcised and uncircumcised penises are equally sensitive.\nDevelopment.\nThe glans develops as the terminal end of a phallic structure, called the genital tubercle, which forms in the embryo regardless of sex during the early weeks of pregnancy. Initially undifferentiated, the tubercle develops into a penis during the development of the reproductive system depending on the exposure to male hormones, such as androgens. In mammals, sexual differentiation is determined by the sperm that carries either an X or a Y (male) chromosome. The Y chromosome contains a sex-determining gene (SRY) that encodes a transcription factor for the protein TDF (testis determining factor) and triggers the creation of testosterone for the embryo's development into a male. \nAlthough the sex of the infant is determined from the moment of conception, the complete external differentiation of the organs begins about eight or nine weeks after conception. Some sources state that the process will be completed by the twelfth week, while others state that it is clearly evident by the thirteenth week and that the sex organs are fully developed by the sixteenth week.\nBoth the penis and clitoris develop from the same tissues that become the glans and shaft of the penis and this shared embryonic origin makes these two organs homologous (different versions of the same structure). In the female fetus the absence of testosterone will stop the growth of the phallus causing the tubercle to shrink and form the clitoris. In the male fetus the presence of a Y chromosome leads to the development of the testes, which secrete a large amount of hormones called androgens. These hormones will cause the masculinization of the phenotypically indifferent organs. When exposed to testosterone, the genital tubercle elongates to form the penis. By fusion of the urogenital folds\u2014elongated spindle-shaped structures that contribute to the formation of the urethral groove on the belly aspect of the genital tubercle\u2014the urogenital sinus closes completely to form the spongy urethra and the labioscrotal swellings unite to form the scrotum. The secretion of testosterone during this phase plays a decisive role in the final shaping of the penis. After birth, testosterone levels drop significantly until puberty.\nClinical significance.\nThe epithelium of the glans penis consists of mucosal tissue. Birley \"et al.\" report that excessive washing with soap may dry the mucous membrane which covers the glans penis and cause non-specific dermatitis. The condition is described as an inflammation of the skin, often caused by an irritating substance or a contact allergy. Sensitivity to chemicals in certain products can cause an allergic reaction, including irritation, itching and rash.\nInflammation of the glans penis is known as balanitis. It is a treatable condition that occurs in about 3\u201311% of males (up to 35% of diabetic males). Edwards reported that it is generally more common in males who have poor hygiene habits or have not been circumcised. It has many causes, including irritation or infection with a wide variety of pathogens. Symptoms of balanitis may appear suddenly or develop gradually. They might include pain, irritation, redness or red patches on the glans penis. Careful identification of the cause with the aid of patient history, physical examination, swabs and cultures, and biopsy are essential in order to determine the proper treatment.\nThe meatus (opening) of the urethra located at the tip of the glans might become subject to meatal stenosis, a condition mostly seen as a late complication of circumcision. It occurs in about 2\u201320% of circumcised boys and it is rarely seen in uncircumcised men. It is characterized by a narrowing of the meatus, which might cause sudden or often urges to urinate and burning during the process.\nFor some individuals who experience difficulty in achieving full glanular engorgement of glans penis, they may be diagnosed with soft glans syndrome (glans insufficiency syndrome). It is often undiagnosed in the general population due to the lack of a standardized nomenclature. \nOther animals.\nMammals.\nCarnivores.\nMale felids are able to urinate backwards by curving the tip of the glans penis backward. In cats, the glans penis is covered with spines. Penile spines also occur on the glans of male and female spotted hyenas. In male dogs the glans penis is smooth and consists of two parts called the \"bulbus glandis\" and \"pars longa glandis\". The glans of a fossa's penis extends about halfway down the shaft and is spiny except at the tip. In comparison, the glans of felids is short and spiny, while that of viverrids is smooth and long. \nRodents.\nThe glans penis of the marsh rice rat is long and robust, averaging long and broad. Winkelmann's mouse can most readily be distinguished from its close relatives by its partially corrugated glans penis. In \"Thomasomys ucucha\", the glans penis is rounded, short, and small and is superficially divided into left and right halves by a trough at the top and a ridge at the bottom. Most of the glans is covered with spines, except for an area near the tip. The glans penis of a male cape ground squirrel is large with a prominent baculum.\nPerissodactyls.\nWhen erect, the glans of a horse's penis increases by 3 to 4 times. The urethra opens within the urethral fossa, a small pouch at the distal end of the glans. Unlike the human glans, the glans of a horse's penis extends backwards on its shaft.\nMarsupials, monotremes and bats.\nThe shape of the glans varies among different marsupial species. In most marsupials, the glans is divided, but male macropods have an undivided glans penis. \nThe glans penis is also divided into two parts in platypuses and echidnas.\nMales of Racey's pipistrelle bat have a narrow, egg-shaped glans penis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49085", "revid": "715696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49085", "title": "Palette knife", "text": "Artist's equipment\nA palette knife is a blunt tool used for mixing or applying paint, with a flexible steel blade. It is primarily used for applying paint to the canvas, mixing paint colors, adding texture to the painted surface, paste, etc., or for marbling, decorative endpapers, etc. The \"palette\" in the name is a reference to an artist's palette which is used for mixing oil paint and acrylic paints.\nArt knives come primarily in two types:\nWhile palette knives are manufactured without sharpened cutting edges, with prolonged use they may become \"sharpened\" by the action of abrasive pigments such as earth colors.\nPalette knives are also used in cooking, where their flexibility allows them to easily slide underneath pastries or other items. See frosting spatula.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49086", "revid": "26347579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49086", "title": "Libanius", "text": "Greek rhetorician (4th century AD)\nLibanius (; c.\u2009314\u2013392 or 393) was a teacher of rhetoric of the Sophist school in the Eastern Roman Empire. His prolific writings make him one of the best documented teachers of higher education in the ancient world and a critical source of history of the Greek East during the 4th century AD. During the rise of Christian hegemony in the later Roman Empire, he remained unconverted and in religious matters was a pagan Hellene.\nLife.\nOrigin.\nLibanius was born in Antioch, Coele-Syria located near the modern-day city of Antakya, Turkey. He was born into a deeply cultured and once-influential family that had experienced substantial recent decline. In 303 AD, eleven years before his birth, his family had participated in resisting an insurrection by a local army garrison, led by a certain Eugenius. In the end, Roman Imperial authorities were equally concerned by local aristocrats arming themselves as they were by the rebellious troops. Libanius' family fell out of favor and his grandfather was executed. Libanius' father died when he was eleven, leaving his upbringing to his mother and maternal uncles, who were in the process of rebuilding his family's reputation.\nAt fourteen years old he began his study of rhetoric, for which he withdrew from public life and devoted himself to philosophy. Unfamiliar with Latin literature, he deplored its influence.\nCareer.\nHe studied in Athens under Diophantus the Arab and began his career in Constantinople as a private tutor. He was exiled to Nicomedia in 346 (or earlier) for around five years but returned to Constantinople and taught there until 354. At this time, he held an official appointment as a sophist in the capital and received an imperial salary.\nBefore his exile, Libanius was a friend of the emperor Julian, with whom some correspondence survives, and in whose memory he wrote a series of orations; they were composed between 362 and 365. \nIn winter 353/54 he returned to Antioch in expectation of succeeding his former teacher Zenobius, but the latter refused to yield his place and Libanius could only take the position upon Zenobius' illness and following death in autumn 354. His pupils included both pagans and Christians. There, he continued to receive an imperial salary, which was cut for a period of time, which resulted in Libanius in writing many letters trying to obtain it back.\nLibanius used his arts of rhetoric to advance various private and political causes. He attacked the increasing imperial pressures on the traditional city-oriented culture that had been supported and dominated by the local upper classes. Nevertheless, though Libanius liked to assume the role of an honourable, independent citizen, he concerned himself often with winning for himself and his friends honours and privileges bestowed by the central imperial authority. He is known to have protested against the persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire. In 386, he appealed without success to emperor Theodosius to prevent the destruction of a temple in Edessa, and pleaded for toleration and the preservation of the temples against the predation of Christian monks, who he claimed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[...]hasten to attack the temples with sticks and stones and bars of iron, and in some cases, disdaining these, with hands and feet. Then utter desolation follows, with the stripping of roofs, demolition of walls, the tearing down of statues and the overthrow of altars, and the priests must either keep quiet or die. After demolishing one, they scurry to another, and to a third, and trophy is piled on trophy, in contravention of the law. Such outrages occur even in the cities, but they are most common in the countryside. Many are the foes who perpetrate the separate attacks, but after their countless crimes this scattered rabble congregates and they are in disgrace unless they have committed the foulest outrage...Temples, Sire, are the soul of the countryside: they mark the beginning of its settlement, and have been passed down through many generations to the men of today. In them the farming communities rest their hopes for husbands, wives, children, for their oxen and the soil they sow and plant. An estate that has suffered so has lost the inspiration of the peasantry together with their hopes, for they believe that their labour will be in vain once they are robbed of the gods who direct their labours to their due end. And if the land no longer enjoys the same care, neither can the yield match what it was before, and, if this be the case, the peasant is the poorer, and the revenue jeopardized.\u2014\u200a\nThe surviving works of Libanius, which include over 1,600 letters, 64 speeches and 96 progymnasmata (rhetorical exercises), are valuable as a historical source for the changing world of the later 4th century. His oration \"A Reply To Aristides On Behalf Of The Dancers\" is one of the most important records of Roman concert dance, particularly that immensely popular form known as pantomime. His first \"Oration I\" is an autobiographical narrative, first written in 374 and revised throughout his life, a scholar's account that ends as an old exile's private journal. Progymnasma 8 (see below for explanation of a \"progymnasma\") is an imaginary summation of the prosecution's case against a physician charged with poisoning some of his patients.\nAlthough Libanius was not a Christian his students included such notable Christians as John Chrysostom and Theodore of Mopsuestia. Despite his friendship with the pagan restorationist Emperor Julian he was made an honorary \"praetorian prefect\" by the Christian Emperor Theodosius I.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49087", "revid": "15944039", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49087", "title": "Libanios", "text": ""}
{"id": "49088", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49088", "title": "College Bowl", "text": "American trivia game show\nCollege Bowl (which has carried a naming rights sponsor, initially General Electric and later Capital One) is a radio, television, and student quiz show. \"College Bowl\" first aired on the NBC Radio Network in 1953 as \"College Quiz Bowl\". It then moved to American television broadcast networks, airing from 1959 to 1963 on CBS and from 1963 to 1970 on NBC. In 1977, the president of College Bowl, Richard Reid, developed it into a non-televised national championship competition on campuses across America through an affiliation with the Association of College Unions International (ACUI), which lasted for 31 years. In 1989, College Bowl introduced a (sponsored) version of College Bowl for historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs) called Honda Campus All-Star Challenge (HCASC) which is ongoing. In 2007, College Bowl produced a new version and format of the game as an international championship in Africa, called Africa Challenge (Celtel Africa Challenge, Zain Africa Challenge). The College Bowl Campus Program and National Championship ran until 2008.\nIn November 2020, NBC announced a revival of the show, developed from the format of Honda Campus All-Star Challenge and \"Africa Challenge\", with Peyton Manning as host and a ten-episode run ordered. The revival, \"Capital One College Bowl\", aired from June 22, 2021 to October 28, 2022.\nHistory.\n\"College Bowl\" originated as a USO activity created by Canadian Don Reid for soldiers serving in World War II. Reid and John Moses then developed the game into a radio show. Grant Tinker, later President of NBC and MTM Enterprises, got his start as an assistant on the show.\nRichard Reid has led the College Bowl since 1975. He has created, produced, and supervised all versions of College Bowl innovated since then (except for a 1984 NBC special).\nTwo four-member teams representing various colleges and universities competed; one member of each team was its captain. The game began with a \"toss-up\" question for ten points. The first player to buzz in got the right to answer, but if the contestant was wrong, the other team could try to answer (if a player buzzed in before the host finished reading the question and was wrong, the team was penalized five points). Answering a \"toss-up\" correctly earned the team the right to answer a multi-part \"bonus\" question worth up to thirty points; the team members could collaborate, but only the captain was allowed to answer. The game continued in this manner and was played in halves. During halftime, the players were allowed to show a short promotional film of their school or they might talk about career plans or the like.\nThe first \"College Quiz Bowl\" match was played on NBC radio on October 10, 1953, when Northwestern University defeated Columbia University, 135\u201360. Twenty-six episodes ran in that first season, with winning teams receiving $500 grants for their school. \"Good Housekeeping\" magazine became the sponsor for the 1954\u201355 season, and a short third season in the autumn of 1955 finished the run. The most dominant team was the University of Minnesota, which had teams appear in 23 of the 68 broadcast matches. The 1953\u201355 series had a powerful appeal because it used remote broadcasts; each team was located at their college where they were cheered on by their wildly enthusiastic classmates. The effect was akin to listening to a football game.\nTelevision.\nThough a pilot was shot in the spring of 1955, the game did not move to television until 1959. As \"G.E. College Bowl\" with General Electric as the primary sponsor, the show ran on CBS from 1959 to 1963, and moved back to NBC from 1963 to 1970. Allen Ludden was the original host, but left to do \"Password\" full-time in 1962. Robert Earle was the moderator for the rest of the run. The norm developed in the Ludden-Earle era of undefeated teams retiring after winning five games. Each winning team earned $1,500 in scholarship grants from General Electric with runner-up teams receiving $500. A team's fifth victory awarded $3,000 from General Electric plus $1,500 from Gimbels department stores for a grand total of $10,500. On April 16, 1967, \"Seventeen\" magazine matched GE's payouts so that each victory won $3,000 and runners-up earned $1,000. The payouts from Gimbel's department stores remained the same so that five-time champions retired with a grand total of $19,500.\nColgate University was the first team to win five consecutive contests and become \"retired undefeated champions,\" defeating New York University in Colgate's first appearance in April 1960 when NYU was going for its fifth win. Rutgers was the second college to win five contests and be retired. Colgate later defeated Rutgers in a special one-time playoff contest to become the only six-time winner in a \"five-win-limit\" competition. An upset occurred in 1961, when the small liberal arts colleges of Hobart and William Smith in Geneva, New York, defeated Baylor University to become the third college to retire undefeated. Pomona College began its five-game G.E. College Bowl winning streak on October 15, 1961, by first defeating Texas Christian University followed by the University of Washington, Hood College, Amherst College, and Washington and Lee University. In another surprise, Lafayette College retired undefeated in fall 1962 after beating the University of California, Berkeley for its fifth victory, a David and Goliath event. Ohio Wesleyan University retired undefeated easily beating Bard, Marymount, UCLA, Michigan Tech, and Alfred. Lawrence University went undefeated in 1964-1965, Another upset occurred in 1966 when the all-female Agnes Scott College from Georgia defeated an all-male team from Princeton University.\nThe show licensed and spun off three other academic competitions in the U.S.:\nHonda Campus All-Star Challenge.\nIn 1989, College Bowl introduced its academic team championship for historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs) called Honda Campus All-Star Challenge (HCASC) sponsored by American Honda Motor Company. From 1990 to 1995, Honda Campus All-Star Challenge was broadcast on BET, featuring the top 16 HBCUs, survivors of regional tournaments, competing in a single-elimination tournament. The game was played under the same rules as College Bowl. Starting in 1996 and until the present, HCASC has been played as a live-event national championship. Originally, sixty-four HBCUs traveled to and competed at the national championship. Now, forty-eight schools travel and compete. Due to the pandemic, in 2020 the national championship was suspended and the 2021 version was a virtual event.\nIn 2011, HCASC adopted the Africa Challenge format of the game created by Richard Reid: the highlights of the format were three rounds of Face-Off (Toss-up) and Bonus questions played in categories followed by a catch-up round called the Ultimate Challenge.\nInternational versions.\n\"University Challenge\".\nA British version of the televised College Bowl competition was launched as \"University Challenge\" in 1962. The program, presented by Bamber Gascoigne, produced by Granada Television and broadcast across the ITV network, was very popular and ran until it was taken off the air in 1987. In 1994, the show was resurrected by the BBC with Jeremy Paxman (who was also hosting \"Newsnight\" at that time) as the new quizmaster. In 2022, it was announced that Amol Rajan would be taking over as host, after Paxman announced that he was stepping down, owing to Parkinson's disease. Since 2011, a Christmas-time edition has also existed, titled \"Christmas University Challenge\", featuring often well-known university alumni.\n\"University Challenge New Zealand\".\nA New Zealand version of \"University Challenge\" ran from 1976 to 1989, hosted by Peter Sinclair. It had a three-year revival beginning in 2014, with Tom Conroy as host.\n\"University Challenge Australia\".\n\"University Challenge\" in Australia ran on ABC from 1987 until 1989, hosted by Magnus Clarke.\n\"Africa Challenge\".\nLaunched in 2007, Africa Challenge was an international championship version of College Bowl featuring schools from across the continent that finished at the top of nationwide, non-televised championship tournaments. The format for Africa Challenge was created by Richard Reid. It featured three players playing three rounds of Face-Off and Bonus questions, and it culminated in a catch-up round called the Ultimate Challenge.\nThe program was sponsored by the mobile phone company Celtel, its headquarters in The Netherlands. In the first year, schools from Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda competed. In the second year schools from Malawi and Zambia were added. In the third year, schools from Ghana, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone were added. After the second year, Celtel was sold to the mobile phone company Zain, headquartered in Bahrain. The name of the game changed to \"Zain Africa Challenge\". Season five, which was set to be telecast in 2011, failed to make it past pre-production after Zain sold its African network operations to Bharti Airtel.\n\"Challenging Times\".\nAn Irish version of the competition called \"Challenging Times\" ran between 1991 and 2002. It was sponsored by The Irish Times newspaper and presented by Kevin Myers, then a columnist with that newspaper. Throughout the show, University College Cork had the most wins, with three, while National University of Ireland, Galway qualified for the most finals, winning twice and placing second twice.\nLater history.\nThe game returned to radio from 1979 to 1982, hosted by Art Fleming, with the 1978 and 1979 national tournament semi-finals and finals appearing on syndicated television. The two champions from those years earned $5,000 for their school and competed against teams from the UK for a $7,500 grant in the \"College Bowl World Championship,\" which was also televised. In 1978, Stanford defeated Yale with a score of 260\u2013200 at the US Championships, earning the right to represent the US against a UK all-star team. The UK all-star team, composed of two students from Oxford, one student from Nottingham, and one from Durham, defeated the US team with a score of 385\u201355. The game played in 1978 between the US and the UK followed College Bowl rules. In 1979, Davidson College emerged as the winner of the US Championships and competed against Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge University under University Challenge rules. Once again, the UK team secured a win. There have been two television appearances since then; the 1984 tournament semi-finals and finals aired on NBC, hosted by Pat Sajak, and the entire 1987 tournament on Disney Channel, hosted by Dick Cavett. The University of Minnesota won both iterations.\nIn 1970, modern quiz bowl invitational tournaments began with the Southeastern Invitational Tournament, and the circuit expanded through the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. These tournaments increasingly made various modifications to the College Bowl format and came to be known as quiz bowl. Earlier invitational tournaments, such as the \"Syra-quiz\" at Syracuse University, had occurred in the 1950s and 1960s. \nIn 1976, the program became affiliated with the Association of College Unions International (ACUI), which continued to promote the competition as a non-broadcast event after the demise of the radio and television experiments. That affiliation ended in 2008, and the College Bowl campus program is no longer active. The College Bowl Company continues to create, produce and license versions of College Bowl in the United States and elsewhere, including \"Africa Challenge\" (2007\u201310), which featured schools from Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia; \"University Challenge\" in New Zealand and India; \"University Challenge\" in the United Kingdom, which is seen every week in primetime on BBC 2; and the Honda Campus All-Star Challenge at historically black colleges and universities, sponsored by American Honda, which has awarded over $10,000,000 in institutional grants since its debut in 1989.\nIn the 1990s with the rise of the Academic Competition Federation and National Academic Quiz Tournaments, both with their national championships, several schools (such as the University of Maryland, the University of Chicago, both former national champions, and recent runner up Georgia Tech) \"de-affiliated\" from College Bowl. Factors that contributed to this process included, among other issues, eligibility rules for College Bowl (which limited the number of graduate students who could compete and required a minimum course load), higher participation costs for College Bowl relative to these other formats, and concerns regarding the quality and difficulty of the questions used in College Bowl competitions.\n2021 revival.\nOn November 24, 2020, it was announced that a 10-episode revival of the series had been ordered at NBC, with Peyton Manning as host (and producer) and his brother Cooper serving as sidekick. The revival, titled \"Capital One College Bowl\", premiered on June 22, 2021. Twelve teams compete for $1 million in scholarship funds; each team fields four players, three starters and one alternate who can be brought in if a starter has to withdraw for any reason.\nOn April 28, 2022, NBC renewed the series for a second season, with Harry Friedman being named executive producer. The second season premiered on September 9, 2022.\nGameplay.\nThe game is played using a modified version of the current \"Honda Campus All-Star Challenge\" rules, between two teams of three players, with no penalty for wrong answers. In each of the first two rounds, the teams are shown four categories. This round was known as the \"Face-Off\" in season one but was renamed the \"Kickoff\" in season two, with only one round being played. Each category contains one \"Face-Off\" question and two bonus \"Follow-Up\" questions, all worth 10 points each. The Face-Off questions are asked on the buzzers to all players, with no conferring allowed. The first player to buzz in and answer correctly wins control of the Follow-Ups, for which conferring is allowed. An incorrect response at any time gives the opposing team a chance to steal the points with a correct answer. In season two, a category that was used is replaced with a new one. One category is secretly designated as \"Extra Credit,\" awarding 20 points per question if chosen. This was removed in the second season. Each of these rounds ends after three categories have been played.\nA random draw decides which team will choose first in Round 1, and the trailing team at the end of this round chooses first in Round 2. During both rounds, the team that correctly answers the Face-Off question in a category earns the right to select the next one, regardless of the outcome of the Follow-Ups.\nThe second \"Kickoff\" round was replaced in season two by a new round dubbed \"One-on-One,\" in which three categories, each with three questions, are shown and both teams determine who will participate. Correct answers are worth 20 points, while an incorrect response gives the opponent control.\nThe third and final round is the \"Two-Minute Drill,\" in which each team has two minutes to answer as many questions as possible. In season one, teams chose their categories (\"majors\") from a group of six before the game began, and the trailing team went first. Teammates may confer on the questions, but only the captain may buzz in and answer. Each correct response scores 25 points, and a bonus is awarded after every fifth such answer, starting with 50 for the fifth and increasing by 25 for each additional set of five. The bonus was set to a flat 100 points in the second season.\nEach qualifying contest consists of two complete games, with two new teams per game. The two highest-scoring teams from each contest advance to an eight-team elimination bracket, regardless of whether they won their respective games. The two highest scorers from the remaining six teams also advance as wild cards.\nAll matches beyond the qualifiers in the first season had three Face-Off rounds, with five categories available; each round ended when four of them have been played. The higher-seeded team in each match starts the first round. In season one, the Face-Offs were followed by a \"Dropout Round,\" in which the host asks a question with multiple correct answers (e.g. naming the 30 teams in the NBA) and calls on one member at a time from alternating teams to respond. A miss or repetition of any previously given answer eliminates the contestant from the round. When called on, a contestant may challenge any one opposing team member to respond instead; if the opponent gives a correct answer, the challenger is eliminated. The first team to be eliminated must choose one of its members to sit out the Two-Minute Drill, while the opposing team plays the round with all three.\nThe \"Dropout Round\" was replaced in season two starting with the quarterfinals with a new round dubbed \"The Handoff,\" in which three categories each feature a question with three correct answers. The trailing team goes first. Each correct response is worth 20 points, while an incorrect response moves on to the next teammate until all three chances have finished. Just like \"The Knockout,\" a used category gets replaced with a new one. In subsequent turns, the contestant in the position corresponding to the question number goes first. The round ends after six questions.\nIn season two, a new round was added in between the quarterfinals and semifinals, called \"The Blitz,\" consisting of the Kickoff and Two-Minute Drill. 3 matches are played, with the winner of each advancing to the semifinals, along with the runner-up team that scored the most points.\nIn the second season's semifinals, a new round dubbed \"Pass-Play\" was introduced. In this round, two categories are shown, and the controlling team chooses which one to play, with the remaining category being given to the opposing team. The trailing team goes first. Correct answers are worth 20 points, while an incorrect answer awards the opponents those points. The round consists of eight questions, with the latter half including two \"Extra Credit\" categories that not only double the points but also feature two answers.\nIn season one, members of teams eliminated in the qualifiers, quarterfinals, or semifinals each receive $5,000, $10,000, or $15,000, respectively. In season two, members of teams eliminated in the qualifiers, quarterfinals, \"The Blitz,\" or semifinals each receive $5,000, $10,000, $15,000, or $20,000 respectively. Members of the tournament champion and runner-up teams each receive $125,000 and $25,000, respectively. Alternates did not receive the same monetary award as their teammates. In addition, four contestants are chosen to receive $5,000 Merit Awards based on their character and leadership ability.\nResults.\nSeason 1.\nThe revival's first season took place over four rounds, with a qualifier round followed by a traditional playoff bracket including quarterfinals, semifinals, and a final.\nAfter the end of the qualifier rounds, eight of the original 12 teams advanced to the quarterfinals. Listed by team name (seed), these were: Ole Miss (1), Tennessee (2), Michigan (3), USC (4), UCLA (5), Alabama (6), Columbia (7), and Auburn (8). Morehouse, UVA, Minnesota, and XULA were eliminated.\nThe quarterfinal results were as follows:\nFor the semifinals, the remaining four teams were re-seeded based on their combined scores from the qualifier and quarterfinal rounds. The resulting order was: Columbia (1), USC (2), Alabama (3), and Auburn (4). USC was the only team to avoid being defeated by a lower-seeded opponent in the quarterfinals.\nThe semifinal results were as follows:\nFor the final, the team with the higher cumulative score in all previous matches (USC) won the right to choose the first category in Round 1. Columbia won the championship with a score of 790\u2013775; team members Tamarah Wallace, Shomik Ghose, and Jake Fisher received $125,000 scholarships to put towards their college education, as did alternate Addis Boyd. USC's Ann Nguyen, Karan Menon, and Brendan Glascock, along with alternate Astrid, received $25,000 scholarships as the runner-up team.\nSeason 2.\nThe revival's second season took place over five rounds, with a qualifier round followed by a traditional playoff bracket including quarterfinals, \"The Blitz,\" semifinal, and a final.\nAfter the end of the qualifier rounds, twelve of the original 16 teams advanced to the quarterfinals. Listed by team name (seed), these were: Notre Dame (1), Oklahoma (2), Texas (3), Georgia (4), Washington (5), BYU (6), Penn State (7), Spelman (8), Syracuse (9), UC Santa Barbara (10), Columbia (11), and Duke (12). Ohio State, Florida, Albany State, and Morehouse were eliminated.\nThe quarterfinal results were as follows:\nFor \"The Blitz,\" the remaining six teams were re-seeded based on their combined scores from the qualifier and quarterfinal rounds. The resulting order was: Penn State (1), Columbia (2), BYU (3), Georgia (4), Syracuse (5), and UC Santa Barbara (6). Penn State advanced to the semifinal, with the most points out of the runner-up teams.\nThe \"Blitz\" results were as follows:\nFor the semifinal, the remaining four teams were re-seeded based on their combined scores from the qualifier, quarterfinal, and \"Blitz\" rounds. The resulting order was: Columbia (1), Penn State (2), BYU (3), and Georgia (4).\nThe semifinal results were as follows:\nFor the final, Georgia won the championship with a score of 910\u2013855; team members Layla Parsa, Aidan Leahy, and Elijah Odunade received $125,000 scholarships to put towards their college education. Columbia's Akshay Manglik, Albert Zhang, and Forrest Weintraub received $25,000 scholarships as the runner-up team.\nCriticism.\nIn the 1987 regional tournament, College Bowl was accused of recycling questions from previous tournaments, thereby possibly compromising the integrity of results. Questions for tournaments need to be new for all teams involved, or certain teams could have a competitive advantage from having heard some questions previously. The 1987 National Tournament on the Disney Channel saw additional controversy, as several protested matches proved to strain the television format. Especially in the early 1990s, The College Bowl Company attempted to collect licensing fees based on copyright and trade dress claims from invitational tournaments that employed formats that it claimed were similar to College Bowl and threatened not to allow schools that failed to pay these fees to compete in College Bowl events. As it was, the company's intellectual property claims were never tested in court. These events and the growing Internet community of quiz bowl players led to a great increase in teams, tournaments, and formats.\nSource: http://\nTop four finishers of CBI National Championship Tournament (1978\u20132008).\nNo tournament was held in 1983 or 1985, though regional tournaments were held each year.\n\u2020Tied for third (lost in semifinals, no playoff for third place).\n\u2020\u2020In 1994, Brigham Young University finished second in the round-robin, qualifying for the final series. However, as the final best-two-out-of-three series was held on Sunday, the team declined to participate, and the University of Virginia took their place instead. Brigham Young was awarded third place.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49089", "revid": "49810581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49089", "title": "Cox's theorem", "text": "Derivation of the laws of probability theory\nCox's theorem, named after the physicist Richard Threlkeld Cox, is a derivation of the laws of probability theory from a certain set of postulates. This derivation justifies the so-called \"logical\" interpretation of probability, as the laws of probability derived by Cox's theorem are applicable to any proposition. Logical (also known as objective Bayesian) probability is a type of Bayesian probability. Other forms of Bayesianism, such as the subjective interpretation, are given other justifications.\nCox's assumptions.\nCox wanted his system to satisfy the following conditions:\nThe postulates as stated here are taken from Arnborg and Sj\u00f6din.\n\"Common sense\" includes consistency with Aristotelian logic in the sense that logically equivalent propositions shall have the same plausibility.\nThe postulates as originally stated by Cox were not mathematically\nrigorous (although more so than the informal description above),\nas noted by Halpern. However it appears to be possible\nto augment them with various mathematical assumptions made either\nimplicitly or explicitly by Cox to produce a valid proof.\nCox's notation:\nThe plausibility of a proposition formula_1 given some related information formula_2 is denoted by formula_3.\nCox's postulates and functional equations are:\nIn form of a functional equation\nformula_12\nBecause of the associative nature of the conjunction in propositional logic, the consistency with logic gives a functional equation saying that the function formula_13 is an associative binary operation.\nAll strictly increasing associative binary operations on the real numbers are isomorphic to multiplication of numbers in a subinterval of [0,\u2009+\u221e], which means that there is a monotonic function formula_15 mapping plausibilities to [0,\u2009+\u221e] such that\nformula_16\nformula_21\nThis shall hold for any proposition formula_6, which leads to\nformula_23\nformula_28\nThis shall hold for any proposition formula_6, which, without loss of generality, leads to a solution\nformula_30\nDue to the requirement of monotonicity, this means that formula_15 maps plausibilities to interval [0,\u20091].\nThis postulates the existence of a function formula_32 such that\nformula_33\nBecause \"a double negative is an affirmative\", consistency with logic gives a functional equation\nformula_34\nsaying that the function formula_32 is an involution, i.e., it is its own inverse.\nThe above functional equations and consistency with logic imply that\nformula_37\nSince formula_4 is logically equivalent to formula_39, we also get\nformula_40\nIf, in particular, formula_41, then also formula_42 and formula_43 and we get\nformula_44\nand\nformula_45\nAbbreviating formula_46 and formula_47 we get the functional equation\nformula_48\nImplications of Cox's postulates.\nThe laws of probability derivable from these postulates are the following. Let formula_49 be the plausibility of the proposition formula_1 given formula_6 satisfying Cox's postulates. Then there is a function formula_15 mapping plausibilities to interval [0,1] and a positive number formula_53 such that\nIt is important to note that the postulates imply only these general properties. We may recover the usual laws of probability by setting a new function, conventionally denoted formula_57 or formula_58, equal to formula_59. Then we obtain the laws of probability in a more familiar form:\nRule 2 is a rule for negation, and rule 3 is a rule for conjunction. Given that any proposition containing conjunction, disjunction, and negation can be equivalently rephrased using conjunction and negation alone (the conjunctive normal form), we can now handle any compound proposition.\nThe laws thus derived yield finite additivity of probability, but not countable additivity. The measure-theoretic formulation of Kolmogorov assumes that a probability measure is countably additive. This slightly stronger condition is necessary for certain results. An elementary example (in which this assumption merely simplifies the calculation rather than being necessary for it) is that the probability of seeing heads for the first time after an even number of flips in a sequence of coin flips is formula_64.\nInterpretation and further discussion.\nCox's theorem has come to be used as one of the justifications for the use of Bayesian probability theory. For example, in Jaynes it is discussed in detail in chapters 1 and 2 and is a cornerstone for the rest of the book. Probability is interpreted as a formal system of logic, the natural extension of Aristotelian logic (in which every statement is either true or false) into the realm of reasoning in the presence of uncertainty.\nIt has been debated to what degree the theorem excludes alternative models for reasoning about uncertainty. For example, if certain \"unintuitive\" mathematical assumptions were dropped then alternatives could be devised, e.g., an example provided by Halpern. However Arnborg and Sj\u00f6din suggest additional\n\"common sense\" postulates, which would allow the assumptions to be relaxed in some cases while still ruling out the Halpern example. Other approaches were devised by Hardy or Dupr\u00e9 and Tipler.\nThe original formulation of Cox's theorem is in , which is extended with additional results and more discussion in . Jaynes cites Abel for the first known use of the associativity functional equation. J\u00e1nos Acz\u00e9l provides a long proof of the \"associativity equation\" (pages 256-267). Jaynes reproduces the shorter proof by Cox in which differentiability is assumed. A guide to Cox's theorem by Van Horn aims at comprehensively introducing the reader to all these references.\nBaoding Liu, the founder of uncertainty theory, criticizes Cox's theorem for presuming that the truth value of conjunction formula_65 is a twice differentiable function formula_32 of truth values of the two propositions formula_57 and formula_68, i.e., formula_69, which excludes uncertainty theory's \"uncertain measure\" from its start, because the function formula_70, used in uncertainty theory, is not differentiable with respect to formula_71 and formula_72. According to Liu, \"there does not exist any evidence that the truth value of conjunction is completely determined by the truth values of individual propositions, let alone a twice differentiable function.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49090", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49090", "title": "Ohm's law", "text": "Law of electrical current and voltage\nOhm's law states that the electric current through a conductor between two points is directly proportional to the voltage across the two points. Introducing the constant of proportionality, the resistance, one arrives at the three mathematical equations used to describe this relationship:\nformula_1\nwhere \"I\" is the current through the conductor, \"V\" is the voltage measured across the conductor and \"R\" is the resistance of the conductor. More specifically, Ohm's law states that the \"R\" in this relation is constant, independent of the current. If the resistance is not constant, the previous equation cannot be called \"Ohm's law\", but it can still be used as a definition of static/DC resistance. Ohm's law is an empirical relation which accurately describes the conductivity of the vast majority of electrically conductive materials over many orders of magnitude of current. However some materials do not obey Ohm's law; these are called non-ohmic.\nThe law was named after the German physicist Georg Ohm, who, in a treatise published in 1827, described measurements of applied voltage and current through simple electrical circuits containing various lengths of wire. Ohm explained his experimental results by a slightly more complex equation than the modern form above (see \"\" below).\nIn physics, the term \"Ohm's law\" is also used to refer to various generalizations of the law; for example the vector form of the law used in electromagnetics and material science:\nformula_2\nwhere J is the current density at a given location in a resistive material, E is the electric field at that location, and \"\u03c3\" (sigma) is a material-dependent parameter called the conductivity, defined as the inverse of resistivity \"\u03c1\" (rho). This reformulation of Ohm's law is due to Gustav Kirchhoff.\nHistory.\nIn January 1781, before Georg Ohm's work, Henry Cavendish experimented with Leyden jars and glass tubes of varying diameter and length filled with salt solution. He measured the current by noting how strong a shock he felt as he completed the circuit with his body. Cavendish wrote that the \"velocity\" (current) varied directly as the \"degree of electrification\" (voltage). He did not communicate his results to other scientists at the time, and his results were unknown until James Clerk Maxwell published them in 1879.\nFrancis Ronalds delineated \"intensity\" (voltage) and \"quantity\" (current) for the dry pile\u2014a high voltage source\u2014in 1814 using a gold-leaf electrometer. He found for a dry pile that the relationship between the two parameters was not proportional under certain meteorological conditions.\nOhm did his work on resistance in the years 1825 and 1826, and published his results in 1827 as the book \"Die galvanische Kette, mathematisch bearbeitet\" (\"The galvanic circuit investigated mathematically\"). He drew considerable inspiration from Joseph Fourier's work on heat conduction in the theoretical explanation of his work. For experiments, he initially used voltaic piles, but later used a thermocouple as this provided a more stable voltage source in terms of internal resistance and constant voltage. He used a galvanometer to measure current, and knew that the voltage between the thermocouple terminals was proportional to the junction temperature. He then added test wires of varying length, diameter, and material to complete the circuit. He found that his data could be modeled through the equation\nformula_3\nwhere \"x\" was the reading from the galvanometer, \"\u2113\" was the length of the test conductor, \"a\" depended on the thermocouple junction temperature, and \"b\" was a constant of the entire setup. From this, Ohm determined his law of proportionality and published his results.\nIn modern notation we would write,\nformula_4\nwhere formula_5 is the open-circuit emf of the thermocouple, formula_6 is the internal resistance of the thermocouple and formula_7 is the resistance of the test wire. In terms of the length of the wire this becomes,\nformula_8\nwhere formula_9 is the resistance of the test wire per unit length. Thus, Ohm's coefficients are,\nformula_10\nOhm's law was probably the most important of the early quantitative descriptions of the physics of electricity. We consider it almost obvious today. When Ohm first published his work, this was not the case; critics reacted to his treatment of the subject with hostility. They called his work a \"web of naked fancies\" and the Minister of Education proclaimed that \"a professor who preached such heresies was unworthy to teach science.\" The prevailing scientific philosophy in Germany at the time asserted that experiments need not be performed to develop an understanding of nature because nature is so well ordered, and that scientific truths may be deduced through reasoning alone. Also, Ohm's brother Martin, a mathematician, was battling the German educational system. These factors hindered the acceptance of Ohm's work, and his work did not become widely accepted until the 1840s. However, Ohm received recognition for his contributions to science well before he died.\nIn the 1850s, Ohm's law was widely known and considered proved. Alternatives such as \"Barlow's law\", were discredited, in terms of real applications to telegraph system design, as discussed by Samuel F. B. Morse in 1855.\nThe electron was discovered in 1897 by J. J. Thomson, and it was quickly realized that it was the particle (charge carrier) that carried electric currents in electric circuits. In 1900, the first (classical) model of electrical conduction, the Drude model, was proposed by Paul Drude, which finally gave a scientific explanation for Ohm's law. In this model, a solid conductor consists of a stationary lattice of atoms (ions), with conduction electrons moving randomly in it. A voltage across a conductor causes an electric field, which accelerates the electrons in the direction of the electric field, causing a drift of electrons which is the electric current. However the electrons collide with atoms which causes them to scatter and randomizes their motion, thus converting kinetic energy to heat (thermal energy). Using statistical distributions, it can be shown that the average drift velocity of the electrons, and thus the current, is proportional to the electric field, and thus the voltage, over a wide range of voltages.\nThe development of quantum mechanics in the 1920s modified this picture somewhat, but in modern theories the average drift velocity of electrons can still be shown to be proportional to the electric field, thus deriving Ohm's law. In 1927 Arnold Sommerfeld applied the quantum Fermi-Dirac distribution of electron energies to the Drude model, resulting in the free electron model. A year later, Felix Bloch showed that electrons move in waves (Bloch electrons) through a solid crystal lattice, so scattering off the lattice atoms as postulated in the Drude model is not a major process; the electrons scatter off impurity atoms and defects in the material. The final successor, the modern quantum band theory of solids, showed that the electrons in a solid cannot take on any energy as assumed in the Drude model but are restricted to energy bands, with gaps between them of energies that electrons are forbidden to have. The size of the band gap is a characteristic of a particular substance which has a great deal to do with its electrical resistivity, explaining why some substances are electrical conductors, some semiconductors, and some insulators.\nWhile the old term for electrical conductance, the mho (the inverse of the resistance unit ohm), is still used, a new name, the siemens, was adopted in 1971, honoring Ernst Werner von Siemens. The siemens is preferred in formal papers.\nIn the 1920s, it was discovered that the current through a practical resistor actually has statistical fluctuations, which depend on temperature, even when voltage and resistance are exactly constant; this fluctuation, now known as Johnson\u2013Nyquist noise, is due to the discrete nature of charge. This thermal effect implies that measurements of current and voltage that are taken over sufficiently short periods of time will yield ratios of V/I that fluctuate from the value of R implied by the time average or ensemble average of the measured current; Ohm's law remains correct for the average current, in the case of ordinary resistive materials.\nOhm's work long preceded Maxwell's equations and any understanding of frequency-dependent effects in AC circuits. Modern developments in electromagnetic theory and circuit theory do not contradict Ohm's law when they are evaluated within the appropriate limits.\nScope.\nOhm's law is an empirical law, a generalization from many experiments that have shown that current is approximately proportional to electric field for most materials. It is less fundamental than Maxwell's equations and is not always obeyed. Any given material will break down under a strong-enough electric field, and some materials of interest in electrical engineering are \"non-ohmic\" under weak fields.\nOhm's law has been observed on a wide range of length scales. In the early 20th century, it was thought that Ohm's law would fail at the atomic scale, but experiments have not borne out this expectation. As of 2012, researchers have demonstrated that Ohm's law works for silicon wires as small as four atoms wide and one atom high.\nMicroscopic origins.\nThe dependence of the current density on the applied electric field is essentially quantum mechanical in nature; (see Classical and quantum conductivity.) A qualitative description leading to Ohm's law can be based upon classical mechanics using the Drude model developed by Paul Drude in 1900.\nThe Drude model treats electrons (or other charge carriers) like pinballs bouncing among the ions that make up the structure of the material. Electrons will be accelerated in the opposite direction to the electric field by the average electric field at their location. With each collision, though, the electron is deflected in a random direction with a velocity that is much larger than the velocity gained by the electric field. The net result is that electrons take a zigzag path due to the collisions, but generally drift in a direction opposing the electric field.\nThe drift velocity then determines the electric current density and its relationship to E and is independent of the collisions. Drude calculated the average drift velocity from p\u00a0=\u00a0\u2212\"eE\u03c4\" where p is the average momentum, \u2212\"e\" is the charge of the electron and \u03c4 is the average time between the collisions. Since both the momentum and the current density are proportional to the drift velocity, the current density becomes proportional to the applied electric field; this leads to Ohm's law.\nHydraulic analogy.\nA hydraulic analogy is sometimes used to describe Ohm's law. Water pressure, measured by pascals (or PSI), is the analog of voltage because establishing a water pressure difference between two points along a (horizontal) pipe causes water to flow. The water volume flow rate, as in liters per second, is the analog of current, as in coulombs per second. Finally, flow restrictors\u2014such as apertures placed in pipes between points where the water pressure is measured\u2014are the analog of resistors. We say that the rate of water flow through an aperture restrictor is proportional to the difference in water pressure across the restrictor. Similarly, the rate of flow of electrical charge, that is, the electric current, through an electrical resistor is proportional to the difference in voltage measured across the resistor. More generally, the hydraulic head may be taken as the analog of voltage, and Ohm's law is then analogous to Darcy's law which relates hydraulic head to the volume flow rate via the hydraulic conductivity.\nFlow and pressure variables can be calculated in fluid flow network with the use of the hydraulic ohm analogy. The method can be applied to both steady and transient flow situations. In the linear laminar flow region, Poiseuille's law describes the hydraulic resistance of a pipe, but in the turbulent flow region the pressure\u2013flow relations become nonlinear.\nThe hydraulic analogy to Ohm's law has been used, for example, to approximate blood flow through the circulatory system.\nCircuit analysis.\nIn circuit analysis, three equivalent expressions of Ohm's law are used interchangeably:\nformula_11\nEach equation is quoted by some sources as the defining relationship of Ohm's law,\nor all three are quoted, or derived from a proportional form,\nor even just the two that do not correspond to Ohm's original statement may sometimes be given.\nThe interchangeability of the equation may be represented by a triangle, where \"V\" (voltage) is placed on the top section, the \"I\" (current) is placed to the left section, and the \"R\" (resistance) is placed to the right. The divider between the top and bottom sections indicates division (hence the division bar).\nResistive circuits.\nResistors are circuit elements that impede the passage of electric charge in agreement with Ohm's law, and are designed to have a specific resistance value \"R\". In schematic diagrams, a resistor is shown as a long rectangle or zig-zag symbol. An element (resistor or conductor) that behaves according to Ohm's law over some operating range is referred to as an \"ohmic device\" (or an \"ohmic resistor\") because Ohm's law and a single value for the resistance suffice to describe the behavior of the device over that range.\nOhm's law holds for circuits containing only resistive elements (no capacitances or inductances) for all forms of driving voltage or current, regardless of whether the driving voltage or current is constant (DC) or time-varying such as AC. At any instant of time Ohm's law is valid for such circuits.\nResistors which are in \"series\" or in \"parallel\" may be grouped together into a single \"equivalent resistance\" in order to apply Ohm's law in analyzing the circuit.\nReactive circuits with time-varying signals.\nWhen reactive elements such as capacitors, inductors, or transmission lines are involved in a circuit to which AC or time-varying voltage or current is applied, the relationship between voltage and current becomes the solution to a differential equation, so Ohm's law (as defined above) does not directly apply since that form contains only resistances having value \"R\", not complex impedances which may contain capacitance (\"C\") or inductance (\"L\").\nEquations for time-invariant AC circuits take the same form as Ohm's law. However, the variables are generalized to complex numbers and the current and voltage waveforms are complex exponentials.\nIn this approach, a voltage or current waveform takes the form \"Ae\"\"st\", where \"t\" is time, \"s\" is a complex parameter, and \"A\" is a complex scalar. In any linear time-invariant system, all of the currents and voltages can be expressed with the same \"s\" parameter as the input to the system, allowing the time-varying complex exponential term to be canceled out and the system described algebraically in terms of the complex scalars in the current and voltage waveforms.\nThe complex generalization of resistance is impedance, usually denoted \"Z\"; it can be shown that for an inductor,\nformula_12\nand for a capacitor,\nformula_13\nWe can now write,\nformula_14\nwhere \"V\" and \"I\" are the complex scalars in the voltage and current respectively and \"Z\" is the complex impedance.\nThis form of Ohm's law, with \"Z\" taking the place of \"R\", generalizes the simpler form. When \"Z\" is complex, only the real part is responsible for dissipating heat.\nIn a general AC circuit, \"Z\" varies strongly with the frequency parameter \"s\", and so also will the relationship between voltage and current.\nFor the common case of a steady sinusoid, the \"s\" parameter is taken to be formula_15, corresponding to a complex sinusoid formula_16. The real parts of such complex current and voltage waveforms describe the actual sinusoidal currents and voltages in a circuit, which can be in different phases due to the different complex scalars.\nLinear approximations.\nOhm's law is one of the basic equations used in the analysis of electrical circuits. It applies to both metal conductors and circuit components (resistors) specifically made for this behaviour. Both are ubiquitous in electrical engineering. Materials and components that obey Ohm's law are described as \"ohmic\" which means they produce the same value for resistance (\"R\" = \"V\"/\"I\") regardless of the value of \"V\" or \"I\" which is applied and whether the applied voltage or current is DC (direct current) of either positive or negative polarity or AC (alternating current).\nIn a true ohmic device, the same value of resistance will be calculated from \"R\" = \"V\"/\"I\" regardless of the value of the applied voltage \"V\". That is, the ratio of \"V\"/\"I\" is constant, and when current is plotted as a function of voltage the curve is \"linear\" (a straight line). If voltage is forced to some value \"V\", then that voltage \"V\" divided by measured current \"I\" will equal \"R\". Or if the current is forced to some value \"I\", then the measured voltage \"V\" divided by that current \"I\" is also \"R\". Since the plot of \"I\" versus \"V\" is a straight line, then it is also true that for any set of two different voltages \"V\"1 and \"V\"2 applied across a given device of resistance \"R\", producing currents \"I\"1 = \"V\"1/\"R\" and \"I\"2 = \"V\"2/\"R\", that the ratio (\"V\"1 \u2212 \"V\"2)/(\"I\"1 \u2212 \"I\"2) is also a constant equal to \"R\". The operator \"delta\" (\u0394) is used to represent a difference in a quantity, so we can write \u0394\"V\" = \"V\"1 \u2212 \"V\"2 and \u0394\"I\" = \"I\"1 \u2212 \"I\"2. Summarizing, for any truly ohmic device having resistance \"R\", \"V\"/\"I\" = \u0394\"V\"/\u0394\"I\" = \"R\" for any applied voltage or current or for the difference between any set of applied voltages or currents.\nThere are, however, components of electrical circuits which do not obey Ohm's law; that is, their relationship between current and voltage (their \"I\"\u2013\"V\" curve) is \"nonlinear\" (or non-ohmic). An example is the p\u2013n junction diode (curve at right). As seen in the figure, the current does not increase linearly with applied voltage for a diode. One can determine a value of current (\"I\") for a given value of applied voltage (\"V\") from the curve, but not from Ohm's law, since the value of \"resistance\" is not constant as a function of applied voltage. Further, the current only increases significantly if the applied voltage is positive, not negative. The ratio \"V\"/\"I\" for some point along the nonlinear curve is sometimes called the \"static\", or \"chordal\", or DC, resistance, but as seen in the figure the value of total \"V\" over total \"I\" varies depending on the particular point along the nonlinear curve which is chosen. This means the \"DC resistance\" V/I at some point on the curve is not the same as what would be determined by applying an AC signal having peak amplitude \u0394\"V\" volts or \u0394\"I\" amps centered at that same point along the curve and measuring \u0394\"V\"/\u0394\"I\". However, in some diode applications, the AC signal applied to the device is small and it is possible to analyze the circuit in terms of the \"dynamic\", \"small-signal\", or \"incremental\" resistance, defined as the one over the slope of the \"V\"\u2013\"I\" curve at the average value (DC operating point) of the voltage (that is, one over the derivative of current with respect to voltage). For sufficiently small signals, the dynamic resistance allows the Ohm's law small signal resistance to be calculated as approximately one over the slope of a line drawn tangentially to the \"V\"\u2013\"I\" curve at the DC operating point.\nTemperature effects.\nOhm's law has sometimes been stated as, \"for a conductor in a given state, the electromotive force is proportional to the current produced. \"That is, that the resistance, the ratio of the applied electromotive force (or voltage) to the current, \"does not vary with the current strength.\"The qualifier \"in a given state\" is usually interpreted as meaning \"at a constant temperature,\" since the resistivity of materials is usually temperature dependent. Because the conduction of current is related to Joule heating of the conducting body, according to Joule's first law, the temperature of a conducting body may change when it carries a current. The dependence of resistance on temperature therefore makes resistance depend upon the current in a typical experimental setup, making the law in this form difficult to directly verify. Maxwell and others worked out several methods to test the law experimentally in 1876, controlling for heating effects. Usually, the measurements of a sample resistance are carried out at low currents to prevent Joule heating. However, even a small current causes heating(cooling) at the first(second) sample contact due to the Peltier effect. The temperatures at the sample contacts become different, their difference is linear in current. The voltage drop across the circuit includes additionally the Seebeck thermoelectromotive force which again is again linear in current. As a result, there exists a thermal correction to the sample resistance even at negligibly small current. The magnitude of the correction could be comparable with the sample resistance.\nRelation to heat conduction.\nOhm's principle predicts the flow of electrical charge (i.e. current) in electrical conductors when subjected to the influence of voltage differences; Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Fourier's principle predicts the flow of heat in heat conductors when subjected to the influence of temperature differences.\nThe same equation describes both phenomena, the equation's variables taking on different meanings in the two cases. Specifically, solving a heat conduction (Fourier) problem with \"temperature\" (the driving \"force\") and \"flux of heat\" (the rate of flow of the driven \"quantity\", i.e. heat energy) variables also solves an analogous electrical conduction (Ohm) problem having \"electric potential\" (the driving \"force\") and \"electric current\" (the rate of flow of the driven \"quantity\", i.e. charge) variables.\nThe basis of Fourier's work was his clear conception and definition of thermal conductivity. He assumed that, all else being the same, the flux of heat is strictly proportional to the gradient of temperature. Although undoubtedly true for small temperature gradients, strictly proportional behavior will be lost when real materials (e.g. ones having a thermal conductivity that is a function of temperature) are subjected to large temperature gradients.\nA similar assumption is made in the statement of Ohm's law: other things being alike, the strength of the current at each point is proportional to the gradient of electric potential. The accuracy of the assumption that flow is proportional to the gradient is more readily tested, using modern measurement methods, for the electrical case than for the heat case.\nOther versions.\nOhm's law, in the form above, is an extremely useful equation in the field of electrical/electronic engineering because it describes how voltage, current and resistance are interrelated on a \"macroscopic\" level, that is, commonly, as circuit elements in an electrical circuit. Physicists who study the electrical properties of matter at the microscopic level use a closely related and more general vector equation, sometimes also referred to as Ohm's law, having variables that are closely related to the V, I, and R scalar variables of Ohm's law, but which are each functions of position within the conductor. Physicists often use this continuum form of Ohm's Law:\nformula_17\nwhere E is the electric field vector with units of volts per meter (analogous to V of Ohm's law which has units of volts), J is the current density vector with units of amperes per unit area (analogous to I of Ohm's law which has units of amperes), and \u03c1 \"rho\" is the resistivity with units of ohm\u00b7meters (analogous to R of Ohm's law which has units of ohms). The above equation is also written as J = \"\u03c3\"E where \u03c3 \"sigma\" is the conductivity which is the reciprocal of \u03c1.\nThe voltage between two points is defined as:\nformula_18\nwith formula_19 the element of path along the integration of electric field vector E. If the applied E field is uniform and oriented along the length of the conductor as shown in the figure, then defining the voltage V in the usual convention of being opposite in direction to the field (see figure), and with the understanding that the voltage V is measured differentially across the length of the conductor allowing us to drop the \u0394 symbol, the above vector equation reduces to the scalar equation:\nformula_20\nSince the E field is uniform in the direction of wire length, for a conductor having uniformly consistent resistivity \u03c1, the current density J will also be uniform in any cross-sectional area and oriented in the direction of wire length, so we may write:\nformula_21\nSubstituting the above 2 results (for \"E\" and \"J\" respectively) into the continuum form shown at the beginning of this section:\nformula_22\nThe electrical resistance of a uniform conductor is given in terms of resistivity by:\nformula_23\nwhere \"\u2113\" is the length of the conductor in SI units of meters, a is the cross-sectional area (for a round wire \"a\" = \"\u03c0r\"2 if r is radius) in units of meters squared, and \u03c1 is the resistivity in units of ohm\u00b7meters.\nAfter substitution of \"R\" from the above equation into the equation preceding it, the continuum form of Ohm's law for a uniform field (and uniform current density) oriented along the length of the conductor reduces to the more familiar form:\nformula_24\nA perfect crystal lattice, with low enough thermal motion and no deviations from periodic structure, would have no resistivity, but a real metal has crystallographic defects, impurities, multiple isotopes, and thermal motion of the atoms. Electrons scatter from all of these, resulting in resistance to their flow.\nThe more complex generalized forms of Ohm's law are important to condensed matter physics, which studies the properties of matter and, in particular, its electronic structure. In broad terms, they fall under the topic of constitutive equations and the theory of transport coefficients.\nMagnetic effects.\nIf an external B-field is present and the conductor is not at rest but moving at velocity v, then an extra term must be added to account for the current induced by the Lorentz force on the charge carriers.\nformula_25\nIn the rest frame of the moving conductor this term drops out because v = 0. There is no contradiction because the electric field in the rest frame differs from the E-field in the lab frame: E\u2032 = E + v \u00d7 B.\nElectric and magnetic fields are relative, see Lorentz transformation.\nIf the current J is alternating because the applied voltage or E-field varies in time, then reactance must be added to resistance to account for self-inductance, see electrical impedance. The reactance may be strong if the frequency is high or the conductor is coiled.\nConductive fluids.\nIn a conductive fluid, such as a plasma, there is a similar effect. Consider a fluid moving with the velocity formula_26 in a magnetic field formula_27. The relative motion induces an electric field formula_28 which exerts electric force on the charged particles giving rise to an electric current formula_29. The equation of motion for the electron gas, with a number density formula_30, is written as\nformula_31\nwhere formula_32, formula_33 and formula_34 are the charge, mass and velocity of the electrons, respectively. Also, formula_35 is the frequency of collisions of the electrons with ions which have a velocity field formula_36. Since, the electron has a very small mass compared with that of ions, we can ignore the left hand side of the above equation to write\nformula_37\nwhere we have used the definition of the current density, and also put formula_38 which is the electrical conductivity. This equation can also be equivalently written as\nformula_39\nwhere formula_40 is the electrical resistivity. It is also common to write formula_41 instead of formula_42 which can be confusing since it is the same notation used for the magnetic diffusivity defined as formula_43.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49091", "revid": "50584560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49091", "title": "Optical character recognition", "text": "Computer recognition of visual text\nOptical character recognition or optical character reader (OCR) is the electronic or mechanical conversion of images of typed, handwritten or printed text into machine-encoded text, whether from a scanned document, a photo of a document, a scene photo (for example the text on signs and billboards in a landscape photo) or from subtitle text superimposed on an image (for example: from a television broadcast).\nWidely used as a form of data entry from printed paper data records\u00a0\u2013 whether passport documents, invoices, bank statements, computerized receipts, business cards, mail, printed data, or any suitable documentation\u00a0\u2013 it is a common method of digitizing printed texts so that they can be electronically edited, searched, stored more compactly, displayed online, and used in machine processes such as cognitive computing, machine translation, (extracted) text-to-speech, key data and text mining. OCR is a field of research in pattern recognition, artificial intelligence and computer vision.\nEarly versions needed to be trained with images of each character, and worked on one font at a time. Advanced systems capable of producing a high degree of accuracy for most fonts are now common, and with support for a variety of image file format inputs. Some systems are capable of reproducing formatted output that closely approximates the original page including images, columns, and other non-textual components.\nHistory.\nEarly optical character recognition may be traced to technologies involving telegraphy and creating reading devices for the blind. In 1914, Emanuel Goldberg developed a machine that read characters and converted them into standard telegraph code. Concurrently, Edmund Fournier d'Albe developed the Optophone, a handheld scanner that when moved across a printed page, produced tones that corresponded to specific letters or characters.\nIn the late 1920s and into the 1930s, Emanuel Goldberg developed what he called a \"Statistical Machine\" for searching microfilm archives using an optical code recognition system. In 1931, he was granted US Patent number 1,838,389 for the invention. The patent was acquired by IBM.\nVisually impaired users.\nIn 1974, Ray Kurzweil started the company Kurzweil Computer Products, Inc. and continued development of omni-font OCR, which could recognize text printed in virtually any font. (Kurzweil is often credited with inventing omni-font OCR, but it was in use by companies, including CompuScan, in the late 1960s and 1970s.) Kurzweil used the technology to create a reading machine for blind people to have a computer read text to them out loud. The device included a CCD-type flatbed scanner and a text-to-speech synthesizer. On January 13, 1976, the finished product was unveiled during a widely reported news conference headed by Kurzweil and the leaders of the National Federation of the Blind. In 1978, Kurzweil Computer Products began selling a commercial version of the optical character recognition computer program. LexisNexis was one of the first customers, and bought the program to upload legal paper and news documents onto its nascent online databases. Two years later, Kurzweil sold his company to Xerox, which eventually spun it off as Scansoft, which merged with Nuance Communications.\nIn the 2000s, OCR was made available online as a service (WebOCR), in a cloud computing environment, and in mobile applications like real-time translation of foreign-language signs on a smartphone. With the advent of smartphones and smartglasses, OCR can be used in internet connected mobile device applications that extract text captured using the device's camera. These devices that do not have built-in OCR functionality will typically use an OCR API to extract the text from the image file captured by the device. The OCR API returns the extracted text, along with information about the location of the detected text in the original image back to the device app for further processing (such as text-to-speech) or display.\nVarious commercial and open source OCR systems are available for most common writing systems, including Latin, Cyrillic, Arabic, Hebrew, Indic, Bengali (Bangla), Devanagari, Tamil, Chinese, Japanese, and Korean characters.\nApplications.\nOCR engines have been developed into software applications specializing in various subjects such as receipts, invoices, checks, and legal billing documents.\nThe software can be used for:\nTypes.\nOCR is generally an offline process, which analyses a static document. There are cloud based services which provide an online OCR API service. Handwriting movement analysis can be used as input to handwriting recognition. Instead of merely using the shapes of glyphs and words, this technique is able to capture motion, such as the order in which segments are drawn, the direction, and the pattern of putting the pen down and lifting it. This additional information can make the process more accurate. This technology is also known as \"online character recognition\", \"dynamic character recognition\", \"real-time character recognition\", and \"intelligent character recognition\".\nTechniques.\nPre-processing.\nOCR software often pre-processes images to improve the chances of successful recognition. Techniques include:\nSegmentation of fixed-pitch fonts is accomplished relatively simply by aligning the image to a uniform grid based on where vertical grid lines will least often intersect black areas. For proportional fonts, more sophisticated techniques are needed because whitespace between letters can sometimes be greater than that between words, and vertical lines can intersect more than one character.\nText recognition.\nThere are two basic types of core OCR algorithm, which may produce a ranked list of candidate characters.\nSoftware such as Cuneiform and Tesseract use a two-pass approach to character recognition. The second pass is known as adaptive recognition and uses the letter shapes recognized with high confidence on the first pass to better recognize the remaining letters on the second pass. This is advantageous for unusual fonts or low-quality scans where the font is distorted (e.g. blurred or faded).\nAs of \u00a02016[ [update]], modern OCR software includes Google Docs OCR, ABBYY FineReader, and Transym. Others like OCRopus and Tesseract use neural networks which are trained to recognize whole lines of text instead of focusing on single characters.\nA technique known as iterative OCR automatically crops a document into sections based on the page layout. OCR is then performed on each section individually using variable character confidence level thresholds to maximize page-level OCR accuracy. A patent from the United States Patent Office has been issued for this method.\nThe OCR result can be stored in the standardized ALTO format, a dedicated XML schema maintained by the United States Library of Congress. Other common formats include hOCR and PAGE XML.\nFor a list of optical character recognition software, see Comparison of optical character recognition software.\nPost-processing.\nOCR accuracy can be increased if the output is constrained by a lexicon\u00a0\u2013 a list of words that are allowed to occur in a document. This might be, for example, all the words in the English language, or a more technical lexicon for a specific field. This technique can be problematic if the document contains words not in the lexicon, like proper nouns. Tesseract uses its dictionary to influence the character segmentation step, for improved accuracy.\nThe output stream may be a plain text stream or file of characters, but more sophisticated OCR systems can preserve the original layout of the page and produce, for example, an annotated PDF that includes both the original image of the page and a searchable textual representation.\n\"Near-neighbor analysis\" can make use of co-occurrence frequencies to correct errors, by noting that certain words are often seen together. For example, \"Washington, D.C.\" is generally far more common in English than \"Washington DOC\".\nKnowledge of the grammar of the language being scanned can also help determine if a word is likely to be a verb or a noun, for example, allowing greater accuracy.\nThe Levenshtein Distance algorithm has also been used in OCR post-processing to further optimize results from an OCR API.\nApplication-specific optimizations.\nIn recent years, the major OCR technology providers began to tweak OCR systems to deal more efficiently with specific types of input. Beyond an application-specific lexicon, better performance may be had by taking into account business rules, standard expression, or rich information contained in color images. This strategy is called \"Application-Oriented OCR\" or \"Customized OCR\", and has been applied to OCR of license plates, invoices, screenshots, ID cards, driver's licenses, and automobile manufacturing.\n\"The New York Times\" has adapted the OCR technology into a proprietary tool they entitle \"Document Helper\", that enables their interactive news team to accelerate the processing of documents that need to be reviewed. They note that it enables them to process what amounts to as many as 5,400 pages per hour in preparation for reporters to review the contents.\nWorkarounds.\nThere are several techniques for solving the problem of character recognition by means other than improved OCR algorithms.\nForcing better input.\nSpecial fonts like OCR-A, OCR-B, or MICR fonts, with precisely specified sizing, spacing, and distinctive character shapes, allow a higher accuracy rate during transcription in bank check processing. Several prominent OCR engines were designed to capture text in popular fonts such as Arial or Times New Roman, and are incapable of capturing text in these fonts that are specialized and very different from popularly used fonts. As Google Tesseract can be trained to recognize new fonts, it can recognize OCR-A, OCR-B and MICR fonts.\n\"Comb fields\" are pre-printed boxes that encourage humans to write more legibly\u00a0\u2013 one glyph per box. These are often printed in a dropout color which can be easily removed by the OCR system.\nPalm OS used a special set of glyphs, known as Graffiti, which are similar to printed English characters but simplified or modified for easier recognition on the platform's computationally limited hardware. Users would need to learn how to write these special glyphs.\nZone-based OCR restricts the image to a specific part of a document. This is often referred to as \"Template OCR\".\nCrowdsourcing.\nCrowdsourcing humans to perform the character recognition can quickly process images like computer-driven OCR, but with higher accuracy for recognizing images than that obtained via computers. Practical systems include the Amazon Mechanical Turk and reCAPTCHA. The National Library of Finland has developed an online interface for users to correct OCRed texts in the standardized ALTO format. Crowd sourcing has also been used not to perform character recognition directly but to invite software developers to develop image processing algorithms, for example, through the use of rank-order tournaments.\nAccuracy.\nCommissioned by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), the Information Science Research Institute (ISRI) had the mission to foster the improvement of automated technologies for understanding machine printed documents, and it conducted the most authoritative of the \"Annual Test of OCR Accuracy\" from 1992 to 1996.\nRecognition of typewritten, Latin script text is still not 100% accurate even where clear imaging is available. One study based on recognition of 19th- and early 20th-century newspaper pages concluded that character-by-character OCR accuracy for commercial OCR software varied from 81% to 99%; total accuracy can be achieved by human review or Data Dictionary Authentication. Other areas\u00a0\u2013 including recognition of hand printing, cursive handwriting, and printed text in other scripts (especially those East Asian language characters which have many strokes for a single character)\u00a0\u2013 are still the subject of active research. The MNIST database is commonly used for testing systems' ability to recognize handwritten digits.\nAccuracy rates can be measured in several ways, and how they are measured can greatly affect the reported accuracy rate. For example, if word context (a lexicon of words) is not used to correct software finding non-existent words, a character error rate of 1% (99% accuracy) may result in an error rate of 5% or worse if the measurement is based on whether each whole word was recognized with no incorrect letters. Using a large enough dataset is important in a neural-network-based handwriting recognition solutions. On the other hand, producing natural datasets is very complicated and time-consuming.\nAn example of the difficulties inherent in digitizing old text is the inability of OCR to differentiate between the \"long s\" and \"f\" characters.\nWeb-based OCR systems for recognizing hand-printed text on the fly have become well known as commercial products in recent years (see Tablet PC history). Accuracy rates of 80% to 90% on neat, clean hand-printed characters can be achieved by pen computing software, but that accuracy rate still translates to dozens of errors per page, making the technology useful only in very limited applications.\nRecognition of cursive text is an active area of research, with recognition rates even lower than that of hand-printed text. Higher rates of recognition of general cursive script will likely not be possible without the use of contextual or grammatical information. For example, recognizing entire words from a dictionary is easier than trying to parse individual characters from script. Reading the \"Amount\" line of a check (which is always a written-out number) is an example where using a smaller dictionary can increase recognition rates greatly. The shapes of individual cursive characters themselves simply do not contain enough information to accurately (greater than 98%) recognize all handwritten cursive script.\nMost programs allow users to set \"confidence rates\". This means that if the software does not achieve their desired level of accuracy, a user can be notified for manual review.\nAn error introduced by OCR scanning is sometimes termed a \"scanno\" (by analogy with the term \"typo\").\nUnicode.\nCharacters to support OCR were added to the Unicode Standard in June 1993, with the release of version 1.1.\nSome of these characters are mapped from fonts specific to MICR, OCR-A or OCR-B.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49092", "revid": "5820279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49092", "title": "Soldier sim", "text": ""}
{"id": "49093", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49093", "title": "Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six (video game)", "text": "1998 video game\nTom Clancy's Rainbow Six is a 1998 tactical shooter video game developed and published by Red Storm Entertainment for Microsoft Windows, with later ports for the Nintendo 64, PlayStation, Mac OS, Game Boy Color, and Dreamcast. It is the first installment in the \"Rainbow Six\" series. Based on the Tom Clancy novel of the same name, the game follows Rainbow, a top secret international counterterrorist organization, and the conspiracy they unravel as they handle a seemingly random spike in terrorism.\nIn singleplayer, the player advances through a series of missions in a campaign. Before each mission, the player is briefed on the situation, selects and organizes their operatives and equipment, and plans their movement through the level; during missions, the player controls an operative leading computer-controlled teammates as they follow the player's plan. In multiplayer, players cooperate in player versus environment missions or battle to complete objectives in player versus player matches. The game features realistic gameplay factors, weapon lethality, and consequences for failure, forcing players to plan their approach carefully and promoting replayability for more streamlined completion.\n\"Rainbow Six\" began as a concept by Red Storm following their formation in 1996. The game was developed in parallel with the \"Rainbow Six\" novel, with a design philosophy of realism and strategy guiding all aspects of development; however, numerous setbacks stymied the game's development and forced the developers to crunch. Though his name is in the game's title, Tom Clancy's involvement in \"Rainbow Six\"'s development was very minimal. Red Storm developed the PC version, while all other ports were developed by their respective companies.\n\"Rainbow Six\" was released on August 21, 1998 to widespread critical acclaim, though the console ports received relatively lower ratings than the PC version. For most releases, praise was directed toward gameplay, multiplayer, immersion, and the game's combination of strategy and action, while criticism mainly centered on AI issues, glitches, and the graphics and controls of some ports. The game sold over 200,000 copies in its first year of release and continued to sell hundreds of thousands more copies well into the early 2000s. \"Rainbow Six\" was nominated for numerous accolades and has been deemed one of the best video games of 1998. It is considered a milestone in the history of first-person shooters and made a lasting impact on the then-fledgling tactical shooter genre.\nAn expansion pack, \"Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six Mission Pack: Eagle Watch\", was released on January 26, 1999. A sequel, ', was released in 1999. A loose mobile game remake, ', was released in 2011.\nGameplay.\n\"Rainbow Six\" is a tactical shooter, in which characters are affected by realistic factors and can be killed with a single bullet; therefore, wise tactics and planning are encouraged to complete missions over sheer force and firepower.\nThe game follows a campaign of several missions, with the plot being advanced in the mission briefing of each. Missions in each version differ: the PC and Game Boy Color versions have 16 missions, the Nintendo 64 port has 12 missions, the PlayStation port has 14 missions and the Dreamcast port has 21 missions. Objectives in missions include defeating enemies, rescuing hostages, defusing bombs, gathering intelligence, and planting surveillance devices. Players are encouraged to find their own ways to complete objectives using a variety of tactics and methods, ranging from stealthy infiltration to a frontal assault (except in missions where stealth is mandatory). Successful missions often last just minutes, but may require dozens of repetitions and planning changes to account for failures, new plans, or simply faster or cleaner completion.\nBefore each mission is a planning stage, in which the player is briefed on the situation, chooses the Rainbow operatives to be involved in the mission, organizes them into color-coded teams, and selects their weapons, equipment, and uniforms. Operatives are categorized into five classes based on their skill specializations: Assault, Demolitions, Electronics, Recon, and Sniper. The vast majority of operatives are named characters with their own backstories and skillsets, but generic \"reserves\" are also available for each class should players wish to avoid risking named operatives, although they have greatly reduced skills. In the planning stage, the player is shown a map of the area of operations to set team orders, such as AI pathing, team \"go\" codes to hold until ordered, where AI operatives will deploy equipment such as flashbangs or door breaching charges, and rules of engagement; alternatively, the player can skip this by choosing to follow a preset plan instead.\nDuring gameplay, the player directly controls a team leader, and can use their weapons and equipment, manually lead their team, and see stats for the controlled operative and their team on the HUD. The player can take control of any alive team leader at will. Operatives and teams not under player control follow the orders given to them in the planning stage. Injured or fatigued operatives require time off after a mission to recover (they can still be used, just with lower health or reduced skills), while deceased operatives are permanently lost and cannot be used for the rest of the campaign playthrough, forcing players to plan carefully to avoid casualties.\nOnline multiplayer for the PC version was available on the MPlayer.com and Zone.com services. Multiplayer modes include cooperative modes, deathmatch, and team deathmatch, among others. Most other console ports lack multiplayer, though the Nintendo 64 port includes a two-player split-screen cooperative mode.\nMost versions of \"Rainbow Six\" have considerable differences. The PlayStation port was developed by Rebellion and features visible weapons in first person, entirely new mission layouts, and a smaller team size (4, opposed to 8 in other versions). The Nintendo 64 port has a simpler HUD design and completely reorganized missions, including some from \"Eagle Watch\". The Game Boy Color port is the most notable example, having radically different gameplay and presentation due to the platform's technical limitations: gameplay is slowed and simplified, crossfire is removed, and the 3D graphics from other releases are replaced by a 2.5D top-down perspective.\nPlot.\nIn 1999, in response to a post-Cold War rise in terrorism, the world's special forces units, police tactical units, and intelligence agencies form \"Rainbow\", a covert international counterterrorist organization led by John Clark.\nIn 2000, Rainbow responds to a series of terrorist attacks linked to the Phoenix Group eco-terrorist organization. Rainbow's operations against Phoenix are assisted by John Brightling, chairman of the powerful biotechnology corporation Horizon Inc., whose facilities are frequently targeted by Phoenix; Anne Lang, the Science Advisor to the President of the United States and an acquaintance of Brightling; and Catherine Winston, a biological expert working with Horizon who is rescued by Rainbow following an attack in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.\nAfter a raid on a Phoenix compound in Idaho that reveals unethical human experimentation, Rainbow learns the Phoenix Group is a front for Horizon. Viewing humanity as an environmentally destructive \"disease\", Brightling plans to exterminate most of humanity using a highly contagious manmade strain of the Ebola virus called \"Brahma\", sparing only his chosen few (including Lang), who will rebuild Earth into a scientific environmental utopia. To achieve this, Brightling has engineered terrorist attacks to exploit heightened terrorism concerns and secure a contract for his private security firm Global Security at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney. Global Security's personnel, led by William Hendrickson, will then release Brahma at the Olympics through Stadium Australia's cooling system, spreading the virus worldwide when the athletes and spectators return home.\nAfter gathering intelligence and rescuing Winston from a last-ditch attempt to silence her, Rainbow apprehends Lang and Hendrickson and prevents Brahma's release at the Olympic Village, foiling Brightling's plans. Brightling and his collaborators flee to their Horizon Ark facility in the Amazon rainforest, where they planned to weather out the Brahma pandemic. Rainbow assaults the Ark, neutralizes Brightling's collaborators, and takes Brightling into custody.\nDevelopment.\nThe idea of the game that would become \"Rainbow Six\" originated from early concepts Red Storm Entertainment had conceived following the company's formation in 1996. Selected from around 100 other ideas, the original concept, titled \"HRT\", followed the FBI Hostage Rescue Team rescuing hostages from criminals and terrorists. \"HRT\" was gradually expanded in scope with the addition of covert operations and an international setting, and the game was rechristened \"Black Ops\". With the initial FBI HRT concept dropped and gameplay branching away from just hostage rescue, multiple alternate settings were proposed for \"Black Ops\"\u2014including World War II, 1960s spy fiction-esque Cold War espionage, the near future, and a dystopian antihero-centered story called \"Jackbooted Thugs\"\u2014before finally settling on contemporary counterterrorism. Red Storm CEO Doug Littlejohns, a former Royal Navy submarine commander and a close friend of Tom Clancy, did not want to develop an arcade shooter with \"mindless violence\", but also did not want a \"boring\" slow-paced strategy game, so \"Black Ops\" was designed to focus on realism and action, with a strong emphasis on planning and strategy. Lead game designer Brian Upton, recalling \"Rainbow Six\"'s development process in the May 1999 issue of \"Game Developer\", described the game's design philosophy from the initial concept:We knew from the start that we wanted to capture the excitement of movies such as and \"The Dirty Dozen\" \u2014 the thrill of watching a team of skilled specialists pull off an operation with clockwork precision. We also knew that we wanted it to be an action game with a strong strategic component \u2014 a realistic shooter that would be fun to play even without a \"Quake\" player's twitch reflexes.\"Rainbow Six\"\u2014both the game and the novel\u2014originated from a discussion between Littlejohns and Clancy during a Red Storm company outing in 1996, when Littlejohns mentioned \"Black Ops\". When Clancy mentioned that he was writing his own novel about a hostage rescue unit, their conversation led to Littlejohns noting the protracted diplomatic delays in authorizing a foreign counterterrorist unit's deployment overseas, and he suggested the formation of a permanent counterterrorist unit that already had authorization to deploy internationally. The name \"Rainbow\" came from the term \"Rainbow nation\", coined by Desmond Tutu to describe post-apartheid South Africa under Nelson Mandela's presidency. \"Six\" came from the American rank code for captain (O-6); though John Clark would more accurately be described as a major general (O-8), \"Rainbow Six\" read better than \"Rainbow Eight\". Upton objected to the addition of \"Six\", believing having a number at the end of the title would affect a potential sequel, but he was overruled.\nFollowing the game's development doctrine of realism, lead level designer John Sonedecker designed each level to be as accurate and realistic to real-world architecture as possible, noting that the presence of unusual design elements seen in other less-realistic shooters, such as unnecessarily large doorways or building layouts seemingly designed for combat, would ruin the player's immersion and affect gameplay. The development team had access to counterterrorism experts, military trainers, and technical consultants, and used their advice to ensure authenticity and streamline development by cutting mechanics deemed unrealistic or unnecessary, such as jumping. These technical advisors also provided motion capture for character animations.\nBy 1997, the game was very behind on schedule, and the developers began to crunch. Many developers slept in a spare room of the office, Upton's mental health deteriorated to the point that he had a nervous breakdown that prompted company restructuring to reduce his workload, and network programmer Dave Weinstein (hired as part of the aforementioned company restructuring) was once stopped by police on suspicion of driving under the influence due to his severe exhaustion from crunch. Clancy's involvement in development was \"minimal\", only sending Red Storm an early manuscript of the novel to work plot details into the game (hence why the game's plot features different characters and a slightly different storyline). Clancy would insist the developers add features his experts claimed were realistic, such as the fictional heartbeat sensor used in the novel that functions as a radar-like equipment item in-game. In November 1997, the developers realized the game was becoming too demanding, only having single-digit frame rates on high-end devices, so a massive two-month overhaul was ordered. Despite these setbacks, development managed to progress relatively smoothly overall, and a gameplay demonstration at E3 1998 that unintentionally displayed AI teammates rescuing hostages by themselves boosted the game's publicity ahead of release.\nSeveral weeks prior to the game's release on PC, early copies of the game were leaked onto online piracy websites. The users that uploaded the game files reportedly \"took credit for 'cracking' a game with no copy protection in it\", frustrating the developers; Weinstein recalled going on a profanity-laden rant on the topic in Red Storm's office, only to be pulled aside by Littlejohns for his volume, having been heard three offices away.\nThe Nintendo 64, PlayStation, Mac OS, Game Boy Color, and Dreamcast releases of the game were each developed by separate companies: Saffire for the N64, Rebellion Developments for the PS1, Varcon Systems for Mac OS, Crawfish Interactive for the GBC, and Pipe Dream Interactive for the Dreamcast. Saffire struggled to simplify \"Rainbow Six\"'s control scheme to suit the Nintendo 64 controller and ultimately had to completely remake the game so it would be able to run without frame rate dips on the N64. Crawfish opted to give the Game Boy Color port a unique game style, as they felt other game styles would not suit \"Rainbow Six\"'s gameplay and features on the platform. The release of Pipe Dream's Dreamcast port was delayed by eight months.\nThe game's box art, featuring a Rainbow operative armed with a Heckler &amp; Koch USP, was not created for the game and is actually a modified 1992 photograph of Heckler &amp; Koch USA sales executive John T. Meyer. The original image was used to promote the American launch of the USP in 1993. Heckler &amp; Koch permitted the use of the image for the game and sent firearms instructors to assist with motion capture.\nRelease.\n\"Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six\" was released for Windows on August 21, 1998, in North America and on October 23, 1998, in Europe. In North America, the game was released by Red Storm Entertainment, with SouthPeak Games handling distribution duties. Take-Two Interactive published the game in Europe. The Nintendo 64 port was released in North America on November 17, 1999, and in the United Kingdom one month later on December 10. The PlayStation conversion was released in the United Kingdom on November 19, and in North America on November 23. A port for Mac OS was released on December 1, 1999. A distinct version of the game was released for Game Boy Color in North America April 12, 2000, and in the United Kingdom on November 10, 2000. The Dreamcast port was delayed several times before being released. Initially expected to be released on September 9, 1999, as a launch title for the system, it was delayed due to the difficulties of working with Windows CE during development. The port was initially delayed to October 19, 1999, before being postponed a month again. It then went gold on November 30, 1999, with an expected release date of December 9, and was released five months later on May 3, 2000, in North America by Majesco Sales' publishing label Pipe Dream Interactive, and on February 2, 2001, in the United Kingdom by German publisher Swing! Entertainment.\nAfter the release of the game, Tom Clancy offered to sign copies of the game for Red Storm employees, despite being relatively uninvolved in development, annoying several developers; as Upton opined, \"Even though it had his name on the box, it wasn't his game. It was our game. He should have been asking us to sign a copy for him!\"\nThe PAL PlayStation port of the game was one of 20 games preloaded on the PlayStation Classic (excluding the Japan, Taiwan, and Hong Kong releases), released on December 3, 2018.\n\"Rainbow Six Mission Pack: Eagle Watch\".\n\"Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six Mission Pack: Eagle Watch\" is an expansion pack of the original game, released exclusively for Windows in North America on January 26, 1999, and in Europe in February 1999. It adds five new missions, four new operatives from the \"Rainbow Six\" novel, three new weapons, and new multiplayer modes. The new missions, unrelated to each other or the original campaign, take place in 2001 and follow Rainbow's high-profile operations in landmark locations around the world, namely the \"Buran\" spaceplane in Russia, the Taj Mahal in India, the Forbidden City in China, the Palace of Westminster in the United Kingdom, and the Capitol in the United States. The expansion was packaged with the original game as \"Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Gold Pack Edition\" when it was released in 1999 in North America in June and in the United Kingdom in September. The Nintendo 64 port includes some of the missions from \"Eagle Watch\", and the Dreamcast port contains all of them.\nReception.\n\"Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six\" was met with mostly positive reviews on PC, though the console ports received relatively lower ratings. Review aggregator Metacritic displays a score of 85 out of 100 for the PC version. Video game review aggregator GameRankings displays scores of 82% for PC, 74% for the Nintendo 64, 48% for the PlayStation, 54% for the Game Boy Color, and 73% for the Dreamcast.\nOverall gameplay was positively received. The game's difficulty and playstyle differences to contemporary shooters such as \"Quake II\" and \"GoldenEye 007\" were highlighted by multiple reviewers, as was the detailed planning stage. Trent C. Ward, reviewing the PC version for \"IGN\", praised the complexities of the planning stage, realistic damage, competent AI, and freedom to complete missions from multiple approaches, saying it was \"unlike any first-person shooter yet made.\" \"PC Gamer US\" called the game \"an enthralling package loaded to the brim with tense, nail-biting gameplay, slick technology, and excellent replayability\" and \"undoubtedly one of the most original and best games of the year.\" Jeremy Dunham of \"IGN\", reviewing the Dreamcast port, praised the game's change in pace, saying, \"Long exposed to mindless romps and pointless first-person gore-fest clones, the ability to actually think and THEN destroy puts a big ol' smile on my face.\" \"Push Square\"'s Sam Brooke, reviewing the PlayStation port in a 2018 retrospective, enjoyed the sense of accomplishment from completing challenging missions properly, calling it \"a trailblazer in its genre\". Alan Dunkin of \"GameSpot\" noted the game could be difficult, but to the point of sometimes being frustrating.\nSeveral reviews highlighted the game's realism and immersion. Dunkin stated \"the immersive feeling of \"Rainbow Six\" is perhaps one of the best seen in a game.\" Christian Nutt, reviewing the Nintendo 64 port for \"GameSpot\", said of \"Rainbow Six\", \"realism is the order of the day ... this game does deliver a military simulation on a very personal level.\" \"Next Generation\" commended the game's attempts at realism, but noted flaws in presentation such as the odd manner in which characters leaned around corners.\nMultiplayer was singled out for praise, especially for the PC version. Ward praised the multiplayer functionality and its addictiveness, adding that \"[f]or weeks now, the offices here have literally shut down as teams from \"IGN-PC\", \"PC Gamer\" and \"PC Accelerator\" stop what they're doing to take each other on in a team deathmatch, or to cooperate on a difficult mission.\" Dunkin opined that the multiplayer \"saves the game\" from its other flaws. \"PC Gamer US\" favorably described the multiplayer functionality as \"tense and exciting\", but suggested the quick time-to-kill could make smaller matches simple and boring. Peter Olafson of \"GamePro\" said the multiplayer was \"a nice-looking shooter\" but criticized lag issues.\nAI issues and glitches were subject to considerable criticism. Raphael Liberatore, reviewing the game for \"Computer Gaming World\", criticized \"faulty AI and game-killing bugs\" for impeding \"what could have been a benchmark game\u2014a game troubled by what it could have been.\" Olafson singled out the lack of variation in AI behavior, with enemies idling and teammates only moving in single-file lines. Brooke criticized AI pathfinding through narrow corridors, recounting one mission where it took longer to extract a hostage than it did to find them in the first place. Ward also recalled experiencing several glitches and instances of teammates obstructing him, but opined such issues could easily be overlooked during gameplay.\nConsole ports.\nThe Nintendo 64 port was well-received by most reviewers. Aaron Boulding of \"IGN\" said the only issue with the port was the shortened campaign, but Nutt considered the short length to be acceptable, viewing the multiple difficulty levels and the co-op mode as making up for it. \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" highlighted the port's detailed graphics yet smooth framerate as impressive for the Nintendo 64, especially without having to resort to render fog. Mike Wolf of \"Next Generation\" gave it three stars out of five, stating that though it was \"a fantastic game\", its flaws meant it was \"not a must-have\". In a 2018 retrospective, \"N64 Today\" said the port still stood up 20 years after its release, but noted noticeable graphical issues, especially if not played on a CRT display.\nThe PlayStation port was widely panned as inferior to other versions. \"Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine\" gave it one star out of five. Nutt lambasted it as \"awkward\" and \"aesthetically bankrupt\", noting its apparent abandonment of the team leadership aspect, deeming it \"an uninspired FPS with some weird hostage-saving minigame tacked on.\" \"IGN\"'s Matt White criticized its unusually poor graphics, and called it \"a mighty fine example for impressionable young developers of how not to handle a port.\" Brooke called the PlayStation port \"janky\" and \"unpolished\", but gave it credit for the game's influence.\nThe Game Boy Color version received mixed reviews. \"IGN\"'s Craig Harris criticized it for removing risk factors such as enemy effectiveness and crossfire, thus making most planning and tactics worthless, though he commended Crawfish Interactive's ambition in adapting a three-dimensional shooter to a two-dimensional handheld. Frank Provo of \"GameSpot\" criticized AI issues, gameplay repetition, and noticeable reuse of sprites and sounds, but still considered it a faithful version for what it was.\nThe Dreamcast port was very well-received. Garrett Kenyon of \"Next Generation\" gave it four stars out of five, calling it \"[a]n impressive PC translation that Dreamcast owners should certainly consider owning.\" Erik Wolpaw, reviewing the Dreamcast port for \"GameSpot\", stated it was a faithful port of the PC game and \"as deep and challenging as action games get\", though he criticized its long loading times, lack of multiplayer, and unusually complex method of issuing commands\u2014over 35 exist, but require specific combinations of joystick and button inputs. Dunham had the same criticisms, noting these issues still existed in the final release despite an eight-month delay in the port's development, but nonetheless deemed it \"one of the deepest, most realistic games to inhabit the Dreamcast so far.\"\n\"Eagle Watch\".\nMike Lohrey of \"IGN\" reviewed the \"Eagle Watch\" expansion, praising its new levels and additions but criticizing AI awareness issues and inconsistent damage mechanics compared to the original game. Liberatore, who had previously panned the original game, rated \"Eagle Watch\" 4.5 out of 5, stating it \"vastly improved the original, AI included, making \"R6\" the standout title it deserves to be.\"\nAccolades.\nThe Academy of Interactive Arts &amp; Sciences nominated \"Rainbow Six\" for \"PC Action Game of the Year\" during the 2nd Annual Interactive Achievement Awards, but it lost to \"Half-Life\". \"Rainbow Six\" was a finalist for \"Computer Gaming World\"'s 1998 \"Best Action\" award, which ultimately went to \"Battlezone\". The editors wrote that \"Rainbow Six\" \"deftly mixed strategic planning with nail-biting action as it brought the world of counterterrorist operations to life.\" \"PC Gamer US\" named \"Rainbow Six\" the best action game of 1998. CNN, in partnership with Games.net, named \"Rainbow Six\" one of the \"top 25 game downloads of 1998\".\nSales.\nIn the United States, \"Rainbow Six\"'s Windows release sold 218,183 copies during 1998, accounting for $8.86 million in revenue that year. The PC version's \"Gold Edition\" release sold another 321,340 copies in the United States during 1999, and was the country's 12th best-selling computer game that year. According to \"Gamasutra\", \"Rainbow Six\" and \"Rainbow Six: Rogue Spear\" together sold 450,000 copies \"during the first half of the 2001/2002 fiscal year\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49094", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49094", "title": "Tactical Shooter", "text": ""}
{"id": "49096", "revid": "43682176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49096", "title": "Danny Kass", "text": "American snowboarder\nDaniel Kass (born September 21, 1982) is an American professional snowboarder who has competed at the Olympic level. In Snowboarding at the 2002 Winter Olympics, Kass won silver in the Men's Halfpipe.\nCareer.\nKass was born in Pompton Plains, New Jersey. He was raised in the Scenic Lakes section of Vernon Township, New Jersey, and attended Vernon Township High School. He began snowboarding in the area at the age of twelve. His home slopes are what are now known as Hidden Valley and Mountain Creek ski resorts, both located in the mountains of Vernon Township and Highland Lakes. After several years of shredding around the Mid-Atlantic States, Kass entered the Okemo Mountain School in Vermont. In 2001, Kass broke out into what has become one of the most successful contest streaks in snowboarding with four US Open Championships, seven Winter X Games medals and two Olympic silver medals.\nDuring the winter of 2006, Kass fought his way back from a slow start in the US Grand Prix Circuit to qualify for the Olympics in Torino for the second time in a row. Kass took home another silver medal with back-to-back 1080s and his signature smooth style.\nKass and his brother Matt Kass were the founders of Grenade Gloves, which specializes in snowboarding gloves, accessories, and other extreme sporting gear.\nKass is one of the stars of \"The Adventures of Danny and The Dingo\" on Fuel TV. He also has a podcast with Luke \"The Dingo\" Trembath on the Monster Energy's YouTube channel, called \"Unleashed\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49098", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49098", "title": "City planning", "text": ""}
{"id": "49101", "revid": "267668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49101", "title": "Chinese chess", "text": ""}
{"id": "49102", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49102", "title": "Japanese chess", "text": ""}
{"id": "49104", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49104", "title": "University of Minnesota System", "text": "Public university system in Minnesota\nThe University of Minnesota System is a public university system with five campuses spread across the U.S. state of Minnesota.\nThe university system's campuses are in the Twin Cities, Crookston, Duluth, Morris, and Rochester. The university also operates several research facilities around the state, including some large parcels of land. The Twin Cities, Crookston, Duluth, Morris and Rochester campuses are accredited by the Higher Learning Commission (HLC). The other public system of higher education in the state is the larger Minnesota State Colleges and Universities system (Minnesota State System, previously MnSCU).\nThe university system receives annual funding from the State of Minnesota.\nCampuses.\nThe flagship Twin Cities campus is the largest in the system, with a total enrollment of 50,943 students (undergraduate, graduate, professional, and non-degree included) in fall 2018. In the same year Crookston had 2,810, Duluth had 11,040, Morris had 1,554, and Rochester had 533, bringing the system-wide total to 66,880.\nThe colors of the university, which are used system-wide, are maroon and gold.\nTwin Cities.\nThe University of Minnesota - Twin Cities (UMTC) is the largest with locations in Minneapolis and neighboring Saint Paul (actually, the suburb of Falcon Heights). The locations are connected via a dedicated bus transitway. The buildings on each campus are connected by a series of tunnels and above-ground skyways called The Gopher Way. The campus is the oldest and largest in the system and has the ninth-largest main campus student body in the United States, with 52,376 students at the start of the 2021\u201322 academic year.\nThe Minneapolis portion is the largest and has a number of colleges dedicated to a variety of subjects. The Twin Cities campus located in Minneapolis can be further subdivided into the East Bank (main portion) and West Bank, as the Mississippi River flows through it. Students become well-acquainted with the double-decker Washington Avenue Bridge that connects the two sections. There are a number of distinguished graduate and professional schools on the Minneapolis campus, notably the College of Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota Law School, Medical School, Carlson School of Management, School of Public Health, and Hubert H. Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs. In addition, Minneapolis houses many research facilities such as The Cancer Center.\nThe Twin Cities campus located in St Paul is home to the University of Minnesota College of Food, Agricultural and Natural Resource Sciences, University of Minnesota College of Design, and University of Minnesota College of Biological Sciences programs, the University of Minnesota School of Social Work, the College of Veterinary Medicine, and a variety of additional programs and student services. The Bell Museum of Natural History is also located on the campus in St. Paul.\nThe mascot for the Twin Cities campus is Goldy Gopher, and the sports teams are called the Minnesota Golden Gophers. They participate in the NCAA's Division I and the football team participates in the Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS). The majority of the teams compete in the Big Ten Conference, however, the women's hockey program competes in the Western Collegiate Hockey Association.\nAmong the graduates from this campus are two former U.S. Vice Presidents, Hubert Humphrey and Walter Mondale, former NAACP president Roy Wilkins, British Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg, several Nobel Prize winners, several athletes such as Ric Flair, Kevin McHale, Dave Winfield, Patty Berg, Brock Lesnar, Curt Hennig, Shelton Benjamin, Bobby Jackson of the NBA, and composer Yanni. Folksinger Bob Dylan famously attended the University and was a part of its thriving \"West Bank\" music scene, but did not graduate. A wide variety of medical and technological innovations have taken place there as well. For instance, the Internet Gopher protocol was created at the Twin Cities campus. A predecessor of sorts to the World Wide Web, it was named after the school mascot.\nCampus media includes the \"Minnesota Daily\" newspaper, \"The Wake Student Magazine\", and 770 Radio K (KUOM), an AM radio station that is probably the oldest in the state.\nCrookston.\nThe University of Minnesota Crookston (UMC) joined the university system in 1966. At that time it was known as the University of Minnesota Technical Institute at Crookston. Since 1993 the Crookston campus has offered bachelor's degrees, and it has grown to be a more comprehensive regional college campus. It is known for its focus on experiential learning and technology, and through fees each student is provided a laptop computer as part of their experience. The campus mascot is Regal the Eagle, and the athletics teams are known as the Golden Eagles.\nDuluth.\nThe University of Minnesota Duluth (UMD) became part of the system in 1947, though the campus has a history stretching back to 1895 when it was formed as the Normal School at Duluth. \nIts men's hockey program competes in the National Collegiate Hockey Conference and its women's hockey program competes in the Western Collegiate Hockey Association. UMD baseball, men's and women's basketball, men's and women's cross country, football, men's and women's track and field, soccer, softball, tennis, and volleyball are Division II teams. Their teams are nicknamed Bulldogs. and their mascot is Champ.\nAmong the graduates from UMD are former Lieutenant Governor of Minnesota Yvonne Prettner Solon, former Duluth mayor Emily Larson, and former Duluth mayor Don Ness. Brian Kobilka received the 2012 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. UMD has produced numerous professional hockey players including John Harrington and Mark Pavelich from the 1980 Miracle on Ice Olympic hockey team, and NHL Hall of Famer Brett Hull.\nCampus media includes \"The Bark\" newspaper; until 2021, UMD also owned radio station KUMD-FM (now WDSE-FM).\nMorris.\nThe University of Minnesota Morris (UMM) joined the system in 1960. UMN Morris is a public liberal arts college.\nThe campus offers 34 majors, 35 minors, and 13 licensure areas, along with the option to create one's own major. The student-to-faculty ratio is 13:1, and students are able to engage in undergraduate research and internships with faculty members. One in five students also participates in NCAA Division III Intercollegiate Athletics as a Cougar athlete.\nWith tuition a quarter of Minnesota's most expensive private school and 96% of incoming students receiving financial aid, UMN Morris students graduate with the lowest student loan debt in the University of Minnesota system.\nRochester.\nThe University of Minnesota Rochester (UMR) is the public undergraduate health sciences university. UMR is the newest campus of the University of Minnesota system, having been formally established in December 2006 (although the University of Minnesota has offered classes in Rochester as a satellite site since as early as 1966).\nUMR has no NCAA athletic teams, but it does have a mascot, the Rochester Raptor.\nUMR, located in University Square in downtown Rochester, is neighbor to world-renowned Mayo Clinic. \nPrograms offered:\nWaseca.\nThe Waseca campus opened in 1971 and closed in 1992. Their mascot was \"Ramus\" the ram. During its operation, it maintained a college cable-FM radio station with the call letters KUMW. Campus buildings became part of a low-security federal prison for women (see Federal Correctional Institution, Waseca). The University still operates an agricultural outreach program in the city.\nHistory.\nThe University of Minnesota was founded in Minneapolis in 1851 as a college preparatory school, seven years prior to Minnesota's statehood. As such, the University of Minnesota enjoys much autonomy from other operations of the state government. The school was closed during the American Civil War, but reopened in 1867. Minneapolis businessman John Sargent Pillsbury is known today as the \"Father of the University\", and aided the campus through financial troubles as a regent, state senator, and governor. The Morrill Land Grant Colleges Act also helped provide funding for the University of Minnesota.\nIn 1869 the school reorganized and became an institution of higher education. William Watts Folwell served as the University of Minnesota's first president. An official residence known as Eastcliff has been used by six university presidents since 1958. The 20-room house, originally built by lumber baron Edward Brooks, Sr., was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2000.\nDuring the traditional autumn through spring year, classes are not held on Thanksgiving Day or the Friday after, and the school traditionally has an extended break covering Christmas and New Year's Day. Classes don't resume in January until the day after Martin Luther King, Jr. Day. A week-long spring break occurs after the eighth week of the spring term, which sometimes coincides with Easter.\nSources of funding.\nAs of 2007, the University of Minnesota maintained an endowment of $2.8 billion. Also, as a public university, the system received an estimated $641 million from the State of Minnesota. The system's total budget for FY 2006 was $2.36 billion.\nAdditional properties.\nThere are several other research and outreach centers across the state operated by the University of Minnesota - Twin Cities or by the university system. As of September 2004, these areas plus the campuses are spread across 28,300\u00a0acres (44\u00a0miles\u00b2 or 115\u00a0km2). Other areas owned by the state and university bring this up to a total of 57,200\u00a0 acres (89\u00a0miles\u00b2 or 231\u00a0km2)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49105", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49105", "title": "Vacuum cleaner", "text": "Device that sucks up dirt from a surface\nA vacuum cleaner, also known simply as a vacuum (or a hoover in the UK), is a device that uses suction, and often agitation, in order to remove dirt and other debris from carpets, hard floors, and other surfaces.\nThe dirt is collected into a dust bag or a plastic bin. Vacuum cleaners, which are used in homes as well as in commercial settings, exist in a variety of sizes and types, including stick vacuums, handheld vacuums, upright vacuums, and canister vacuums. Specialized shop vacuums can be used to clean both solid debris and liquids.\nName.\nAlthough \"vacuum cleaner\" and the short form \"vacuum\" are neutral names, in some countries (UK, Ireland) \" hoover\" is used instead as a genericized trademark, and as a verb. The name comes from the Hoover Company, one of the first and most influential companies in the development of the device. In New Zealand, particularly the Southland region, it is sometimes called a \"lux\", likewise a genericized trademark and used as a verb. The device is also sometimes called a \"sweeper\" although the same term also refers to a carpet sweeper, a similar invention.\nHistory.\nThe vacuum cleaner evolved from the carpet sweeper via manual vacuum cleaners. The first manual models, using bellows, were developed in the 1860s, and the first motorized designs appeared at the turn of the 20th century, with the first decade being the boom decade.\nManual vacuums.\nIn 1860, a manual vacuum cleaner was invented by Daniel Hess of West Union, Iowa. Called a \"carpet sweeper,\" it gathered dust with a rotating brush and had bellows for generating suction.\nAnother early model was the \"Whirlwind\", invented in Chicago in 1868 by Ives W. McGaffey. The bulky device worked with a belt-driven fan cranked by hand that made it awkward to operate, although it was commercially marketed with mixed success.\nA similar model was constructed by Melville R. Bissell of Grand Rapids, Michigan in 1876, who also manufactured carpet sweepers. The company later added portable vacuum cleaners to its line of cleaning tools.\nPowered vacuum cleaners.\nThe end of the 19th century saw the introduction of powered cleaners, although early types used some variation of blowing air to clean instead of suction. One appeared in 1898 when John S. Thurman of St. Louis, Missouri, submitted a patent (U.S. No. 634,042) for a \"pneumatic carpet renovator\" which blew dust into a receptacle. Thurman's system, powered by an internal combustion engine, traveled to the customer's residence on a horse-drawn wagon as part of a door-to-door cleaning service. Corrine Dufour of Savannah, Georgia, received two patents in 1899 and 1900 for another blown-air system that seems to have featured the first use of an electric motor.\nIn 1901, powered vacuum cleaners using suction were invented independently by British engineer Hubert Cecil Booth and American inventor David T. Kenney. Booth also may have coined the word \"vacuum cleaner\". Booth's horse-drawn combustion-engine-powered \"Puffing Billy\", maybe derived from Thurman's blown-air design, relied upon just suction with air pumped through a cloth filter and was offered as part of his cleaning services. Kenney's was a stationary steam-engine-powered system with pipes and hoses reaching into all parts of the building.\nDomestic vacuum cleaner.\nThe first vacuum-cleaning device to be portable and marketed at the domestic market was built in 1905 by Walter Griffiths, a manufacturer in Birmingham, England. His \"Griffith's Improved Vacuum Apparatus for Removing Dust from Carpets\" resembled modern-day cleaners; it was portable, easy to store, and powered by \"any one person (such as the ordinary domestic servant)\", who would have the task of compressing a bellows-like contraption to suck up dust through a removable, flexible pipe, to which a variety of shaped nozzles could be attached.\nIn 1906, James B. Kirby developed his first of many vacuums called the \"Domestic Cyclone\". It used water for dirt separation. Later revisions became known as the Kirby Vacuum Cleaner. The Cleveland, Ohio factory was built in 1916 and remains open currently, and all Kirby vacuum cleaners are manufactured in the United States.\nIn 1907 department store janitor James Murray Spangler (1848\u20131915) of Canton, Ohio, invented the first portable electric vacuum cleaner, obtaining a patent for the Electric Suction Sweeper on 2 June 1908. In addition to suction from an electric fan that blew the dirt and dust into a soap box and one of his wife's pillowcases, Spangler's design utilized a rotating brush to loosen debris. Unable to produce the design himself due to lack of funding, he sold the patent in 1908 to local leather goods manufacturer William Henry Hoover (1849\u20131932), who had Spangler's machine redesigned with a steel casing, casters, and attachments, founding the company that in 1922 was renamed the Hoover Company. Their first vacuum was the 1908 Model O, which sold for $60 ($ in 2024 dollars). Subsequent innovations included the beater bar in 1919 (\"It beats as it sweeps as it cleans\"), disposal filter bags in the 1920s, and an upright vacuum cleaner in 1926.\nIn Continental Europe, the Fisker and Nielsen company in Denmark was the first to sell vacuum cleaners in 1910. The design weighed just and could be operated by a single person. The Swedish company Electrolux launched their Model V in 1921 with the innovation of being able to lie on the floor on two thin metal runners. In the 1930s the German company Vorwerk started marketing vacuum cleaners of their own design which they sold through direct sales.\nPost-Second World War.\nFor many years after their introduction, vacuum cleaners remained a luxury item, but after the Second World War, they became common among the middle classes. Vacuums tend to be more common in Western countries, because in most other parts of the world, wall-to-wall carpeting is uncommon and homes have tile or hardwood floors, which are easily swept, wiped or mopped manually without power assist.\nThe last decades of the 20th century saw the more widespread use of technologies developed earlier, including filterless cyclonic dirt separation, central vacuum systems, and rechargeable hand-held vacuums. In addition, miniaturized computer technology and improved batteries allowed the development of a new type of machine\u2014the autonomous robotic vacuum cleaner. In 1997, Electrolux of Sweden demonstrated the Electrolux Trilobite, the first autonomous cordless robotic vacuum cleaner on the BBC-TV program \"Tomorrow's World\", and introduced it to the consumer market in 2001.\nModern configurations.\nA wide variety of technologies, designs, and configurations are available for both domestic and commercial cleaning jobs.\nUpright.\nUpright vacuum cleaners were not only popular in the US, UK, and numerous Commonwealth countries, but also in some Continental European countries like Germany (where the \u2033Kobold\u2033 was introduced by Vorwerk). They take the form of a cleaning head, onto which a handle and bag are attached. Upright designs generally employ a rotating brushroll or beater bar, which removes dirt through a combination of sweeping and vibration. There are two types of upright vacuums; dirty-air/direct fan (found mostly on commercial vacuums), or clean-air/fan-bypass (found on most of today's domestic vacuums).\nThe older of the two designs, direct-fan cleaners have a large impeller (fan) mounted close to the suction opening, through which the dirt passes directly, before being blown into a bag. The motor is often cooled by a separate cooling fan. Because of their large-bladed fans, and comparatively short airpaths, direct-fan cleaners create a very efficient airflow from a low amount of power, and make effective carpet cleaners. Their \"above-floor\" cleaning power is less efficient, since the airflow is lost when it passes through a long hose, and the fan has been optimized for airflow volume and not suction.\nFan-bypass uprights have their motor mounted after the filter bag. Dust is removed from the airstream by the bag, and usually a filter, before it passes through the fan. The fans are smaller, and are usually a combination of several moving and stationary turbines working in sequence to boost power. The motor is cooled by the airstream passing through it. Fan-bypass vacuums are good for both carpet and above-floor cleaning, since their suction does not significantly diminish over the distance of a hose, as it does in direct-fan cleaners. However, their air-paths are much less efficient, and can require more than twice as much power as direct-fan cleaners to achieve the same results.\nThe most common upright vacuum cleaners use a drive-belt powered by the suction motor to rotate the brush-roll. However, a more common design of dual motor upright is available. In these cleaners, the suction is provided via a large motor, while the brushroll is powered by a separate, smaller motor, which does not create any suction. The brush-roll motor can sometimes be switched off, so hard floors can be cleaned without the brush-roll scattering the dirt. It may also have an automatic cut-off feature which shuts the motor off if the brush-roll becomes jammed, protecting it from damage.\nCanister.\nCanister models (in the UK also often called cylinder models) dominate the European market. They have the motor and dust collectors (using a bag or bagless) in a separate unit, usually mounted on wheels, which is connected to the vacuum head by a flexible hose. Their main advantage is flexibility, as the user can attach different heads for different tasks, and maneuverability (the head can reach under furniture and makes it very easy to vacuum stairs and vertical surfaces). Many cylinder models have power heads as standard or add-on equipment containing the same sort of mechanical beaters as in upright units, making them as efficient on carpets as upright models. Such beaters are driven by a separate electric motor or a turbine which uses the suction power to spin the brushroll via a drive belt.\nDrum.\nDrum or shop vac models are essentially heavy-duty industrial versions of cylinder vacuum cleaners, where the canister consists of a large vertically positioned drum which can be stationary or on wheels. Smaller versions, for use in garages or small workshops, are usually electrically powered. Larger models, which can store over , are often hooked up to compressed air, utilizing the Venturi effect to produce a partial vacuum. Built-in dust collection systems are also used in many workshops.\nWet/dry.\nWet or wet/dry vacuum cleaners are a specialized form of cylinder/drum models that can be used to clean up wet or liquid spills. They are generally designed to be used both indoors and outdoors and to accommodate both wet and dry debris; some are also equipped with an exhaust port or detachable blower for reversing the airflow, a useful function for everything from clearing a clogged hose to blowing dust into a corner for easy collection.\nShop vacs are able to collect large, bulky or otherwise inconvenient material that would damage or foul household vacuum cleaners, like sawdust, swarf, and liquids.\nThey use wide hoses, which open directly into the collection chamber (usually a bucket-like cylinder constituting the body of the vacuum). As the airstream enters the larger volume, its flow slows down, allowing the material to drop into the chamber before air is sucked out through the filter and to the vacuum's exhaust.\nShop vacs' performance can be evaluated by a number of metrics. Commonly used ones include the motor's rating (using power measurements like watts or horsepower), the vacuum's ability to develop suction (using pressure measurements like inches of water), and total airflow through the system (using volume rate measurements like cubic feet per minute).\nRelated to the wet vacuum is the extraction vacuum cleaner used mainly in hot water extraction, a method of cleaning hard-to-move pieces of fabric like carpets. These machines are able to spray hot soapy water and then suck it back out of the fabric, removing dirt in the process.\nWet vacuum cleaners have been modified by end users, adding an internally mounted sump pump for continuous removal of liquids without having to stop to empty the tank.\nPneumatic.\nPneumatic or pneumatic wet/dry vacuum cleaners are a specialized form of wet/dry models that hook up to compressed air. They commonly can accommodate both wet and dry soilage, a useful feature in industrial plants and manufacturing facilities.\nBackpack.\nBackpack vacuum cleaners are commonly used for commercial cleaning: they allow the user to move rapidly about a large area. They are essentially small canister vacuums strapped onto the user's back.\nHand-held.\nLightweight hand-held vacuum cleaners, either powered from rechargeable batteries or mains power, are also popular for cleaning up smaller spills. Frequently seen examples include the Black &amp; Decker DustBuster, which was introduced in 1979, and numerous handheld models by Dirt Devil, which were first introduced in 1984. Some battery-powered handheld vacuums are wet/dry rated; the appliance must be partially disassembled and cleaned after picking up wet materials to avoid developing unpleasant odors.\nPile lifter.\nA pile lifter or pile brush is a vacuum cleaner-like device used in the manufacture of carpets as well as in heavy-duty carpet cleaning. The motors, brushes and belts of a pile lifter are much stronger than those found in traditional vacuum cleaners, and their brushes are denser with bristles that extend to the carpet backing for removal of embedded particles. They resemble upright vacuum cleaners and are often equipped with two motors. The combination of agitation from the brushes and suction from vacuums removes embedded soil, but frequent use is noted to dramatically alter the appearance of a carpet. The device was invented by the Certified Chemical &amp; Equipment Company in the 1950s and was produced by modifying an upright floor sanding machine.\nPile lifters may also lift and straighten the carpet fibers from the base and align the piles with special needles to prepare them for shearing. A device known as a pile lifter employed in textile manufacturing generates a static charge to raise or \"lift\" piles that are compressed during a drying process.\nRobotic.\nIn the late 1990s and early 2000s, several companies developed robotic vacuum cleaners, a form of carpet sweeper usually equipped with limited suction power. Some prominent brands are Roomba, Neato, and bObsweep. These machines move autonomously while collecting surface dust and debris into a dustbin. They can usually navigate around furniture and come back to a docking station to charge their batteries, and a few are able to empty their dust containers into the dock as well. Most models are equipped with motorized brushes and a vacuum motor to collect dust and debris. While most robotic vacuum cleaners are designed for home use, some models are appropriate for operation in offices, hotels, hospitals, etc.\nIn December 2009, Neato Robotics launched the world's first robotic vacuum cleaner which uses a rotating laser-based range-finder (a form of lidar) to scan and map its surrounding. It uses this map to clean the floor methodically, even if it requires the robot to return to its base multiple times to recharge itself. In many cases it will notice when an area of the floor that was previously inaccessible becomes reachable, such as when a dog wakes up from a nap, and return to vacuum that area.\nCyclonic.\nPortable vacuum cleaners working on the cyclonic separation principle became popular in the 1990s. This dirt separation principle was well known and often used in central vacuum systems. Cleveland's P.A. Geier Company had obtained a patent on a cyclonic vacuum cleaner as early as 1928, which was later sold to Health-Mor in 1939, introducing the Filter Queen cyclonic canister vacuum cleaner.\nIn 1979, James Dyson introduced a portable unit with cyclonic separation, adapting this design from industrial saw mills. He launched his cyclone cleaner first in Japan in the 1980s at a cost of about US$1800 and in 1993 released the Dyson DC01 upright in the UK for \u00a3200. Critics expected that people would not buy a vacuum cleaner at twice the price of a conventional unit, but the Dyson design later became the most popular cleaner in the UK.\nCyclonic cleaners do not use filtration bags. Instead, the dust is separated in a detachable cylindrical collection vessel or bin. Air and dust are sucked at high speed into the collection vessel at a direction tangential to the vessel wall, creating a fast-spinning vortex. The dust particles and other debris move to the outside of the vessel by centrifugal force, where they fall due to gravity.\nIn fixed-installation central vacuum cleaners, the cleaned air may be exhausted directly outside without need for further filtration. A well-designed cyclonic filtration system loses suction power due to airflow restriction only when the collection vessel is almost full. This is in marked contrast to filter bag systems, which lose suction when pores in the filter become clogged as dirt and dust are collected.\nIn portable cyclonic models, the cleaned air from the center of the vortex is expelled from the machine after passing through a number of successively finer filters at the top of the container. The first filter is intended to trap particles which could damage the subsequent filters that remove fine dust particles. The filters must regularly be cleaned or replaced to ensure that the machine continues to perform efficiently.\nSince Dyson's success in raising public awareness of cyclonic separation, several other companies have introduced cyclone models. Competing manufacturers include Hoover, Bissell, Bosch, Eureka, Electrolux and Vax. This high level of competition means the cheapest models are generally no more expensive than a conventional cleaner.\nCentral.\nCentral vacuum cleaners, also known as built-in or ducted, are a type of canister/cylinder model which has the motor and dirt filtration unit located in a central location in a building, and connected by pipes to fixed vacuum inlets installed throughout the building. Only the hose and cleaning head need be carried from room to room, and the hose is commonly 8\u00a0m (25\u00a0ft) long, allowing a large range of movement without changing vacuum inlets. Plastic or metal piping connects the inlets to the central unit. The vacuum head may be unpowered, or have beaters operated by an electric motor or by an air-driven turbine.\nThe dirt bag or collection bin in a central vacuum system is usually so large that emptying or changing needs to be done less often, perhaps a few times per year for an ordinary household. The central unit usually stays in stand-by, and is turned on by a switch on the handle of the hose. Alternately, the unit powers up when the hose is plugged into the wall inlet, when the metal hose connector makes contact with two prongs in the wall inlet and control current is transmitted through low voltage wires to the main unit.\nA central vacuum typically produces greater suction than common portable vacuum cleaners because a larger fan and more powerful motor can be used when they are not required to be portable. A cyclonic separation system, if used, does not lose suction as the collection container fills up, until the container is nearly full. This is in marked contrast to filter-bag designs, which start losing suction immediately as pores in the filter become clogged by accumulated dirt and dust.\nA benefit to allergy sufferers is that unlike a standard vacuum cleaner, which must blow some of the dirt collected back into the room being cleaned (no matter how efficient its filtration), a central vacuum removes all the dirt collected to the central unit. Since this central unit is usually located outside the living area, no dust is recirculated back into the room being cleaned. Also it is possible on most newer models to vent the exhaust entirely outside, even with the unit inside the living quarters.\nAnother benefit of the central vacuum is, because of the remote location of the motor unit, there is much less noise in the room being cleaned than with a standard vacuum cleaner.\nConstellation.\nIntroduced in 1954, The Hoover Company's \"Constellation\" was of the cylinder type and lacked wheels. Instead the vacuum cleaner floated on its exhaust, operating as a hovercraft, although that was not true of the earliest models, which had a rotating hose, the intention being that the user would place the unit in the center of the room, and work around the cleaner.\nThe Constellation was changed and updated over the years until discontinued in 1975. Later Constellations routed all of the exhaust under the vacuum using an airfoil. The updated design was quiet even by modern standards, particularly on carpet, because it muffled the sound. Those models float on carpet or bare floor although, on hard flooring, the exhaust air tends to scatter any fluff or debris around.\nHoover re-released an updated version of the later-model Constellation in the US (model # S3341 in Pearl White and # S3345 in stainless steel). Changes included a HEPA filtration bag, a 12-amp motor, a turbine-powered brush roll, and a redesigned version of the handle. The same model was marketed in the UK under the Maytag brand, called the \"Satellite\" because of licensing restrictions. It was sold from 2006 to 2009.\nVehicles.\nSee vacuum truck for very big vacuum cleaners mounted on vehicles.\nOther.\nSome other vacuum cleaners include an electric mop in the same machine: for a dry and a later wet clean.\nThe iRobot company developed the Scooba, a robotic wet vacuum cleaner that carries its own cleaning solution, applies it and scrubs the floor, and vacuums the dirty water into a collection tank.\nTechnology.\nA vacuum's suction is caused by a difference in air pressure. A fan driven by an electric motor (often a universal motor) reduces the pressure inside the machine. Atmospheric pressure then pushes the air through the carpet and into the nozzle, and so the dust is literally pushed into the bag.\nTests have shown that vacuuming can kill 100% of young fleas and 96% of adult fleas.\nExhaust filtration.\nVacuums by their nature cause dust to become airborne, by exhausting air that is not completely filtered. This can cause health problems since the operator ends up inhaling respirable dust, which is also redeposited into the area being cleaned. There are several methods manufacturers use to control this problem, some of which may be combined in a single appliance. Typically a filter is positioned so that the incoming air passes through it before it reaches the fan, and then the filtered air passes through the motor for cooling purposes. Some other designs use a completely separate air intake for cooling.\nIt is nearly impossible for a practical air filter to completely remove all ultrafine particles from a dirt-laden airstream. An ultra-efficient air filter will immediately clog up and become ineffective during everyday use, and practical filters are a compromise between filtering effectiveness and restriction of airflow. One way to sidestep this problem is to exhaust partially filtered air to the outdoors, which is a design feature of some central vacuum systems. Specially engineered portable vacuums may also utilize this design, but are more awkward to set up and use, requiring temporary installation of a separate exhaust hose to an exterior window.\nOrdinary vacuum cleaners should never be used to clean up asbestos fibers, even if fitted with a HEPA filter. Specially designed machines are required to safely clean up asbestos.\nAttachments.\nMost vacuum cleaners are supplied with numerous specialized attachments, such as tools, brushes and extension wands, which allow them to reach otherwise inaccessible places or to be used for cleaning a variety of surfaces. The most common of these tools are:\nSpecifications.\nThe performance of a vacuum cleaner can be measured by several parameters:\nOther specifications of a vacuum cleaner are:\nSuction (Pa).\nThe suction is the maximum pressure difference that the pump can create. For example, a typical domestic model has a suction of about negative 20\u00a0kPa. This means that it can lower the pressure inside the hose from normal atmospheric pressure (about 100\u00a0kPa) by 20\u00a0kPa. The higher the suction rating, the more powerful the cleaner. One inch of water is equivalent to about 249\u00a0Pa; hence, the typical suction is of water.\nInput power (W).\nThe power consumption of a vacuum cleaner, in watts, is often the only figure stated. Many North American vacuum manufacturers give the current only in amperes (e.g. \"6\u00a0amps\"), and the consumer is left to multiply that by the line voltage of 120 volts to get the approximate power ratings in watts. The rated input power does not indicate the effectiveness of the cleaner, only how much electricity it consumes.\nAfter August 2014, due to EU rules, manufacture of vacuum cleaners with a power consumption greater than 1600 watts were banned within the EU, and from 2017 no vacuum cleaner with a wattage greater than 900 watts was permitted.\nOutput power (AW).\nThe amount of input power that is converted into airflow at the end of the cleaning hose is sometimes stated, and is measured in \"airwatts\": the measurement units are simply watts. The word \"air\" is used to clarify that this is output power, not input electrical power.\nThe airwatt is derived from English units. ASTM International defines the airwatt as 0.117354\u00a0\u00d7 F\u00a0\u00d7 S, where F is the rate of air flow in ft3/min and S is the pressure in inches of water. This makes one airwatt equal to 0.9983 watts.\nPeak horsepower.\nThe peak horsepower of a vacuum cleaner is often measured by removal of any cooling fans and calculating power based on the motor's power plus the rotational inertial energy stored the motor armature and centrifugal blower. A peak horsepower rating is often an impractical figure and is only valid for a very short period. Continuous power is typically far lower.\nCultural references.\nVacuum cleaners have become closely associated with housecleaning, and artists have sometimes used them to symbolize the banality and routine of everyday life and culture. Visual artist Jeff Koons exhibited his \"The New\" series of household vacuums enshrined in museum-quality vitrines, such as \"New Shelton Wet/Dry Doubledecker\" (1981) at the Museum of Modern Art and \"New Hoover Convertibles, Green, Blue; New Hoover Convertibles, Green, Blue; Doubledecker\" (1981\u20131987) at the Whitney Museum of American Art. In 2002, fashion designer Tara Subkoff used topless models wielding upright vacuum cleaners to promote her controversial fashion label \"Imitation of Christ\".\nIn 2018, Paulius Markevi\u010dius organized performances of \"Dance for the Vacuum-Cleaner and Father\" choreographed by Greta Grinevi\u010di\u016bt\u0117, and premiered in Vilnius, Lithuania. In 2019, Sandrina Lindgren choreographed dancers in \"Requiem for Vacuum Cleaning\" in the Barker Theatre of Turku, Finland, with each performer operating multiple machines simultaneously.\nMusician Frank Zappa used vacuum cleaners in many of his different performances and on promotional artwork. Other performers have used a vacuum cleaner hose or wand as a modernized version of the Australian Aboriginal didgeridoo, or used the whine of the motor for techno music.\nIn 1996, \"Mister Rogers' Neighborhood\" episode #1702 featured vacuum cleaners, including dancing, magic, and a segment showing how a small Dirt Devil canister vacuum was manufactured.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49107", "revid": "50551941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49107", "title": "Willie Dixon", "text": "American blues musician (1915\u20131992)\nWilliam James Dixon (July 1, 1915\u00a0\u2013 January 29, 1992) was an American blues musician, vocalist, songwriter, arranger and record producer. He was proficient in playing both the upright bass and the guitar, and sang with a distinctive voice, but he is perhaps best known as one of the most prolific songwriters of his time. Next to Muddy Waters, Dixon is recognized as the most influential person in shaping the post\u2013World War II sound of the Chicago blues.\nDixon's songs have been recorded by countless musicians in many genres as well as by various ensembles in which he participated. A short list of his most famous compositions includes \"Hoochie Coochie Man\", \"I Just Want to Make Love to You\", \"Little Red Rooster\", \"My Babe\", \"Spoonful\", and \"You Can't Judge a Book by the Cover\". These songs were written during the peak years of Chess Records, from 1950 to 1965, and were performed by Muddy Waters, Howlin' Wolf, Little Walter, and Bo Diddley; they influenced a generation of musicians worldwide.\nDixon was an important link between the blues and rock and roll, working with Little Walter, Chuck Berry, and Bo Diddley in the late 1950s. In the 1960s, his songs were adapted by numerous rock artists. He received a Grammy Award and was inducted into the Blues Hall of Fame, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, and the Songwriters Hall of Fame.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nDixon was born in Vicksburg, Mississippi, on July 1, 1915. He was one of 14 children. His mother, Daisy, often rhymed things she said, a habit her son imitated. At the age of seven, young Dixon became an admirer of a band that featured pianist Little Brother Montgomery. He sang his first song at Springfield Baptist Church at the age of four. Dixon was introduced to blues when he served time on prison farms in Mississippi as a young teenager. Later in his teens, he learned to sing harmony from a local carpenter, Theo Phelps, who led a gospel quintet, the Union Jubilee Singers, in which Dixon sang bass; the group regularly performed on the Vicksburg radio station WQBC. He began adapting his poems into songs and even sold some to local music groups.\nAdulthood.\nDixon left Mississippi for Chicago in 1936. A man of considerable stature, standing 6 feet 6 inches tall and weighing over 250 pounds, he took up boxing, at which he was successful, winning the Illinois State Golden Gloves Heavyweight Championship (Novice Division) in 1937. Around 1939, he became a professional boxer and worked briefly as Joe Louis's sparring partner, but after four fights he left boxing in a dispute with his manager over money.\nDixon met Leonard Caston at a boxing gym, where they would harmonize at times. Dixon performed in several vocal groups in Chicago, but it was Caston that persuaded him to pursue music seriously. Caston built him his first bass, made of a tin-can and one string. Dixon's experience singing bass made the instrument familiar. He also learned to play the guitar.\nIn 1939, Dixon was a founding member of the Five Breezes, with Caston, Joe Bell, Gene Gilmore and Willie Hawthorne. The group blended blues, jazz, and vocal harmonies, in the mode of the Ink Spots. Dixon's progress on the upright bass came to an abrupt halt with the advent of World War II, when he refused induction into military service as a conscientious objector and was imprisoned for ten months. He refused to go to war because he would not fight for a nation in which institutionalized racism and racist laws were prevalent. After the war, he formed a group named the Four Jumps of Jive. He then reunited with Caston, forming the Big Three Trio, which went on to record for Columbia Records.\nPinnacle of career.\nDixon signed with Chess Records as a recording artist, but he began performing less, being more involved with administrative tasks for the label. By 1951, he was a full-time employee at Chess, where he acted as producer, talent scout, session musician and staff songwriter. He was also a producer for the Chess subsidiary Checker Records. His relationship with Chess was sometimes strained, but he stayed with the label from 1948 to the early 1960s. During this time Dixon's output and influence were prodigious. From late 1956 to early 1959, he worked in a similar capacity for Cobra Records, for which he produced early singles for Otis Rush, Magic Sam, and Buddy Guy. In 1956, Dixon wrote \"Fishin' in My Pond\", which was recorded by Lee Jackson, and released on Cobra in February 1957. Dixon later recorded for Bluesville Records. From the late 1960s until the mid-1970s, Dixon ran his own record label, Yambo Records, and two subsidiary labels, Supreme and Spoonful. He released his 1971 album, \"Peace?\", on Yambo and also singles by McKinley Mitchell, Lucky Peterson and others.\nDixon is considered one of the key figures in the creation of Chicago blues. He worked with Chuck Berry, Muddy Waters, Howlin' Wolf, Otis Rush, Bo Diddley, Little Walter, Sonny Boy Williamson II, Koko Taylor, Little Milton, Eddie Boyd, Jimmy Witherspoon, Lowell Fulson, Willie Mabon, Memphis Slim, Washboard Sam, Jimmy Rogers, Sam Lay and others.\nIn December 1964, the Rolling Stones reached number one on the UK Singles Chart with their cover of Dixon's \"Little Red Rooster\". In the same year, the group also covered \"I Just Want To Make Love To You\" on their debut album, \"The Rolling Stones\".\nCopyright battles.\nIn his later years, Dixon became a tireless ambassador for the blues and a vocal advocate for its practitioners, founding the Blues Heaven Foundation, which works to preserve the legacy of the blues and to secure copyrights and royalties for blues musicians who were exploited in the past. Speaking with the simple eloquence that was a hallmark of his songs, Dixon claimed, \"The blues are the roots and the other musics are the fruits. It's better keeping the roots alive, because it means better fruits from now on. The blues are the roots of all American music. As long as American music survives, so will the blues.\"\nIn 1977, unhappy with the small royalties paid by Chess's publishing company, Arc Music, Dixon and Muddy Waters sued Arc and later Dixon founded his own publishing company, Hoochie Coochie Music.\nIn 1987, Dixon reached an out-of-court settlement with the rock band Led Zeppelin after suing for plagiarism in the band's use of his music in \"Bring It On Home\" and lyrics from his composition \"You Need Love\" (1962) in the band's recording of \"Whole Lotta Love\".\nDeath and legacy.\nDixon's health increasingly deteriorated during the 1970s and the 1980s, primarily as a result of long-term diabetes. Eventually one of his legs was amputated.\nDixon was inducted into the Blues Hall of Fame in 1980, in the inaugural session of the Blues Foundation's ceremony. In 1989 he received a Grammy Award for his album \"Hidden Charms\".\nDixon died of heart failure on January 29, 1992, in Burbank, California. His body was carried by a horse-drawn hearse through where he grew up. He was buried in Burr Oak Cemetery, in Alsip, Illinois.\nAfter his death, his widow, Marie Dixon, took over the Blues Heaven Foundation and moved the headquarters to Chess Records. Dixon was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in the category Early Influences (pre-rock) in 1994. On April 28, 2013, both Dixon and his grandson Alex Dixon were inducted into the Chicago Blues Hall of Fame.\nIn 2007, Dixon was honored with a marker on the Mississippi Blues Trail in Vicksburg.\nThe actor and comedian Cedric the Entertainer portrayed Dixon in \"Cadillac Records\", a 2008 film loosely based on the early history of Chess Records.\nIn 2020, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked him as the 12th greatest bass player and mentioned him as the history's most influential bluesmen. \"Rolling Stone\" also placed him at number 51 on their list of \"The 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time\".\nSongs.\nDixon wrote or co-wrote more than 500 songs. Several have become blues standards, including \"Help Me\", \"Hoochie Coochie Man\", \"I Can't Quit You Baby\", \"I Ain't Superstitious\" \"I'm Ready\", \"Little Red Rooster\", \"My Babe\", and \"Spoonful\". Other Dixon compositions that reached the record charts include \"Evil\" (Howlin' Wolf), \"I Just Want to Make Love to You\" (Muddy Waters), \"Pretty Thing\" (Bo Diddley), \"The Seventh Son\" (Willie Mabon), \"Wang Dang Doodle\" (Koko Taylor), and \"You Can't Judge a Book by the Cover\" (Bo Diddley). In the 1960s, Dixon's songs were adapted by numerous rock artists.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49109", "revid": "485987", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49109", "title": "Gustav Vasa", "text": "King of Sweden from 1523 to 1560\nGustav Eriksson Vasa (12 May 1496 \u2013 29 September 1560), also known as Gustav I, was King of Sweden from 1523 until his death in 1560. He was previously self-recognised Protector of the Realm (\"Riksf\u00f6rest\u00e5ndare\") from 1521, during the Swedish War of Liberation against King Christian II of Denmark, Norway and Sweden. Gustav rose to lead this war following the Stockholm Bloodbath, where his father was executed. Gustav's election as king on 6 June 1523 (the future National Day of Sweden) and his triumphant entry into Stockholm eleven days later marked Sweden's final secession from the Kalmar Union.\nDuring his reign, Gustav initiated the Protestant reformation in Sweden, transformed the country from an elective to a hereditary monarchy and established a standing army and navy.\nEarly life.\nGustav Eriksson, a son of Cecilia M\u00e5nsdotter Eka and Erik Johansson Vasa, was probably born in 1496. The birth most likely took place in Rydboholm Castle, northeast of Stockholm, the manor house of the father, Erik. The newborn got his name, Gustav, from Erik's grandfather Gustav Anundsson.\nErik Johansson's parents were Johan Kristersson and Birgitta Gustafsdotter of the dynasties Vasa and Sture respectively, both dynasties of high nobility. Birgitta Gustafsdotter was the sister of Sten Sture the Elder, regent of Sweden, and their mother was a half-sister of King Charles VIII of Sweden. Being a relative and ally of uncle Sten Sture, Erik inherited the regent's estates in Uppland and S\u00f6dermanland when the latter died in 1503. Although a member of a family with considerable properties since childhood, Gustav Eriksson would later be the holder of possessions of a much greater dimension.\nBoth of Gustav's parents descended from Gregers, the illegitimate son of Birger Jarl; Gustav's father descended from Gregers through his maternal great-grandmother Margareta Karlsdotter, while Gustav's mother descended from him through her father Magnus Karlsson Eka. Additionally, Birgitta Gustafsdotter and Sten Sture (and consequently also Gustav) descended from King Sverker II of Sweden through King Sverker's granddaughter Benedikte Sunesdotter (who was married to Svantepolk Knutsson, son of Duke of Reval).\nResistance against the Kalmar Union.\nSupporting the Sture party.\nSince the end of the 14th century, Sweden had been a part of the Kalmar Union with Denmark and Norway. The Danish dominance in this union occasionally led to uprisings in Sweden. During Gustav's childhood, parts of the Swedish nobility tried to make Sweden independent. Gustav and his father Erik supported the party of Sten Sture the Younger, regent of Sweden from 1512, and its struggle against King Christian II of Denmark. Following the battle of Br\u00e4nnkyrka in 1518, where Sten Sture's troops beat the Danish forces, it was decided that Sten Sture and King Christian would meet in \u00d6sterhaninge for negotiations. To guarantee the safety of the king, the Swedish side sent six men as hostages to be kept by the Danes for as long as the negotiations lasted. However, Christian did not show up for the negotiations, violated the deal with the Swedish side and took the hostages aboard ships carrying them to Copenhagen. The six members of the kidnapped hostage were Hemming Gadh, Lars Siggesson (Sparre), J\u00f6ran Siggesson (Sparre), Olof Ryning, Bengt Nilsson (F\u00e4rla) \u2013 and Gustav Eriksson. Gustav was held in Kal\u00f8 Castle where he was treated very well after promising he would not make attempts to escape. A reason for this gentle treatment was King Christian's hope to convince the six men to switch sides, and turn against their leader Sten Sture. This strategy was successful regarding all men but Gustav, who stayed loyal to the Sture party.\nIn 1519, Gustav Eriksson escaped from Kal\u00f8. He fled to the Hanseatic city of L\u00fcbeck where he arrived on 30 September. How he managed to escape is not certain, but according to a somewhat likely story, he disguised himself as a bullocky. For this, Gustav got the nicknames \"King Oxtail\" and \"Gustav Cow Butt\", something he indeed disliked. When a swordsman drank to His Majesty \"Gustav Cow Butt\" in Kalmar in 1547, the swordsman was killed.\nWhile staying in L\u00fcbeck, Gustav could hear about developments in his native Sweden. While he was there, Christian II mobilised to attack Sweden in an effort to seize power from Sten Sture and his supporters. In 1520, the forces of King Christian were triumphant. Sten Sture died in March, but some strongholds, including the Swedish capital Stockholm, were still able to withstand the Danish forces. Gustav left L\u00fcbeck on a ship, and was put ashore south of Kalmar on 31 May.\nIt seems Gustav stayed largely inactive during his first months back on Swedish soil. According to some sources, Gustav received an invitation to the coronation of Christian. This was to take place in the newly captured Stockholm in November. Even though King Christian had promised amnesty to his enemies within the Sture party, including Gustav Eriksson, the latter chose to decline the invitation. The coronation took place on 4 November and days of festivities in a friendly spirit followed. When the celebration had lasted a few days, the castle was locked and the former enemies of King Christian were imprisoned. Accusations against the old supporters of Sten Sture regarding heresy were brought forward. The following day the sentences were announced. During the Stockholm Bloodbath, close to 100 people were executed on Stortorget, among them Gustav Eriksson's father, Erik Johansson, and uncle, Joakim Brahe. Gustav himself was at the time staying at R\u00e4fsn\u00e4s, close to Gripsholm Castle.\nIn Dalarna.\nGustav Eriksson had reasons to fear for his life and left R\u00e4fsn\u00e4s. He travelled to the province of Dalarna, in what was then northwestern Sweden. What happened there has been described in Peder Svart's chronicle, which can be described as a strongly biased heroic tale about Gustav Eriksson. The Dalarna adventures of Gustav that could be described as a part of the national heritage of Sweden, can therefore not be verified in a satisfying way. He is supposed to have tried to gather troops among the peasantry in the province, but with little success initially. Being chased by men loyal to King Christian and failing at creating an army to challenge the king, Gustav Eriksson had no other alternative but to flee to Norway. While he made his way from Mora via Lima to Norway, people that had recently turned down Gustav's call for support against the king changed their minds. Representatives of that group caught up with Gustav before he had reached Norway and convinced him to follow them back to Mora. Gustav Eriksson's run towards Norway and back has formed the background to the famous cross-country ski race Vasaloppet.\nSwedish War of Liberation.\nGustav Eriksson was appointed \"h\u00f6vitsman\". The rebel force he led grew. In February 1521 it consisted of 400 men, mainly from the area around Lake Siljan. The first significant conflict in the Dissolution of the Kalmar Union took place at Brunnb\u00e4ck's Ferry in April, where a rebel army defeated an army loyal to the king. The sacking of the city of V\u00e4ster\u00e5s and with it controlling important copper and silver mines gave Gustav Vasa resources and supporters flocked to him. Other parts of Sweden, for example the G\u00f6taland provinces of Sm\u00e5land and V\u00e4sterg\u00f6tland, also saw rebellions. The leading noblemen of G\u00f6taland joined Gustav Eriksson's forces and, in Vadstena in August, they declared Gustav regent of Sweden.\nThe election of Gustav Eriksson as a regent made many Swedish nobles, who had so far stayed loyal to King Christian, switch sides. Some noblemen, still loyal to the king, chose to leave Sweden, while others were killed. As a result, the Swedish Privy Council lost old members who were replaced by supporters of Gustav Eriksson. Most fortified cities and castles were conquered by Gustav's rebels, but the strongholds with the best defences, including Stockholm, were still under Danish control. In 1522, after negotiations between Gustav Eriksson's people and L\u00fcbeck, the Hanseatic city joined the war against Denmark. The winter of 1523 saw the joint forces attack the Danish and Norwegian areas of Scania, Halland, Blekinge and Bohusl\u00e4n. During this winter, Christian II was overthrown and replaced by Frederick I. The new king openly claimed the Swedish throne and had hopes L\u00fcbeck would abandon the Swedish rebels. The German city, preferring an independent Sweden to a strong Kalmar Union dominated by Denmark, took advantage of the situation and put pressure on the rebels. The city wanted privileges on future trade as well as guarantees regarding the loans they had granted the rebels. The Privy Council and Gustav Eriksson knew the support from L\u00fcbeck was absolutely crucial. As a response, the council decided to appoint Gustav Eriksson king.\nElection as king.\nThe ceremonial election of the regent Gustav Eriksson as king of Sweden took place when the leading men of Sweden got together in Str\u00e4ngn\u00e4s in June 1523. \nWhen the councillors of Sweden had chosen Gustav as king, he met with the two visiting councillors of L\u00fcbeck. The German representatives supported the appointment without hesitation and declared it an act of God. Gustav stated he had to bow to what was described as the will of God. In a meeting with the Privy Council, Gustav Eriksson announced his decision to accept. In the following ceremony, led by the deacon of Str\u00e4ngn\u00e4s, Laurentius Andreae, Gustav swore the royal oath. The next day, bishops and priests joined Gustav in Roggeborgen where Laurentius Andreae raised the holy sacrament above a kneeling Gustav Eriksson. Flanked by the councillors of L\u00fcbeck, Gustav Eriksson was brought to Str\u00e4ngn\u00e4s Cathedral where the king sat down in the choir with the Swedish privy councillors on one side, and the L\u00fcbeck representatives on the other. After the hymn \"Te Deum\", Laurentius Andreae proclaimed Gustav Eriksson king of Sweden. He was, however, still not crowned. In 1983, in remembrance of the election of Gustav as Swedish king on 6 June, that date was declared the National Day of Sweden.\nThe capture of Stockholm.\nShortly after the events of 1523 in Str\u00e4ngn\u00e4s, letters patent were issued to L\u00fcbeck and its allied Hanseatic cities, who now were freed from tolls when trading in Sweden. An agreement, designed by L\u00fcbeck negotiators, was made with the Danish defenders in Stockholm. On 17 June the rebels could enter the capital city. At Midsummer, a grand entrance of king Gustav was arranged at S\u00f6derport, the southern gate of Stockholm. Celebrations followed, including a mass of thanksgiving in Storkyrkan (also known as Stockholm Cathedral) led by Peder Jakobsson. Gustav could now install himself in the Tre Kronor palace.\nThe war ends.\nBailiffs, still loyal to Christian II, were still holding castles in Finland, a part of Sweden at the time. During the summer and fall of 1523 they all surrendered. The next year, on 24 August 1524, Gustav arrived in Malm\u00f6 in order to reach a settlement with King Frederick of Denmark-Norway. The Treaty of Malm\u00f6 (in Swedish: \"Malm\u00f6 recess\") had both positive and negative sides to it, from King Gustav's perspective. The treaty meant that Denmark-Norway acknowledged the independence of Sweden. The hopes Gustav had carried of winning further provinces (Gotland and Blekinge) were however scuttled. The treaty marked the end of the Swedish War of Liberation.\nThe Reformation.\nAfter Gustav seized power, the previous Archbishop, Gustav Trolle, who at the time held the post of a sort of chancellor, was exiled from the country. Gustav sent a message to Pope Clement VII requesting the acceptance of a new archbishop selected by Gustav himself: Johannes Magnus.\nThe Pope sent back his decision demanding that the unlawful expulsion of Archbishop Gustav Trolle be rescinded, and that the archbishop be reinstated. Here Sweden's remote geographical location proved to have a marked impact \u2013 for the former Archbishop had been allied with Christian, or at least was considered to have been so allied in contemporary Stockholm, and to reinstate him would be close to impossible for Gustav.\nThe king let the Pope know the impossibility of the request, and the possible results if the Pope persisted, but \u2013 for better or worse \u2013 the Pope did persist, and refused to accept the king's suggestions of archbishops. At the time, incidentally and for different reasons, there were also four other unoccupied bishop's seats, where the king made suggestions to the Pope about candidates, but the Pope only accepted one of the candidates. Because the Pope refused to budge on the issue of Gustav Trolle, the king, influenced by Lutheran scholar Olaus Petri, in 1531 took it upon himself to appoint yet another archbishop, namely the brother of Olaus, Laurentius Petri. With this royal act, the Pope lost any influence over the Swedish Church.\nIn the 1520s, the Petri brothers led a campaign for the introduction of Lutheranism. The decade saw many events which can be seen as gradual introductions of Protestantism, for instance the marriage of Olaus Petri \u2013 a consecrated priest \u2013 and several texts published by him, advocating Lutheran dogmas. A translation of the New Testament had also been published in 1526. After the reformation, a full translation was published in 1540\u201341, called the Gustav Vasa Bible. However, knowledge of Greek and Hebrew among Swedish clergymen was not sufficient for a translation from the original sources; instead the work followed the German translation by Martin Luther in 1534.\nGustav Vasa's breaking with the Catholic Church is virtually simultaneous with Henry VIII doing the same in England; both kings acted following a similar pattern, i.e., a prolonged confrontation with the Pope culminating with the king deciding to take his own decisions independently of Rome.\nFurther reign.\nGustav encountered resistance from some areas of the country. People from Dalarna rebelled three times in the first ten years of Gustav's reign, as they considered the king to have been too harsh on everyone he perceived as a supporter of the Danish, and as they resented his introduction of Protestantism. Many of those who had helped Gustav in his war against the Danes became involved in these rebellions and paid for this, several of them with their lives.\nPeasants in Sm\u00e5land rebelled in 1542, fuelled by grievances over taxes, church reform and confiscation of church bells and vestments. For several months this uprising caused Gustav severe difficulties in the dense forests. The king sent a letter to the people of the province of Dalarna, requesting that they should circulate letters to every Swedish province, stating their support for the king with their troops, and urging every other province to do the same. Gustav got his troops, with whose help \u2013 and, not least, with paid German mercenaries \u2013 he managed to defeat the rebels in the spring of 1543.\nThe leader of the rebels, Nils Dacke, has traditionally been seen as a traitor to Sweden. His own letters and proclamations to fellow peasants focused on the suppression of Roman Catholic customs of piety, the King's requisitions of church bells and church plate to be smelted down for money and the general discontent with Gustav's autocratic measures, and the King's letters indicate that Dacke had considerable military success for several months. Historical records state that Nils was seriously wounded during a battle, taking bullet wounds to both legs; if this is true, his survival may have been surprising in view of contemporary medical techniques. Some sources state that Nils was executed by quartering; others that he was reduced to the state of an outlaw after recovering from his wounds, and killed while trying to escape through the woods on the border between Sm\u00e5land and then Danish Blekinge. It is said that his body parts were displayed throughout Sweden as a warning to other would-be rebels; this is uncertain though his head was likely mounted on a pole at Kalmar. Modern Swedish scholarship has toned down criticism of Nils Dacke, sometimes making him into a hero in the vein of Robin Hood, particularly in Sm\u00e5land.\nDifficulties with the continuation of the Church also troubled Gustav Vasa. The 1540s saw him imposing death sentences upon both the Petri brothers, as well as his former chancellor Laurentius Andreae. All of them were however granted amnesty, after spending several months in jail. In 1554\u20131557, he waged an inconclusive war against Ivan the Terrible of Russia.\nEnd of reign.\nIn the late 1550s, Gustav's health declined. When his grave was opened in 1945, an examination of his corpse revealed that he had suffered chronic infections of a leg and in his jaw.\nGustav gave a so-called \"last speech\" in 1560 to the chancellors, his children and other noblemen, whereby he encouraged them to remain united. On 29 September 1560, Gustav died and was buried (together with three of his wives, while only two are engraved) in the Cathedral of Uppsala.\nGustav as king.\nGustav proved an energetic administrator with a ruthless streak not inferior to his predecessor's, brutally suppressing subsequent uprisings (three in Dalarna \u2013 which had once been the first region to support his claim to the throne \u2013 one in V\u00e4sterg\u00f6tland, and one in Sm\u00e5land). He worked to raise taxes and bring about a Reformation in Sweden, replacing the prerogatives of local landowners, noblemen and clergy with centrally appointed governors and bishops. His 37-year rule, which was the longest of an adult Swedish king to that date (subsequently passed by Gustav V and Carl XVI Gustav) saw a complete break with not only the Danish \u2013 Norwegian supremacy but also the Roman Catholic Church, whose assets were nationalised, with the Lutheran Church of Sweden established under his personal control. He became the first truly autocratic native Swedish sovereign and was a skilled bureaucrat and propagandist, with tales of his largely fictitious adventures during the liberation struggle still widespread to this day. In 1544, he abolished Medieval Sweden's elective monarchy and replaced it with a hereditary monarchy under the House of Vasa, which held the Swedish throne until 1654. Three of his sons, Erik XIV, John III and Charles IX, held the kingship at different points.\nGustav Vasa has subsequently been labelled the founder of modern Sweden, and the \"father of the nation\". Gustav liked to compare himself to Moses, whom he believed to have also liberated his people and established a sovereign state. As a person, Gustav was known for ruthless methods and a bad temper, but also a fondness for music. He had a certain sly wit and ability to outmaneuver and annihilate his opponents. According to his chronicler Peder Svart, Gustav attacked Hanseatic delegate Herman Iserhel with a knife during the negotiations in Malm\u00f6, Iserhel barely escaping. He founded one of the oldest orchestras of the world, \"Kungliga Hovkapellet\" (Royal Court Orchestra); thus Royal housekeeping accounts from 1526 mention twelve musicians including wind players and a timpanist but no string players. Today, \"Kungliga Hovkapellet\" is the orchestra of the Royal Swedish Opera.\nLegacy.\nIn Sweden, Gustav Vasa is considered to rank among the country's greatest kings, arguably even the most significant ruler in Swedish history. Having led Sweden out of the Kalmar Union, centralised and reorganised the government, cut religious ties to Rome, established the Swedish Church, and founded Sweden's hereditary monarchy, Gustav Vasa holds a place of great prominence in Swedish history and is a central character in Swedish nationalist narratives. He is often described as a founding father of the modern Swedish state. Historians have nonetheless noted the often brutal methods with which he ruled, and his legacy, though clearly of great and lasting importance, is not necessarily viewed in exclusively positive terms.\nMany details of Gustav Vasa's historical record are disputed. In 19th-century Swedish history a folklore developed wherein Gustav was supposed to have had many adventures when he liberated Sweden. Today, most of these stories are considered to have no other foundation than legend and skillful propaganda by Gustav during his time. There are many stories about Gustav's close encounters with death, however it is questionable if any of his adventures in Dalarna really happened or were dramatised by Gustav; regardless of whether they happened or not, his adventures are still told to this day in Sweden.\nGustav's memory has been honoured greatly, resulting in embroidered history books, commemorative coins, and the annual ski event Vasaloppet (the largest ski event in the world with 15,000 participants). Gustav is remembered in Finland among other things for founding the country's capital, Helsinki, in 1550, and the city of Vaasa in Finland was named after the royal house of Vasa in 1606. 18th century playwrights and librettists used his biography as the source for some of their works, including the 1739 \"Gustavus Vasa\" by Henry Brooke (the first play banned under the Licensing Act 1737, due to Robert Walpole's belief that the play's villain was a proxy for himself) and the 1770 \"Gustavo primo, re di Svezia\". The name \"Gustavus Vasa\" was also given to Olaudah Equiano, a prominent Black British abolitionist.\nGustav used to be portrayed on the 1,000 kronor note, until he was replaced by Dag Hammarskj\u00f6ld in June 2016. Gustav has been regarded by some as a power-hungry man who wished to control everything\u00a0\u2014 the Church, the economy, the army and all foreign affairs. Nonetheless, in doing this he also managed to unite Sweden, where individual provinces held strong regional power. He also laid the foundation for Sweden's professional army that was to make Sweden into a regional superpower in the 17th century.\nGallery.\nGustav Vasa had a series of allegorical paintings made during his reign. The originals are lost but watercolor reproductions from the 18th century date remain. Several interpretations have been put forth, including that they show him abolishing the Catholic church, but the main view is that they depict him freeing Sweden from Christian II's control.\nFamily.\nGustav's first wife was Catherine of Saxe-Lauenburg (1513\u20131535), whom he married on 24 September 1531. They had a son:\nOn 1 October 1536, he married his second wife, Margareta Leijonhufvud (1514\u20131551). Their children were:\nAt Vadstena Castle, on 22 August 1552, he married his third wife, Katarina Stenbock (1535\u20131621).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49110", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49110", "title": "List of cities in Sardinia", "text": "Sardinian towns\nThis is a list of selected cities in Sardinia with local names.\nMetropolitan areas.\n\"Including Quartu Sant'Elena, Selargius, Assemini, Capoterra, Monserrato, Sestu, Sinnai, Quartucciu, Maracalagonis and Elmas.\""}
{"id": "49112", "revid": "39150892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49112", "title": "Potsdam", "text": "Capital of Brandenburg, Germany\nPotsdam () is the capital and largest city of the German state of Brandenburg. It is part of the Berlin/Brandenburg Metropolitan Region. Potsdam sits on the River Havel, a tributary of the Elbe, downstream of Berlin, and lies embedded in a hilly morainic landscape dotted with many lakes, around 20 of which are located within Potsdam's city limits. It lies some southwest of Berlin's city centre. The name of the city and of many of its boroughs are of Slavic origin.\nPotsdam was a residence of the Prussian kings and the German Emperor until 1918. Its planning embodied ideas of the Age of Enlightenment: through a careful balance of architecture and landscape, Potsdam was intended as \"a picturesque, pastoral dream\" which would remind its residents of their relationship with nature and reason.\nThe city, which is over 1,000 years old, is widely known for its palaces, its lakes, and its overall historical and cultural significance. Landmarks include the parks and palaces of Sanssouci, Germany's largest World Heritage Site, as well as other palaces such as the Orangery Palace, the New Palace, Cecilienhof Palace, and Charlottenhof Palace. Potsdam was also the location of the significant Potsdam Conference in 1945, the conference where the three heads of government of the USSR, the US, and the UK decided on the division of Germany following its surrender, a conference which defined Germany's history for the following 45 years.\nBabelsberg, in the south-eastern part of Potsdam, was already by the 1930s the home of a major film production studio and it has enjoyed success as an important centre of European film production since the fall of the Berlin Wall. The Filmstudio Babelsberg, founded in 1912, is the oldest large-scale film studio in the world.\nPotsdam developed into a centre of science in Germany in the 19th century. Today, there are three public colleges, the University of Potsdam, and more than 30 research institutes in the city.\nGeography.\nThe area was formed from a series of large moraines left after the last glacial period. Today, only one quarter of the city is built up, the rest remaining as green space.\nThere are about 20 lakes and rivers in and around Potsdam, such as the Havel, the Griebnitzsee, Templiner See, Tiefer See, Jungfernsee, Teltowkanal, Heiliger See, and Sacrower See. The highest point is the \"Kleiner Ravensberg\".\nSubdivisions.\nPotsdam is divided into seven historic city \"Stadtteile\" (quarters) and nine new \"Ortsteile\" (suburbs/wards, former separate villages), which joined the city in 2003. The appearance of the city boroughs is quite different. Those in the north and in the centre consist mainly of historical buildings, the south of the city is dominated by larger areas of newer buildings.\nThe city of Potsdam is divided into 32 \"Stadtteile\" (boroughs, both quarters and suburbs/wards together), which are divided further into 84 statistical \"Bezirke\" (districts).\nToday, one distinguishes between the older parts of the city (areas of the historic city and places suburbanized at the latest in 1939) \u2013 these are the city center, the western and northern suburbs, Bornim, Bornstedt, Nedlitz, Potsdam South, Babelsberg, Drewitz, Stern and Kirchsteigfeld \u2013 and those communities incorporated after 1990 which have since 2003 become \"Ortsteile\" \u2013 these are Eiche, Fahrland, Golm, Gro\u00df Glienicke, Grube, Marquardt, Neu Fahrland, Satzkorn and Uetz-Paaren. The new \"Ortsteile\" are located mainly in the north of the city. For the history of all incorporations, see the relevant section on incorporation and spin-offs.\n\"Structure with statistical numbering:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAt the end of 2019, a change was made to the administrative structure:\nClimate.\nOfficially the climate is oceanic - more degraded by being far from the coast and to the east (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"), but using the 1961\u20131990 normal and the 0\u00a0\u00b0C isotherm the city has a humid continental climate (\"Dfb\"), which also shows a slight influence of the continent different from the climates predominantly influenced by the Atlantic Ocean. Low averages below freezing for almost all winter causing snows that are frequent and winters are cold, but not as stringent as inland locations or with greater influence from the same. Summer is also relatively warm with temperatures between 23 and 24\u00a0\u00b0C, the heat waves being influenced by the UHI of Potsdam.\nThe average winter high temperature is , with a low of . Snow is common in the winter. Spring and autumn are short. Summers are mild, with a high of and a low of .\nThe Potsdam weather station has recorded the following extreme values:\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Potsdam\" originally seems to have been \"Poztupimi\". A common theory is that it derives from an old West Slavonic term meaning \"beneath the oaks\", i.e., the corrupted \"pod dubmi/dubimi\" (\"pod\" \"beneath\", \"dub\" \"oak\"). However, some question this explanation.\nHistory.\nPre- and early history.\nThe area around Potsdam shows signs of occupancy since the Bronze Age and was part of \"Magna Germania\" as described by Tacitus. After the great migrations of the Germanic peoples, Slavs moved in and Potsdam was probably founded after the 7th century as a settlement of the Hevelli tribe centred on a castle. It was first mentioned in a document in 993 as \"Poztupimi\", when Emperor Otto III gifted the territory to the Quedlinburg Abbey, then led by his aunt Matilda. By 1317, it was mentioned as a small town. It gained its town charter in 1345. In 1573, it was still a small market town of 2,000 inhabitants.\nEarly modern era.\nPotsdam lost nearly half of its population due to the Thirty Years' War (1618\u20131648).\nA continuous Hohenzollern possession since 1415, Potsdam became prominent, when it was chosen in 1660 as the hunting residence of Frederick William I, Elector of Brandenburg, the core of the powerful state that later became the Kingdom of Prussia. It also housed Prussian barracks.\nAfter the Edict of Potsdam in 1685, Potsdam became a centre of European immigration. Its religious freedom attracted people from France (Huguenots), Russia, the Netherlands and Bohemia. The edict accelerated population growth and economic recovery.\nLater, the city became a full residence of the Prussian royal family. The buildings of the royal residences were built mainly during the reign of Frederick the Great. One of these is the Sanssouci Palace (French: \"without cares\" or \"no concern\", by Georg Wenzeslaus von Knobelsdorff, 1744), famed for its formal gardens and Rococo interiors. Other royal residences include the New Palace and the Orangery.\nIn 1815, at the formation of the Province of Brandenburg, Potsdam became the provincial capital until 1918, except for a period between 1827 and 1843 when Berlin was the provincial capital (as it became once again after 1918). The province comprised two governorates named after their capitals Potsdam and Frankfurt (Oder).\nGovernorate of Potsdam.\nBetween 1815 and 1945, the city of Potsdam served as capital of the Regierungsbezirk of Potsdam (). The \"Regierungsbezirk\" encompassed the former districts of Uckermark, the Mark of Priegnitz, and the greater part of the Middle March. It was situated between Mecklenburg and the Province of Pomerania on the north, and the Province of Saxony on the south and west (Berlin, with a small surrounding district, was an urban governorate and enclave within the governorate of Potsdam between 1815 and 1822, then it merged as urban district into the governorate only to be disentangled again from Potsdam governorate in 1875, becoming a distinct province-like entity on 1 April 1881). Towards the north west the governorate was bounded by the rivers Elbe and the Havel, and on the north east by the Oder. The south eastern boundary was to the neighbouring governorate of Frankfurt (Oder). About 500,000 inhabitants lived in the Potsdam governorate, which covered an area of about , divided into thirteen rural districts, partially named after their capitals:\nThe traditional towns in the governorate were small, however, in the course of the industrial labour migration some reached the rank of urban districts. The principal towns were Brandenburg upon Havel, K\u00f6penick, Potsdam, Prenzlau, Spandau and Ruppin. Until 1875 Berlin also was a town within the governorate. After its disentanglement a number of its suburbs outside Berlin's municipal borders grew to towns, many forming urban \"Bezirke\" within the governorate of Potsdam such as Charlottenburg, Lichtenberg, Rixdorf (after 1912 Neuk\u00f6lln), and Sch\u00f6neberg (all of which, as well as K\u00f6penick and Spandau, incorporated into Greater Berlin in 1920). The urban \"Bezirke\" were (years indicating the elevation to rank of urban \"Bezirk\" or affiliation with Potsdam governorate, respectively):\n20th century.\nBerlin was the capital of Prussia and later of the German Empire, but the court remained in Potsdam, where many government officials settled. In 1914, Emperor Wilhelm II signed the Declaration of War in the \"Neues Palais\" (New Palace). The city lost its status as a \"second capital\" in 1918, when Wilhelm II abdicated and Germany became a Republic at the end of World War I.\nAfter the Nazis seized power in 1933, there was a ceremonial handshake between President Paul von Hindenburg and the new Chancellor Adolf Hitler on 21 March 1933 in Potsdam's Garrison Church in what became known as the \"Day of Potsdam\". This symbolised a coalition of the military (\"Reichswehr\") and Nazism. Potsdam was severely damaged by Allied bombing raids during World War II.\nThe Cecilienhof Palace was the scene of the Potsdam Conference from 17 July to 2 August 1945, at which the victorious Allied leaders Harry S. Truman, Winston Churchill and Joseph Stalin met to decide the future of Germany and postwar Europe in general. The conference ended with the Potsdam Agreement and the Potsdam Declaration.\nThe government of East Germany (formally known as the German Democratic Republic (German: \"Deutsche Demokratische Republik\", DDR)) tried to remove symbols of \"Prussian militarism\". Many historic buildings, some of them badly damaged in the war, were demolished.\nWhen in 1946 the remainder of the province of Brandenburg west of the Oder-Nei\u00dfe line was constituted as the state of Brandenburg, Potsdam became its capital. In 1952 the GDR disestablished its states and replaced them by smaller new East German administrative districts known as \"Bezirke\". Potsdam became the capital of the new \"Bezirk Potsdam\" until 1990.\nPotsdam, south-west of Berlin, lay just outside West Berlin after the construction of the Berlin Wall. The walling off of West Berlin not only isolated Potsdam from West Berlin, but also doubled commuting times to East Berlin. The Glienicke Bridge across the Havel connected the city to West Berlin and was the scene of some Cold War exchanges of spies.\nAfter German reunification, Potsdam became the capital of the newly re-established state of Brandenburg. Since then there have been many ideas and efforts to reconstruct the original appearance of the city, including the Potsdam City Palace and the Garrison Church.\nDemography.\nSince 2000 Potsdam has been one of the fastest-growing cities in Germany.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational residents.\nLargest groups of foreign residents:\nGovernance.\nCity government.\nPotsdam has had a mayor (\"B\u00fcrgermeister\") and city council since the 15th century. From 1809 the city council was elected, with a mayor (\"Oberb\u00fcrgermeister\") at its head. During Nazi Germany, the mayor was selected by the NSDAP and the city council was dissolved; it was reconstituted in token form after 1945, but free elections did not take place until after reunification.\nToday, the city council is the city's central administrative authority. Local elections took place on 26 October 2003 and again in 2008. Between 1990 and 1999, the Chairman of the City Council was known as the \"Town President\" but today the post is the \"Chairman of the City Council\". The mayor is elected directly by the population.\nThe current mayor is Mike Schubert of the Social Democratic Party (SPD) since 2018. The most recent mayoral election was held on 23 September 2018, with a runoff held on 14 October, and the results were as follows:\nThe city council governs the city alongside the mayor. The most recent city council election was held on 9 June 2024, and the results were as follows:\nBrandenburg state government.\nThe Landtag Brandenburg, the parliament of the state of Brandenburg is in Potsdam. It has been housed in the Potsdam City Palace since 2014.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nPotsdam is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nRail transport.\nPotsdam, included in the fare zone \"C\" (\"Tarifbereich C\") of Berlin's public transport area and fare zones A and B of its own public transport area, is served by the S7 \"S-Bahn\" line. The stations served are Griebnitzsee, Babelsberg and the Central Station (\"Hauptbahnhof\"), the main and long-distance station of the city. Other DB stations in Potsdam are Charlottenhof, Park Sanssouci (including the monumental \"Kaiserbahnhof\"), Medienstadt Babelsberg, Rehbr\u00fccke, Pirschheide and Marquardt. The city also possesses a 27\u00a0km-long tramway network.\nRoad transport.\nPotsdam is served by several motorways: the A 10, a beltway better known as \"Berliner Ring\", the A 115 (using part of the AVUS) and is closely linked to the A 2 and A 9. The B 1 and B 2 federal roads cross the city. Potsdam features a network of urban and suburban buses.\nAirports.\nPotsdam is connected to national and international air traffic via Berlin Brandenburg Airport (BER), which is around 40 kilometers to the east.\nEducation and research.\nPotsdam is a university town. The University of Potsdam was founded in 1991 as a university of the State of Brandenburg. Its predecessor was the \"Akademie f\u00fcr Staats- und Rechtswissenschaften der DDR \"Walter Ulbricht\"\", a college of education founded in 1948 which was one of the GDR's most important colleges. There are about 20,000 students enrolled at the university.\nIn 1991 the \"Fachhochschule Potsdam\" was founded as the second college. It had 3,518 students as of 2017.\nKonrad Wolf Film University of Babelsberg (HFF), founded in 1954 in Babelsberg, is the foremost centre of the German film industry since its birth, with over 600 students.\nThere are also several research foundations, including Fraunhofer Institutes for Applied Polymer Research and Biomedical Engineering, Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (\"Albert Einstein Institute\"), Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, and Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology, the GFZ \u2013 German Research Centre for Geosciences, the Potsdam Astrophysical Institute, the Institute for Advanced Sustainability Studies, The Leibniz Institute for Agricultural Engineering and Bioeconomy and the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, which employs 340 people in researching climate change.\nAs well as universities, Potsdam is home to reputable secondary schools. Montessori Gesamtschule Potsdam, in western Potsdam, attracts 400 students from the Brandenburg and Berlin region.\nCulture.\nPotsdam was historically a centre of European immigration. Its religious tolerance attracted people from France, Russia, the Netherlands and Bohemia. This is still visible in the culture and architecture of the city.\nThe most popular attraction in Potsdam is Sanssouci Park, west of the city centre. In 1744 King Frederick the Great ordered the construction of a residence here, where he could live \"sans souci\" (\"without worries\", in the French spoken at the court). The park hosts a botanical garden (Botanical Garden, Potsdam) and many buildings:\nThree gates from the original city wall remain today. The oldest is the Hunters' Gate (\"J\u00e4gertor\"), built in 1733. The Nauener Tor was built in 1755 and close to the historic Dutch Quarter. The ornate Brandenburg Gate (built in 1770, not to be confused with the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin) is situated on the Luisenplatz at the western entrance to the old town.\nThe Old Market Square (\"Alter Markt\") is Potsdam's historical city centre. For three centuries this was the site of the City Palace (\"Stadtschlo\u00df\"), a royal palace built in 1662. Under Frederick the Great, the palace became the winter residence of the Prussian kings. The palace was severely damaged by Allied bombing in 1945 and demolished in 1961 by the Communist authorities. In 2002 the Fortuna Gate (\"Fortunaportal\") was rebuilt in its original historic position which was followed by a complete reconstruction of the palace as the Brandenburg Landtag building inaugurated in 2014. Nearby the square in the Humboldtstra\u00dfe block, which also was demolished after getting damaged in 1945, reconstructions of several representative residential palaces including Palazzo Pompei and Palazzo Barberini housing an arts museum were completed in 2016\u20132017 alongside buildings with modernized facades to restore the historical proportions of the block.\nThe Old Market Square is dominated today by the dome of St. Nicholas' Church, built in 1837 in the Neoclassical style. It was the last work of Karl Friedrich Schinkel, who designed the building but did not live to see its completion. It was finished by his disciples Friedrich August St\u00fcler and Ludwig Persius. The eastern side of the Market Square is dominated by the Old City Hall, built in 1755 by the Dutch architect Jan Bouman (1706\u20131776). It has a characteristic circular tower, crowned with a gilded Atlas bearing the world on his shoulders.\nNorth of the Old Market Square is the oval French Church (\"Franz\u00f6sische Kirche\"), erected in the 1750s by Boumann for the Huguenot community. To the south lies the Museum Barberini, a copy of the previous building, the Barberini Palace. The museum was funded by the German billionaire Hasso Plattner. The former Baroque building was built by Carl von Gontard in 1771\u20131772, inspired by the Renaissance palace Palazzo Barberini in Rome. The newly built museum was scheduled to open in spring 2017.\nThe Garrison Church contains a Coventry chapel, an exhibition about the history of the place and a viewing platform at a height of 57 meters.\nAnother landmark of Potsdam is the two-street Dutch Quarter (\"Holl\u00e4ndisches Viertel\"), an ensemble of buildings that is unique in Europe, with about 150 houses built of red bricks in the Dutch style. It was built between 1734 and 1742 under the direction of Jan Bouman to be used by Dutch artisans and craftsmen who had been invited to settle here by King Frederick Wilhelm I. Today, this area is one of Potsdam's most visited quarters.\nNorth of the city centre is the Russian colony of Alexandrowka, a small enclave of Russian architecture (including an Orthodox chapel) built in 1825 for a group of Russian immigrants. Since 1999, the colony has been part of the UNESCO World Heritage Site Palaces and Parks of Potsdam and Berlin.\nEast of the Alexandrowka colony is a large park, the New Garden (\"Neuer Garten\"), which was laid out from 1786 in the English style. The site contains two palaces; one of them, the Cecilienhof, was where the Potsdam Conference was held in July and August 1945. The \"Marmorpalais\" (Marble Palace) was built in 1789 in Neoclassical style. Nearby is the \"Biosph\u00e4re Potsdam\", a tropical botanical garden.\nBabelsberg, a quarter south-east of the centre, houses the UFA film studios (Babelsberg Studios), and an extensive park with some historical buildings, including the Babelsberg Palace (Schlo\u00df Babelsberg, a Gothic revival palace designed by Schinkel).\nThe Einstein Tower is located within the Albert Einstein Science Park, which is on the top of the \"Telegraphenberg\" within an astronomy compound.\nPotsdam also features a memorial centre in the former KGB prison in Leistikowstra\u00dfe. In the Volkspark to the north, there is one of the last monuments dedicated to Lenin in Germany.\nPotsdam joined UNESCO's Network of Creative Cities as a Design City on October 31, 2019, on the occasion of World Cities' Day.\nParks.\nThere are many parks in Potsdam, most of them UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Among their attractions are:\nNotable people.\n18th century\n19th century\n20th century\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n21st century\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49114", "revid": "543434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49114", "title": "Rouen", "text": "Prefecture and commune in Normandy, France\nRouen (, ; ) is a city on the River Seine, in northwestern France. It is in the prefecture of region of Normandy and the department of Seine-Maritime. Formerly one of the largest and most prosperous cities of medieval Europe, the population of the metropolitan area () is 702,945 (2018). People from Rouen are known as \"Rouennais\".\nRouen was the seat of the Exchequer of Normandy during the Middle Ages. It was one of the capitals of the Anglo-Norman and Angevin dynasties, which ruled both England and large parts of modern France from the 11th to the 15th centuries. From the 13th century onwards, the city experienced a remarkable economic boom, thanks in particular to the development of textile factories and river trade. Claimed by both the French and the English during the Hundred Years' War, it was on its soil that Joan of Arc was tried and burned alive on 30 May 1431. Severely damaged by the wave of bombing in 1944, it nevertheless regained its economic dynamism in the post-war period thanks to its industrial sites and its large seaport, which merged with the ports of Le Havre and Paris in 2021 to form the HAROPA Port.\nEndowed with a prestige established during the medieval era, and with a long architectural heritage in its historical monuments, Rouen is an important cultural capital. Several renowned establishments are located here, such as the Museum of Fine Arts, Le Secq des Tournelles museum, and Rouen Cathedral.\nSeat of an archdiocese, it also hosts a court of appeal and a university. Every four to six years, Rouen becomes the showcase for a large gathering of sailing ships called \"L'Armada\"; this event makes the city an occasional capital of the maritime world.\nHistory.\nRouen was founded by the Gaulish tribe of the Veliocasses, who controlled a large area in the lower Seine valley. They called it \"Ratumacos\"; the Romans called it \"Rotomagus\". It was considered the second city of Gallia Lugdunensis after Lugdunum (Lyon) itself. Under the reorganization of Diocletian, Rouen was the chief city of the divided province Gallia Lugdunensis II and reached the apogee of its Roman development, with an amphitheatre and \"thermae\" of which foundations remain. In the 5th century, it became the seat of a bishopric and later a capital of Merovingian Neustria.\nFrom their first incursion into the lower valley of the Seine in 841, the Normans overran Rouen. From 912, Rouen was the capital of the Duchy of Normandy and residence of the local dukes, until William the Conqueror moved his residence to Caen. In 1150, Rouen received its founding charter which permitted self-government.\nDuring the 12th century, Rouen was the site of a yeshiva known as . Discovered in 1976, it is now a museum. At that time, about 6,000 Jews lived in the town, comprising about 20% of the population.\nOn 24 June 1204, King Philip II Augustus of France entered Rouen and definitively annexed Normandy to the French Kingdom. He demolished the Norman castle and replaced it with his own, the , built on the site of the Gallo-Roman amphitheatre. A textile industry developed based on wool imported from England, for which the cities of Flanders and Brabant were constantly competitors, and finding its market in the Champagne fairs. Rouen also depended for its prosperity on the river traffic of the Seine, on which it enjoyed a monopoly that reached as far upstream as Paris.\nIn the 13th and 14th centuries urban strife threatened the city: in 1291, the mayor was assassinated and noble residences in the city were pillaged. Philip IV reimposed order and suppressed the city's charter and the lucrative monopoly on river traffic, but he was quite willing to allow the Rouennais to repurchase their old liberties in 1294. In 1306, he decided to expel the Jewish community of Rouen, then numbering some five or six thousand. In 1389, another urban revolt of the underclass occurred, the \"Harelle\". It was suppressed with the withdrawal of Rouen's charter and river-traffic privileges once more.\nDuring the Hundred Years' War, on 19 January 1419, Rouen surrendered after a long siege to Henry V of England, who annexed Normandy once again to the Plantagenet domains. French soldier Alain Blanchard summarily hung English prisoners of war from the city walls during the siege, for which he was beheaded after Rouen fell, while canon and vicar general of Rouen Robert de Livet excommunicated Henry V, resulting in him being imprisoned for five years in England. Joan of Arc, who supported a return to French rule, was burned at the stake on 30 May 1431 in Rouen, where most inhabitants supported the duke of Burgundy, the French king's enemy. The king of France, Charles VII, recaptured the town in 1449.\nRouen was staunchly Catholic during the French Wars of Religion, and underwent an unsuccessful five-month siege in 1591/2 by the Protestant Henry IV of France and an English force under Earl of Essex. A brief account by an English participant has survived.\nDuring the repression of January and February 1894, the police conducted raids targeting the anarchists living there, without much success. The first competitive motor race ran from Paris to Rouen in 1894.\nDuring the German occupation in World War II, the Kriegsmarine had its headquarters located in a chateau on what is now the Rouen Business School. The city was heavily damaged during the same war on D-Day, and its famed cathedral was almost destroyed by Allied bombs.\nMain sights.\nRouen is known for Rouen Cathedral, with its \"Tour de Beurre\" (\"butter tower\") financed by the sale of indulgences for the consumption of butter during Lent. The cathedral's gothic fa\u00e7ade (completed in the 16th century) was the subject of a series of paintings by Claude Monet, some of which are exhibited in the Mus\u00e9e d'Orsay in Paris.\nThe \"Gros Horloge\" is an astronomical clock dating back to the 14th century. It is located in the Gros Horloge street.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cubemap viewer/styles.css\"/&gt;) * 1px); --pitch: calc( var(--calculator-pitch, 3) * 1deg ); --yaw: calc( var(--calculator-yaw, 0) * 1deg ); background-color: #7D7F7C; color: black /*Make lint happy*/\" data-calculator-for=\"originalYaw;originalPitch;yaw;pitch\" data-calculator-formula=\"ifequal(getclick(type),1,yaw,originalYaw);ifequal(getclick(type),1,pitch,originalPitch);((atan(getclick(startx)/300 * 2 - 1) - atan( getclick(x)/300*2 - 1 )) * 180/pi *hfov / 90 ) + originalYaw;((atan(getclick(y) / 400 * 2 - 1) - atan(getclick(starty) / 400 * 2 - 1)) * 180 / pi * (2 * atan(tan(hfov/360*pi) * 400 / 300) * 180 / PI) / 90) + originalPitch\"&gt;\n3900\nPlace Barth\u00e9l\u00e9my with the Church of Saint-Maclou, 360\u00b0-panorama 2019\nOther famous structures include Rouen Castle, whose keep is known as the \"tour Jeanne d'Arc\", where Joan of Arc was brought in 1431 to be threatened with torture (contrary to popular belief, she was not imprisoned there but in the \"tour de lady Pucelle\" (since destroyed); the \"Church of Saint Ouen\" (12th\u201315th century); the \"Palais de Justice\", which was once the seat of the \"Parlement\" (French court of law) of Normandy; the Gothic \"Church of St Maclou\" (15th century); and the Museum of Fine Arts and Ceramics which contains a splendid collection of fa\u00efence and porcelain for which Rouen was renowned during the 16th to 18th centuries. Rouen is also noted for its surviving half-timbered buildings.\nThere are many museums in Rouen: the Mus\u00e9e des Beaux-Arts de Rouen, an art museum with paintings by well-known artists such as Claude Monet and G\u00e9ricault; the Mus\u00e9e maritime fluvial et portuaire, a museum on the history of the port of Rouen and navigation; Mus\u00e9e des Antiquit\u00e9s, an art and history museum with local works from the Bronze Age through the Renaissance; the Mus\u00e9e de la c\u00e9ramique, the Museum of Natural History, founded in 1834 and re-opened in 2007; and the Mus\u00e9e Le Secq des Tournelles, which houses various collections of objects.\nThe Jardin des Plantes de Rouen is a notable botanical garden once owned by Scottish banker John Law, dating from 1840 in its present form. It was the site of \u00c9lisa Garnerin's parachute jump from a balloon in 1817. There is also a park and garden at the Champs de Mars, to the east of the city centre. The Paris\u2013Rouen motor race of 1894, \"Le Petit Journal\" Horseless Carriages Contest, ended at the Champs de Mars.\nIn the centre of the Place du Vieux March\u00e9 (the site of Joan of Arc's pyre) is the modern church of St Joan of Arc. This is a large, modern structure which dominates the square. The form of the building represents an upturned Viking boat and a fish shape.\nRouen was also home to the French Grand Prix, hosting the race at the nearby Rouen-Les-Essarts track sporadically between 1952 and 1968. In 1999 Rouen authorities demolished the grandstands and other remnants of Rouen's racing past. Today, little remains beyond the public roads that formed the circuit.\nRouen has an opera house, whose formal name is \"Rouen Normandy Opera House \u2013 Theatre of Arts\" (in French: \"Op\u00e9ra de Rouen Normandie \u2013 Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des arts\").\nTransport.\nMainline trains operate from Gare de Rouen-Rive-Droite to Le Havre and Paris, and regional trains to Caen, Dieppe and other local destinations in Normandy. Daily direct trains operate to Amiens and Lille, and direct TGVs (high-speed trains) connect daily with Lyon and Marseille.\nCity transportation in Rouen consists of a tram and a bus system. The tramway branches into two lines out of a tunnel under the city centre. Rouen is also served by TEOR (Transport Est-Ouest Rouennais) and by buses run in conjunction with the tramway by TCAR (Transports en commun de l'agglom\u00e9ration rouennaise), a subsidiary of Transdev.\nRouen has its own airport. However, there are no scheduled flights to/from Rouen Airport. Residents in the city normally use Paris's Charles de Gaulle Airport, which is located south east of Rouen. \nThe Seine is a major axis for maritime cargo links in the Port of Rouen. The Cross-Channel ferry ports of Caen, Le Havre, Dieppe (50 minutes) and Calais, and the Channel Tunnel are within easy driving distance (two and a half hours or less).\nAdministration.\nRouen and its metropolitan area of 70 suburban communes form the M\u00e9tropole Rouen Normandie, with 494,382 inhabitants at the 2010 census. In descending order of population, the largest of these suburbs are Sotteville-l\u00e8s-Rouen, Saint-\u00c9tienne-du-Rouvray, Le Grand-Quevilly, Le Petit-Quevilly, and Mont-Saint-Aignan, each with a population exceeding 20,000. The city council is based at the H\u00f4tel de Ville.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nThe main schools of higher education are the University of Rouen and NEOMA Business School (former \u00c9cole Sup\u00e9rieure de Commerce de Rouen), Unilasalle (agronomy and agriculture), both located at nearby Mont-Saint-Aignan, and the INSA Rouen, ESIGELEC, ESITech and the CESI, the three at nearby Saint-\u00c9tienne-du-Rouvray.\nCulture.\nThe main opera company in Rouen is the Op\u00e9ra de Rouen \u2013 Normandie. The company performs in the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des Arts, 7 rue du Docteur Rambert. The company presents opera, classical and other types of music, both vocal and instrumental, as well as dance performances. Every five years, the city hosts the large maritime exposition, L'Armada.\nThe city is represented by Quevilly-Rouen football club, currently in the Championnat National. Officially called Union Sportive Quevillaise-Rouen M\u00e9tropole, the club play at the 12,018 capacity Stade Robert Diochon in nearby Le Petit-Quevilly. Rouen Normandie Rugby represent the city in Rugby Union. One of few professional rugby teams from northern France, Rouen Normandie Rugby, currently play in the second-tier Pro D2. Dragons de Rouen, an ice hockey club, play in the top-tier Ligue Magnus at the \u00cele Lacroix arena. Baseball is also played in the city at Stade Saint Exup\u00e9ry. The local team, Huskies de Rouen play in the top French tier, they also play some games in European competition.\nNotable residents.\nRouen was the birthplace of:\nInternational relations.\nRouen is twinned with:\nSculpture.\nDuring the second half of the 20th century, sculptures by Jean-Yves Lechevallier were erected in the city. Inaugurated in 2010, the Rouen Impressionn\u00e9e hosted the contemporary urban redevelopment installation sculpture 'Camille' by Belgian artist Arne Quinze. Quinze's use of interlocking systems in sculpture employ wood, concrete, paint and metal. The Quasi-Quinze method of sculpture utilizes structural integrity and randomness as key elements for 'Camille'. Located on the Boieldieu Bridge in the center of Rouen, this location was chosen by the artist to magnify the historical separation of its city's citizens.\nRepresentations in art.\n\"Rouen Cathedral\" is the subject of a series of paintings by the Impressionist painter Claude Monet, who painted the same scene at different times of the day. Two paintings are in the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C.; two are in the Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts in Moscow; one is in the National Museum of Serbia in Belgrade. The estimated value of one painting is over $40\u00a0million.\nClimate.\nRouen has an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\" in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49115", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49115", "title": "Solothurn", "text": "Town in Switzerland\nSolothurn ( ; ; ; ; ) is a town, a municipality, and the capital of the canton of Solothurn in Switzerland. It is located in the north-west of Switzerland on the banks of the Aare and on the foot of the Weissenstein Jura mountains.\nThe town is the only municipality of the district of the same name.\nThe town got its name from Salodurum, a Roman-era settlement. From 1530 to 1792 it was the seat of the French ambassador to Switzerland. The pedestrian-only old town was built between 1530 and 1792 and shows an impressive array of Baroque architecture, combining Italian Grandezza, French style, and Swiss ideas. The town has eighteen structures listed as heritage sites.\nThe official language of Solothurn is (the Swiss variety of Standard) German, but the main spoken language is the local variant of the Alemannic Swiss German dialect.\nHistory.\nPre-Roman settlement.\nThe oldest finds from Solothurn probably date from the Paleolithic era. The remains of a Mesolithic camp were discovered in 1986 during renovations of the former \"Kino Elite\" building. From the Neolithic, Bronze and Iron Age, only a few scattered items have been discovered.\nRoman settlement.\nThe Roman settlement at Solothurn was probably built around AD 15\u201325 as a road station and bridge head on the road from Aventicum to Augusta Raurica or Vindonissa. A small vicus or settlement quickly developed around the castrum. Solothurn is first mentioned in 219 as \"vico salod[uro]\" on the so-called Eponastein. The name may indicate either that a Celtic settlement existed on the site before or just be a testimony to the mixed Gallo-Roman culture in the north-west provinces of the Roman Empire. It came to be known as \"Salodurum\", this name believed to derive from a Celtic language, possibly meaning \"Salo's fort,\" from the personal name Salo + Proto-Celtic *\"d\u016bnom\", meaning \"fort\" or \"stronghold,\" likely influenced by the Latin \"durus\", meaning \"hard\" or \"strong,\" as in other place names. Its strategical importance lay in the position at the approach to the Rhine from southeast. In the 2nd\u20133rd century AD, the vicus expanded rapidly to fill almost all of what is now the old town of Solothurn, including a portion of today's suburb south of the Aare.\nThe Roman bridge was probably somewhat above the current Wengibr\u00fccke. The Roman era river bed was north of the present Aare. The main street of the Vicus was well below the present main street. In addition to the normal government of the settlement, there were two mayors (magistri), and a six-member college (seviri Augustales), which was entrusted with supporting the imperial cult. Salodurum was also home to a guard detachment of the XXII Legion, whose high command was stationed in Mainz in Germany. According to inscriptions, there was a temple of Jupiter, a temple of Apollo Augustus and an altar to the goddess of horses Epona, who was popular in the Roman military and of Celtic origin. However, the locations of those three temples is not known. There was bath house on the main street and a pottery district in the northwest of the town which have been documented archaeologically. A cemetery with urns and cremation burials on the eastern end of the Vicus was discovered in 1762\u201363 during the demolition of the old church of St. Ursus. In addition, two Roman tombs were discovered in the same area.\nAround 325\u2013350, the unfortified settlement along the road was transformed into a fortified camp or castrum, which covered only half of the former settlement area. A thick and high wall was built around the settlement. The new, fortified town was bell-shaped, and is still visible in the cadastral map of the town. At various points in the town, large and small pieces of the old Roman wall are still visible in the houses of the old town. The location of a gate in the north and a tower in the south-east corner are known and it is likely that there were additional gates and towers. Almost nothing is known about the buildings inside the walls.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nIn the Early Middle Ages there were two settlement centres, a secular settlement in the former castrum and a religious settlement on the grounds of the late-Roman cemeteries outside the walls. Both the religious histories and archeological discoveries indicate that both areas remained inhabited continuously into the Early Middle Ages. The former chapel of St. Stephen inside the castrum was built on the foundation of an earlier, late-Roman building. A burial memorial in the cemetery of the nearby St. Peter's Chapel dates to around the collapse of the Roman Empire. By the middle of the 5th century, St. Eucherius of Lyon mentions the martyrdom of St. Ursus and St. Victor and a cult of saints in Solothurn. About 500 AD, the Burgundian Princess Sedeleuba took the bones of St. Victor to Geneva, while the bones of St. Ursus remained in Solothurn. The church dedicated to the veneration of Saint Ursus is first mentioned in 870.\nMedieval city.\nDuring the Early Middle Ages, Solothurn was part of the Kingdom of Lotharingia (Lorraine). After the collapse of Lotharingia, it became part of the Second Kingdom of Burgundy. In 1033, the Kingdom of Burgundy became part of the Holy Roman Empire and Solothurn gained some independence. In 1038, Emperor Conrad II held court at Solothurn and there crowned his son, Henry III King of Burgundy. The royal court resided in Solothurn on several occasions until 1052, however, there is no evidence of a permanent royal palace. In 1127, it was acquired by the dukes of Z\u00e4hringen. Under the rule of the Z\u00e4hringens, in 1146, Solothurn's coins are first mentioned. In 1182, \"causidicus\" or Z\u00e4hringen appointed judges first appeared in Solothurn. After the extinction of the Z\u00e4hringer line in 1218 it became a free imperial city under the Holy Roman Emperor. In 1252, the town council and Schultheiss or mayor became mostly independent and had their own town seals. In 1251 it was mentioned as \"saluerre\" and in 1275 as \"Solotren\". Starting around 1200, there was a council of nobles in the town.\nIn 1252, a group of nobles that could witness and support deeds, known as \"consuls et cives Solodorenses\", first appears in the town. Initially the nobles exercised power over the entire town. However, the guild movement of the 14th century resulted in a reduction in the power of the nobles and also a restricted guild system in Solothurn. By around 1350, an eleven-member \"Altrat\" (Council of Elders) and a 22-member \"Jungrat\" (Younger Council) existed in the city. Each of the eleven guilds were represented by a member of the \"Altrat\" and two members of the \"Jungrat\". These 33 councillors exercised, together with the mayor, the power of government and helped appoint lawmakers. The members of the two councils were elected each year by the citizens of the city, after which the councils and mayor appointed many of the government officials. The noble families retained some power as the guilds became part of the town council. However, in 1459 the last noble family died out and positions on the council fell to wealthy farmers, butchers and millers.\nUntil the pogrom on 1348 during an outbreak of the plague, there was a small Jewish community in Solothurn.\nOver the 13th to 15th centuries, the citizens of the city slowly emancipated themselves from the higher nobility. In 1276 and 1280 Emperor Rudolf I codified the previously poorly defined rights of the city and granted it the privilege \"de non Evocando\" or the right that their citizens were protected from trial in foreign courts. In 1344 Solothurn acquired the right to appoint their own Schultheiss from the Count of Buchegg, which was confirmed by Emperor Charles IV in 1360. In 1409, Emperor Ruprecht extended the \"de non Evocando\" privilege to include the royal High Court as well.\nAs the city grew in power, it bound the Monastery of St. Ursus more closely to the city. In 1251 the city defeated claims made by the Monastery on the right to appoint the Schultheiss. Shortly after the acquisition of the right to the Schultheiss office in 1344, the city came into possession of the vogt right over the Monastery by granting citizenship rights to the former vogt (bailiff), Burkhard Senn the Elder. In 1512\u201320 the city received the right to appoint canons and provosts from the Pope.\nAfter the alliance with Bern in 1295, it became part of the Swiss Confederation. In 1382 the Habsburgs attacked the city, involving Solothurn in the Battle of Sempach. By the treaty of two years later, the Habsburgs renounced all claims to the territory of the city. The latter was expanded by acquisition of neighbouring lands in the 15th century, roughly up to the today's canton area.\nIn 1481, it obtained full membership in the Swiss Confederation.\nBuildings in the medieval city.\nBefore 1200 there was a Z\u00e4hringer fortified tower north of the Monastery of St. Ursus. In the first half of the 13th century, a city wall was built around the area of the former castrum as well as the adjoining industrial area to the east and the churches of St. Peter and St. Urs. Near the Monastery of St. Ursus, a Franciscan monastery was built, and after 1280 it formed the northern city wall on the eastern part of the city. In 1532, the French embassy with a church and stately home was built in the eastern half of the city. In the western part of Solothurn, the town hall was built. First it was along the main street and in 1476 it moved south of the Franciscan monastery. A main market place grew up along the main street, and in the first half of the 17th century it moved to the northern banks of the Aare. The town hall, market place and clock tower formed the political and economic centre of city life.\nEarly modern Solothurn.\nThe medieval cooperative election of the mayor and councillors led to the creation of a nearly hereditary oligarchy by the 15th century. By the second half of the 16th century, the political voice of citizens was nearly totally suppressed. By the second half of the 17th century, the government was run by a small group of patricians. The oligarchs were weakened in the 18th century, when in 1718\u201321 the city council managed to regain some powers. However, in 1682, a new citizenship law prevented wealthy families who had moved into Solothurn from becoming members of the council. While this law reduced the number of people who could be on the city council, the introduction of a secret ballot procedure in 1764 and measures against vote-buying in 1774 allowed more and more non-patrician burghers to join the council.\nDuring the heyday of the patricians in the 17th and 18th centuries, a number of elegant town houses (Reinert House 1692\u201393, Palais Besenval 1703\u201306) and summer residences outside the city (Sommerhaus Vigier 1648\u201350, Waldegg Castle 1682\u201386 (now in nearby Feldbrunnen-St. Niklaus), Steinbrugg Castle 1665\u201368 and Blumenstein Castle 1725\u201328) were built. A number of new public buildings were also added including; the Arsenal (1610\u201319), the town hall with its north staircase tower (1632\u201334) and its eastern fa\u00e7ade (Archive tower 1624, completed 1703\u201314), the Jesuit church (1680\u201389), the new Ambassadorenhof (1717\u201324), the Holy Spirit Hospital in a suburb (1735\u20131800) and the new classicist Church of St. Ursus (1763\u201390). In the 16th century the town walls were reinforced with the Basel gate and three round towers.\nBetween 1667 and 1727, following plans by Francesco Polatta, Jacques Le Prestre Tarade and S\u00e9bastien de Vauban, the city built fortifications with eleven full and half bastions. The new city wall increased the size of the city by including the eastern suburb of Kreuzacker. Until the 18th century, prisoners were housed in the towers of the medieval and early modern fortifications store. Between 1753 and 1761 a new prison was built outside the city walls, which remained in use into the 20th century. A gallows was first mentioned in 1460 and was located northeast of the city near Feldbrunnen. A second gallows was located to the southwest of the city.\nFrom 1530 to 1792 it was the seat of the French ambassador to Switzerland.\nThe early modern period in Solothurn ended, as in the rest of Switzerland, with the French invasion in 1798.\nModern Solothurn.\nFollowing the capitulation of Solothurn on 2 March 1798, the French General Balthazar Alexis Henri Schauenburg set up a provisional government on the following day. The new government met in April to set up the new constitution. The eleven old \"Vogtei\" (baillywicks) were replaced by five districts: Solothurn, Biberist, Balsthal, Olten, and Dornach. The municipal B\u00fcrgergemeinde laid claim to the assets of the defunct city-state and in 1801 it received the \"S\u00f6nderungsconvention\", large estates and extensive forest land outside the town. In 1831 the cantonal parliament withdrew all political power from the eleven city guilds. Over the following years (1831\u20131842) all the guilds were dissolved. Due to the municipal law of 1859, the enforcement of the Federal Constitution of 1874 and the Cantonal Constitution of 1875, an \"Einwohnergemeinde\" was created. The \"Einwohnergemeinde\" included all residents of the town, as opposed to the more limited \"B\u00fcrgergemeinde\". The division of property between residents and the B\u00fcrgergemeinde proved to be lengthy and could not be completed until 1978 and then only with the help of the Executive Council.\nIn 1828 Solothurn became the seat of the Bishop of Basel.\nSince 1897, the municipal council has been elected by proportional voting and consists of 30 members and 15 alternate members. As the executive body, it elects the council commission (seven members). Mayor and Vice-Mayor are elected by the people. The municipal assembly is the legislative body. The composition of the council remained remarkably stable between 1917 and 1973. The Liberals held an average of 60% of the seats, the Social Democrats and the Conservative People's Party (CVP today), about 20% each. In 1970, the municipality granted voting rights for women. With the emergence of new parties, the Liberals lost its dominant position. 2009, the FDP 30%, SP 23%, CVP 23%, the Greens 17% and 7% of the votes go to the SVP.\nRock band Krokus was formed in Solothurn in 1974.\nGeography.\nSolothurn has an area, as of 2009[ [update]], of . Of this area, or 22.6% is used for agricultural purposes, while or 2.7% is forested. Of the rest of the land, or 69.6% is settled (buildings or roads), or 5.3% is either rivers or lakes.\nOf the built up area, industrial buildings made up 4.1% of the total area while housing and buildings made up 38.5% and transportation infrastructure made up 17.5%. Power and water infrastructure as well as other special developed areas made up 1.9% of the area while parks, green belts and sports fields made up 7.5%. Out of the forested land, 0.5% of the total land area is heavily forested and 2.2% is covered with orchards or small clusters of trees. Of the agricultural land, 14.2% is used for growing crops and 7.0% is pastures, while 1.4% is used for orchards or vine crops. All the water in the municipality is flowing water.\nSolothurn is located in the north-west of Switzerland on the banks of the Aare and on the foot of the Weissenstein Jura mountains.\nThe municipalities of Biberist, Derendingen, Luterbach, Bellach, Langendorf and Solothurn are considering a merger at a date in the future into the new municipality of with an, as of 2011[ [update]], undetermined name.\nCoat of arms.\nThe blazon of the municipal coat of arms is \"Per fess Gules and Argent.\"\nDemographics.\nSolothurn has a population (as of December 2020[ [update]]) of . As of 2008[ [update]], 21.1% of the population are resident foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years (1999\u20132009) the population has changed at a rate of 4.4%.\nMost of the population (as of 2000[ [update]]) speaks German (13,270 or 85.7%), with Italian being second most common (469 or 3.0%) and Albanian being third (261 or 1.7%). There are 193 people who speak French and 19 people who speak Romansh.\nAs of 2008[ [update]], the gender distribution of the population was 48.1% male and 51.9% female. The population was made up of 5,891 Swiss men (37.0% of the population) and 1,775 (11.1%) non-Swiss men. There were 6,669 Swiss women (41.8%) and 1,604 (10.1%) non-Swiss women. Of the population in the municipality 3,864 or about 24.9% were born in Solothurn and lived there in 2000. There were 3,630 or 23.4% who were born in the same canton, while 4,135 or 26.7% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 3,193 or 20.6% were born outside of Switzerland.\nIn 2008[ [update]] there were 115 live births to Swiss citizens and 27 births to non-Swiss citizens, and in same time span there were 190 deaths of Swiss citizens and 10 non-Swiss citizen deaths. Ignoring immigration and emigration, the population of Swiss citizens decreased by 75 while the foreign population increased by 17. There were 8 Swiss men and 13 Swiss women who immigrated back to Switzerland. At the same time, there were 91 non-Swiss men and 78 non-Swiss women who immigrated from another country to Switzerland. The total Swiss population change in 2008 (from all sources, including moves across municipal borders) was an increase of 98 and the non-Swiss population increased by 161 people. This represents a population growth rate of 1.7%.\nThe age distribution, as of 2000[ [update]], in Solothurn is; 913 children or 5.9% of the population are between 0 and 6 years old and 2,013 teenagers or 13.0% are between 7 and 19. Of the adult population, 888 people or 5.7% of the population are between 20 and 24 years old. 4,832 people or 31.2% are between 25 and 44, and 3,678 people or 23.7% are between 45 and 64. The senior population distribution is 2,068 people or 13.4% of the population are between 65 and 79 years old and there are 1,097 people or 7.1% who are over 80.\nAs of 2000[ [update]], there were 6,784 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 6,403 married individuals, 1,144 widows or widowers and 1,158 individuals who are divorced.\nAs of 2000[ [update]], there were 7,447 private households in the municipality, and an average of 1.9 persons per household. There were 3,468 households that consist of only one person and 303 households with five or more people. Out of a total of 7,625 households that answered this question, 45.5% were households made up of just one person and there were 49 adults who lived with their parents. Of the rest of the households, there are 1,907 married couples without children, 1,455 married couples with children. There were 405 single parents with a child or children. There were 163 households that were made up of unrelated people and 178 households that were made up of some sort of institution or another collective housing.\nIn 2000[ [update]] there were 1,311 single family homes (or 44.3% of the total) out of a total of 2,957 inhabited buildings. There were 838 multi-family buildings (28.3%), along with 441 multi-purpose buildings that were mostly used for housing (14.9%) and 367 other use buildings (commercial or industrial) that also had some housing (12.4%). Of the single family homes 161 were built before 1919, while 62 were built between 1990 and 2000. The greatest number of single family homes (443) were built between 1919 and 1945.\nIn 2000[ [update]] there were 8,586 apartments in the municipality. The most common apartment size was 3 rooms of which there were 2,954. There were 728 single room apartments and 1,634 apartments with five or more rooms. Of these apartments, a total of 7,272 apartments (84.7% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 794 apartments (9.2%) were seasonally occupied and 520 apartments (6.1%) were empty. As of 2009[ [update]], the construction rate of new housing units was 3.3 new units per 1000 residents. As of 2003[ [update]] the average price to rent an average apartment in Solothurn was 980.18 Swiss francs (CHF) per month (US$1043, \u00a3760, \u20ac852) approx. exchange rate from March 4, 2018). The average rate for a one-room apartment was 568.85 CHF (US$605, \u00a3438, \u20ac495), a two-room apartment was about 725.13 CHF (US$772, \u00a3558, \u20ac631), a three-room apartment was about 904.51 CHF (US$962, \u00a3696, \u20ac787) and a six or more room apartment cost an average of 1564.78 CHF (US$1665, \u00a31204, \u20ac1361). The average apartment price in Solothurn was 87.8% of the national average of 1116 CHF. The vacancy rate for the municipality, in 2010[ [update]], was 0.45%.\nHistorical population.\nThe historical population is given in the following chart:\nMain sights.\nThe old town was built between 1530 and 1792 and shows an architectural combination of Italian Grandezza, French style and Swiss ideas.\nIn 1980, Solothurn was awarded the Wakker Prize for the development and preservation of its architectural heritage.\nSolothurn is home to 18 structures that are listed as Swiss heritage sites of national significance. The religious buildings on the list are; the Visitation Convent, the Jesuit Church with \"Kollegium\" (Lapidarium), the Swiss Reformed Church on Westringstrasse and the St. Ursen Cathedral. There are four civic buildings on the list; the old Armory which is now the Cantonal Museum, the Rathaus (town council house), the State Archives at Bielstrasse 41 and the nearby Central Library at Bielstrasse 39. Two other museums are on the list, the Art Museum and the Naturmuseum. There are two houses and two public objects on the list; the Haller-Haus (former Bishops Palace) at Baselstrasse 61, the Sommerhaus Vigier at Untere Steingrubenstrasse 21, the Mauritius Fountain and the town clock tower. Two castles are listed; the former Blumenstein Castle and Steinbrugg Castle. Finally, the list includes the old town of Salodurum which was a Roman era Vicus and the medieval and early modern city as well as the city walls. The entire old city of Solothurn is part of the Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites.\nSights include:\nPolitics.\nIn the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the SP which received 24.09% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the FDP (23.53%), the Green Party (18.56%) and the CVP (17.19%). In the federal election, a total of 5,767 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 53.8%.\nEconomy.\nAs of \u00a02010[ [update]], Solothurn had an unemployment rate of 4.6%. As of 2008[ [update]], there were 22 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 4 businesses involved in this sector. 2,587 people were employed in the secondary sector and there were 178 businesses in this sector. 14,381 people were employed in the tertiary sector, with 1,226 businesses in this sector. There were 8,023 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which women made up 46.9% of the workforce.\nIn 2008[ [update]] the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 13,378. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 16, of which 7 were in agriculture and 9 were in forestry or lumber production. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 2,430 of which 1,398 or (57.5%) were in manufacturing and 813 (33.5%) were in construction. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 10,932. In the tertiary sector; 1,537 or 14.1% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 454 or 4.2% were in the movement and storage of goods, 610 or 5.6% were in a hotel or restaurant, 583 or 5.3% were in the information industry, 975 or 8.9% were the insurance or financial industry, 1,095 or 10.0% were technical professionals or scientists, 614 or 5.6% were in education and 2,612 or 23.9% were in health care.\nIn 2000[ [update]], there were 13,529 workers who commuted into the municipality and 3,598 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net importer of workers, with about 3.8 workers entering the municipality for every one leaving. Of the working population, 20.1% used public transportation to get to work, and 40.3% used a private car.\nTransport.\nSolothurn railway station is the main ralway station and located south of the old town on the opposite side of the Aare river. It is served by long- and medium-distance trains (IC, RE) as well as local S-Bahn trains (e.g. Bern S-Bahn). Services are operated by Swiss Federal Railways, BLS, RBS and Aare Seeland mobil (asm). Two other railway stations on the standard gauge Jura foot line are Solothurn Allmend and Solothurn West, which are both only served by S-Bahn trains. The asm operates over the meter gauge Solothurn\u2013Niederbipp railway line, with two additional stations within Solothurn (Solothurn Baseltor, Solothurn Sternen) and another one (St. Katharinen) located on the municipal boundary.\nThe A5 motorway runs south of Solothurn.\nReligion.\nFrom the 2000 census[ [update]], 5,463 or 35.3% were Roman Catholic, while 4,358 or 28.1% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there were 278 members of an Orthodox church (or about 1.79% of the population), there were 182 individuals (or about 1.18% of the population) who belonged to the Christian Catholic Church, and there were 248 individuals (or about 1.60% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 27 individuals (or about 0.17% of the population) who were Jewish, and 915 (or about 5.91% of the population) who were Islamic. There were 78 individuals who were Buddhist, 173 individuals who were Hindu and 27 individuals who belonged to another church. 3,139 (or about 20.27% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 601 individuals (or about 3.88% of the population) did not answer the question.\nEducation.\nIn Solothurn about 5,724 or (37.0%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education, and 2,815 or (18.2%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a \"Fachhochschule\"). Of the 2,815 who completed tertiary schooling, 58.0% were Swiss men, 28.0% were Swiss women, 8.1% were non-Swiss men and 5.9% were non-Swiss women.\nDuring the 2010\u20132011 school year there were a total of students in the Solothurn school system. The education system in the Canton of Solothurn allows young children to attend two years of non-obligatory Kindergarten. During that school year, there were Sch\u00fclerbestand children in kindergarten. The canton's school system requires students to attend six years of primary school, with some of the children attending smaller, specialized classes. In the municipality there were 2010\u20132011 students in primary school. The secondary school program consists of three lower, obligatory years of schooling, followed by three to five years of optional, advanced schools. All the lower secondary students from Solothurn attend their school in a neighboring municipality. As of 2000[ [update]], there were 2,517 students in Solothurn who came from another municipality, while 188 residents attended schools outside the municipality.\nSolothurn is home to two libraries. These libraries include the Zentralbibliothek Solothurn and the \"Fachhochschule Nordwestschweiz, P\u00e4dagogische Hochschule, Standort Solothurn\" (a library of the Fachhochschule Nordwestschweiz). There was a combined total (as of 2008[ [update]]) of 1,195,394 books or other media in the libraries, and in the same year a total of 522,650 items were loaned out.\nSport.\nFC Solothurn is the town's football club.\nThe number 11.\nSolothurn has a special affinity for the number eleven.\nThe Canton of Solothurn was the eleventh to become part of the Swiss Confederation. There are eleven churches and chapels, as well as eleven historical fountains and eleven towers. The St. Ursus cathedral has eleven altars and eleven bells, and the stairs in front of the cathedral have landings after every eleven steps.\nA local brewery has named itself \"\u00d6ufi\", which is Swiss German for eleven, and produces a beer with the same name.\nSolothurn Folk Tale.\nThe City of Solothurn has a Mythical Tale set during the Roman occupation times. The People of Solothurn who believed in a singular god were tortured by the Roman soldiers in the Area. The Romans who were polytheist were forcefully converting the locals to believing in their gods. But the People of Solothurn were resilient and stubborn with what they thought was the truth. Some converted though and after a while the romans started imprisoning the Heretics to their Religion. The prisoners were famished, dehydrated, cold, and put into inhabitable conditions, just until they stopped believing in their singular God. But they did not falter and after months it was decided that they would be executed. The Romans built a great Fire intending to burn them, but when time came to actually execute the plan a great big storm arrived and poured rain on the city including the fire extinguish it. The People of Solothurn believed that this was an act of their god to save them. The romans wanting to get over with it brought the prisoners to the Bridge that stood over the river Aare. There they put the prisoners to their knees and head over the water and one by one chopped their heads off then pushed the rest of the body into the river. When it was out of sight the bodies would find their heads and go on shore to an empty field. The Bodies would then use their heads to dig themselves a grave where they would then put themselves to rest.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns\u2014Sister cities.\nSolothurn is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49116", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49116", "title": "Persian Empire (dynasty)", "text": ""}
{"id": "49117", "revid": "48889163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49117", "title": "Regensburg", "text": "City in Bavaria, Germany\nRegensburg (historically known in English as Ratisbon, ) is a city in eastern Bavaria, at the confluence of the rivers Danube, Naab and Regen, Danube's northernmost point. It is the capital of the Upper Palatinate subregion of the state. With more than 150,000 inhabitants, Regensburg is the fourth-largest city in the State of Bavaria after Munich, Nuremberg and Augsburg and the eighth-largest of all cities on the river Danube. From its foundation as an imperial Roman river fort, the city has been the political, economic and cultural centre of the surrounding region. Later, under the rule of the Holy Roman Empire, it housed the Perpetual Diet of Regensburg.\nThe medieval centre of the city was made a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2006 because of its well-preserved architecture, being the biggest medieval city site north of the Alps, and the city's historical importance for assemblies during the Holy Roman Empire. In 2014, Regensburg was among the top sights and travel attractions in Germany.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe first settlements in the Regensburg area date from the Stone Age. The oldest Celtic name given to a settlement near Regensburg was Radasbona, a site where a Roman fort was built around AD 90. In 179, a major new Roman fort, called Castra Regina (\"fortress by the river Regen\"), was built for Legio III \"Italica\" during the reign of Emperor Marcus Aurelius. It was an important camp at the most northerly point of the Danube; it corresponds to what is today the core of Regensburg's Old City or \"Altstadt\" east of the Obere and Untere Bachgasse and west of the Schwanenplatz. It is believed that as early as the late Roman period the city was the seat of a bishop.\nFrom the early 6th century, Regensburg was the seat of a ruling family known as the Agilolfings. From about 530 to the first half of the 13th century, it was the capital of Bavaria. The bishopric established by the Romans was re-established by St Boniface as the Bishopric of Regensburg in 739. In the late 8th century, Regensburg remained an important city during the reign of Charlemagne. In 792, Regensburg hosted the ecclesiastical section of Charlemagne's General Assembly, the bishops in council who condemned the heresy of the nontrinitarian adoptionism doctrine taught by their Spanish counterparts, Elipandus of Toledo and Felix of Urgell. After the partition of the Carolingian Empire in 843, the city became the seat of the Eastern Frankish ruler, Louis the German. Two years later, 14 Bohemian princes came to Regensburg to receive baptism there. This was the starting point of the Christianization of the Czechs, and the diocese of Regensburg became the mother diocese of that of Prague. These events had a wide impact on the cultural history of the Czech lands, as they were consequently part of the Roman Catholic and not the Slavic-Orthodox world. On 8 December 899 Arnulf of Carinthia, a descendant of Charlemagne, died at Regensburg.\nBy the High Middle Ages in the year 1000, the population increased to 40,000 from 23,000 inhabitants in 800. In 1096, on the way to the First Crusade, Peter the Hermit led a mob of crusaders who attempted to force the mass conversion of Jews in Regensburg, they then killed all those who resisted. Between 1135 and 1146, the Stone Bridge across the Danube was built at Regensburg. This bridge opened major international trade routes between northern Europe and Venice, and this began Regensburg's golden age as a residence of wealthy trading families. Regensburg became the cultural centre of southern Germany and was celebrated for its gold work and fabrics.\nLate Middle Ages and early modern period.\nIn 1245 Regensburg became a Free Imperial City and was a trade centre before the shifting of trade routes in the late Middle Ages. Regensburg has always been a place where international meetings were held. This was also the case in 1471 when a war against the Turks was to be decided. In 1486, Regensburg became part of the Duchy of Bavaria, but its independence was restored by the Holy Roman Emperor ten years later.\nIn 1519, the medieval Jewish community of Regensburg - one of the largest and most significant in southern Germany - was expelled following the death of Emperor Maximilian I, who had previously protected the city\u2019s Jews. Without imperial oversight, the city council and local guilds moved quickly to remove the community, citing economic grievances and long-standing religious hostility. Around 500 Jews were forced to leave the city, their property was confiscated, and the centuries-old synagogue and much of the Jewish quarter were demolished. The medieval Jewish cemetery, one of the oldest in the region, was also destroyed; many of its gravestones were removed, broken, or reused in construction around the city. The 1519 expulsion marked the end of Jewish life in Regensburg for several centuries, until Jews were permitted to resettle in the city in the early modern period.\nThe first Diet of Regensburg took place in 1541. The city adopted the Protestant Reformation in 1542 and its Town Council remained entirely Lutheran.\nFrom 1663 to 1806, the city was the permanent seat of the Imperial Diet of the Holy Roman Empire, which became known as the Perpetual Diet of Regensburg. Thus, Regensburg was one of the central towns of the Empire, attracting visitors in large numbers.\nA minority of the population remained Roman Catholic, and Roman Catholics were denied civic rights ('). Although the Imperial city had adopted the Reformation, the town remained the seat of a Roman Catholic bishop and several abbeys. Three of these, St. Emmeram, Niederm\u00fcnster and Oberm\u00fcnster, were free imperial estates within the Holy Roman Empire, meaning that they were granted a seat and a vote at the Imperial Diet ('). So there was the unique situation that the town of Regensburg comprised five independent \"states\" (in terms of the Holy Roman Empire): the Protestant city itself, the Roman Catholic bishopric, and the three monasteries. In addition, it was seen as the traditional capital of the region Bavaria (not the state), acted as functional co-capital of the Empire (second to the Emperor's court at Vienna) due to the presence of the Perpetual Diet, and it was the residence of the Emperor's Commissary-Principal to the same diet, who with one very brief exception was a prince himself (for many years the Prince of Thurn and Taxis, still resident in the town).\nLate modern period.\nIn 1803 the city lost its status as an imperial city following its incorporation into the Principality of Regensburg. It was handed over to the Archbishop-Elector of Mainz and Archchancellor of the Holy Roman Empire Carl von Dalberg in compensation for the territory of the Electorate of Mainz located on the left bank of the Rhine which had been annexed by France under the terms of the Treaty of Lun\u00e9ville in 1801. The Archbishopric of Mainz was formally transferred to Regensburg. Dalberg united the bishopric, the monasteries, and the town itself, making up the Principality of Regensburg (\"F\u00fcrstentum Regensburg\"). Dalberg strictly modernized public life. Most importantly, he awarded equal rights to Protestants and Roman Catholics alike. In 1810 Dalberg ceded Regensburg to the Kingdom of Bavaria, he himself being compensated by the award of Fulda and Hanau to him under the title of \"Grand Duke of Frankfurt\".\nBetween 19 and 23 April 1809, Regensburg was the scene of the Battle of Ratisbon between forces commanded by Henri Gatien Bertrand and Napoleon himself and the retreating Austrian forces. The city was eventually overrun, after supplies and ammunition ran out. The city suffered severe damage during the fight, with about 150 houses being burnt and others being looted. Robert Browning's poem \"Incident at the French Camp\" describes the battle from the French perspective, but is filled with historical errors.\nNazism and World War II.\nThe Jewish community was persecuted after the Nazi Party came to power in Germany in 1933, many Jews fled in the following years, and some were also expelled to Poland; thanks, however, to a Polish-German agreement they were allowed to return to the city. On 9 November 1938, during the Kristallnacht, the Regensburg Synagogue and several Jewish homes and stores were destroyed, and around 220 Jews were arrested, some were also deported to the Dachau concentration camp. During World War II, many Jews emigrated to various countries, and in 1942, over 200 Jews were deported either to Piaski in German-occupied Poland or the Theresienstadt Ghetto in German-occupied Czechoslovakia. In the final months of World War II, in March and April 1945, the Regensburg subcamp of the Flossenb\u00fcrg concentration camp was located in the city, with 460 forced laborers of various nationalities, 40 of whom died.\nRegensburg was home to both a Messerschmitt Bf 109 aircraft factory and an oil refinery, which were bombed by the Allies on 17 August 1943, in the Schweinfurt-Regensburg mission, and on 5 February 1945, during the Oil Campaign of World War II. Although both targets were badly damaged, Regensburg itself suffered little damage from the Allied strategic bombing campaign, and the nearly intact medieval city centre is listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The city's most important cultural loss was that of the Romanesque church of Oberm\u00fcnster, which was destroyed in a March 1945 air raid and was not rebuilt (the belfry survived). Also, Regensburg's slow economic recovery after the war ensured that historic buildings were not torn down and replaced by newer ones. When the upswing in restoration reached Regensburg in the late 1960s, the prevailing mindset had turned in favour of preserving the city's heritage.\nHistory after 1945.\nBetween 1945 and 1949, Regensburg was the site of the largest displaced persons (DP) camp in Germany. At its peak in 1946\u20131947, the workers' district of Ganghofersiedlung housed almost 5,000 Ukrainian and 1,000 non-Ukrainian refugees and displaced persons. With the approval of U.S. Military Government in the American Allied Occupation Zone, Regensburg and other DP camps organised their own camp postal service. In Regensburg, the camp postal service began operation on 11 December 1946.\nAt the beginning of the 1960s, Regensburg invested heavily in technical and social infrastructure to attract industry. Siemens was the first multinational company to come to Regensburg, a significant step in the city's development after World War II. In 1965, Regensburg University was founded; Regensburg University of Applied Sciences was established in 1971. The second multinational company, BMW, arrived in 1986 and set up a large production plant. Since the 1990s, several well-known hightech companies have been located in Regensburg, such as Infineon and OSRAM, contributing to the city's current wealth.\nIn 1997, Regensburg was awarded the Europe Prize for its outstanding achievements in European integration.\nThe World Heritage Committee listed Regensburg's Old Town a UNESCO World Heritage Site in July 2006.\nGeography.\nTopography.\nRegensburg is situated on the northernmost part of the river Danube at the geological crossroads of four distinct landscapes:\nClimate.\nRegensburg straddles the humid continental (\"Dfb\") and oceanic (\"Cfb\") climate zones under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. While the average temperature of in the period from 1971 to 2000 is slightly above the German average (), still only 5 of the 80 cities in Germany above 100,000 inhabitants are colder. The average precipitation of per year ranges slightly below the German average (approximately ). For the newer period from 1981 to 2010 the average temperature and precipitation rose up to respectively . As this increase in the average temperature can also be seen in the other cities, Regensburg still ranks fifth place (shared with Ingolstadt and Kiel) in the above-mentioned ranking. With a total of 1670 sunshine hours per year, Regensburg is roughly 120 hours above German average.\nThe warmest month of the year, on average, is July. The coolest month of the year, on average, is January.\nMain sights.\nCity.\nRegensburg includes the largest medieval old town north of the Alps with nearly 1,500 listed buildings and a picturesque cityscape. Its most famous sights are located mainly in the Old Town, such as:\nSurroundings.\nNear Regensburg there are two very imposing classical buildings erected by Ludwig I of Bavaria as national monuments dedicated to German patriotism and greatness:\nWeltenburg Abbey (Kloster Weltenburg), a Benedictine monastery, is located in Weltenburg near the town of Kelheim. The abbey is situated on a peninsula of the Danube, by what are known as the \"Weltenburg Narrows\" or \"Danube Gorge\". The monastery, founded by Irish or Scottish monks in about 620, is said to be the oldest monastery in Bavaria.\nTo the east of Regensburg lies the Bavarian Forest and its National Park, one of the most visited protected areas in Germany.\nRegensburg is on a designated heritage route, the Route of Emperors and Kings.\nCulture.\nMuseums and exhibitions.\nThere are 20 museums in Regensburg. The Regensburg Museum of History covers the history, culture and arts of Regensburg and Eastern Bavaria from the Stone Age to the present. The Imperial Diet Museum (Reichstagsmuseum) in the Old Town Hall presents life during the Holy Roman Empire. Its main attractions are an original torture chamber and the Reichssaal, the rooms occupied by the Imperial Diet from 1663 to 1806. The Kepler Memorial House (Keplerged\u00e4chtnishaus) illustrates the life of the famous astronomer and mathematician Johannes Kepler. The Municipal Art Gallery (Leerer Beutel) houses art collections, film events and cultural festivals. The city has also added several outdoor museums, known as \"Document\" sites, which give an overview of specific topics such as Roman, Jewish and Bavarian history.\nIn addition, there are the Diocese Museums (Bistumsmuseen) of Regensburg and a branch of the Bavarian National Museum located in St. Emmeram's Abbey, which contains the Princely Treasure Chamber of the Thurn und Taxis family. The Domschatzmuseum where church treasures, monstrances and tapestries are displayed is in St. Peter's Cathedral. Other museums include the Kunstforum Ostdeutsche Galerie, the Naturkundemuseum Ostbayern, the Reptile Zoo, the Regensburg Museum of Danube Shipping (Donau-Schiffahrts-Museum), the Public Observatory Regensburg as well as the Watch Museum (Uhrenmuseum), the Golf Museum, the Post Museum and the Dinoraeum. To celebrate its centenary in 2018, the State of Bavaria opened the Museum of Bavarian History in Regensburg. In 2023 a Dackelmuseum (Dachshund museum) opened. There are also guided tours of most of the historical monuments in Regensburg, as well as organized tours of the city available in several languages.\nTheaters.\nThe Theater Regensburg on the Bismarckplatz was established in 1804 and is the city's most important theater. Operas, operettas, musicals and ballets are performed there. In the summer open-air performances also take place. While the theater on the Bismarckplatz is the city's oldest and largest, the Theater Regensburg also has four other stages with programmes that complement each other. In the \"Neuhaussaal\" of the theater on the Bismarckplatz, concerts by the Philharmonic Orchestra Regensburg take place. The Velodrom Theater presents musicals and plays. In the Haidplatz Theater it is mainly literary and modern plays that are performed, whereas the Turmtheater at the Goliathplatz puts on cabarets, musicals and plays for children as well as modern plays.\nMusic.\nRegensburg is home to the famous Regensburger Domspatzen, the cathedral choir that specializes in liturgy but has toured internationally with a wide variety of music. The Regensburger Schlossfestspiele has been held in the inner courtyard of the St. Emmeram's Abbey every July from 2003, sponsored by the former princely house of Thurn und Taxis. Meanwhile, those were attracting musicians like Elton John, David Garrett, Tom Jones, or Pl\u00e1cido Domingo. Modern music styles, especially jazz, are presented every summer during the Bavarian Jazz weekend during which over a hundred bands, combos, and soloists perform in the Old Town. In 2015, the House of Music was opened, giving a home to skilled musicians and their education.\nFilm and cinema.\nThe international short film season is hosted annually in Regensburg. It is a non-profit event and takes place every March, being one of the most important of its type in Germany. Aside, there are several cinemas, such as CinemaxX, the largest one showing blockbusters and arthouse films, and smaller independent cinemas such as Garbo, Ostentor Kino and Regina Filmtheater. Regensburg has two open air cinemas as well.\nDialect.\nAlthough the German language is Germany's official language, Regensburg is considered a part of the Bavarian dialect language area (') which encompasses much of Bavaria, Austria, and the South Tyrolean region of northern Italy. More specifically, the dialect attributed to Regensburg is called Central Bavarian ('). A 2019 report estimates that about half of Bavaria's 12 million inhabitants speak a variation of the Bavarian dialect.\nThe first dictionary of a German dialect was Johann Ludwig Prasch's '. Published in Regensburg in 1689, it contains 500 words from the Bavarian variation spoken in Regensburg. Regensburg's \"Bauerntheater\", a type of farmers' or folk theater, has staged plays delivered in Bavarian for over 90 years. Moreover, premiering in 2011, Joseph Berlinger's play \"Mei F\u00e4hr Lady\", a story about three \"students\" taking a crash course in Bavarian dialect, has been performed at Regensburg's Turmtheater over 300 times. In fact, the role of the dialect professor is played by Ludwig Zehetner, professor emeritus in Bavarian dialectology at University of Regensburg. Manfred Rohm, whose pen name Sepp Grantelhauer takes on the Bavarian verb ' for \"to complain\", writes a weekly satirical column solely in Bavarian for the \"\".\nBuildings.\nThe Old Town of Regensburg with nearly 1,500 listed buildings offers a huge cultural diversity from Roman to modern times.\nRecreation.\nThe Old Town of Regensburg is surrounded completely by a green belt. Numerous inner-city parks like the City Park (\"Stadtpark\"), the \"Herzogspark\", the \"D\u00f6rnbergpark\", the \"Villapark\" or the university's botanical garden are sources for recreation and leisure.\nMemorial sites.\nThe city of Regensburg has erected several memorials to combat racism, intolerance towards minorities, and all other forms of contempt for human dignity:\nParticular to Regensburg are the so-called \"Stolpersteine\" (stumbling stones) in honor of Jews deported during Nazism.\nEvents.\nTwice a year the Regensburg Dult takes place. This is the city's Volksfest, which is Bavaria's fourth largest. The B\u00fcrgerfest (citizen celebration) in the Old Town is held every two years, attracting over 100,000 visitors. Every second weekend in July, people dressed as knights and other medieval characters come together at the Regensburg Spectaculum, a medieval market, near the Stone Bridge. Every December, there are several Christmas markets all over the city.\nNightlife.\nWith over 500 bars, restaurants, clubs, and other venues in the inner city alone, Regensburg provides a rich and diverse nightlife due to its young population.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\nIn 2023, Regensburg had 178,577 inhabitants, making it the fourth largest city in Bavaria. Over the last hundred years, the city's population has grown rapidly, exceeding 100,000 in 1945 due to the influx of Germans who were expelled from various Eastern and Central European countries at the end of the war. Today Regensburg is one of the fastest growing cities in Germany.\nInternational communities.\nJust over 22% of the total population are foreigners. As of 2022, most come from Ukraine, the Middle East and Southeastern Europe:\nReligion.\nA relative majority of Regensburg's population is Catholic. In 2020, about 48% of the city's inhabitants identified with the Catholic Church, 12.4% were registered Protestants and about 39.6% identified with other religions or had no registered religious affiliation.\nPolitics.\nThe city of Regensburg falls within the Regensburg electoral district, a constituency of the German federal parliament in Berlin (the Bundestag).\nGovernment.\nThe mayor and the City Council are elected for a period of six years. Both elections take place at the same time. The City Council is composed of 51 members and includes the mayor, two deputy mayors, five counsellors and the other council members.\nThe municipal elections in Bavaria of 2020 delivered the following results:\nBoroughs.\nRegensburg is subdivided into 18 boroughs (Stadtbezirke): Innenstadt, Stadtamhof, Steinweg-Pfaffenstein, Sallern-Gallingkofen, Konradsiedlung-Wutzlhofen, Brandlberg-Keilberg, Reinhausen, Weichs, Schwabelweis, Ostenviertel, Kasernenviertel, Galgenberg, Kumpfm\u00fchl-Ziegetsdorf-Neupr\u00fcll, Gro\u00dfpr\u00fcfening-Dechbetten-K\u00f6nigswiesen, Westenviertel, Ober- und Niederwinzer-Kager, Oberisling-Gra\u00df, Burgweinting-Harting. Each borough contains a number of localities (Ortsteile), which can have historic roots in older municipalities that became urbanized and incorporated into the city.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nRegensburg is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nRegensburg's economy counts among the most dynamic and fastest growing in Germany. Focus is on manufacturing industries, such as automotive, industrial and electrical engineering.\nCompanies.\nThere are several multinational corporations located in Regensburg, such as BMW, Continental, E.ON, General Electric, Infineon, Osram, Schneider Electric, Siemens, Telekom, Vitesco Technologies, SGB-SMIT and Toshiba as well as hidden champions (Krones, MR).\nBMW operates an automobile production plant in Regensburg; the Regensburg BMW plant produces 3 Series, 1 Series and (previously) Z4 vehicles. Continental AG, with the headquarters of its car component business, Osram Opto-Semiconductors, SGB-SMIT Group transformers and Siemens as well as Infineon, the former Siemens semiconductor branch, provide a high level of innovation and technical development in Regensburg. Other well known international companies, such as AREVA, Schneider Electric and Toshiba, have built plants in or near Regensburg. GE Aviation founded a greenfield site to innovate, develop and produce turbine machinery components with a new manufacturing casting technology. Amazon.com located its first German customer service centre in Regensburg. The hidden champions Maschinenfabrik Reinhausen (MR) and Krones are both headquartered in or close to Regensburg and are among the major employers.\nAside from the industrial sector, tourism contributes a lot to Regensburg's economical growth, especially since 2006, when the city gained status as UNESCO World Heritage Site. The University of Regensburg, the Regensburg University of Applied Sciences and mercantile trade also play major roles in Regensburg's economy. Increasingly, biotech companies were founded in Regensburg over the last two decades and have their headquarters and laboratories in the city's \"BioPark\". Another focus is on information technology, with the city running a start-up centre for IT firms. One of these former start-ups, CipSoft, now is a known video game company still based in Regensburg.\nOTTI, the Eastern Bavaria Technology Transfer-Institut e.V., is headquartered in Regensburg.\nTourism.\nThe city recorded 912,238 overnight hotel stays and 531,943 hotel guests in 2012. Tourism figures have nearly doubled within the last 15 years and Regensburg has become one of the most-visited German cities from 100,000 to 500,000 residents. In 2014, Regensburg was ranked as a Top-30 travel attraction in Germany by international tourists.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nRegensburg Hauptbahnhof (central station) is connected to lines to Munich, Nuremberg, Passau, Weiden and Hof and Ingolstadt and Ulm. The city lies also on two motorways, the A3 from Cologne and Frankfurt to Vienna, and the A93 from Holledau to Hof.\nThe local transport is provided by a bus network run by the RVV (Regensburger Verkehrsverbund).\nThe city does not own its airport. The nearest airport are: \nEnergy.\nRegensburg's energy is mainly supplied by the German company E.ON, one of the world's largest electric utility service providers. Its subsidiary Bayernwerk runs the local hydropower station in the Danube. In 2012, about 9.1% of the total electricity consumption was generated by renewable energy sources, about 5.1% of the total heat consumption were generated by renewables. Both figures show, that Regensburg is behind other Bavarian cities in this context. Therefore, the municipal government presented an energy plan in 2014, which should enhance the transformation towards renewable energy sources over the next decade.\nHealth.\nRegensburg has one of the most modern university hospitals in Europe, the \"Universit\u00e4tsklinikum Regensburg\". In addition there are several other well-known hospitals such as the \"Krankenhaus Barmherzige Br\u00fcder\" and the \"St. Josef-Krankenhaus\". Psychiatric illnesses are treated in the \"Bezirksklinikum\". With 19.4 hospital beds per 1000 residents, Regensburg has the fourth-highest ratio of beds to residents in Germany as well as the third-highest ratio of medical doctors to residents in Germany (339 per 100,000 residents).\nThe city's BioPark, home to Bavaria's second largest biotech cluster, hosts numerous research institutions and biotech companies.\nEducation.\nUniversities and academia.\nRegensburg is known for its higher education institutions, the largest being the University of Regensburg. Founded in 1962, it is one of Germany's newest universities and ranked among the Top 400 universities worldwide. Among the prominent intellectuals associated with the university are Pope Benedict XVI, Udo Steiner and Wolfgang Wiegard. The campus is situated in a single location together with the Regensburg University of Applied Sciences.\nSince 1874 there has been a College of Catholic Music in the city, the Hochschule f\u00fcr Katholische Kirchenmusik und Musikp\u00e4dagogik Regensburg.\nResearch.\nIn addition to the research centres and institutes of the universities, there are several research institutions situated in the city of Regensburg. Among them are the Leibniz-Institute for East and Southeast European Studies (IOS), the Regensburg Centre for Interventional Immunology (RCI), the Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine (ITEM) and the BioPark, the Bavarian biotech cluster.\nSchools.\nThere are eighteen elementary schools in Regensburg. The city also has several secondary education institutions, both public and private, representing all levels of the German school system. There are eight \"Gymnasien\", five \"Realschulen\", six \"Hauptschulen\" and four vocational schools (\"Berufsschulen\"). In addition, there are several folk high schools with different specialisations.\nThe SIS Swiss International School provides international educational. Founded in 2002, the \"Sportinternat Regensburg\" was Europe's first baseball boarding school.\nSports.\nFootball.\nSSV Jahn Regensburg is the local football club and attracts a fairly large local following. The team was part of a larger sports club founded in 1889 as \"Turnerbund Jahn Regensburg\" which took its name from Friedrich Ludwig Jahn, whose ideas of gymnastics greatly influenced German sport in the 19th century. The football department was created in 1907. The footballers and swimmers left their parent club in 1924 to form \"Sportbund Jahn Regensburg\".\nIce hockey.\nEV Regensburg is the local ice hockey club, currently playing in the DEL2, Germany's second highest professional league.\nBaseball.\nRegensburg Legion\u00e4re is the baseball and softball club from Regensburg. The team is also known as Buchbinder Legion\u00e4re, following a sponsorship of the Buchbinder company. The club plays in the German Bundesliga and is one of the most famous and most successful baseball clubs in Germany. Several players now in the MLB formerly played at the club. Its arena, Armin-Wolf-Arena, was built in 1996 and has a capacity of 10,000 spectators, making it to Germany's largest baseball stadium.\nAthletics.\nThe local athletics club, LG TELIS FINANZ Regensburg, offers a wide range of different competitions and is counted among the most successful clubs in Germany.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49118", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49118", "title": "Ratisbon", "text": ""}
{"id": "49120", "revid": "7770027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49120", "title": "Carthusians", "text": "Roman Catholic Church religious order founded in 1084\nThe Carthusians, also known as the Order of Carthusians (), are a Latin enclosed religious order of the Catholic Church. The order was founded by Bruno of Cologne in 1084 and includes both monks and nuns. The order has its own rule, called the \"Statutes\", and their life combines both eremitical and cenobitic monasticism. The motto of the Carthusians is , Latin for \"The Cross is steady while the world turns.\" The Carthusians retain a unique form of liturgy known as the Carthusian Rite.\nThe name \"Carthusian\" is derived from the Chartreuse Mountains in the French Prealps: Bruno built his first hermitage in a valley of these mountains. These names were adapted to the English \"charterhouse\", meaning a Carthusian monastery. Today, there are 23 charterhouses, 18 for monks and 5 for nuns. The alcoholic cordial Chartreuse has been produced by the monks of Grande Chartreuse since 1737, which gave rise to the name of the color, though the liqueur is in fact produced not only as green chartreuse, but also as yellow chartreuse.\nIn Italy, the Carthusians are known as Certosini and their monastery as a Certosa.\nHistory.\nIn 1084 Bishop Hugh of Grenoble offered Bruno, the former Chancellor of the Diocese of Reims, a solitary site in the mountains of his diocese, in the valley of Chartreuse. There Bruno and six companions built a hermitage, consisting of a few wooden cabins opening towards a gallery that allowed them access to the communal areas, the church, the refectory, and the chapter room without having to suffer too much from inclement conditions.\nSix years later, Bruno's former pupil, Pope Urban II, requested his services. Bruno would only live in Rome for a few short months however, before leaving to establish a new hermitage in Serra San Bruno, in Calabria, a region of southern Italy. He died there on 6 October 1101.\nIn 1132, an avalanche destroyed the first hermitage, killing 7 monks under the snow. The fifth prior of Chartreuse, Guiges, rebuilt the hermitage.\nThe order was founded upon the \"Consuetudines\". It contains largely the rule of the order. It was described by Trappist monk Thomas Merton as \"every line of the Carthusian rule convinces the reader that the men who framed it knew precisely what they were looking for and had a very good notion of the best means of finding it.\"\nCarthusians in Britain.\nThere were ten Carthusian monasteries in Britain before the Reformation, with one in Scotland and nine in England. The first was founded by Henry II of England in 1181 at Witham Friary, Somerset as penance for the murder of Thomas Becket. Hugh of Lincoln was its first prior. The third Charterhouse built in Britain was Beauvale Priory, remains of which can still be seen in Beauvale, Greasley, Nottinghamshire.\nThe Carthusians, as with all Catholic religious orders, were variously persecuted and banned during the Reformation. The abolition of their priories, which were sources of charity in England, particularly reduced their numbers. This was followed by the French Revolution which had a similar effect in France.\nThe Charterhouse, Coventry has been conserved and was opened to the public in April 2023. The area, about a mile from the centre of the city, is a conservation area, and the buildings had been in use as part of a local college. Inside the building is a medieval wall painting, alongside many carvings and wooden beams. Nearby is the river Sherbourne which runs underneath the centre of the city.\nThe best preserved remains of a medieval Charterhouse in the UK are at Mount Grace Priory near Osmotherley, North Yorkshire. One of the cells has been reconstructed to illustrate how different the layout is from monasteries of most other Christian orders, which are normally designed with communal living in mind.\nThe London Charterhouse gave its name to Charterhouse Square and several streets in the City of London, as well as to the Charterhouse School which used part of its site before moving out to Godalming, Surrey.\nNothing remains at Hull or Sheen, although Hull Charterhouse is an almshouse that shared the site of the monastery. Axholme, Hinton, and Witham have slight remains.\nPerth Charterhouse, the single Carthusian Priory founded in Scotland during the Middle Ages, was located in Perth. It stood just west of the medieval town and was founded by James I (1406\u20131437) in the early 15th century. James I and Joan Beaufort, Queen of Scots (died 1445) were both buried in the priory church, as was Queen Margaret Tudor (died 1541), widow of James IV of Scotland. The Priory, said to have been a building of \"wondrous cost and greatness\", was sacked during the Scottish Reformation in 1559, and swiftly fell into decay. No remains survive above ground, though a Victorian monument marks the site. The Perth names Charterhouse Lane and Pomarium Flats (built on the site of the Priory's orchard) recall its existence.\nThere is an active Carthusian house in England, St Hugh's Charterhouse, Parkminster, West Sussex. This has cells around a square cloister approximately on a side, making it the largest cloister in Europe. It was built in the 19th century to accommodate two communities which were expelled from the continent.\nCharterhouse.\nThe monastery is generally a small community of hermits based on the model of the 4th-century Lauras of Palestine. A Carthusian monastery consists of a number of individual \"cells\", usually small houses, each with a small garden, built around a cloister. The individual cells are typically organised so that the door of each cell comes off a large corridor or cloister inner wall.\nThe focus of Carthusian life is contemplation. To this end, there is an emphasis on solitude and silence. Carthusians do not have abbots\u2014instead, each charterhouse is headed by a prior and is populated by two types of monks: the choir monks, referred to as hermits, and the lay brothers. This reflects a division of labor in providing for the material needs of the monastery and the monks. For the most part, the number of brothers in the Order has remained the same for centuries, as it is now: seven or eight brothers for every ten fathers. Humility is a characteristic of Carthusian spirituality. The Carthusian identity is one of shared solitude.\nMusical practice.\nSimilar to the tradition of the Byzantine Rite, Carthusians eschew the use of musical instruments in worship.\nChoirmonks.\nEach hermit, a monk who is or who will be a priest, has his own living space, called a cell, usually consisting of a small dwelling. Traditionally there is a one-room lower floor for the storage of wood for a stove and a workshop as all monks engage in some manual labour. A second floor consists of a small entryway with an image of the Virgin Mary as a place of prayer and a larger room containing a bed, a table for eating meals, a desk for study, a choir stall, and a kneeler for prayer. Each cell has a high-walled garden wherein the monk may meditate as well as grow flowers for himself and/or vegetables for the common good of the community, as a form of physical exercise.\nNext to the door is a small revolving compartment, called a \"turn\", so that meals and other items may be passed in and out of the cell without the hermit having to meet the bearer. Most meals are provided in this manner, which the hermit then eats in the solitude of his cell. There are two meals provided for much of the year: lunch and supper. During seasons or days of fasting, just one meal is provided. The hermit makes his needs known to the lay brother by means of a note, requesting items such as a fresh loaf of bread, which will be kept in the cell for eating with several meals. Carthusians observe a perpetual abstinence from meat.\nThe hermit spends most of his day in the cell: he meditates, prays the minor hours of the Liturgy of the Hours on his own, eats, studies and writes, and works in his garden or at some manual trade. Unless required by other duties, the Carthusian hermit leaves his cell daily only for three prayer services in the monastery chapel, including the community Mass, and occasionally for conferences with his superior. Additionally, once a week, the community members take a long walk in the countryside during which they may speak. On Sundays and solemn feast days a community meal is taken in silence. Twice a year there is a day-long community recreation, and the monk may receive an annual visit from immediate family members.\nLay brothers.\nThere have always been lay brothers in the charterhouse. When Bruno retired to the Chartreuse, two of his companions were secular ones: Andrew and Guerin. They also live a life of solitary prayer and join in the communal prayer and Mass in the chapel. However, the lay brothers are monks under a slightly different type of vows and spend less time in contemplative prayer and more time in manual labour. The lay brothers provide material assistance to the choir monks: cooking meals, doing laundry, undertaking physical repairs, providing the choir monks with books from the library and managing supplies. The life of the brothers complements that of the choir monks and makes the fathers' lives of seclusion possible.\nDuring the brothers' seven-year formation period, some time is given each day to the study of the Bible, theology, liturgy, and spirituality. They can continue their studies throughout their lives. All of the monks live lives of silence.\nThe Carthusians do not engage in work of a pastoral or missionary nature. Unlike most monasteries, they do not have retreatants, and those who visit for a prolonged period are people who are contemplating entering the monastery. As far as possible, the monks have no contact with the outside world.\nCarthusian nuns live a life similar to the monks but with some differences. Choir nuns tend to lead somewhat less eremitical lives, while still maintaining a strong commitment to solitude and silence.\nModern Carthusians.\nToday, the monastery of the Grande Chartreuse is still the Motherhouse of the order. There is a museum illustrating the history of the Carthusian order next to Grande Chartreuse; the monks of that monastery are also involved in producing Chartreuse liqueur. Visits are not possible into the Grande Chartreuse itself, but the 2005 documentary \"Into Great Silence\" gave unprecedented views of life within the hermitage.\nToday, Carthusians live very much as they originally did, without any relaxing of their rules. Generally, those wishing to enter must be between the ages of twenty-one and forty-five. Nowadays, medical examinations are considered necessary before the Novitiate and Profession. The Carthusian novice is introduced to \"Lectio divina\" (spiritual reading).\nIn the 21st century, the S\u00e9lignac Charterhouse, near Simandre sur Suran in France, was converted into a house in which lay people could come and experience Carthusian retreats, living the Carthusian life for shorter periods (an eight-day retreat being fixed as the minimum, to enter at least somewhat into the silent rhythm of the charterhouse).\nLiturgy.\nBefore the Council of Trent in the 16th century, the Catholic Church in Western Europe had a wide variety of rituals for the celebration of Mass. Although the essentials were the same, there were variations in prayers and practices from region to region or among the various religious orders.\nWhen Pope Pius V made the Roman Missal mandatory for all Catholics of the Latin Church, he permitted the continuance of other forms of celebrating Mass that had an antiquity of at least two centuries. The rite used by the Carthusians was one of these and continues in use in a version revised in 1981. Apart from the new elements in this revision, it is substantially the rite of Grenoble in the 12th century, with some admixture from other sources. According to current Catholic legislation, priests can celebrate the traditional rites of their order without further authorization.\nA feature unique to Carthusian liturgical practice is that the bishop bestows on Carthusian nuns, in the ceremony of their profession, a stole and a maniple. The nun, who may receive the consecration of virgins is then also invested with a crown and a ring. The nun wears these ornaments again only on the day of her monastic jubilee and on her bier after her death. At Matins, if no priest or deacon is present, a nun assumes the stole and reads the Gospel; and although in the time of the Tridentine Mass the chanting of the Epistle was reserved to an ordained subdeacon, a consecrated virgin sang the Epistle at the conventual Mass, though without wearing the maniple. For centuries Carthusian nuns retained this rite, administered by the diocesan bishop four years after the nun took her vows.\nFormation.\nThe formation of a Carthusian begins with 6 to 12 months of postulancy. This is followed by two years of novitiate, where the novice wears a black cloak over the white Carthusian habit. Subsequently, the novice takes simple vows and becomes a junior professed for three years, during which the professed wears the full Carthusian habit. The simple vows may be renewed for another two years. Finally, the Carthusian makes the solemn profession.\nLocations of monasteries.\nAs of March\u00a02024[ [update]], there are 21 extant charterhouses, 16 for monks and 5 for nuns:: Argentina (1), Brazil (1), France (6), Germany (1), Italy (3), Korea (2), Portugal (1), Slovenia (1), Spain (4), Switzerland (1), the United Kingdom (1) and the United States (1).\nSaints, blesseds, and other holy people.\nSaints\nBlesseds\nDeclared Blessed by popular acclaim\nServants of God\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49121", "revid": "50806073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49121", "title": "Phoenix, Arizona", "text": "Capital and most populous city of Arizona, U.S.\nPhoenix ( ) is the capital and most populous city of the U.S. state of Arizona. With over 1.6 million residents at the 2020 census, Phoenix is the fifth-most populous city in the United States and the most populous state capital. The Phoenix metropolitan area, with an estimated 5.19 million residents, is the tenth-most populous metropolitan area in the U.S. and the most populous in the Southwest. Phoenix is the county seat of Maricopa County in the Salt River Valley and Arizona Sun Corridor and, with an area of , is the largest city by area in Arizona and 11th-largest city by area in the United States.\nPhoenix was settled in 1867 as an agricultural community near the confluence of the Salt and Gila Rivers and was incorporated as a city in 1881. It became the capital of Arizona Territory in 1889. Its canal system led to a thriving farming community with the original settlers' crops, such as alfalfa, cotton, citrus, and hay, remaining important parts of the local economy for decades. Cotton, cattle, citrus, climate, and copper were known locally as the \"Five C's\" anchoring Phoenix's economy. These remained the driving forces of the city until after World War II, when high-tech companies began to move into the valley and air conditioning made Phoenix's hot summers more bearable.\nPhoenix is the cultural center of Arizona. It is in the northeastern reaches of the Sonoran Desert and is known for its hot desert climate. The region's gross domestic product reached over $362 billion by 2022. The city averaged a four percent annual population growth rate over a 40-year period from the mid-1960s to the mid-2000s, and was among the nation's ten most populous cities by 1980. Phoenix is also one of the largest plurality Hispanic cities in the United States, with 42% of its population being Hispanic.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe Hohokam people occupied the Phoenix area for 2,000 years. They created roughly of irrigation canals, making the desert land arable, and paths of these canals were used for the Arizona Canal, Central Arizona Project Canal, and the Hayden-Rhodes Aqueduct. They also carried out extensive trade with the nearby Ancestral Puebloans, Mogollon, and Sinagua, as well as with the more distant Mesoamerican civilizations. It is believed periods of drought and severe floods between 1300 and 1450 led to the Hohokam civilization's abandonment of the area.\nAfter the departure of the Hohokam, groups of Akimel O'odham (commonly known as Pima), Tohono O'odham, and Maricopa tribes began to use the area, as well as segments of the Yavapai and Apache. The O'odham were offshoots of the Sobaipuri tribe, who in turn were thought to be the descendants of the Hohokam.\nThe Akimel O'odham were the major group in the area. They lived in small villages with well-defined irrigation systems that spread over the Gila River Valley, from Florence in the east to the Estrellas in the west. Their crops included corn, beans, and squash for food as well as cotton and tobacco. They banded with the Maricopa for protection against incursions by the Yuma and Apache tribes. The Maricopa are part of the larger Yuma people; however, they migrated east from the lower Colorado and Gila Rivers in the early 1800s, when they began to be enemies with other Yuma tribes, settling among the existing communities of the Akimel O'odham.\nThe Tohono O'odham also lived in the region, but largely to the south and all the way to the Mexican border. The O'odham lived in small settlements as seasonal farmers who took advantage of the rains, rather than the large-scale irrigation of the Akimel. They grew crops such as sweet corn, tapary beans, squash, lentils, sugar cane, and melons, as well as taking advantage of native plants such as saguaro fruits, cholla buds, mesquite tree beans, and mesquite candy (sap from the mesquite tree). They also hunted local game such as deer, rabbit, and javelina for meat.\nThe Mexican\u2013American War ended in 1848, Mexico ceded its northern zone to the United States, and the region's residents became U.S. citizens. The Phoenix area became part of the New Mexico Territory. In 1863, the mining town of Wickenburg was the first to be established in Maricopa County, to the northwest of Phoenix. Maricopa County had not been incorporated; the land was within Yavapai County, which included the major town of Prescott to the north of Wickenburg.\nThe Army created Fort McDowell on the Verde River in 1865 to forestall Indian uprisings. The fort established a camp on the south side of the Salt River by 1866, which was the first settlement in the valley after the decline of the Hohokam. Other nearby settlements later merged to become the city of Tempe.\nFounding and incorporation.\nThe history of Phoenix begins with Jack Swilling, a Confederate veteran of the Civil War who prospected in the nearby mining town of Wickenburg in the newly formed Arizona Territory. As he traveled through the Salt River Valley in 1867, he saw a potential for farming to supply Wickenburg with food. He also noted the eroded mounds of dirt that indicated previous canals dug by native peoples who had long since left the area. He formed the Swilling Irrigation and Canal Company that year, dug a large canal that drew in river water, and erected several crop fields in a location that is now within the eastern portion of central Phoenix near its airport. Other settlers soon began to arrive, appreciating the area's fertile soil and lack of frost, and the farmhouse Swilling constructed became a frequently-visited location in the valley. Lord Darrell Duppa was one of the original settlers in Swilling's party, and he suggested the name \"Phoenix\", as it described a city born from the ruins of a former civilization.\nThe Board of Supervisors in Yavapai County officially recognized the new town on May 4, 1868, and the first post office was established the following month with Swilling as the postmaster. In October 1870, valley residents met to select a new townsite for the valley's growing population. A new location three miles to the west of the original settlement, containing several allotments of farmland, was chosen, and lots began to officially be sold under the name of Phoenix in December of that year. This established the downtown core in a grid layout pattern that has been the hallmark of Phoenix's urban development ever since.\nOn February 12, 1871, the territorial legislature created Maricopa County by dividing Yavapai County; it was the sixth one formed in the Arizona Territory. The first election for county office was held in 1871 when Tom Barnum was elected the first sheriff. He ran unopposed when the other two candidates (John A. Chenowth and Jim Favorite) fought a duel; Chenowth killed Favorite and was forced to withdraw from the race.\nThe town grew during the 1870s, and President Ulysses S. Grant issued a land patent for the site of Phoenix on April 10, 1874. By 1875, the town had a telegraph office, 16 saloons, and four dance halls, but the townsite-commissioner form of government needed an overhaul. An election was held in 1875, and three village trustees and other officials were elected. By 1880, the town's population stood at 2,453.\nBy 1881, Phoenix's continued growth made the board of trustees obsolete. The Territorial Legislature passed the Phoenix Charter Bill, incorporating Phoenix and providing a mayor-council government; Governor John C. Fremont signed the bill on February 25, 1881, officially incorporating Phoenix as a city with a population of around 2,500.\nThe railroad's arrival in the valley in the 1880s was the first of several events that made Phoenix a trade center whose products reached eastern and western markets. In response, the Phoenix Chamber of Commerce was organized on November 4, 1888. The city offices moved into the new City Hall at Washington and Central in 1888. The territorial capital moved from Prescott to Phoenix in 1889, and the territorial offices were also in City Hall. The arrival of the Santa Fe, Prescott and Phoenix Railway in 1895 connected Phoenix to Prescott, Flagstaff, and other communities in the northern part of the territory. The increased access to commerce expedited the city's economic rise. The Phoenix Union High School was established in 1895 with an enrollment of 90.\n1901 to World War II.\nOn February 25, 1901, Governor Oakes Murphy dedicated the permanent Capitol building, and the Carnegie Free Library opened seven years later, on February 18, 1908, dedicated by Benjamin Fowler. The National Reclamation Act was signed by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1902, which allowed dams to be built on waterways in the west for reclamation purposes. The first dam constructed under the act, Salt River Dam#1, began in 1903. It supplied both water and electricity, becoming the first multi-purpose dam, and Roosevelt attended the official dedication on May 18, 1911. At the time, it was the largest masonry dam in the world, forming a lake in the mountains east of Phoenix. The dam would be renamed after Teddy Roosevelt in 1917, and the lake would follow suit in 1959.\nOn February 14, 1912, Phoenix became a state capital, as Arizona was admitted to the Union as the 48th state under President William Howard Taft. This occurred just six months after Taft had vetoed a joint congressional resolution granting statehood to Arizona, due to his disapproval of the state constitution's position on the recall of judges. In 1913, Phoenix's move from a mayor-council system to council-manager made it one of the first cities in the United States with this form of city government. After statehood, Phoenix's growth started to accelerate; eight years later, its population reached 29,053. In 1920, Phoenix would see its first skyscraper, the Heard Building; it was the tallest building in the state until the completion of the Luhrs Building in 1924. In 1929, Sky Harbor was officially opened, at the time owned by Scenic Airways. The city purchased it in 1935 and continues to operate it today.\nOn March 4, 1930, former U.S. President Calvin Coolidge dedicated a dam on the Gila River named in his honor. However, the state had just been through a long drought, and the reservoir which was supposed to be behind the dam was virtually dry. The humorist Will Rogers, who was on hand as a guest speaker joked, \"If that was my lake, I'd mow it.\" Phoenix's population had nearly doubled during the 1920s and by 1930 stood at 48,118. It was also during the 1930s that Phoenix and its surrounding area began to be called \"The Valley of the Sun\", which was an advertising slogan invented to boost tourism.\nDuring World War II, Phoenix's economy shifted to that of a distribution center, transforming into an \"embryonic industrial city\" with the mass production of military supplies. There were three air force fields in the area: Luke Field, Williams Field, and Falcon Field, as well as two large pilot training camps, Thunderbird Field No. 1 in Glendale and Thunderbird Field No. 2 in Scottsdale.\nPost-World War II explosive growth.\nA town that had just over 65,000 residents in 1940 became America's fifth most populous city by 2020, with a population of nearly 1.6 million, and millions more in nearby suburbs. After the war, many of the men who had undergone their training in Arizona returned with their new families. Learning of this large untapped labor pool enticed many large industries to move their operations to the area. In 1948, high-tech industry, which would become a staple of the state's economy, arrived in Phoenix when Motorola chose Phoenix as the site of its new research and development center for military electronics. Seeing the same advantages as Motorola, other high-tech companies, such as Intel and McDonnell Douglas, moved into the valley and opened manufacturing operations.\nBy 1950, over 105,000 people resided in the city and thousands more in surrounding communities. The 1950s growth was spurred on by advances in air conditioning, which allowed homes and businesses to offset the extreme heat experienced in Phoenix and the surrounding areas during its long summers. There was more new construction in Phoenix in 1959 alone than from 1914 to 1946.\nLike many emerging American cities at the time, Phoenix's spectacular growth did not occur evenly. It largely took place on the city's north side, a region that was nearly all Caucasian. In 1962, one local activist testified at a US Commission on Civil Rights of hearing that of 31,000 homes that had recently sprung up in this neighborhood, not a single one had been sold to an African-American. Phoenix's African-American and Mexican-American communities remained largely sequestered on the south side of town. The color lines were so rigid that no one north of Van Buren Street would rent to the African-American baseball star Willie Mays, in town for spring training in the 1960s. In 1964, a reporter from \"The New Republic\" wrote of segregation in these terms: \"Apartheid is complete. The two cities look at each other across a golf course.\"\n1960s to present.\nThe continued rapid population growth led more businesses to the valley to take advantage of the labor pool, and manufacturing, particularly in the electronics sector, continued to grow. The convention and tourism industries saw rapid expansion during the 1960s, with tourism becoming the third largest industry by the end of the decade. In 1965, the Phoenix Corporate Center opened; at the time it was the tallest building in Arizona, topping off at 341 feet. The 1960s saw many other buildings constructed as the city expanded rapidly, including the Rosenzweig Center (1964), today called Phoenix City Square, the landmark Phoenix Financial Center (1964), as well as many of Phoenix's residential high-rises. In 1965 the Arizona Veterans Memorial Coliseum opened at the Arizona State Fairgrounds, west of downtown. When Phoenix was awarded an NBA franchise in 1968, which would be called the Phoenix Suns, they played their home games at the Coliseum until 1992, after which they moved to America West Arena. In 1968, President Lyndon B. Johnson approved the Central Arizona Project, assuring future water supplies for Phoenix, Tucson, and the agricultural corridor between them. The following year, Pope Paul VI created the Diocese of Phoenix on December 2, by splitting the Archdiocese of Tucson, with Edward A. McCarthy as the first Bishop.\nIn the 1970s the downtown area experienced a resurgence, with a level of construction activity not seen again until the urban real estate boom of the 2000s. By the end of the decade, Phoenix adopted the Phoenix Concept 2000 plan which split the city into urban villages, each with its own village core where greater height and density was permitted, further shaping the free-market development culture. The nine original villages have expanded to 15 over the years (see Cityscape below). This officially turned Phoenix into a city of many nodes, which would later be connected by freeways. The Phoenix Symphony Hall opened in 1972; other major structures which saw construction downtown during this decade were the First National Bank Plaza, the Valley Center (the tallest building in Arizona), and the Arizona Bank building.\nOn September 25, 1981, Phoenix resident Sandra Day O'Connor broke the gender barrier on the U.S. Supreme Court, when she was sworn in as the first female justice. In 1985, the Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station, the nation's largest nuclear power plant, began electrical production. Pope John Paul II and Mother Teresa both visited the Valley in 1987.\nThere was an influx of refugees due to low-cost housing in the Sunnyslope area in the 1990s, resulting in 43 different languages being spoken in local schools by 2000. The new 20-story City Hall opened in 1992.\nPhoenix has maintained a growth streak in recent years, growing by 24.2% before 2007. This made it the second-fastest-growing metropolitan area in the United States, surpassed only by Las Vegas. In 2008, Squaw Peak, the city's second tallest mountain, was renamed Piestewa Peak after Army Specialist Lori Ann Piestewa, an Arizonan and the first Native American woman to die in combat while serving in the U.S. military, as well as being the first American female casualty of the 2003 Iraq War. 2008 also saw Phoenix as one of the cities hardest hit by the subprime mortgage crisis, and by early 2009 the median home price was $150,000, down from its $262,000 peak in 2007. Crime rates in Phoenix have fallen in recent years, and once troubled, decaying neighborhoods such as South Mountain, Alhambra, and Maryvale have recovered and stabilized. On June 1, 2023, the State of Arizona announced the decision to halt new housing development in the Phoenix metropolitan area that relies solely on groundwater due to a predicted water shortfall.\nGeography.\nPhoenix is in the south-central portion of Arizona; about halfway between Tucson to the southeast and Flagstaff to the north, in the Southwestern United States. By car, Phoenix is approximately north of the US\u2013Mexico border at Sonoyta and north of the border at Nogales. The metropolitan area is known as the \"Valley of the Sun\" due to its location in the Salt River Valley. It lies at a mean elevation of 1,086 feet (331 m), in the northern reaches of the Sonoran Desert.\nOther than the mountains in and around the city, Phoenix's topography is generally flat, which allows the city's main streets to run on a precise grid with wide, open-spaced roadways. Scattered, low mountain ranges surround the valley: McDowell Mountains to the northeast, the White Tank Mountains to the west, the Superstition Mountains far to the east, and both South Mountain and the Sierra Estrella to the south/southwest. Camelback Mountain, North Mountain, Sunnyslope Mountain, and Piestewa Peak are within the heart of the valley. The city's outskirts have large fields of irrigated cropland and Native American reservation lands. The Salt River runs westward through Phoenix, but the riverbed is often dry or contains little water due to large irrigation diversions. South Mountain separates the community of Ahwatukee from the rest of the city.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has an area of , of which is land and , or 0.2%, is water.\nMaricopa County grew by 711% from 186,000 in 1940 to 1,509,000 by 1980, due in part to air conditioning, cheap housing, and an influx of retirees. The once \"modest urban sprawl\" now \"grew by 'epic' proportions\u2014not only a myriad of residential tract developments on both farmland and desert.\" Retail outlets and office complexes spread out and did not concentrate in the small downtown area. There was low population density and a lack of widespread and significant high-rise development. As a consequence Phoenix became a textbook case of urban sprawl for geographers. Even though it is the fifth most populated city in the United States, the large area gives it a low density rate of approximately 2,797 people per square mile. In comparison, Philadelphia, the sixth most populous city with nearly the same population as Phoenix, has a density of over 11,000 people per square mile.\nLike most of Arizona, Phoenix does not observe daylight saving time. In 1973, Governor Jack Williams argued to the U.S. Congress that energy use would increase in the evening should Arizona observe DST. He went on to say energy use would also rise early in the day \"because there would be more lights on in the early morning.\" Additionally, he said daylight saving time would cause children to go to school in the dark.\nCityscape.\nNeighborhoods.\nSince 1979, the city of Phoenix has been divided into urban villages, many of which are based upon historically significant neighborhoods and communities that have since been annexed into Phoenix. Each village has a planning committee appointed directly by the city council. According to the city-issued village planning handbook, the purpose of the village planning committees is to \"work with the city's planning commission to ensure a balance of housing and employment in each village, concentrate development at identified village cores, and to promote the unique character and identity of the villages.\" There are 15 urban villages, all contained within their own particular planning area: Ahwatukee Foothills, Alhambra, Camelback East, Central City, Deer Valley, Desert View, Encanto, Estrella, Laveen, Maryvale, North Gateway, North Mountain, Paradise Valley, Rio Vista, and South Mountain.\nThe urban village of Paradise Valley is distinct from the nearby Town of Paradise Valley. Although the urban village is part of Phoenix, the town is independent.\nIn addition to the above urban villages, Phoenix has a variety of commonly referred-to regions and districts, such as Downtown, Midtown, Uptown, Melrose District, West Phoenix, North Phoenix, South Phoenix, Biltmore Area, Arcadia, and Sunnyslope.\nFlora and fauna.\nWhile some of the native flora and fauna of the Sonoran Desert can be found within Phoenix city limits, most are found in the suburbs and the undeveloped desert areas that surround the city. Native mammal species include coyote, javelina, bobcat, mountain lion, desert cottontail rabbit, jackrabbit, antelope ground squirrel, mule deer, ringtail, coati, and multiple species of bats, such as the Mexican free-tailed bat and western pipistrelle, that roost in and around the city. There are many species of native birds, including Costa's hummingbird, Anna's hummingbird, Gambel's quail, Gila woodpecker, mourning dove, white-winged dove, the greater roadrunner, the cactus wren, and many species of raptors, including falcons, hawks, owls, vultures (such as the turkey vulture and black vulture), and eagles, including the golden and the bald eagle.\nThe greater Phoenix region is home to the only thriving feral population of rosy-faced lovebirds in the U.S. This bird is a popular birdcage pet, native to southwestern Africa. Feral birds were first observed living outdoors in 1987, probably escaped or released pets, and by 2010 the Greater Phoenix population had grown to about 950 birds. These lovebirds prefer older neighborhoods where they nest under untrimmed, dead palm tree fronds.\nThe area is also home to a plethora of native reptile species including the Western diamondback rattlesnake, Sonoran sidewinder, several other types of rattlesnakes, Sonoran coral snake, dozens of species of non-venomous snakes (including the Sonoran gopher snake and the California kingsnake), the gila monster, desert spiny lizard, several types of whiptail lizards, the chuckwalla, desert horned lizard, western banded gecko, Sonora mud turtle, and the desert tortoise. Native amphibian species include the Couch's spadefoot toad, Chiricahua leopard frog, and the Sonoran desert toad.\nPhoenix and the surrounding areas are also home to a wide variety of native invertebrates including the Arizona bark scorpion, giant desert hairy scorpion, Arizona blond tarantula, Sonoran Desert centipede, tarantula hawk wasp, camel spider, and tailless whip scorpion. Of great concern is the presence of Africanized bees which can be extremely dangerous\u2014even lethal\u2014when provoked.\nThe Arizona Upland subdivision of the Sonoran Desert (of which Phoenix is a part) has \"the most structurally diverse flora in the United States.\" One of the most well-known types of succulents, the giant saguaro cactus, is found throughout the city and its neighboring environs. Other native species are the organpipe, barrel, fishhook, senita, prickly pear and cholla cacti; ocotillo; Palo Verde trees and foothill and blue paloverde; California fan palm; agaves; soaptree yucca, Spanish bayonet, desert spoon, and red yucca; ironwood; mesquite; and the creosote bush.\nMany non-native plants also thrive in Phoenix including, but not limited to, the date palm, Mexican fan palm, pineapple palm, Afghan pine, Canary Island pine, Mexican fencepost cactus, cardon cactus, acacia, eucalyptus, aloe, bougainvillea, oleander, lantana, bottlebrush, olive, citrus, and red bird of paradise.\nClimate.\nPhoenix has a hot desert climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BWh\"), typical of the Sonoran Desert, and is the largest city in the Americas in this climatic zone. Phoenix has long, extremely hot summers and short, mild winters. The city is within one of the world's sunniest regions, with its sunshine duration comparable to the Sahara region. With 3,872 hours of bright sunshine annually, Phoenix receives the most sunshine of any major city on Earth. Average high temperatures in summer are the hottest of any major city in the United States. On average, there are 111 days annually with a high of at least , including most days from the end of May through late September. Highs top an average of 21 days during the year. On June 26, 1990, the temperature reached an all-time recorded high of . The annual minimum temperature in Phoenix is in the mid-to-low 30s. It rarely drops to or below. Snow is rare.\nIn July 2023, Phoenix became the first major city in the US to have an average monthly temperature of over with an average daily mean temperature for the month at , which is also the hottest month ever recorded in the city. That same month the city had an unprecedented streak of 31 days with + highs that lasted from June 30 to July 30. That year the city also had a record 55 days of daily highs topping +, which also made summer of 2023 the hottest on record there, until it was beaten by the summer of 2024 with the hottest ever June at , the third hottest August at and the 2nd hottest July record at by average daily temperature respectively. That same year in 2024, it also recorded an unprecedented 113 day streak of daily highs topping + that lasted from May 27 to September 16 and ultimately recorded a record 70 days in a single year, ending by October 7. Because extreme heat is so common, nearly all homes in Phoenix have air conditioning, though poorer residents may not be able to afford to repair or operate them when needed.\nMaricopa County, which includes Phoenix, was ranked seventh for most ozone pollution in the United States according to the American Lung Association. Vehicle emissions are cited as precursors to ozone formation. Phoenix also has high levels of particulate pollution; although cities in California lead the nation in this hazard. PM2.5 particulate matter, which is a component of diesel engine exhaust, and larger PM10 particles, which can come from dust, can both reach concerning levels in Phoenix. In fact, people, pets, and other animals exposed to high concentrations of PM10 dust particles\u2015primarily from dust storms or from disturbed agricultural or construction sites\u2015are at risk of contracting Valley Fever, a fungal lung infection.\nUnlike most desert locations which have drastic fluctuations between day and nighttime temperatures, the urban heat island effect limits Phoenix's diurnal temperature variation. As the city has expanded, average summer low temperatures have been steadily rising. Pavement, sidewalks, and buildings store the Sun's heat and radiate it at night. The daily normal low remains at or above for an average of 74 days per summer. On July 19, 2023, at the height of an unprecedent heatwave that caused daily highs to top or higher that lasted for 31 days straight, Phoenix set its record for the warmest daily low temperature, at .\nThe city averages approximately 300 days of sunshine, or over 85% of daylight hours, per year, and receives scant rainfall\u2015the average annual total at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport is . The region's trademark dry and sunny weather is interrupted by sporadic Pacific storms in the winter and the arrival of the North American monsoon in the summer. Historically, the monsoon officially started when the average dew point was for three days in a row\u2014typically occurring in early July. To increase monsoon awareness and promote safety, however, the National Weather Service decreed that starting in 2008, June 15 would be the official \"first day\" of the monsoon, and it would end on September 30. When active, the monsoon raises humidity levels and can cause heavy localized precipitation, flash floods, hail, destructive winds, and dust storms\u2014which can rise to the level of a haboob in some years.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2020, Phoenix was the fifth most populous city in the United States, with the census bureau placing its population at 1,608,139, edging out Philadelphia with a population of 1,567,872. In the aftermath of the Great Recession, Phoenix had a population of 1,445,632 according to the 2010 United States census, the sixth largest city and still the most populous state capital in the United States. Prior to the Great Recession, in 2006, Phoenix's population was 1,512,986, the fifth largest just ahead of Philadelphia.\nAfter leading the U.S. in population growth for over a decade, the sub-prime mortgage crisis, followed by the recession, led to a slowing in the growth of Phoenix. There were approximately 77,000 people added to the population of the Phoenix metropolitan area in 2009, which was down significantly from its peak in 2006 of 162,000. Despite this slowing, Phoenix's population grew by 9.4% since the 2000 census (a total of 124,000 people), while the entire Phoenix metropolitan area grew by 28.9% during the same period. This compares with an overall growth rate nationally during the same time frame of 9.7%. Not since 1940\u201350, when the city had a population of 107,000, had the city gained less than 124,000 in a decade. Phoenix's recent growth rate of 9.4% from the 2010 census is the first time it has recorded a growth rate under 24% in a census decade. However, in 2016, Phoenix once again became the fastest growing city in the United States, adding approximately 88 people per day during the preceding year.\nThe Phoenix Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) (officially known as the Phoenix-Mesa-Chandler MSA), is one of 10 MSAs in Arizona, and was the 11th largest in the United States, with a 2018 U.S. census population estimate of 4,857,962, up from the 2010 census population of 4,192,887. Consisting of both Pinal and Maricopa counties, the MSA accounts for 65.5% of Arizona's population. Phoenix only contributed 13% to the total growth rate of the MSA, down significantly from its 33% share during the prior decade. Phoenix is also part of the Arizona Sun Corridor megaregion (MR), which is the tenth most populous of the 11 MRs, and the eighth largest by area. It had the second largest growth by percentage of the MRs (behind only the Gulf Coast MR) between 2000 and 2010.\nThe population is almost equally split between men and women, with men making up 50.2% of city's citizens. The population density is 2,797.8 people per square mile, and the city's median age is 32.2 years, with only 10.9 of the population being over 62. 98.5% of Phoenix's population lives in households with an average household size of 2.77 people.\nThere were 514,806 total households, with 64.2% of those households consisting of families: 42.3% married couples, 7% with an unmarried male as head of household, and 14.9% with an unmarried female as head of household. 33.6% of those households have children below the age of 18. Of the 35.8% of non-family households, 27.1% have a householder living alone, almost evenly split between men and women, with women having 13.7% and men occupying 13.5%.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], Phoenix has 590,149 dwelling units, with an occupancy rate of 87.2%. The largest segment of vacancies is in the rental market, where the vacancy rate is 14.9%, and 51% of all vacancies are in rentals. Vacant houses for sale only make up 17.7% of the vacancies, with the rest being split among vacation properties and other various reasons.\nThe city's median household income was $47,866, and the median family income was $54,804. Males had a median income of $32,820 versus $27,466 for females. The city's per capita income was $24,110. 21.8% of the population and 17.1% of families were below the poverty line. Of the total population, 31.4% of those under the age of 18 and 10.5% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.\nEthnicity.\nAccording to the 2020 census, the racial breakdown of Phoenix was as follows:\nAccording to the 2010 census, the racial breakdown of Phoenix was as follows:\nPhoenix's population has historically been predominantly white. From 1890 to 1970, over 90% of the citizens were white. In recent years, this percentage has dropped, reaching 65% in 2010. However, a large part of this decrease can be attributed to new guidelines put out by the U.S. Census Bureau in 1980, when a question regarding Hispanic origin was added to the census questionnaire. This has led to an increasing tendency for some groups to no longer self-identify as white, and instead categorize themselves as \"other races\".\n20.6% of the population of the city was foreign born in 2010. Of the 1,342,803 residents over five years of age, 63.5% spoke only English, 30.6% spoke Spanish at home, 2.5% spoke another Indo-European language, 2.1% spoke Asian or Islander languages, with the remaining 1.4% speaking other languages. About 15.7% of non-English speakers reported speaking English less than \"very well\". The largest national ancestries reported were Mexican (35.9%), German (15.3%), Irish (10.3%), English (9.4%), Black (6.5%), Italian (4.5%), French (2.7%), Polish (2.5%), American Indian (2.2%), and Scottish (2.0%).\nHispanics or Latinos of any race make up 40.8% of the population. Of these the largest groups are at 35.9% Mexican, 0.6% Puerto Rican, 0.5% Guatemalan, 0.3% Salvadoran, 0.3% Cuban.\nPhoenix has the largest urban Native American population in Arizona. Phoenix has around 200 Dakota Sioux, approximately 100 Minnesota Chippewas, 100 Kiowas, about 175 Creeks, 100 Choctaws, several hundred Cherokees, several hundred Pueblos, and smaller numbers of Shawnees, Blackfeet, Pawnees, Cheyennes, Iroquois, Tlingit, Yakimas and other Native Americans from far away states.\nHispanics are now the majority in Phoenix. African Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans live primarily in the southern portion of Phoenix, below the downtown district.\nAccording to the National Immigration Forum, the majority of Phoenix's immigrants are from Latin America: Mexico (196,941), Guatemala (5.093), El Salvador (2,980); Asia: India (10,128), Philippines (5.756), Vietnam (4,698); Africa: Ethiopia (1,157), Liberia (1,089), Sudan (1,067) and Europe: Bosnia and Herzegovina (2.944), Germany (2,847) and Romania (1,658).\nAccording to a 2014 study by the Pew Research Center, 66% of the population of the city identified themselves as Christians, while 26% claimed no religious affiliation. The same study says other religions (including Judaism, Buddhism, Islam, and Hinduism) collectively make up about 7% of the population. In 2010, according to the Association of Religion Data Archives, which conducts religious census each ten years, 39% of those polled in Maricopa county considered themselves a member of a religious group. Of those who expressed a religious affiliation, the area's religious composition was reported as 35% Catholic, 22% to Evangelical Protestant denominations, 16% Latter-Day Saints (LDS), 14% to nondenominational congregations, 7% to Mainline Protestant denominations, and 2% Hindu. The remaining 4% belong to other religions, such as Buddhism and Judaism.\nWhile the number of religious adherents increased by 103,000 during the decade, the growth did not keep pace with the county's overall population increase of almost three-quarters of million individuals during the same period. The largest aggregate increases were in the LDS (a 58% increase) and Evangelical Protestant churches (14% increase), while all other categories saw their numbers drop slightly or remain static. The Catholic Church had an 8% drop, while mainline Protestant groups saw a 28% decline.\nAccording to the 2022 Point-In-Time Homeless Count, there were 3,096 homeless people in Phoenix.\nEconomy.\nPhoenix's early economy focused on agriculture and natural resources, especially the \"5Cs\" of copper, cattle, climate, cotton, and citrus. With the opening of the Union Station in 1923, the establishment of the Southern Pacific rail line in 1926, and the creation of Sky Harbor airport in 1928, the city became more easily accessible. The Great Depression affected Phoenix, but Phoenix had a diverse economy and by 1934 the recovery was underway. At the conclusion of World War II, the valley's economy surged, as many men who had completed their military training at bases in and around Phoenix returned with their families. The construction industry, spurred on by the city's growth, further expanded with the development of Sun City. It became the template for suburban development in post-WWII America, and Sun City became the template for retirement communities when it opened in 1960. The city averaged a four percent annual growth rate over a 40-year period from the mid-1960s to the mid-2000s.\nAs the subprime mortgage crisis began, construction in Phoenix collapsed and housing prices plunged. Arizona jobs declined by 11.8% from peak to trough; in 2007 Phoenix had 1,918,100 employed individuals, by 2010 that number had shrunk by 226,500 to 1,691,600. By the end of 2015, the employment number in Phoenix had risen to 1.97 million, finally regaining its pre-recession levels, with job growth occurring across the board.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], the Phoenix MSA had a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of just under $243 billion. The top five industries were: real estate ($41.96), finance and insurance ($19.71), manufacturing ($19.91), retail trade ($18.64), and health care ($19.78). Government (including federal, state and local), if it had been a private industry, would have been ranked second on the list, generating $23.37 billion.\nIn Phoenix, real estate developers face few constraints when planning and developing new projects.\nEmployment.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], Phoenix had a per capita income of $61,840 and an unemployment rate of 3.3%; the top employers were:\nPhoenix is also home to several Fortune 500 companies, including: electronics corporation Avnet, mining company Freeport-McMoRan, retailer PetSmart, and waste hauler Republic Services. Honeywell's Aerospace division is headquartered in Phoenix, and the valley hosts many of their avionics and mechanical facilities. Intel has one of their largest sites in the area, employing about 12,000 employees, the second largest Intel location in the country. The city is also home to the headquarters of U-HAUL International, Best Western, and Apollo Group, parent of the University of Phoenix. Southwest is the largest carrier at Phoenix's Sky Harbor International Airport. Mesa Air Group, a regional airline group, is headquartered in Phoenix.\nThe U.S. military has a large presence in Phoenix, with Luke Air Force Base in the western suburbs. The city was severely affected by the effects of the\nsub-prime mortgage crash. However, Phoenix has recovered 83% of the jobs lost\ndue to the recession.\nArts and culture.\nPerforming arts.\nThe city has many performing arts venues, most of which are in and around downtown Phoenix or Scottsdale. The Phoenix Symphony Hall is home to the Phoenix Symphony Orchestra, the Arizona Opera and Ballet Arizona. The Arizona Opera company also has intimate performances at its new Arizona Opera Center, which opened in March 2013. Another venue is the Orpheum Theatre, home to the Phoenix Opera. Ballet Arizona, in addition to the Symphony Hall, also has performances at the Orpheum Theatre and the Dorrance Theater. Concerts also regularly make stops in the area. The largest downtown performing art venue is the Herberger Theater Center, which houses three performance spaces and is home to two resident companies, the Arizona Theatre Company and the Centre Dance Ensemble. Three other groups also use the facility: Valley Youth Theatre, iTheatre Collaborative and Actors Theater.\nConcerts take place at Mortgage Matchup Center and Comerica Theatre in downtown Phoenix, Ak-Chin Pavilion in Maryvale, Gila River Arena in Glendale, and Gammage Auditorium in Tempe (the last public building designed by Frank Lloyd Wright). Several smaller theaters including Trunk Space, the Mesa Arts Center, The Van Buren, the Crescent Ballroom, Celebrity Theatre, and Modified Arts support regular independent musical and theater performances. Music can also be seen in some of the venues usually reserved for sports, such as the Wells Fargo Arena and State Farm Stadium.\nSeveral television series have been set in Phoenix, including \"Alice\" (1976\u201385), the 2000s paranormal drama \"Medium\", the 1960\u201361 syndicated crime drama \"The Brothers Brannagan\", and \"The New Dick Van Dyke Show\" from 1971 to 1974.\nMuseums.\nThe valley has dozens of museums. They include the Phoenix Art Museum, Arizona Capitol Museum, Scottsdale Museum of Contemporary Art, Arizona Military Museum, Hall of Flame Fire Museum, Phoenix Police Museum, the Pueblo Grande Museum Archaeological Park, Children's Museum of Phoenix, Arizona Science Center, and the Heard Museum. In 2010, the Musical Instrument Museum opened their doors, featuring the biggest musical instrument collection in the world. In 2015 the Children's Museum of Phoenix was recognized as one of the top three children's museums in the United States.\nDesigned by Alden B. Dow, a student of Frank Lloyd Wright, the Phoenix Art Museum was constructed in a single year, opening in November 1959. The Phoenix Art Museum has the southwest's largest collection of visual art, containing more than 17,000 works of contemporary and modern art from around the world. Interactive exhibits can be found in nearby Peoria's Challenger Space Center, where individuals learn about space, renewable energies, and meet astronauts.\nThe Heard Museum has over of gallery, classroom and performance space. Some of the museum's signature exhibits include a full Navajo hogan, the Mareen Allen Nichols Collection of 260 pieces of contemporary jewelry, the Barry Goldwater Collection of 437 historic Hopi kachina dolls, and an exhibit on the 19th-century boarding school experiences of Native Americans. The Heard Museum attracts about 250,000 visitors a year.\nCultural heritage resources.\nArizona has museums, journals, societies, and libraries that serve as sources of important cultural heritage knowledge. They include the Arizona State Archives Historic Photographs Memory Project, which includes over 90,000 images that focus on the unique history of Arizona as a state and territory, the Arizona Historical Society, the \"Journal of Arizona History\", and numerous museum databases. The Tonatierra Community Development Institute focuses specifically on protecting indigenous culture in the city.\nFine arts.\nThe Artlink organization and the galleries downtown launched a First Friday cross-Phoenix gallery opening. In April 2009, artist Janet Echelman installed \"Her Secret Is Patience\", a netted sculpture suspended above Phoenix Civic Space Park that makes patterns of desert wind visible. During the day, the sculpture hovers above the park, and at night, the illumination changes color gradually through the seasons.\nArchitecture.\nPhoenix is the home of a unique architectural tradition and community. Frank Lloyd Wright moved to Phoenix in 1937 and built his winter home, Taliesin West, and the main campus for The Frank Lloyd Wright School of Architecture. Over the years, Phoenix has attracted notable architects who have made it their home and grown successful practices. These architectural studios embrace the desert climate, and are unconventional in their approach to the practice of design. They include the Paolo Soleri (who created Arcosanti), Al Beadle, Will Bruder, Wendell Burnette, and Blank Studio architectural design studios. Another major force in architectural landscape of the city was Ralph Haver whose firm, Haver &amp; Nunn, designed commercial, industrial and residential structures throughout the valley. Of particular note was his trademark, \"Haver Home\", which were affordable contemporary-style tract houses.\nTourism.\nThe tourist industry is the longest running of the top industries in Phoenix. Starting with promotions back in the 1920s, the industry has grown into one of the top 10 in the city. With nearly 28,000 hotel rooms in over 175 hotels and resorts Phoenix sees over 19 million visitors each year, most of whom are leisure travelers. Sky Harbor Airport, which serves the Greater Phoenix area, serves about 45 million passengers a year, ranking it among the nation's 10 busiest airports.\nOne of the biggest attractions of the Phoenix area is golf, with over 200 golf courses. In addition to the sites of interest in the city, there are many attractions near Phoenix, such as Agua Fria National Monument, Arcosanti, Casa Grande Ruins National Monument, Lost Dutchman State Park, Montezuma's Castle, Montezuma's Well, and Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument. Phoenix also serves as a central point to many of the sights around the state of Arizona, such as the Grand Canyon, Lake Havasu (where the London Bridge is located), Meteor Crater, the Painted Desert, the Petrified Forest, Tombstone, Kartchner Caverns, Sedona and Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff.\nOther attractions and annual events.\nDue to its natural environment and climate, Phoenix has a number of outdoor attractions and recreational activities. The Phoenix Zoo is the largest privately owned nonprofit zoo in the United States. Since opening in 1962, it has developed an international reputation for its efforts on animal conservation, including breeding and reintroducing endangered species into the wild. The adjacent Phoenix Botanical Gardens, opened in 1939, are acclaimed worldwide for their art and flora exhibits and educational programs, featuring the largest collection of arid plants in the U.S. South Mountain Park, the largest municipal park in the U.S., is also the highest desert mountain preserve in the world.\nOther popular sites in the city are Japanese Friendship Garden, Historic Heritage Square, Phoenix Mountains Park, Pueblo Grande Museum, Tovrea Castle, Camelback Mountain, Hole in the Rock, Mystery Castle, St. Mary's Basilica, Taliesin West, and the Wrigley Mansion.\nMany annual events in and near Phoenix celebrate the city's heritage and its diversity. They include the Scottsdale Arabian Horse Show, the world's largest horse show; Matsuri, a celebration of Japanese culture; Pueblo Grande Indian Market, an event highlighting Native American arts and crafts; Grand Menorah Lighting, a December event celebrating Hanukah; ZooLights, a December evening event at the Phoenix Zoo that features millions of lights; the Arizona State Fair, begun in 1884; Scottish Gathering &amp; Highland Games, an event celebrating Scottish heritage; Estrella War, a celebration of medieval life; and the Tohono O'odham Nation Rodeo &amp; Fair, Oldest Indian rodeo in Arizona\nCuisine.\nPhoenix is also renowned for its Mexican food, thanks to its large Hispanic population and its proximity to Mexico. Some of Phoenix's restaurants have a long history. The Stockyards steakhouse dates to 1947, while Monti's La Casa Vieja (Spanish for \"The Old House\") was in operation as a restaurant since the 1890s, but closed its doors November 17, 2014. Macayo's (a Mexican restaurant chain) was established in Phoenix in 1946, and other major Mexican restaurants include Garcia's (1956) and Manuel's (1964). The population boom has brought people from all over the nation, and to a lesser extent from other countries, and has since influenced the local cuisine. Phoenix boasts cuisines from all over the world, such as barbecue, Cajun/Creole, Greek, Hawaiian, Irish, Japanese, Italian, fusion, Persian, Indian (South Asian), Korean, Spanish, Thai, Chinese, southwestern, Tex-Mex, Vietnamese, Brazilian, and French.\nThe first McDonald's franchise was sold by the McDonald brothers to a Phoenix entrepreneur in 1952. Neil Fox paid $1,000 for the rights to open an establishment based on the McDonald brothers' restaurant. The hamburger stand opened in 1953 on the southwest corner of Central Avenue and Indian School Road, on the growing north side of Phoenix, and was the first location to sport the now internationally known golden arches, which were initially twice the height of the building. Three other franchise locations opened that year, two years before Ray Kroc purchased McDonald's.\nSports.\nMajor league.\nPhoenix is home to several professional sports franchises, and until recently, was one of only 13 U.S. metropolitan areas to have representatives of all four major professional sports leagues, although only one of these teams actually carry the city name and two of them play within the city limits.\nThe Phoenix Suns were the first major sports team in Phoenix, being granted a National Basketball Association (NBA) franchise in 1968. They lost the 1976 NBA Championship to the Boston Celtics in 6 games. They had originally played at the Arizona Veterans Memorial Coliseum before moving to America West Arena (now Mortgage Matchup Center) in 1992. The year following their move to the new arena, the Suns made it to the NBA Finals for the second time in franchise history, losing to Michael Jordan's Chicago Bulls, four games to two. The U.S. Airways Center hosted both the 1995 and the 2009 NBA All-Star Games. They also lost the 2021 NBA Finals in six games to the Milwaukee Bucks.\nThe Arizona Diamondbacks of Major League Baseball began play as an expansion team in 1998. The team has played all of its home games in the same downtown park, now known as Chase Field. It is the second highest stadium in the U.S. (after Coors Field in Denver), and is known for its swimming pool beyond the outfield fence. In 2001, the Diamondbacks defeated the New York Yankees four games to three in the World Series, becoming the city's first professional sports franchise to win a national championship while in Arizona. The win was also the fastest an expansion team had ever won the World Series, surpassing the old mark of the Florida Marlins of five years, set in 1997.\nThe Arizona Cardinals are the oldest continuously run professional football franchise in the nation. Founded in 1898 in Chicago, they moved to Phoenix from St. Louis, Missouri in 1988 and play in the Western Division of the National Football League's National Football Conference. Upon their move to Phoenix, the Cardinals played their home games at Sun Devil Stadium on the campus of Arizona State University in nearby Tempe. In 2006, they moved to the new State Farm Stadium in suburban Glendale. Since moving to Phoenix, the Cardinals have made one championship appearance, Super Bowl XLIII in 2009, where they lost 27\u201323 to the Pittsburgh Steelers.\nSun Devil Stadium held Super Bowl XXX in 1996. State Farm Stadium hosted Super Bowl XLII in 2008, Super Bowl XLIX in 2015, and Super Bowl LVII in 2023 .\nThe Arizona Coyotes of the National Hockey League, formerly the original Winnipeg Jets, moved to the area in 1996. They originally played their home games at America West Arena in downtown Phoenix before moving in December 2003 to the Glendale Arena (now named the Desert Diamond Arena) in Glendale. In 2022, the Coyotes lost their lease in Glendale and moved to the then newly opened Mullett Arena on the campus of Arizona State University. They were working with the city of Tempe to create a new entertainment district. However, after residents of Tempe rejected a bond initiative to pay for a new stadium, the Coyotes were deactivated, and the team's assets were moved to Salt Lake City, Utah. The Coyotes have a five-year window to get a new arena in the area where they will be reactivated as an expansion franchise, otherwise the league will cease all operations for the franchise.\nPhoenix Rising FC is a professional soccer team that competes in the USL Championship, the second tier of US professional soccer. Phoenix Rising FC started as Arizona United SC in 2014 and played at the Peoria Sports Complex and Scottsdale Stadium from 2014 to 2016. Rebranded in 2017 as Phoenix Rising FC, the team started play from 2017 to 2020 at the Casino Arizona Field. In 2021, the club moved to a new home,\u00a0the Phoenix Rising Soccer Complex at Wild Horse Pass, which was located inside the\u00a0Gila River Indian Community\u00a0near\u00a0Chandler and played there throughout the 2022 season. The club began play in 2023 at the newly constructed Phoenix Rising Soccer Stadium, which is modular in design and located in an area north of Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport.\nIn 2018, the now-defunct Alliance of American Football announced the league's Phoenix franchise, the Arizona Hotshots, would begin playing in 2019.\n\"*Note: The Cardinals won their two pre-modern era championships while in Chicago.\"\n\"*Note: The Cardinals moved to Phoenix from St. Louis in 1988.\"\nOther sports.\nThe Phoenix area hosts two annual college football bowl games: the Fiesta Bowl, played at State Farm Stadium, and the Rate Bowl (which has undergone several name changes), held at Chase Field.\nPhoenix has an indoor football team, the Arizona Rattlers of the Indoor Football League. Their games are played at the Desert Diamond Arena. They played in the Arena Football League from 1992 to 2016 and had won five AFL championships before leaving the league.\nIn 1997, the Phoenix Mercury were one of the original eight teams to launch the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA). They also play at Mortgage Matchup Center. They have won the WNBA championship three times: first in 2007 when they defeated the Detroit Shock, again in 2009 when they defeated the Indiana Fever, and in 2014 when they swept the Chicago Sky.\nThe Greater Phoenix area is home to the Cactus League, one of two spring training leagues for Major League Baseball. With the move by the Colorado Rockies and the Diamondbacks to their new facility in the Salt River Indian Community, the league is entirely based in the Greater Phoenix area. With the Cincinnati Reds' move to Goodyear, half of MLB's 30 teams are now included in the Cactus League.\nPhoenix International Raceway was built in 1964 with a oval, with a one-of-a-kind design, as well as a road course. It hosts several NASCAR events per season, and the annual Fall NASCAR weekend, which includes events from four different NASCAR classes, is a huge event. Wild Horse Pass Motorsports Park (formerly Firebird International Raceway) hosts NHRA events in the Phoenix metropolitan area.\nThe city also hosts several major professional golf events, including the LPGA's Founder's Cup and, since 1932, The Phoenix Open of the PGA Tour.\nThe Phoenix Marathon is a new addition to the city's sports scene, and is a qualifier for the Boston Marathon. The Rock 'n' Roll Marathon series has held an event in Phoenix every January since 2004. Phoenix is also home to a soccer club, Phoenix Rising FC.\nParks and recreation.\nPhoenix is home to a large number of parks and recreation areas. The city of Phoenix includes national parks, Maricopa County parks and city parks. Tonto National Forest forms part of the city's northeast boundary, while the county has the largest park system in the country.\nThe city park system established to preserve the desert landscape in areas that would otherwise have succumbed to development includes South Mountain Park, the world's largest municipal park with . The system's 182 parks contain over , making it the largest municipal park system in the country. The park system has facilities for hiking, camping, swimming, horseback riding, cycling, and climbing. Some of the system's other notable parks include Camelback Mountain, Encanto Park, Phoenix Mountains Preserve and Sunnyslope Mountain, also known as \"S\" Mountain.\nPapago Park in east Phoenix is home to both the Desert Botanical Garden and the Phoenix Zoo, in addition to several golf courses and the Hole-in-the-Rock geological formation. The Desert Botanical Garden, which opened in 1939, is one of the few public gardens in the country dedicated to desert plants and displays desert plant life from all over the world. The Phoenix Zoo is the largest privately owned non-profit zoo in the United States and is internationally known for its programs devoted to saving endangered species.\nGovernment.\nIn 1913, Phoenix adopted a new form of government, switching from the mayor-council system to the council-manager system, making it one of the first cities in the United States with this form of city government, where a city manager supervises all city departments and executes the policies adopted by the council. Today, Phoenix represents the largest municipal government of this type in the country.\nThe city council consists of a mayor and eight city council members. While the mayor is elected in a citywide election, Phoenix City Council members are elected by votes only in the districts they represent, with both the Mayor and the Council members serving four-year terms. The mayor of Phoenix is Kate Gallego. The mayor and city council members each have equal voting power in regards to setting city policy and passing rules and regulations. Sunshine Review gave the city's website a Sunny Award for its transparency efforts.\nState government facilities.\nAs the capital of Arizona, Phoenix houses the state legislature, along with numerous state government agencies, many of which are in the State Capitol district immediately west of downtown. The Arizona Department of Juvenile Corrections operates the Adobe Mountain and Black Canyon Schools in Phoenix. Another major state government facility is the Arizona State Hospital, operated by the Arizona Department of Health Services. This is a mental health center and is the only medical facility run by the state government. The headquarters of numerous Arizona state government agencies are in Phoenix, with many in the State Capitol district.\nFederal government facilities.\nThe Federal Bureau of Prisons operates the Federal Correctional Institution (FCI) Phoenix, which is within the city limits, near its northern boundary.\nThe Sandra Day O'Connor U.S. Courthouse, the U.S. District Court of Arizona, is on Washington Street downtown. It is named in honor of retired U.S. Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who was raised in Arizona.\nThe Federal Building is at the intersection of Van Buren Street and First Avenue downtown. It contains various federal field offices and the local division of the U.S. Bankruptcy Court. This building formerly housed the U.S. District Court offices and courtrooms, but these were moved in 2001 to the new Sandra Day O'Connor U.S. Courthouse. Before the construction of this building in 1961, federal government offices were housed in the historic U.S. Post Office on Central Avenue, completed in the 1930s.\nCrime.\nBy the 1960s, crime was a major problem in Phoenix, and by the 1970s, crime continued to increase in the city at a faster rate than almost anywhere else in the country. It was during this time frame when an incident occurred in Phoenix which would have national implications. On March 16, 1963, Ernesto Miranda was arrested and charged with rape. The subsequent Supreme Court ruling on June 13, 1966, \"Miranda v. Arizona\", has led to practice in the United States of issuing a Miranda Warning to all suspected criminals.\nWith Phoenix's rapid growth, one of the prime areas of criminal activity was land fraud. The practice became so widespread that newspapers would refer to Phoenix as \"the Tainted Desert\". These land frauds led to one of the more infamous murders in the history of the valley, when \"Arizona Republic\" writer Don Bolles was murdered by a car bomb in 1976. It was believed his investigative reporting on organized crime and land fraud in Phoenix made him a target.\nBolles was the only reporter from a major U.S. newspaper to be murdered on U.S. soil due to his coverage of a story. Max Dunlap was convicted of first-degree murder in the case.\nStreet gangs and the drug trade had turned into public safety issues by the 1980s, and the crime rate in Phoenix continued to grow.\nAfter seeing a peak in the early and mid-1990s, the city has seen a general decrease in crime rates. The Maricopa County Jail system is the fourth-largest in the country. The violent crime rate peaked in 1993 at 1146 crimes per 100,000 people, while the property crime rate peaked a few years earlier, in 1989, at 9,966 crimes per 100,000.\nIn 2001 and 2002, Phoenix ranked first in the nation in vehicle thefts, with over 22,000 and 25,000 cars stolen each year respectively. It has declined every year since then, eventually falling to 7,200 in 2014, a drop of almost 70% during that timeframe. The Phoenix MSA has dropped to 70th in the nation in terms of car thefts in 2012.\nOn August 2, 2022, a mass shooting took place in the Deer Valley area of Phoenix. The shooter killed two bystanders and injured five others before committing suicide.\nPolitics.\nLong a swing region in Arizona, Phoenix's city limits have increasingly trended toward the Democratic Party in recent years, leading a shift seen across the rest of the state although the trend was bucked in 2024 with Hispanics shifting right. Margaret Hance was elected the city's first female mayor in 1975.\nEducation.\n33 school districts provide public education in the Phoenix area. This is a legacy of numerous annexations over the years; many of the school districts existed before their territories became part of Phoenix.\nThere are 21 elementary school districts, which have over 215 elementary schools, paired with four high school districts with 31 high schools serving Phoenix. Three of the high school districts (Glendale Union, Tempe Union, and Tolleson Union) only partially serve Phoenix. With over 27,000 students, and spread over , Phoenix Union High School District is one of the largest high school districts in the country, containing 16 schools and nearly 3,000 employees. In addition, there are four unified districts, which cover grades K\u201312, which add an additional 58 elementary schools and four high schools to Phoenix's educational system. Of those four, only the Paradise Valley district completely serves Phoenix. Phoenix is also served by a growing number of charter schools, with well over 100 operating in the city.\nPost-secondary education.\nArizona State University (ASU) is the region's largest institution of higher education. Primarily based in Tempe, it has a significant presence at the Arizona State University Downtown Phoenix campus. The campus features programs from ten of ASU's colleges, including the primary locations for the Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass Communication, Watts College of Public Service &amp; Community Solutions, and Sandra Day O'Connor College of Law. Over 10,000 students are enrolled at ASU's Downtown Phoenix campus.\nThe University of Arizona College of Medicine \u2013 Phoenix is also located in downtown Phoenix, as well as a satellite Phoenix Biomedical Campus of Northern Arizona University.\nThe Maricopa County Community College District includes ten community colleges and two skills centers throughout Maricopa County, providing adult education and job training. Phoenix College, part of the district, was founded in 1920 and is the oldest community college in Arizona and one of the oldest in the country.\nCarrington College, a for-profit institution, maintains a campus in Phoenix. The school offers programs in medicine, health studies, dentistry, administration, or veterinary medicine. More than 1087 students attend programs in health care administration, pharmacy technology, practical nursing, veterinary assisting, and dental assisting.\nThe city is also home to many other institutions of higher learning such as the Phoenix Seminary, a Protestant seminary that imparts degree in biblical studies, Christian theology, church history and counseling. Notable institutions include: Barrow Neurological Institute, the world's largest neurological disease treatment and research institution; Grand Canyon University, a private Christian university initially founded in 1949 as a non-profit school, it now operates as a for-profit institution; the University of Phoenix, also a for-profit college, is based out of the city.\nMedia.\nPhoenix's first newspaper was the weekly \"Salt River Valley Herald\", established in 1878, which would change its name the following year to the \"Phoenix Herald\". The paper would go through several additional name changes in its early years before finally settling on the \"Phoenix Herald\", which still exists today in an online form. Today, the city is served by one major daily newspaper: \"The Arizona Republic\", which along with its online entity, \"azcentral.com\", serves the greater metropolitan area. The \"Jewish News of Greater Phoenix\" is an independent weekly newspaper established in 1948. In addition, the city is also served by numerous free neighborhood papers and alternative weeklies such as the \"Phoenix New Times\"' the \"East Valley Tribune\", which primarily serves the cities of the East Valley; and Arizona State University's \"The State Press\".\nThe Phoenix metro area is served by many local television stations and is the largest designated market area (DMA) in the Southwest, and the 12th largest in the U.S., with over 1.8 million homes (1.6% of the total U.S.). The major network television affiliates are KPHO 5 (CBS), Prescott-licensed KAZT-TV 7 (The CW), KAET 8 (PBS, operated by Arizona State University), KSAZ 10 (Fox), KPNX 12 (NBC), KNXV 15 (ABC), and KUTP 45 (MyNetworkTV). Other network television affiliates operating in the area include KPAZ 21 (TBN), KTVW-DT 33 (Univision), KFPH-DT (UniM\u00e1s), KTAZ 39 (Telemundo), and KPPX-TV 51 (ION). KTVK 3 (3TV) and KASW 61 are independent television stations operating in the metro area. KSAZ-TV, KUTP, KPAZ-TV, KTVW-DT, KFPH-DT, and KTAZ are network owned-and-operated stations.\nMany major feature films and television programs have been filmed in the city. From the opening sequences in \"Psycho\", to the night attack by the aliens in 1953's \"The War of the Worlds\", to freeway scenes in \"Little Miss Sunshine\", Phoenix has been the location for numerous major feature films. Other notable pictures filmed at least partially in Phoenix include \"Raising Arizona\", \"A Home at the End of the World\", \"Bill &amp; Ted's Excellent Adventure\", \"Days of Thunder\", \"The Gauntlet\", \"The Grifters\", \"Waiting to Exhale\" and \"Bus Stop\".\nThe radio airwaves in Phoenix cater to a wide variety of musical and talk radio interests. Stations include classic rock formats of KOOL-FM and KSLX-FM, to pop stations like KYOT and alternative stations like KDKB-FM, to the talk radio of KFYI-AM and KKNT-AM, the pop and top 40 programming of KZZP-FM and KALV-FM, and the country sounds of KMLE-FM. With its large Hispanic population there are numerous Spanish stations, such as KHOT-FM and KOMR-FM.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nAir.\nPhoenix Sky Harbor International Airport (), one of the ten busiest airports in the United States, serves over 110,000 people on over 1,000 flights per day. Centrally located in the metro area near several major freeway interchanges east of downtown Phoenix, the airport serves more than 100 cities with non-stop flights.\nAir Canada, Air France, British Airways, Condor, Volaris, and WestJet are among several international carriers as well as American carrier American Airlines (which maintains a hub at the airport) that provide flights to destinations such as Canada, Costa Rica, Mexico, and London. In addition to American, other domestic carriers include Alaska Airlines, Delta, Frontier, Hawaiian, JetBlue, Southwest, Spirit, Sun Country, and United.\nThe Phoenix-Mesa Gateway Airport () in neighboring Mesa also serves the area's commercial air traffic. It was converted from Williams Air Force Base, which closed in 1993. The airport has recently received substantial commercial service with Allegiant Air opening a hub operation at the airport with non-stop service to over a dozen destinations.\nSmaller airports that primarily handle private and corporate jets include Phoenix Deer Valley Airport, in the Deer Valley district of north Phoenix, and Scottsdale Airport, just east of the Phoenix/Scottsdale border. There are also other municipal airports including Glendale Municipal Airport, Falcon Field Airport in Mesa, and Phoenix Goodyear Airport.\nRail and bus.\nAmtrak served Phoenix Union Station until 1996 when the Union Pacific Railroad (UP) proposed abandoning the route between Yuma, Arizona, and Phoenix. Amtrak rerouted trains to Maricopa, south of downtown Phoenix, where passengers can board the \"Texas Eagle\" (Los Angeles-San Antonio-Chicago) and \"Sunset Limited\" (Los Angeles-New Orleans). UP retained the trackage and the station remains. In 2021, Amtrak developed a plan to bring rail service back to Phoenix with connections to Tucson and Los Angeles. This service is supported by the Bipartisan infrastructure bill and could take several years for service to be implemented.\nAmtrak Thruway buses connect Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport to Flagstaff for connection with the Los Angeles-Chicago \"Southwest Chief\". Phoenix is also served by Greyhound bus service, which stops at 24th Street near the airport.\nValley Metro provides public transportation throughout the metropolitan area, with its trains, buses, and a ride-share program. 3.38% of workers commute by public transit. Valley Metro's light rail system called Valley Metro Rail consists of the A Line and B Line. Two light rail extensions of more than are planned to open by 2030. The first segment of the light rail open in December 27, 2008.\nRoads and freeways.\nPhoenix auto traffic depends on both freeways and surface streets. Freeways fall under the auspices of the Arizona Department of Transportation (ADOT). Phoenix ranks first in the nation in the quality of its urban freeways, and the state as a whole ranks first in the nation in the quality of bridges. While being the fifth most populous city in the nation, Phoenix's freeways do not suffer from the same type of congestion seen in other large cities. In fact, in a recent study, there is not a single stretch of freeway in Phoenix ranked in the 100 worst freeways for either congestion or unreliability.\nPart of the reason for this is the extensive freeway system in the city, due to most of that system being funded by local, rather than federal funds, through a half-cent general sales tax measure approved by voters in 1985. Another offshoot of this local funding is that Phoenix is the largest city in the United States to have at least two Interstate Highways, but no three-digit interstates.\nAs of 2005[ [update]], the metropolitan area of Phoenix contains one of the nation's largest and fastest growing freeway systems, consisting of over . The freeway system is a mix of Interstate, U.S., and state highways which include Interstate 10, Interstate 17, US 60, Loop 101, Loop 202, SR 51, SR 143, and Loop 303. There are still major additions to routes 101, 202 and 303 underway, as well as several other smaller projects around the valley. State Routes 87, 85, and 74 connect Phoenix with other areas of the Valley and Arizona.\nThe street system in Phoenix (and some of its suburbs) is laid out in a grid system, with most roads oriented either north\u2013south or east\u2013west, and the zero point of the grid being the intersection of Central Avenue and Washington Street. The one notable exception to this is the diagonal Grand Avenue, which runs northwest\u2013southeast. The original plan was for the east\u2013west streets to be named after U.S. Presidents, with the north\u2013south streets named after Native Americans; but the north\u2013south streets were quickly changed to numbers, with numbered Avenues running to the west of Central, and numbered Streets to its east. Major arterial streets are spaced apart, divided into smaller blocks approximately every . For example, Scottsdale Road, being the 7200 block east, lies to the east of Central Avenue (72 / 8).\nFreeways and state highways in Phoenix:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCycling.\nThe Maricopa Association of Governments has a bicycle advisory committee working to improve conditions for bicycling on city streets and off-road paths.\nUtilities.\nBeing in the desert, Phoenix relies on a water supply delivered to the city via a system of canals which divert water from the region's rivers and lakes, with the largest portion of the city's water coming from the Colorado River through the Central Arizona Project's canal. The city's electrical needs are served primarily by Arizona Public Service, although some customers receive their electricity from the Salt River Project (SRP). The main sources of electrical generation are nuclear and coal power plants. Arizona is home to the Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station, the largest nuclear-generating facility in the United States. SRP is also the largest water provider in Phoenix.\nHealth care.\nIn 2011 (the last year for which information is available), Phoenix had a slightly younger population than the country as a whole. While the United States had 13.3% of its population over the age of 65, Phoenix's percentage stood significantly lower, at 8.1%. Phoenix's percentage of 18.8% in the next age group, 45\u201364 was also a great deal lower than the national average of 26.6%. This results in 73% of Phoenix's population being 44 or younger, as compared to the national percentage of 60.\nIn 2010 (the last year for nationally reported figures), Phoenix was at or below national levels for most reportable diseases, with the exception of both hepatitis A and B, where they were slightly over the national average (0.8 and 1.8 to 0.5 and 1.1%, respectively).\nIn most major categories, Phoenix had a lower incidence of death than the rest of the nation. Only deaths due to Alzheimer's (29.7 to 27.2 deaths per 100,000) and pre-natal conditions (5.3 to 3.8 deaths per 100,000) were slightly above the national average. Deaths due to HIV and liver disease were exactly at the national average of 2.5 and 10.8 respectively. However, in several major categories, Phoenix had significantly lower indices of death: deaths by cancer stood at only 57% (106) of the national average of 184.6 deaths per 100,000; deaths due to heart disease, 56.1% of the national rate of 249.8 per 100,000. Cancer and heart disease were the two top causes of death in the country.\nLow-weight births (7.5%) were below the national average of 8.1%, yet infant mortality (7.2\u2030 [per thousand]) was higher than the rest of the U.S. (6.1\u2030). Births to teen mothers were significantly higher than the rest of the country, sitting at 12.2% as compared to 8.4% nationally.\nThe Phoenix metropolitan area is serviced by 56 hospitals and medical centers. The Mayo Clinic is a not-for-profit medical practice and medical research group based in Rochester, Minnesota. Phoenix is one of two other locations with Mayo Clinic campuses (the other being Jacksonville, Florida). It is the first and largest integrated not-for-profit medical group practice in the world; Mayo Clinic has been near or at the top of the U.S. News &amp; World Report List of \"Best Hospitals\" for more than 20 years.\nSt. Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center is part of Dignity Health (formerly Catholic Healthcare West), one of the largest healthcare systems in the western United States. St. Joseph's is a not-for-profit hospital with special advocacy for the poor and underserved. John C. Lincoln North Mountain Hospital is a general medical and surgical hospital, which performed nearly at the level of nationally ranked U.S. News Best Hospitals in four adult specialties. The Phoenix Children's Hospital is nationally ranked in five pediatric specialties according to U.S. News &amp; World Report. It is a 425-bed children's teaching hospital. Arizona Heart Institute, opened in 1971, is known internationally as one of the first freestanding outpatient clinics dedicated exclusively to cardiovascular health.\nBanner Health is a non-profit health system in the United States, based in Phoenix. It operates 23 hospitals as well as specialized facilities. The health system is the largest employer in Arizona, employing more than 43,440. Banner Health was created in 1999 through a merger of Lutheran Health Systems, based in North Dakota, and Samaritan Health System, based in Phoenix. Of the top ten rated hospitals in the city (top 12 in the state), four are Banner hospitals.\nBarrow Neurological Institute (BNI) at St. Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center is the world's largest dedicated neurosurgical center and a leader in neurosurgical training, research, and patient care.\nValleywise Health is a public hospital and healthcare system based in Phoenix with Community Heath Centers located throughout Maricopa County, Arizona. Valleywise Health includes the Valleywise Health Medical Center, the renowned Diane &amp; Bruce Halle Arizona Burn Center, the Comprehensive Health Center, three Behavioral Health Centers and a network of Community Health Centers located throughout Maricopa County. Valleywise Health is the areas largest public teaching hospital and is a founding partner in the Creighton University Arizona Health Education Alliance. In 2024, Valleywise Health opened its new 10-story 240 bed Valleywise Medical Center on its Roosevelt Campus near downtown Phoenix.On the November 4, 2025 general election, the voters of Maricopa County approved Proposition 409 - a $898 million Valleywise Health measure to expand behavioral health services, rebuild and expand Community Health Centers and to replace the Comprehensive Health Center.\nSister cities.\nWith the creation of the Phoenix Sister Cities (PSC) organization in 1972, Phoenix became a member of the international Sister City movement. They filed for Articles of Incorporation in 1975, and entered into their first Sister City agreement in 1976 with Hermosillo, Mexico. The organization's mission statement states their purpose is to \"foster relationships between the people of Phoenix and our Sister Cities around the world to promote friendship, peace and prosperity.\"\nPhoenix has eleven sister cities. Phoenix and Prague have shared a Capital Cities relationship since May 1991, which was expanded to Sister City Status in 2013.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49122", "revid": "51041206", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49122", "title": "Phoenix (mythology)", "text": "Immortal bird that is cyclically reborn\nThe phoenix (sometimes spelled phenix in American English; see spelling differences) is a legendary immortal bird that cyclically regenerates or is otherwise born again. Originating in Greek mythology, it has analogs in many cultures, such as Egyptian and Persian mythology. Associated with the sun, a phoenix obtains new life by rising from the ashes of its predecessor. Some legends say it dies in a show of flames and combustion, while others say that it simply dies and decomposes before being born again. In the \"Motif-Index of Folk-Literature\", a tool used by folklorists, the phoenix is classified as motif B32.\nThe origin of the phoenix has been attributed to Ancient Egypt by Herodotus and later 19th-century scholars, but other scholars think the Egyptian texts may have been influenced by classical folklore. Over time, the phoenix motif spread and gained a variety of new associations; Herodotus, Lucan, Pliny the Elder, Pope Clement I, Lactantius, Ovid, and Isidore of Seville are among those who have contributed to the retelling and transmission of the phoenix motif. Over time, extending beyond its origins, the phoenix could variously \"symbolize renewal in general as well as the sun, time, the Roman Empire, metempsychosis, consecration, resurrection, life in the heavenly Paradise, Christ, Mary, virginity, the exceptional man, and certain aspects of Christian life\". Some scholars have claimed that the poem \"De ave phoenice\" may present the mythological phoenix motif as a symbol of Christ's resurrection.\nEtymology.\nThe modern English word \"phoenix\" entered the English language from Latin, later reinforced by French. The word first entered the English language by way of a borrowing of Latin \"phoen\u012bx\" into Old English (\"fenix\"). This borrowing was later reinforced by French influence, which had also borrowed the Latin noun. In time, the word developed specialized use in the English language: For example, the term could refer to an \"excellent person\" (12th century), a variety of heraldic emblem (15th century), and the name of a constellation (17th century).\nThe Latin word comes from Greek (\"phoinix\"). The Greek word is first attested in the Mycenaean Greek \"po-ni-ke\", which probably meant \"griffin\", though it might have meant \"palm tree\". That word is probably a borrowing from a West Semitic word for madder, a red dye made from \"Rubia tinctorum\". The word \"Phoenician\" appears to be from the same root, meaning \"those who work with red dyes\". So \"phoenix\" might also have meant \"the Phoenician bird\" or \"the purplish-red bird\".\nEarly texts.\nApart from the Linear B mention above from Mycenaean Greece, the earliest clear mention of the phoenix in ancient Greek literature occurs in a fragment of the \"Precepts of Chiron\", attributed to 8th-century BC Greek poet Hesiod. In the fragment, the wise centaur Chiron tells a young hero Achilles the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thereby describing the phoenix's lifetime as approximately 972 times the length of a human's.\nDisputed origins.\nClassical discourse attributes a potential origin of the phoenix to Ancient Egypt. Herodotus, writing in the 5th century BC, provides the following account of the phoenix:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The Egyptians] have also another sacred bird called the phoenix which I myself have never seen, except in pictures. Indeed it is a great rarity, even in Egypt, only coming there (according to the accounts of the people of Heliopolis) once in five hundred years, when the old phoenix dies. Its size and appearance, if it is like the pictures, are as follow: The plumage is partly red, partly golden, while the general make and size are almost exactly that of the eagle. They tell a story of what this bird does, which does not seem to me to be credible: that he comes all the way from Arabia, and brings the parent bird, all plastered over with myrrh, to the temple of the Sun, and there buries the body. In order to bring him, they say, he first forms a ball of myrrh as big as he finds that he can carry; then he hollows out the ball and puts his parent inside, after which he covers over the opening with fresh myrrh, and the ball is then of exactly the same weight as at first; so he brings it to Egypt, plastered over as I have said, and deposits it in the temple of the Sun. Such is the story they tell of the doings of this bird.\nIn the 19th century, scholastic suspicions appeared to be confirmed by the discovery that Egyptians in Heliopolis had venerated the Bennu, a solar bird similar in some respects to the Greek phoenix. However, the Egyptian sources regarding the bennu are often problematic and open to a variety of interpretations. Some of these sources may have actually been influenced by Greek notions of the phoenix, rather than the other way around.\nDepictions.\nThe phoenix is often depicted in ancient and medieval literature and medieval art endowed with a halo, emphasizing the bird's connection with the Sun. The earliest recorded images of the phoenix feature nimbuses that often have seven rays, like Helios (the Greek personification of the Sun). Pliny the Elder also describes the bird as having a crest of feathers on its head, and Ezekiel the Dramatist compared it to a rooster.\nThe phoenix came to be associated with specific colors over time. Although the phoenix was generally believed to be colorful and vibrant, sources provide no clear consensus about its exact coloration. Tacitus says that its color made it stand out from all other birds. Some said that the bird had peacock-like coloring, and Herodotus's claim of the Phoenix being red and yellow is popular in many versions of the story on record. Ezekiel the Tragedian declared that the phoenix had red legs and striking yellow eyes, but Lactantius said that its eyes were blue like sapphires and that its legs were covered in yellow-gold scales with rose-colored talons.\nHerodotus, Pliny, Solinus, and Philostratus describe the phoenix as similar in size to an eagle, but Lactantius and Ezekiel the Dramatist both claim that the phoenix was larger, with Lactantius declaring that it was even larger than an ostrich.\nAccording to Pliny's \"Natural History\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014Pliny the Elder, \"Naturalis historia\", X: 2\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\u2014translated by Harris Rackham, 1940, LCL: 353, pp. 292\u2013294\nAccording to Claudian's poem \"The Phoenix\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014Claudian, \"Phoenix\", ll. 17\u201322\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\u2014translated by Henry Maurice Platnauer, 1922, LCL: 136, pp. 224\u2013225\nAppearances.\nAccording to Pliny the Elder, a senator Manilius (Marcus Manilius?) had written that the phoenix appeared at the end of each Great Year, which he wrote of \"in the consulship of Gnaeus Cornelius and Publius Licinius\", that is, in 96 BC, that a cycle was 540 years, and that it was 215 into the cycle (i.e. it began in 311 BC). Another of Pliny's sources, Cornelius Valerianus, is cited for an appearance of the phoenix in 36 AD \"in the consulship of Quintus Plautius and Sextus Papinius\". Pliny states that a purported phoenix seen in Egypt in 47 AD was brought to the capital and exhibited in the Comitium in time for the 800th anniversary of the foundation of Rome by Romulus, though he added that \"nobody would doubt that this phoenix was a fabrication\".\nA second recording of the phoenix was made by Tacitus, who said that the phoenix had appeared instead in 34 AD \"in the consulship of Paulus Fabius and Lucius Vitellius\" and that the cycle was either 500 years or 1461 years (which was the Great Year based on the Egyptian Sothic cycle), and that it had previously been seen in the reigns first of Sesosis, then of Amasis, and finally of Ptolemy (third of the Macedonian dynasty). A third recording was made by Cassius Dio, who also said that the phoenix was seen in the consulship of Quintus Plautus and Sextus Papinius.\nDiffusion in later culture.\nIn time, the motif and concept of the phoenix extended from its origins in ancient Greek folklore. For example, the classical motif of the phoenix continues into the Gnostic manuscript \"On the Origin of the World\" from the Nag Hammadi Library collection in Egypt, generally dated to the 4th century:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[...] a soul-endowed living creature called \"phoenix\". It kills itself and brings itself back to life as a witness to the judgement against them, for they did wrong to Adam and his race, unto the consummation of the age. There are\u00a0[...] three phoenixes in paradise\u2014the first is immortal, the second lives 1,000 years; as for the third, it is written in the sacred book that it is consumed. [...] And the phoenix first appears in a living state, and dies, and rises again, being a sign of what has become apparent at the consummation of the age.\nThe anonymous 10th-century Old English \"Exeter Book\" contains a 677-line 9th-century alliterative poem consisting of a paraphrase and abbreviation of Lactantius, followed by an explication of the Phoenix as an allegory for the resurrection of Christ.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014In the original Old English\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\u2014In Modern English translation (1842)\nIn the 14th century, Italian poet Dante Alighieri refers to the phoenix in Canto XXIV of the \"Divine Comedy's\" \"Inferno\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014In the \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\u2014In \nIn the 17th-century play \"Henry VIII\" by English playwrights William Shakespeare and John Fletcher, Archbishop Cranmer says in http:// in reference to Elizabeth (who was to become Queen Elizabeth I):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the 19th-century novel \"Sartor Resartus\" by Thomas Carlyle, Diogenes Teufelsdr\u00f6ckh uses the phoenix as a metaphor for the cyclical pattern of history, remarking upon the \"burning of a World-Phoenix\" and the \"Palingenesia, or Newbirth of Society\" from its ashes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When the Phoenix is fanning her funeral pyre, will there not be sparks flying! Alas, some millions of men, and among them such as a Napoleon, have already been licked into that high-eddying Flame, and like moths consumed there. Still also have we to fear that incautious beards will get singed.\nFor the rest, in what year of grace such Phoenix-cremation will be completed, you need not ask. The law of Perseverance is among the deepest in man: by nature he hates change; seldom will he quit his old house till it has actually fallen about his ears. Thus have I seen Solemnities linger as Ceremonies, sacred Symbols as idle Pageants, to the extent of three hundred years and more after all life and sacredness had evaporated out of them. And then, finally, what time the Phoenix Death-Birth itself will require, depends on unseen contingencies.\u2014Meanwhile, would Destiny offer Mankind, that after, say two centuries of convulsion and conflagration, more or less vivid, the fire-creation should be accomplished, and we to find ourselves again in a Living Society, and no longer fighting but working,\u2014were it not perhaps prudent in Mankind to strike the bargain?\nPhoenixes are present and relatively common in European heraldry, which developed during the High Middle Ages. They most often appear as crests, and more rarely as charges. The heraldic phoenix is depicted as the head, chest and wings of an eagle rising from a fire; the entire creature is never depicted.\nAnalogues.\nScholars have observed analogues to the phoenix in a variety of cultures. These analogues include the Hindu \"garuda\" (\u0917\u0930\u0941\u0921) and \"bherunda\" (\u092d\u0947\u0930\u0941\u0923\u094d\u0921), the Slavic firebird (\u0436\u0430\u0440-\u043f\u0442\u0438\u0446\u0430) and \"Rar\u00f3g\", the Persian \"simorgh\" (\u0633\u06cc\u0645\u0631\u063a), the Georgian \"paskunji\" (\u10e4\u10d0\u10e1\u10d9\u10e3\u10dc\u10ef\u10d8), the Arabian \"anqa\" (\u0639\u0646\u0642\u0627\u0621), the Turkish Konrul, also called \"Z\u00fcmr\u00fcd\u00fc Anka\" (\"emerald anqa\"), the Tibetan \"Me byi karmo\", the Chinese \"Fenghuang\" (\u9cf3\u51f0) and Zhuque (\u6731\u96c0). These perceived analogues are sometimes included as part of the Motif-Index of Folk-Literature \"phoenix\" motif (B32).\nIn popular culture.\nThere are many works of modern literature make reference to the phoenix. Examples include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49123", "revid": "1609017", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49123", "title": "Phoenix (constellation)", "text": "Minor constellation in the southern sky\nPhoenix is a minor constellation in the southern sky. Named after the mythical phoenix, it was first depicted on a celestial atlas by Johann Bayer in his 1603 \"Uranometria\". The French explorer and astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille charted the brighter stars and gave their Bayer designations in 1756. The constellation stretches from roughly \u221239\u00b0 to \u221257\u00b0 declination, and from 23.5h to 2.5h of right ascension. The constellations Phoenix, Grus, Pavo and Tucana, are known as the Southern Birds.\nThe brightest star, Alpha Phoenicis, is named Ankaa, an Arabic word meaning 'the Phoenix'. It is an orange giant of apparent magnitude 2.4. Next is Beta Phoenicis, actually a binary system composed of two yellow giants with a combined apparent magnitude of 3.3. Nu Phoenicis has a dust disk, while the constellation has ten star systems with known planets and the recently discovered galaxy clusters El Gordo and the Phoenix Cluster\u2014located 7.2 and 5.7 billion light years away respectively, two of the largest objects in the visible universe. Phoenix is the radiant of two annual meteor showers: the Phoenicids in December, and the July Phoenicids.\nHistory.\nPhoenix was the largest of the 12 constellations established by Petrus Plancius from the observations of Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser and Frederick de Houtman. It first appeared on a 35-cm diameter celestial globe published in 1597 (or 1598) in Amsterdam by Plancius with Jodocus Hondius. The first depiction of this constellation in a celestial atlas was in Johann Bayer's \"Uranometria\" of 1603. De Houtman included it in his southern star catalog the same year under the Dutch name \"Den voghel Fenicx\", \"The Bird Phoenix\", symbolising the phoenix of classical mythology. One name of the brightest star Alpha Phoenicis\u2014Ankaa\u2014is derived from the , and was coined sometime after 1800 in relation to the constellation.\nCelestial historian Richard Allen noted that unlike the other constellations introduced by Plancius and La Caille, Phoenix has actual precedent in ancient astronomy, as the Arabs saw this formation as representing young ostriches, \"Al Ri'\u0101l\", or as a griffin or eagle. In addition, the same group of stars was sometimes imagined by the Arabs as a boat, \"Al Zaurak\", on the nearby river Eridanus. He observed, \"the introduction of a Phoenix into modern astronomy was, in a measure, by adoption rather than by invention.\"\nThe Chinese incorporated Phoenix's brightest star, Ankaa (Alpha Phoenicis), and stars from the adjacent constellation Sculptor to depict \"Bakui\", a net for catching birds. Phoenix and the neighbouring constellation of Grus together were seen by Julius Schiller as portraying Aaron the High Priest. These two constellations, along with nearby Pavo and Tucana, are called the Southern Birds.\nCharacteristics.\nPhoenix is a small constellation bordered by Fornax and Sculptor to the north, Grus to the west, Tucana to the south, touching on the corner of Hydrus to the south, and Eridanus to the east and southeast. The bright star Achernar is nearby. The three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922, is \"Phe\". The official constellation boundaries, as set by Belgian astronomer Eug\u00e8ne Delporte in 1930, are defined by a polygon of 10 segments. In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 23h 26.5m and 02h 25.0m, while the declination coordinates are between \u221239.31\u00b0 and \u221257.84\u00b0. This means it remains below the horizon to anyone living north of the 40th parallel in the Northern Hemisphere, and remains low in the sky for anyone living north of the equator. It is most visible from locations such as Australia and South Africa during late Southern Hemisphere spring. Most of the constellation lies within, and can be located by, forming a triangle of the bright stars Achernar, Fomalhaut and Beta Ceti\u2014Ankaa lies roughly in the centre of this.\nFeatures.\nStars.\nA curved line of stars comprising Alpha, Kappa, Mu, Beta, Nu and Gamma Phoenicis was seen as a boat by the ancient Arabs. French explorer and astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille charted and designated 27 stars with the Bayer designations Alpha through to Omega in 1756. Of these, he labelled two stars close together Lambda, and assigned Omicron, Psi and Omega to three stars, which subsequent astronomers such as Benjamin Gould felt were too dim to warrant their letters. A different star was subsequently labelled Psi Phoenicis, while the other two designations fell out of use.\nAnkaa is the brightest star in the constellation. It is an orange giant of apparent visual magnitude 2.37 and spectral type K0.5IIIb, 77 light years distant from Earth and orbited by a secondary object about which little is known. Lying close by Ankaa is Kappa Phoenicis, a main sequence star of spectral type A5IVn and apparent magnitude 3.90. Located centrally in the asterism, Beta Phoenicis is the second brightest star in the constellation and another binary star. Together the stars, both yellow giants of spectral type G8, shine with an apparent magnitude of 3.31, though the components are of individual apparent magnitudes of 4.0 and 4.1 and orbit each other every 168 years. Zeta Phoenicis or \"Wurren\" is an Algol-type eclipsing binary, with an apparent magnitude fluctuating between 3.9 and 4.4 with a period of around 1.7 days (40 hours); its dimming results from the component two blue-white B-type stars, which orbit and block out each other from Earth. The two stars are 0.05 AU from each other, while a third star is around 600 AU away from the pair, and has an orbital period exceeding 5000 years. The system is around 300 light years distant. In 1976, researchers Clausen, Gyldenkerne, and Gr\u00f8nbech calculated that a nearby 8th magnitude star is a fourth member of the system.\nAI Phe is an eclipsing binary star identified in 1972. Its long mutual eclipses and combination of spectroscopic and astrometric data allows precise measurement of the masses and radii of the stars which is viewed as a potential cross-check on stellar properties and distances independent on Ceiphid Variables and such techniques. The long eclipse events require space-based observations to avoid Solar interference.\nGamma Phoenicis is a red giant of spectral type M0IIIa and varies between magnitudes 3.39 and 3.49. It lies 235 light years away. Psi Phoenicis is another red giant, this time of spectral type M4III, and has an apparent magnitude that ranges between 4.3 and 4.5 over a period of around 30 days. Lying 340 light years away, it has around 85 times the diameter, but only 85% of the mass, of the Sun. W Phoenicis is a Mira variable, ranging from magnitude 8.1 to 14.4 over 333.95 days. A red giant, its spectrum ranges between M5e and M6e. Located 6.5 degrees west of Ankaa is SX Phoenicis, a variable star which ranges from magnitude 7.1 to 7.5 over a period of a mere 79 minutes. Its spectral type varies between A2 and F4. It gives its name to a group of stars known as SX Phoenicis variables. Rho and BD Phoenicis are Delta Scuti variables\u2014short period (six hours at most) pulsating stars that have been used as standard candles and as subjects to study astroseismology. Rho is spectral type F2III, and ranges between magnitudes 5.20 and 5.26 over a period of 2.85 hours. BD is of spectral type A1V, and ranges between magnitudes 5.90 and 5.94.\nNu Phoenicis is a yellow-white main sequence star of spectral type F9V and magnitude 4.96. Lying some 49 light years distant, it is around 1.2 times as massive as the Sun, and likely to be surrounded by a disk of dust. It is the closest star in the constellation that is visible with the unaided eye. Gliese 915 is a white dwarf only 26 light years away. It is of magnitude 13.05, too faint to be seen with the naked eye. White dwarfs are extremely dense stars compacted into a volume the size of the Earth. With around 85% of the mass of the Sun, Gliese 915 has a surface gravity of 108.39 \u00b1 0.01 (2.45 \u00b7 108) cm\u00b7s\u22122, or approximately 250,000 of Earth's.\nTen stars have been found to have planets to date, and four planetary systems have been discovered with the SuperWASP project. HD 142 is a yellow giant that has an apparent magnitude of 5.7, and has a planet (HD 142 b) 1.36 times the mass of Jupiter which orbits every 328 days. HD 2039 is a yellow subgiant with an apparent magnitude of 9.0 around 330 light years away which has a planet (HD 2039 b) six times the mass of Jupiter. WASP-18 is a star of magnitude 9.29 which was discovered to have a hot Jupiter-like planet (WASP-18b) taking less than a day to orbit the star. The planet is suspected to be causing WASP-18 to appear older than it really is. WASP-4 and WASP-5 are solar-type yellow stars around 1000 light years distant and of 13th magnitude, each with a single planet larger than Jupiter. WASP-29 is an orange dwarf of spectral type K4V and visual magnitude 11.3, which has a planetary companion of similar size and mass to Saturn. The planet completes an orbit every 3.9 days.\nWISE J003231.09-494651.4 and WISE J001505.87-461517.6 are two brown dwarfs discovered by the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer, and are 63 and 49 light years away respectively. Initially hypothesised before they were belatedly discovered, brown dwarfs are objects more massive than planets, but which are of insufficient mass for hydrogen fusion characteristic of stars to occur. Many are being found by sky surveys.\nPhoenix contains HE0107-5240, possibly one of the oldest stars yet discovered. It has around 1/200,000 the metallicity that the Sun has and hence must have formed very early in the history of the universe. With a visual magnitude of 15.17, it is around 10,000 times dimmer than the faintest stars visible to the naked eye and is 36,000 light years distant.\nDeep-sky objects.\nThe constellation does not lie on the galactic plane of the Milky Way, and there are no prominent star clusters. NGC 625 is a dwarf irregular galaxy of apparent magnitude 11.0 and lying some 12.7 million light years distant. Only 24000 light years in diameter, it is an outlying member of the Sculptor Group. NGC 625 is thought to have been involved in a collision and is experiencing a burst of active star formation. Robert's Quartet (composed of the irregular galaxy NGC 87, and three spiral galaxies NGC 88, NGC 89 and NGC 92) is a group of four galaxies located around 160 million light-years away which are in the process of colliding and merging. They are within a circle of radius of 1.6 arcmin, corresponding to about 75,000 light-years. Located in the galaxy ESO 243-49 is HLX-1, an intermediate-mass black hole\u2014the first one of its kind identified. It is thought to be a remnant of a dwarf galaxy that was absorbed in a collision with ESO 243-49. Before its discovery, this class of black hole was only hypothesized.\nLying within the bounds of the constellation is the gigantic Phoenix Cluster, which is around 7.3 million light years wide and 5.7 billion light years away, making it one of the most massive galaxy clusters. It was first discovered in 2010, and the central galaxy is producing an estimated 740 new stars a year. Larger still is El Gordo, or officially ACT-CL J0102-4915, whose discovery was announced in 2012. Located around 7.2 billion light years away, it is composed of two subclusters in the process of colliding, resulting in the spewing out of hot gas, seen in X-rays and infrared images.\nMeteor showers.\nPhoenix is the radiant of two annual meteor showers. The Phoenicids, also known as the December Phoenicids, were first observed on 3 December 1887. The shower was particularly intense in December 1956, and is thought related to the breakup of the short-period comet 289P/Blanpain. It peaks around 4\u20135 December, though is not seen every year. A very minor meteor shower peaks around July 14 with around one meteor an hour, though meteors can be seen anytime from July 3 to 18; this shower is referred to as the July Phoenicids.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "49124", "revid": "40126538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49124", "title": "Phoenix (son of Amyntor)", "text": "Greek mythical figure\nIn Greek mythology, Phoenix (Ancient Greek: \u03a6\u03bf\u1fd6\u03bd\u03b9\u03be \"Phoinix\", gen. \u03a6\u03bf\u03af\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2 \"Phoinikos\") was the son of king Amyntor. Because of a dispute with his father, Phoenix fled to Phthia, where he became king of the Dolopians, and tutor of the young Achilles, whom he accompanied to the Trojan War. After Achilles had in anger withdrawn from the war, Phoenix tried to persuade Achilles to return.\nPhoenix appears as a character in the \"Iliad\", where Homer has him tell his story. He is also mentioned several times in the Epic Cycle. There were several lost 5th-century BC tragedies titled \"Phoenix\", which presumably told his story, and he appeared as a character in several others. Mentions of Phoenix occur in Pindar, the \"Palatine Anthology\", Lycophron, Ovid and Hyginus, and a brief account of his story is given by the mythographer Apollodorus. Phoenix also appears in many works of ancient art from as early as the 6th century BC.\nMythology.\nPhoenix was the son of Amyntor. A dispute with his father, concerning his father's concubine, resulted in Phoenix fleeing his homeland for Phthia, where he became a vassal of Achilles' father Peleus, the king. As told in the \"Iliad\", on the urgings of his jealous mother (variously named as Cleobule, Hippodameia, or Alcimede), Phoenix had had sex with his father's concubine. Amyntor, discovering this, called upon the Erinyes to curse Phoenix with childlessness. In later accounts of the story, Phoenix was falsely accused by Amyntor's concubine, and blinded by his father, but Chiron restored his sight. In either case, Phoenix fled to Phthia, where Peleus made Phoenix a king of the Dolopians, and gave him his young son Achilles to raise.\nPhoenix participated in the Calydonian boar hunt, and was said to have given Achilles's son the name Neoptolemus. As an old man, he went with Odysseus and Nestor to find and recruit Achilles for the Trojan War, and was Achilles's companion at Troy. After Achilles, in his anger at Agamemnon, had withdrawn from the fighting, Phoenix was part of the unsuccessful embassy sent by Agamemnon to persuade Achilles to return to the battle. After Achilles died, Phoenix was one of those sent to fetch Neoptolemus from Scyros. On his way home from Troy, Phoenix died and was buried by Neoptolemus. His tomb was said to be either in Eion, Macedonia, or in Trachis, Thessaly, nearby the \"Phoenix River\" which was said to have been named after the hero.\nSources.\nThe \"Iliad\".\nPhoenix plays an important role in Book 9 of the \"Iliad\" of Homer. Achilles, the Greeks' greatest warrior, has withdrawn from the war because of his great anger at his ill treatment by the Greek commander Agamemnon. Phoenix, who had been in charge of Achilles's upbringing, now an old man, has accompanied Achilles to the Trojan War. Phoenix is sent by Agamemnon to Achilles's tent, as part of an embassy with Ajax and Odysseus, to persuade Achilles to return to the battle. Odysseus speaks first, presenting Agamemnon's offer of reconciliation, an appeal which Achilles rejects utterly, saying that he will leave with his ships the next morning. Next Phoenix\u2014who as his tutor, as he reminds Achilles, has taught him \"to be both a speaker of words and a doer of deeds\"\u2014begins himself a long speech covering 172 lines. Phoenix, \"bursting into tears\", pleads passionately with Achilles to put down his anger and return to the war. Phoenix's speech presents an \"exposition of heroic, traditional ethics\".\nPhoenix begins his appeal, in personal terms, by reminding Achilles how he came to be a second father to Achilles. Phoenix's father was Amyntor, the son of Ormenus, and a king in Hellas. When Amyntor forsook his wife, Phoenix's mother, for a concubine, at the urging of his jealous mother, Phoenix had sex with Amyntor's concubine. To punish this crime Amyntor called upon the Erinyes to curse Phoenix with childlessness. Outraged Phoenix intended to kill Amyntor, but was finally dissuaded. Instead he decided to leave his father's kingdom. For nine days some of his friends and family kept watch over him to prevent his leaving, but finally on the tenth day he managed to escape, and fleeing through Hellas, Phoenix came to Phthia, where king Peleus, the father of Achilles, took in Phoenix, and treated him like a son. Peleus made Phoenix a king of the Dolopians. And Phoenix was given charge of the young Achilles, whom Phoenix reared as a son. Having reminded Achilles of all this, Phoenix asks Achilles to \"master thy proud spirit; it beseemeth thee not to have a pitiless heart. Nay, even the very gods can bend\".\nPhoenix next relates two stories meant to persuade Achilles to relent. The first story concerns the \"Litai\" (\"Prayers\"), daughters of Zeus, who follow along after \"Ate\" (\"Sin\"). This story is meant to show Achilles the dangers inherent in refusing prayers of supplication. After telling the story, Phoenix again asks Achilles to \"cast aside thine anger\" and heed the supplication of his comrads in arms and return to the battle. Phoenix reminds Achilles that heroes of old, in their wrath, might be won over by gifts and pleadings. He then recounts the story of the hero Meleager, with its many parallels to Achilles's situation. Like Achilles, Meleager has withdrawn from battle in anger. Offering gifts, his friends and family beg Meleager to return to the battle, but he refuses them. But when his own household is threatened, finally heeding the pleas of his wife, he returns to the battle, but received no gifts and honors, for doing so. Finally Phoenix urges Achilles not to be like Meleager, but to accept the gifts and honors Agammenon has offered, before it is too late.\nBut Achilles, responding to Phoenix, says he has no need of such gifts and has honor enough already. Further he admonishes Phoenix \"not to confound my spirit by weeping and sorrowing,\" on Agamemnon's behalf. Nevertheless, Achilles invites Phoenix to stay the night \"and at break of day we will take counsel whether to return to our own or to tarry here.\"\nBrief mentions of Phoenix also appear in Books 16, 17, 19, and 23. In Book 16 Phoenix leads a company of Myrmidons into battle. In Book 17, Athena takes Phoenix's form, as she urges on Menelaus in the heat of battle. In Book 19, Phoenix is among those comforting Achilles in his tent after the death of Patroclus. In Book 23, Phoenix is an umpire in Patroclus's funeral games.\nEpic Cycle.\nBesides the \"Iliad\" a few other mentions of Phoenix, from the epic tradition, are found in the Epic Cycle, a collection of epic poems about the Trojan War.\nAccording to scholia to \"Iliad\" 19, citing the Epic Cycle, prior to the Trojan War, Phoenix was sent with Odysseus and Nestor to seek out Achilles (who, as it turns out, is hiding on Skyros disguised as a girl) to recruit him for the war. According to the \"Cypria\", (one of the poems in the Epic Cycle) Achilles's son Neoptolemus, originally named Pyrrhus, was given the name Neoptolemus (\"young soldier\") by Phoenix, because Achilles was a young man when he went to war. According to Proclus' summary of the \"Nostoi\", Phoenix, while traveling home from the Trojan War with Neoptolemus, died and was buried by Neoptolemus.\nLater sources.\nThe late sixth-century early fifth-century BC poet Pindar mentioned Phoenix, saying that he \"held a throng of Dolopians, bold in the use of the sling and bringing aid to the missiles of the Danaans, tamers of horses.\" Phoenix appeared as a character in tragedian Aeschylus' lost play \"Myrmidons\" (c.\u2009490\u2013480), which included an embassy scene, and presumably Phoenix's attempt to persuade Achilles to put aside his anger and return to the battlefield.\nThe tragedian Sophocles, in his play \"Philoctetes\" (409 BC), tells us that after Achilles died at Troy, the Greeks received a prophecy which said that they would never take Troy unless Neoptolemus came to fight for them, so the Greeks sent Phoenix and Odysseus to Scyros to bring Neoptolemus back with them to Troy. A red-figure volute-krater (c.\u2009470 BC), had already depicted Neoptolemus, with Phoenix and Odysseus (all named), saying goodbye to his mother and grandfather Lycomedes on Skyros (Ferrara 44701).\nSophocles, and his fellow fifth-century tragedians Euripides, and Ion of Chios, among others, all wrote plays titled \"Phoenix\", now lost, which presumably told the story of Phoenix's conflict with his father. Nothing is known about the plays by Sophocles or Ion. However, from an allusion in Aristophanes' play \"The Acharnians\", Euripides seems to have represented Phoenix as blind. Moreover, evidence indicates that in Euripides' version of the story, Phoenix is falsely accused of rape by his father's concubine, and is blinded by Amyntor in punishment.\nThe Cyzicene epigrams, the third book of the \"Palatine Anthology\", refers to the blinding of Phoenix by Amyntor, with Phoenix's mother, here named Alcimede, trying to restrain her husband. The poet Lycophron alludes to Phoenix, and his blinding by his father, and the poet Propertius, mentions Chiron restoring Phoenix's sight.\nLycophron also connects Phoenix with Eion, where he was said to have been buried. Lycophron scholia name Phoenix's mother Cleobule, and give the concubine's name as either Clytie or Phthia. According to the A scholia to \"Iliad\" 9.448, Phoenix's mother was named Hippodameia, and the concubine Clytia.\nBoth the poet Ovid and the mythographer Hyginus say that Phoenix was one of the heroes to have participated in the hunt for the Calydonian Boar. And Virgil in his Aeneid, has Phoenix and Odysseus, during the sack of Troy, in a temple, in Priam's palace, standing guard over Troy's treasures.\nThe mythographer Apollodorus, probably drawing on Euripides' \"Phoenix\", says that Phoenix was falsely accused of seducing Amyntor's concubine Phthia. Amyntor blinded Phoenix, but Peleus brought Phoenix to the centaur Chiron who restored his sight. Peleus then made Phoenix king of the Dolopians. Apollodorus mentions the embassy of Odysseus, Phoenix, and Ajax, to Achilles. Like Sophocles, Apollodorus says Phoenix and Odysseus were sent to bring Neoptolemus to Troy, and agreeing with Proclus, says that after the war, traveling home with Neoptolemus, Phoenix died and Neoptolemus buried him.\nThe Greek comic poet Eubulus wrote a play titled \"Phoenix\", so too did the Latin poet Ennius. The 4th-century AD (?) Greek poet Quintus Smyrnaeus, in his epic poem \"Posthomerica\", has Phoenix welcome Achilles's son Neoptolemus to Troy, and give a speech telling Neoptolemus about his father. According to the c. 4th-century AD Dictys Cretensis, Achilles, Ajax, and Phoenix were the commanders of the Greek's Trojan War fleet.\nIconography.\nPhoenix is depicted in several ancient works of art, from as early as c.\u2009570 BC. He can often be distinguished by his white hair and beard, in contrast to the black of the other figures, as in the red-figure kylix by the Brygos Painter (c.\u2009490 BC), where he is being served wine by Briseis (Louvre G152 shown above).\nThe embassy to Achilles, from Book 9 of Homer's Iliad, becomes a popular scene on Attic vases of the early fifth century BC, with Phoenix being a prominent figure. A dozen or so Attic vases depict the scene. The earliest of these, c. 490 BC, is a red-figure calyx-krater attributed to the Eucharides Painter (Louvre G163). It depicts, on the left, Phoenix standing behind a seated Odysseus, both facing right, and on the right, Diomedes (rather than the expected Ajax) standing behind a seated Achilles, both facing left, all named by inscription. Though without his usual white hair, Phoenix here is still recognizably older than the other three men. Other vases showing similar embassy scenes include: Antikensammlungen 8770 (shown above), and Louvre G146 (shown right).\nPhoenix also appears on several other vases. On a black-figure Tyrrhenian amphora, c. 570 BC, (London 1897.0727.2), Phoenix is shown as part of a scene depicting Polyxena's slaughter at the tomb of Achilles. While Neoptolemus cuts Polyxena's throat, Phoenix stands on the far right, with his back turned looking away (perhaps disapproving or unable to watch). As noted above, Phoenix appears with Odysseus and Neoptolemos on a red-figure volute-krater (c.\u2009470 BC), in a scene depicting Neoptolemos' departure from Skyros (Ferrara 44701). Phoenix is probably also depicted on a red-figure kylix, by Euphronios, leading a procession, followed by a woman with hand to head (Thetis?) looking back, Ajax carrying Achilles's corpse, and a warrior (probably Odysseus) at the rear of the procession (J. Paul Getty Museum 77.AE.20).\nPhoenix appears on both sides of an Athenian red-figure stamnos, c. 480 BC, attributed to the Triptolemos Painter (Antikenmuseum BS 477). The B. side is another embassy to Achilles scene. Phoenix, his long white hair tied up in back, stands on the right, behind the seated Achilles. On the A. side, Phoenix on the left, named by inscription, restrains either Ajax or Achilles, while Priam on the right, also depicted with long white hair tied up in the back, restrains Hector. If the warrior being restrained by Phoenix is Ajax, then this would appear to be Ajax's dual with Hector from \"Iliad\" 7, otherwise this might be Achilles's dual with Hektor, following the death of Patroclus, although the \"Iliad\" does not mention Phoenix's involvement in either dual. A related scene occurs on an Athenian red-figure amphora (c.\u2009480 BC) by the Kleophrades Painter (Martin von Wagner Museum L508). On the A. side, Phoenix (named) restrains a warrior (Ajax?), while on the B. side, another old man (Priam?) restrains Hektor (named).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "49125", "revid": "45364314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49125", "title": "Phoenix Force", "text": "Fictional entity from Marvel Comics\nThe Phoenix Force is a fictional entity appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. Created by Chris Claremont and Dave Cockrum, the Phoenix Force is famous for its central role in \"The Dark Phoenix Saga\" storyline, and is intrinsically linked to Jean Grey.\nPublication history.\nThe Phoenix first appeared in \"Uncanny X-Men\" #101 (October 1976), and was created by Chris Claremont and Dave Cockrum.\nFictional character biography.\nThe Phoenix Force is an immortal and immutable manifestation of the universal force of life and passion. The Phoenix Force is a creation of the universe that was born of the void between states of being. It is the nexus of all psionic energy of the past, present, and future in all realities of the multiverse, the Guardian of Creation and of the M'Kraan Crystal.\nThe Phoenix Force is among the most feared beings in all of existence\u2014it can cut, re-grow, or destroy any part of the universe. It has been described as being \"the embodiment of the very passion of Creation\u2014the spark that gave life to the Universe, the flame that will ultimately consume it.\"\nDuring its time as a sentient and formless mass of energy, it traveled the cosmos and was worshiped by several alien races, including the Shi'ar, who named the entity Phal'kon, the \"sister\" of their other gods K'ythri and Sharra.\nAccording to the alien peace-keeping robot Unit, a billion years ago the alien Demon Lords of Stasis cast a spell on their planet to stop evolution. However, five powerful beings led by a female with pyrokinetic powers wage a rebellion against the Lords of Stasis. The rebellion drew the Phoenix to the planet. Although the Demon Lords fight to prevent it, the Phoenix communes with the female and with the loyalty of her disciples that helps her to control the infinite power of the Phoenix, she breaks the spell and the Demons are swept away.\nThe Phoenix later warred with the ancient energy creature known as le Bete Noir, and eventually trapped its enemy within Earth's still cooling molten core, creating in the process the \"Burnt Place\", a permanently razed clearing, where eventually the xenophobic surrounding tribes sacrificed anyone who deviated in any way from their norms. The Phoenix is drawn to Earth when Firehair, a young primitive female red-haired mutant overwhelmed with despair by her friends' deaths, contemplates turning her psychic abilities on herself to commit suicide at the \"Burnt Place\". Attracted to Firehair's untapped raw psychic power, the Phoenix prevents the suicide, bonds with her, and seeks to use her to fulfill its intended purpose of razing planets to ashes. Consumed by vengeful rage, Firehair nearly gives in to the firebird's bloodlust to become a Dark Phoenix, but is pacified by her wolf guardian and decides to use her powers to protect those weaker than herself. Using the alias Lady Phoenix, she joins that time period's incarnation of the Avengers. Her only known fight is with an out-of-control Celestial called the Fallen. During this time she and Odin share a romantic relationship that Odin considers the one time in his life when he truly felt alive. It was later claimed that from their love, Thor was born, but in truth, Phoenix left Odin due to his callousness, until millennia later, she arranged for Odin and Gaea to conceived a child. When Thor was born, his birth was felt by King Laufey who immediately killed him. The Phoenix resurrected him, leaving him permanently imbued with some of her power.\nThe Rise of Dark Phoenix.\nAt some point, the entity ends up in Shi'ar space, where it bonds with a citizen of the Empire named Rook'shir, who controls the power of the Phoenix Force in conjunction with his blade. He is ultimately overwhelmed by the Phoenix's power and becomes the first known host to succumb to the Phoenix Force's destructive impulses, going insane from the power it embodied and becoming the Dark Phoenix. Rook'shir goes on a destructive rampage through the Empire and destroys many planets in the process. He is killed by the Imperial Guard, which later becomes the first line of defense of the Shi'ar Empire. The Phoenix flees, leaving a small remnant of itself in the blade, which can only be lifted by Rook'shir's descendants. Fearing the power of the Phoenix, the Shi'ar demonizes the entity and orders the deaths or sterilizations of Rook'shir's descendants.\nAs time passes, the entity is contacted by a mage named Feron. Feron worships the legendary Phoenix, so his daydream-like visions prompts the Phoenix to adopt the fiery bird's form. He asks the Phoenix to help him by lending its energy to project a lighthouse-like stone pillar across the multiverse. The pillar later becomes the lighthouse base for the British superhero team Excalibur. Afterwards, Necrom attacks Feron to steal the power of the Phoenix. Strengthened by the Phoenix Force, Feron is able to fight back, but Necrom steals a fraction of the Phoenix Force's essence, forcing it to flee back to space in agonized confusion.\nIn the late fifteenth or early sixteenth century, Yu-Ti of K'un-L'un has visions of the Phoenix coming to Earth and of a red-headed Iron Fist who would confront it. In one vision, she loses control and destroys the world; in another, she tames its power. When walking the streets, Yu-Ti comes across Fongji Wu, the daughter of a woman who had ventured to the outside world and lain with a man from beyond K'un-Lun. After defeating Shou-Lao and becoming the Iron Fist, Fongji confronts the Phoenix Force and becomes its host. The Phoenix Force attempts to overwhelm Fongji and turn her into the Dark Phoenix, but she resists the being's control. Determining that she needed to leave Earth to prevent the possibility of losing control, Fongji ventures into space, never to be seen again.\nJean Grey.\nCenturies later, the Phoenix Force returns to Earth without a host when it feels the mind of a human transcend the physical realm and resonate with its energy. Jean Grey telepathically linked her mind to her dying friend Annie Richardson to keep Annie's soul from moving to the afterlife. In doing so, Jean's mind is dragged along to the \"other side\" with Annie. The Phoenix lends its energy to break the connection, and keeps a close watch on her because it felt a kinship with the young mutant. Years later, when Jean is dying on a space shuttle, her mind calls out for help and the Phoenix Force answers and saves her, transforming Jean into the Phoenix.\nThe Phoenix remains with the X-Men for only a short time. She prevents the complete destruction of the universe by repairing the damaged energy matrix at the core of the M'Kraan Crystal. During a skirmish with Magneto, Phoenix and Beast are separated from the other X-Men, each group believing the other to have perished. In Greece, Phoenix meets a man named Nikos, later revealed to be Mastermind, a mutant who can alter the perceptions of others. Mastermind plants seeds of dissent within Phoenix's psyche by comparing her to a god and insisting she could do whatever she wished. She encounters Mastermind again in Scotland under the guise of Jason Wyngarde, believing the latter to be both the work of the reality-warping mutant Proteus and the lover of one of her ancestors.\nAn encounter with the Hellfire Club and manipulation by Mastermind and Emma Frost (the White Queen) transformed the Phoenix into their Black Queen. She breaks free of Mastermind's control, but transforms into the Dark Phoenix. She battles the X-Men, flees to the stars, devours the energies of the D'Bari star system to satisfy her \"hunger\" as the Dark Phoenix, annihilates the five billion inhabitants of its fourth planet, and destroys a nearby Shi'ar observatory vessel that opens fire on her before she returns to Earth. There, the Dark Phoenix is defeated in psionic combat by Professor X, and Jean Grey regains control. The X-Men, along with Phoenix, are teleported to space by the Shi'ar and given a trial by combat. Just as victory seemed certain for the Imperial Guard, Jean becomes Dark Phoenix again. She apparently commits suicide on Earth's moon before Cyclops.\nAs originally written, the Jean Grey incarnation of Phoenix is Jean herself, having attained her ultimate potential as a psi, becoming a being of pure energy and reforming herself as Phoenix, only to become slowly corrupted by the manipulation of such foes as Mastermind and Emma; Jean is driven mad as she is unable to adapt to her enormous power.\nTo return Jean to the fold several years later, this storyline was retconned to reveal the existence of the cosmic Phoenix Force entity, which had created a duplicate body of Jean, believed itself to be Jean, and acted in her place while the real version laid in a healing cocoon at the bottom of Jamaica Bay, where the Avengers and Fantastic Four discover her. It allowed Jean to be revived as a member of X-Factor. The extent to which the duplicate and Jean are separate entities depends on who is writing the characters at the time: some instances portray them as inherently separate, while others demonstrate a shared consciousness.\nAfter committing suicide, the Phoenix Force reaches the White Hot Room where it encounters a manifestation of Death and returns itself to Jean in the cocoon. Horrified by what it has done, Jean rejects it and it fuses with Madelyne Pryor (Jean's clone). This portion of the Phoenix remains with Madelyne until the latter committed suicide while fighting her genetic template before joining into a merged consciousness.\nRachel Summers.\nAnother known possessor of the Phoenix Force is Rachel Summers, Scott Summers and Jean Grey's daughter from the \"Days of Future Past\" alternate future. The Phoenix Force bonds with Rachel, making her the next avatar of the Phoenix Force. Rachel is one of the longest reigning avatars of the Phoenix, and while she eventually adopts the uniform, she never becomes Dark Phoenix. Rachel has been referred by the entity as \"The One True Phoenix\".\nDuring an encounter with Galactus, Rachel Summers\u2014completely overtaken by the Phoenix Force\u2014battles Galactus to save a planet he was preparing to devour. The Phoenix Force disrupts Galactus' feeding process and easily defeats him. Galactus accuses the Phoenix Force of hypocrisy and reveals to it that its existence in a corporeal state is sustained by robbing energy used to birth future generations. Realizing this to be true, the Phoenix vows to return to its prior existence of \"touching all that is\" while allowing an echo of its power to remain with Rachel's now-dominant consciousness.\nInto the Future.\nReturning to Earth with all her memories, Rachel manages to return to the future she had come from. While she could not change her past, she and her teammates are able to change the directives of all the Sentinels of the era to preserve all life, ending the genocide that had prevailed for years. On the way back to her time, Captain Britain is lost in the timestream and Rachel is forced to switch places with him, as she does not belong in the timeline she had existed in. She emerges from the timestream about 1,900 years in the future and forms the Clan Askani, which is responsible for bringing her brother Nathan to their time to fight Apocalypse. She later encounters Diamanda Nero, Apocalypse's High Councilor and viceroy. She tries overpowering him, but is left powerless after being shortly bonded to the Phoenix Force.\nPhoenix resurrection.\nAs an interdimensional portal transports four villains from the 616 Marvel Universe into the Ultraverse dimension, the Phoenix Force is also pulled into the Ultraverse and critically damaged. Requiring a human host to recover, the Phoenix Force bonds with Prime then with Amber Hunt. Amber, unable to control the Phoenix Force's power, attacks her friends and would have destroyed the planet if the X-Men and new Ultra hero Foxfire had not arrived, who after a long battle are able to separate the Phoenix from Amber and send the cosmic entity back to the 616 universe.\nJean Grey begins to wear the same costume the Phoenix Force had worn, manifest Phoenix firebirds, and tap into its cosmic reserves several times, worrying Scott as he feared the Phoenix had returned until Jean temporarily loses her powers as a result of the Psi-War.\nTo help Psylocke after the Psi-War, Jean switches powers with her. Jean loses her telekinesis but her telepathy increases greatly. Jean begins to manifest \"Phoenix raptors\" that represent her telepathic powers \"honed to their sharpest edge\". As a result of the power switch, Jean temporarily displays a shadow astral form with a Phoenix symbol over her right eye.\nJean begins manifesting the Phoenix raptor, creating a rift between her own and Scott's relationship, and the entity starts to appear as another personality within Jean, having a conversation with Professor Xavier on its role in events to come. When the X-Man Xorn reveals himself to be a traitor who claimed to be Magneto, he traps Jean and Wolverine on Asteroid M, which is drifting closer to the Sun. Rather than watch Jean die a slow painful death, Wolverine tries to kill Jean, but he awakens the Phoenix Force within her. Using her incredible powers, Phoenix/Jean returns with Logan to New York City to face \"Magneto\". Xorn's last act is to kill Jean with an electromagnetic pulse.\n\"Endsong\" and \"Warsong\".\nThe Phoenix Force returns to Earth during the mini-series ', where it resurrects Jean Grey from her grave. It is not long before she remembers what she has come for\u2014Scott Summers. She needs to feed from the energy from his optic blasts, and, confused by her own emotions, thinks she is in love with Scott. She realizes Scott is in love with Emma Frost, former White Queen of the Hellfire Club and headmistress of the Xavier Institute for Higher Learning. Through a number of incidents, Jean manages to assert herself and gain control of the Phoenix Force with emotional support from the X-Men. Jean then declares that she and the Phoenix Force are truly one entity, have transcended into the White Phoenix of the Crown\"', signified by a new white and gold costume.\nAs a result of a Shi'ar attack on the Phoenix Force, the entity is in an incomplete state and Jean must search out the remaining parts of the Phoenix Force. The consequences of this were partially addressed in \"\" in which a small part of the Phoenix Force joins with the Stepford Cuckoos. After nearly losing control to the Phoenix power, the Stepford Cuckoos develop a secondary mutation where their hearts turn to diamond and they are able to imprison the piece of the Phoenix Force.\nEnd of Greys.\nWith the failed attack on the Phoenix Force that ended with Jean Grey escaping their suicide bomb attack and returned to the White Hot Room to restore herself, the Shi'ar still want to permanently prevent the ascension of the Phoenix Force. In hopes of eliminating the possibility of a new Omega-level psionic mutant becoming a host for the Phoenix Force, the Shi'ar sent a commando unit\u2014the Death Commandos\u2014with the purpose of wiping out the Grey genome and killing Quentin Quire to Earth. They arrived at Rachel's family reunion site and kill all the members of the Grey family, except Rachel, who was marked, and Cable, who was not present. Afterward, at the graves of the Grey family, Rachel vows revenge on the Shi'ar and says: \"I'm not my mom. I'm not the Phoenix. I'm my own woman. And by the time I'm done... they'll wish I WERE the Phoenix.\"\n\"Kingbreaker\".\nIn the last issue of \"Kingbreaker\", the Phoenix abandons Rachel and Korvus during battle with Vulcan's new guard, leaving them both without its power. As it leaves Rachel mutters \"Please, not now... Mom.\" implying that Jean is calling back the missing pieces of the Phoenix Force, and perhaps planning another resurrection. Rachel later says that it was almost like the Phoenix was never with her for she \"[c]an't feel it... I can't hear it...It's like it was never there.\"\nThe Sisterhood.\nAround the same time in San Francisco, the Red Queen and her Sisterhood attack the X-Men; first trapping Emma in a psychic barricade by Lady Mastermind. Inside what appears to be the White Hot Room, a woman resembling Jean Grey appears to Emma and helps her break free of Regan's influence with what appears to be a miniature version of the Phoenix energy raptor to let her help Logan, who has been robbed of a lock of Jean's hair that was in his possession. Madelyne uses the hair sample to locate Jean's gravesite, and then attempts to repeat a resurrection ritual with her corpse, but Cyclops had ordered Domino to substitute the body for someone else's and it causes Madelyne to either discorporate or become absorbed into the fake.\nUtopia.\nDuring a conflict with several Predators X (genetically engineered mutant hunters), the Stepford Cuckoos are overwhelmed and knocked unconscious as the fragment of the Phoenix they captured forcefully escape from the girls' diamond hearts.\n\"Second Coming\".\nDuring the final confrontation with Bastion, Hope Summers turns into what appears to be the Phoenix and blasts Bastion who manages to grasp Hope's neck. Hope touches the ground, goes full Phoenix Force, and blasts Bastion and the dome. Later at a celebratory bonfire, Emma notices the flames around Hope take the shape of the Phoenix and Emma recalls the Sisterhood attack where the woman resembling Jean freed her from Lady Mastermind's illusion.\nGeneration Hope.\nWhile fighting the fifth so-called \"Light\", who was out of control, Hope attempts to take some of his powers only to exhaust herself and collapses. She is contacted by the Phoenix Force who refers to Hope as her \"child\", and that the other lights needed her. Hope regains consciousness and goes back to face Kenji Uedo.\nAge of X.\nThe Age of X reality is created when Legion's mind reacted to Doctor Nemesis's attempt to restore its sanity. In this reality, Jean Grey's Phoenix Force ability causes a tremendous amount of destruction and death in Albany. Although she was presumed deceased when the Air Force bombs the area, a new phoenix shape emerges from the rubble. Under the name of Revenant, it is not known whether she is Jean Grey (presumably dead after the Albany incident) or a new incarnation. She joins Magneto and becomes part of the Force Warriors.\nWhen the truth about the Age of X is revealed, Legion apologizes to everyone before rewriting the universe and putting everything back the way it was. However, Revenant is also brought back to Utopia. Later, as all mutants begin to regain their true memories, Revenant is revealed to be the mind of Rachel Summers given human form.\n\"Fear Itself\".\nDuring the \"Fear Itself\" storyline, the Phoenix Force appears to Emma Frost. The Phoenix mocks her, saying that Scott Summers would never love her as he loved Jean Grey. It seems to be a side effect of when Emma invaded Juggernaut's mind and began feeding into Emma's fears. As the Phoenix convinces Emma that Hope is Jean reincarnated, it tells Emma that she knows what to do. Emma, in a trance-like state, takes her pillow and is about to smother her to death, but Namor intervenes.\n\"Avengers vs. X-Men\".\nDuring the \"Avengers vs. X-Men\" storyline, the event has the Phoenix Force returning to Earth, presumably to reclaim Hope Summers, which leads to a confrontation between the Avengers and the X-Men on how to deal with its arrival. The Avengers anticipate the destruction that the Phoenix could bring while Cyclops hopes to use the Phoenix Force to restart the mutant population.\nAs the Phoenix Force nears Earth, the Avengers fight the X-Men on the Blue Area of the Moon with Hope caught in the middle, while Iron Man and Giant-Man prepare a disruptor weapon to kill the Phoenix Force. Iron Man pilots the weapon against the Phoenix Force, but when he uses it to blast the Phoenix Force, the entity is forcefully altered and divided into five fragments that bond with Cyclops, Emma Frost, Namor, Colossus, and Magik. They defeat the Avengers and head back to Earth with Hope. It is theorized that Scarlet Witch's spell of \"No more mutants\" angered the Phoenix, and to calm the entity, a new host was needed along, with five acolytes, to succeed at bringing about evolution (the acolytes were actually revealed to be the first five new mutants that have appeared around the globe since the decimation of the mutant population), and that was the reason the Phoenix came to Earth.\nWhen the Avengers defeat Namor in an attack on Wakanda, his portion of the Phoenix Force becomes divided between the other four members of the \"Phoenix Five\", making it harder to defeat them. Spider-Man then baits Colossus and Magik into taking each other out by playing off of their fears when fighting them in a volcano, forcing their portions of the Phoenix to be divided between Emma and Cyclops. When Cyclops invades the mystical city of K'un-L'un, Lei Kung defends the city on the back of Shou-Lao, and reveals it had defeated the Phoenix in a past incarnation. While Cyclops defeats the dragon, Hope is able to absorb its power and defeat Cyclops who then goes to seek the other remaining portion of the Phoenix Force possessed by Emma Frost. Emma had been using the Phoenix Force to control all of Utopia, read the thoughts of everyone on the planet, take vengeance on anyone who had ever harmed a mutant, and dismantle all Sentinels. Cyclops defeats Emma and elevates to the level of Dark Phoenix, killing Professor X in the process.\nIn the final issue, the X-Men and the Avengers battle the Dark Phoenix, but they are losing as the Dark Phoenix starts to burn the world. As a last resort, Captain America sends in Hope and Scarlet Witch, who together manage to take down the Dark Phoenix, while Jean Grey appears within Cyclops' mind and convinces him to let go of the Phoenix Force. The Phoenix escapes Cyclops' body and enters Hope Summers'. Together, Hope and the Scarlet Witch wish away the Phoenix Force and the damage it caused, in the process activating the X-gene that allows the creation of new mutants around the world.\nEven with the Phoenix gone, its effects remain in various ways, with four of the former Phoenix Five\u2014Cyclops, Emma Frost, Colossus and Magik\u2014suffering from various problems with their powers as well as Magneto, due to his prolonged time on Utopia. Cyclops and Magneto's control over their abilities regress back to the level of control that they had possessed in their first appearances, Emma Frost retains her diamond form but only has erratic control over her telepathy, and Colossus' body fluctuates between his organic and his metal parts rather than completely transforming into one or the other. While Magik's powers initially appeared to have been increased to the point where she can channel the power of Limbo on her own, a confrontation with Dormammu reveals that her new power is destroying Limbo each time she used it. It is later revealed that the power disruptions experienced by Cyclops, Emma, Colossus, Magik and Magneto were actually the result of nano-sentinels unleashed on them by Dark Beast.\nSimultaneously, while spending some time in deep space, Iron Man helps defend an ancient planet from space pirates. He is later confronted by robotic police officers looking to arrest him for deicide. Before he is able to escape the planet, Iron Man realizes that the planet's people, known as the Voldi, worship the Phoenix Force and his hand in its disappearance has angered them.\n\"Time Runs Out\" and \"Secret Wars\".\nAt some point during the \"Time Runs Out\" storyline, Cyclops acquires a Phoenix Egg that he holds in reserve, hoping to use it to end the Incursions.\nDuring the \"Secret Wars\" storyline, Cyclops stands on top of the Phoenix Egg during the incursion between Earth-616 and Earth-1610. Cyclops uses it to become one with the Phoenix Force again, and uses his powers to decimate the Children of Tomorrow. After the realities collapse together, the Phoenix-Cyclops was one of the few survivors to come through the Incursion with a full memory of what had come before, proclaiming that resurrection was the goal of their mission. He is killed by God Emperor Doom in a subsequent confrontation.\nAll New, All Different Marvel.\nIt has since been revealed that thousands of years ago, the civilization of planet Maveth was able to create a bomb that, when used, scorched the entire surface of the planet, killing all life within a generation; however, a second bomb is discovered by Gamora and Kitty Pryde to be hidden in the tomb of Maveth's king, which in turn is also being sought by the Chitauri. To Kitty's surprise, the bomb is actually an artifact that contained a fragment of the Phoenix Force. To escape from the Chitauri alive, Kitty accidentally activates the bomb, which kills the Chitauri and apparently releases the fragment of the Phoenix Force into the Universe again.\nThe deities of the Shi'ar, Sharra and K'ythri, can summon the entity at will and consider itself as their sister.\nUnder unknown circumstances, Terrax acquires a Phoenix Egg and stores it on his warship. Thane deceives his allies (the Champion, Starfox, and Nebula) into helping him invade Terrax's warship to steal the egg. After being shot and killed by Nebula, Thane opens the egg and become the new host of the Phoenix. Using his new powers, Thane defeats his own father and conquers the Black Quadrant. Thane finds Thanos and fights him, causing them both to fall into the entrance to the God Quarry. Inside, the Coven senses the Phoenix Force inside of Thane and separates it from him so that Thane can fight his father as the man he truly is. The Phoenix Force flies off and presumably leaves the God Quarry.\nPsych War.\nWhile on a solo mission against the Wrecking Crew, teenaged Jean receives a vision that the Phoenix Force is coming back to Earth. Determined to not succumb to the fate that befell her adult counterpart, Jean tries to fight the future and forge her own destiny. When the Phoenix arrives, Jean, backed by a host of former Phoenix Force wielders, tries to defy destiny and stop the Phoenix before it can take her over. While she is able to wound the Phoenix with the aid of Cable's Psi-mitar, the Phoenix seems just too strong for anyone to overcome. Jean eventually pushes the cosmic force far away from her friends and allies, where a final battle can take place. It is revealed the Phoenix wants the adult Jean, but to do that it needs the younger Jean out of the way. The force floods her body with flaming psychic energy, incinerating her from the inside out, leaving only a skeleton.\nPhoenix Resurrection: The Return of Jean Grey.\nStrange psychic occurrences around the world, which include a large bird flaring out from the sun and an explosion on the moon, raises red flags for the X-Men, who quickly launch an investigation on these events. After a string of bizarre encounters with familiar enemies, many of them considered deceased, the X-Men come to one conclusion: the Phoenix Force is back on Earth. The X-Men also discover that psychics are going missing or falling ill, which prompts the team to investigate Jean Grey's grave. They find her coffin empty, and race to locate the Phoenix Force before it can find a suitable host. With the time-displaced teen Jean Grey out of the Phoenix Force's way, the cosmic entity had resurrected the present adult Jean Grey. However, she does not recall her life as a mutant and an X-Man, and terrible visions from her previous life leave Jean unsure of the differences between reality and fiction. The X-Men theorize that the strange psychic occurrences are subconscious cries for help made by Jean Grey, and they must try to stop the Phoenix Force from merging with her. Old Man Logan is able to make Jean Grey remember her true life and as she learns about the fate of her family and several friends. Jean faces the Phoenix Force and is finally able to convince the cosmic entity to stop bringing her back as its avatar and to let her go. Alive once again, Jean is reunited with her friends as the Phoenix Force journeys back into space.\nReturning to Earth.\nNamor, embittered by the surface world's reckless disregard for his underwater kingdom, beckons the Phoenix Force to Earth and vows to sacrifice every part of himself to reunite with the entity once more. Namor proposes that if the Phoenix helps him destroy the Avengers, then he will help it set the galaxies ablaze. The Phoenix chooses Moon Knight as its new host instead, allowing him to escape Khonshu's sway, but also provides him with a tremendous amount of power that is problematic considering Moon Knight's mental instability. As the Fist of the Phoenix, Moon Knight rejects Khonshu as his master, uppercutting Khonshu with the full might of the Phoenix Force, sending him crashing back down to Earth and losing his hold over Thor's hammer Mjolnir as well. Moon Knight declares that the new age will now belong to him instead. Once on the ground, Black Panther and Ghost Rider get to work, calling back the Spirit of Vengeance, Iron Fist and Eye of Agamotto out of Khonshu's grasp. With that, the Avengers assemble and Khonshu's forces weaken. However, Moon Knight is still floating up in the atmosphere, reacting and dwelling on the new power that now lies within him. The voices in Moon Knight's head suggest that if he were to burn the world with the Phoenix Force, the parasite of humanity would be purged and he would be a hero that saved the world. At this point, Moon Knight understands that he has lost his mind. After he reignites the sun and Thor breaks free from his entrapment with his hammer, Moon Knight almost welcomes the beating he gets from Thor, and the Phoenix Force subsequently leaves him as its host. Instead of returning to space, the Phoenix remains on Earth with Jean Grey deducing it is searching for a new avatar.\nEnter the Phoenix.\nHaving made a nest near Avengers Mountain at the North Pole, Namor and the Defenders of the Deep attempt to take the entity by force, leading to a battle with the Avengers and Agents of Wakanda. However, the Phoenix decides to hold a contest to judge who would be worthy to become its next host. The entity selects Captain America and Doctor Doom as its first combatants, who are empowered by a small spark of the Phoenix's cosmic fire and transported to the Savage Land for their match. Realizing that the Phoenix refuses to let Rogers die for unknown reasons, Doom forfeits, refusing to play into the cosmic entity's game. As Doom is returned, Captain America is transported to the White Hot Room where he encounters other competitors chosen by the Phoenix being held in wait for the next match. The Phoenix grants each competitor a vestige of its power and sends them to different parts of the world to fight each other. During the tournament, the essence of Lady Phoenix attempts to goad Black Panther into becoming the entity's next host, but is rebuked by him. As the tournament continues, the remaining Avengers and their allies attempt to keep the Phoenix at bay. During a confrontation with Thor, the Phoenix reveals that she is his biological mother, which confuses and enrages him. At the tournament's conclusion, Echo is chosen as the Phoenix's new host. As Jean Grey telepathically consoles and congratulates Echo, three Phoenix chicks are seen next to the infant Starbrand's crib at Avengers Mountain.\nPhoenix Song: Echo.\nWhile Maya fully accepts being the Phoenix Force's host, her first outing as the Phoenix does not go according to plan. While stopping a burglary, she loses control of her temper and burns one of the perpetrators alive before starting a fire that threatens to harm countless innocent people. Even Echo's behavior along with her attitude and body language shifts dramatically when being influenced by the Phoenix Force, prompting Elektra and Forge to confront her over the dangers of her powers. She rejects their condescending nature and admonishments but still recognizes that she needs help reigning in her powers.\nEcho would eventually lost the connection to the Phoenix after using it to defend the Quarry of Creation and the Multiverse from the Council of Red.\nHosts.\nThe following are the known hosts of the Phoenix Force:\nOther characters were only possessed by the Phoenix Force during out-of-continuity tales, including Franklin Richards, Nightcrawler, Storm, Wolverine of Earth-14412 (referred to as Old Man Phoenix), King Thor of Earth-14412, Cosmic Ghost Rider, and Gabriel Summers in separate \"What If...\" stories, as well as Cyclops in the X-Men/Teen Titans inter-company crossover. Quentin Quire is revealed to be a host in the \"Here Comes Tomorrow\" storyline and in the visions of Deathlok, and in the timeline of Nocturne, the Phoenix Force possesses Colossus' soulless body and reshapes it into a female form.\nWhite Hot Room.\nThe White Hot Room (or the \"White-Hot Room\") is the home of the Phoenix Force and where Phoenix hosts go after they die. It exists outside of the Multiverse, but also within the M'Kraan Crystal. It has been called \"the epicenter of creation and rebirth.\"\nThe White Hot Room first appeared, retroactively, in the backup story for \"Classic X-Men\" #8 by Chris Claremont and John Bolton. It was established and named in \"New X-Men\" #154 by Grant Morrison and Marc Silvestri.\nThe White Hot Room can appear as an endless white void, but it has also appeared in other forms. In the backup story for \"Classic X-Men\" #43, by Chris Claremont and Mike Collins, the Room appeared as a large tower being constructed in space, with the construction worker identified by Jean Grey as Death. In \"Defenders: Beyond\" #3, by Al Ewing and Javier Rodriguez, it appears the white void, the tower, a dark cave lit by a single fire, a snowy landscape, and an endless expanse of desert. This desert reappears in \"Immortal X-Men\" #14, by Kieron Gillen and Lucas Werneck, where it is eventually revealed to be the White Hot Room.\nIn \"New X-Men\" #154, it was shown to be the home of all of the hosts of the Phoenix Force, past, present, and future. In \"Jean Grey\" #11, by Dennis Hallum, Victor Ibanez, and Alberto Jim\u00e9nez Alburquerque, the Phoenix states that is \"a nexus between all Phoenix hosts and our eternal flame. A place of rest and contemplation. Home to every being with whom I've merged. Every Phoenix host leaves a piece of itself here with me.\"\nIn \"Classic X-Men\" #8, Jean Grey, while dying of radiation during \"X-Men\" #100, finds herself in a blinding white void where she first encounters the Phoenix. Even though this white void remained unnamed until \"New X-Men\" #154, it is technically the first appearance of the White Hot Room. \"New X-Men\" #154 reveals the White Hot Room to be an afterlife for the Phoenix and its hosts.\nIn \"S.W.O.R.D.\" vol 2 #1, the mutant circuit known as the Six manage to break into the White Hot Room and bring back a substance they call \"Mysterium.\" This metal is harder and stronger than Adamantium and has anti-magical properties.\nIn \"Defenders: Beyond\" #3, the Defenders find themselves in the White Hot Room as Taaia is possessed by the Phoenix. Much like the earlier stories by Claremont, this issue equates the White Hot Room with Tiphareth of the Tree of Life in Kabbalah. \nAfter \"X-Men: Hellfire Gala 2023\", during the Fall of X crossover, the majority of Krakoa's population (around 250,000 mutants) were exiled through Krakoan gates into a vast and seeming endless desert; in \"Immortal X-Men\" #16, this desert is revealed to be the White Hot Room. After the Mister Sinister clone Mother Righteous stabs Jean in the center of the White Hot Room, both the Phoenix and the White Hot Room began to die. At the end of \"Rise of the Powers of X\" #5, both the Phoenix and the White Hot Room were restored. The finale of the Krakoan Age \"X-Men\" #35 revealed that while many mutants were able to get back to Earth to fight Orchis, a large number of them still remained in the White Hot Room and this \"New Krakoa\" flourished, returning to Earth after fifteen years before going back to the White Hot Room.\nPowers and abilities.\nThe Phoenix Force can manipulate cosmic energies and tap into the life-force reserved for future generations, which denies their existence. It can wield this energy to project beams of immense destructive force. It can migrate throughout time and space by folding its energy back into itself, causing it to collapse akin to a black hole and then reform itself upon reaching its destination. It can directly absorb offensive energy such as Cyclops' optic blasts or the energy and life-force from a foe. As it is the nexus of all psionic energy, it has mental abilities on a cosmic level, including telepathy and telekinesis.\nIt allows its preferred host to perform cosmic pyrokinesis, as it allows Lady Phoenix from 1,000,000 BC Avengers to summon preternatural flames that can melt supernovas. For Jean Grey, it allows her to perform cosmic pyrokinesis strong enough to easily defeat Terrax, as she is in complete control of her own cosmic fire that after Terrax submits to his defeat, the fire dissipates at her will leaving him charred. She also uses the cosmic fire blast to counter Galactus. In some conditions, a bit of cosmic fire can easily burn anything it comes into contact, as when it possesses young Jean Grey she unconsciously melts the equipment the medics try to put on her.\nThe extent of the Phoenix Force's abilities has not been fully clarified. Jean Grey as The White Phoenix of the Crown is able to change the future of a universe by reaching back in time and urging Cyclops to move on with his life.\nAnother major display of the power of the Phoenix is during the Secret Wars II. Rachel Summers seeks to kill the Beyonder, who expresses both amazement and disappointment in her. With that, the Beyonder gives Rachel full access to the power of the Phoenix as well as some of his own. With such power, Rachel is able to absorb the consciousness of every sentient mortal being in the universe.\nThe Phoenix often seeks hosts with strong inherent psionic abilities so they can withstand its power. When the Phoenix Force enters a host, a small fragment of its power is left behind when it leaves. Even a small fragment can be stronger than an inexperienced host using the Phoenix Force's powers, such as with Rachel Summers, who has full access to the Force, but her opponent Necrom threw moons at her with only a fragment. When bonded with a host, the Phoenix Force amplifies their abilities to incalculable levels. It can manipulate matter on a sub-atomic level and transmute elements, like turning wood to gold or stone to crystal; on a smaller scale, it can alter the molecular fabrics. It can teleport others across space and open interdimensional portals to instantly access distant portions of the Universe. If an avatar of the Phoenix Force is harmed or killed, it forms an \"egg\" of cosmic power around them that is incubated in the White Hot Room, and hatches out completely healed. As one of the oldest cosmic beings, the Phoenix Force possesses a high level of cosmic awareness and prescience.\nCultural impact and legacy.\nCritical reception.\nTamara Jude of \"Sideshow\" stated, \"The Phoenix Force holds a significant place in the \"Marvel\" Comics and stands as the most unforgettable element of \"X-Men\" member \"Jean Grey\u2019s\" comic book history. This character-defining arc, known as the Phoenix Saga and the Dark Phoenix Saga, has resonated with fans for decades with its compelling plot, vibrant panels and shocking ending. The legacy of the Phoenix Force stretches well beyond the pages of Marvel Comics. The Dark Phoenix Saga is regarded as one of the best comic book arcs in history and has become a fan-favorite. It is also one of the favored arcs by comic book critics around the world.\" Tristan Benns of \"Screen Rant\" referred to the Phoenix Force as \"one of the X-Men\u2019s most iconic concepts,\" writing, \"As a staple of Marvel Comics\u2019 X-Men franchise, the Phoenix Force has been a fan-favorite concept well known to both heroes and readers alike for decades. But as long-lived and mysterious as the Phoenix is, it\u2019s hard for anybody to ever truly know its full story.\" \nCrossovers.\nPhoenix has appeared in the following intercompany crossovers:\nIn other media.\nFilm.\nTwo incarnations of the Phoenix Force via Jean Grey appear in the \"X-Men\" film series. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49126", "revid": "35652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49126", "title": "Ethical purchasing", "text": ""}
{"id": "49127", "revid": "165228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49127", "title": "Ethical sourcing", "text": ""}
{"id": "49128", "revid": "157530", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49128", "title": "Moral boycott", "text": ""}
{"id": "49129", "revid": "157530", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49129", "title": "Moral buying", "text": ""}
{"id": "49130", "revid": "165228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49130", "title": "Ethical buying", "text": ""}
{"id": "49131", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49131", "title": "Marathon, Greece", "text": "Town in Greece\nMarathon (Demotic Greek: \u039c\u03b1\u03c1\u03b1\u03b8\u03ce\u03bd\u03b1\u03c2, \"Marath\u00f3nas\"; Attic/Katharevousa: , \"Marath\u1e53n\") is a town in Greece and the site of the Battle of Marathon in 490 BCE, in which the heavily outnumbered Athenian army defeated the Persians. Legend has it that Pheidippides, a Greek herald at the battle, was sent running from Marathon to Athens to announce the victory, which is how the marathon running race was conceived in modern times. Today it is part of East Attica regional unit, in the outskirts of Athens and a popular resort town and center of agriculture.\nHistory.\nThe name \"Marathon\" () comes from the herb fennel, called \"m\u00e1rathon\" () or \"m\u00e1rathos\" () in Ancient Greek, so \"Marathon\" literally means \"a place full of fennel\". It is believed that the town was originally named so because of an abundance of fennel plants in the area.\nIn ancient times, Marathon () occupied a small plain in the northeast of ancient Attica, which contained four places, Marathon, Probalinthus, Tricorythus, and Oenoe, which originally formed the Tetrapolis, one of the 12 districts into which Attica was divided before the time of Theseus. Here Xuthus, who married the daughter of Erechtheus, is said to have reigned; and here the Heracleidae took refuge when driven out of the Peloponnese, and defeated Eurystheus. The Marathonii claimed to be the first people in Greece who paid divine honours to Heracles, who possessed a sanctuary in the plain. Marathon is also celebrated in the legends of Theseus, who conquered the ferocious bull, which used to devastate the plain. Marathon is mentioned in Homer's \"Odyssey\" in a way that implies that it was then a place of importance. In mythology, its name was derived from an eponymous hero Marathon, who is described by Pausanias as a son of Epopeus, king of Sicyon, who fled into Attica in consequence of the cruelty of his father. Plutarch calls him an Arcadian, who accompanied the Dioscuri in their expedition into Attica, and voluntarily devoted himself to death before the battle.\nAfter Theseus united the 12 independent districts of Attica into one state, the name of Tetrapolis gradually fell into disuse; and the four places of which it consisted became Attic demi, Marathon, Tricorythus, and Oeno\u00eb belonging to the tribe Aeantis, and Probalinthus to the tribe Pandionis; but Marathon was so superior to the other three, that its name was applied to the whole district down to the latest times. Hence Lucian speaks of \"the parts of Marathon about Oeno\u00eb\".\nFew places have obtained such celebrity in the history of the world as Marathon, on account of the victory which the Athenians here gained over the Persians in 490\u00a0BCE (Battle of Marathon). After Miltiades (the general of the Greek forces) defeated Darius' Persian forces, the Persians decided to sail from Marathon to Athens in order to sack the unprotected city. Miltiades ordered all his hoplite forces to march \"double time\" back to Athens, so that by the time Darius' troops arrived they saw the same Greek force waiting for them.\nAlthough the name Marathon had a positive resonance in Europe in the nineteenth century, for some time that was sullied by the Dilessi murders, which happened nearby in 1870.\nIn the 19th century and beginning of twentieth century the village was inhabited by an Arvanite population.\nThe sophist and magnate Herodes Atticus was born in Marathon. In 1926, the American company ULEN began construction on the Marathon Dam in a valley above Marathon, in order to ensure water supply for Athens. It was completed in 1929. About 10\u00a0km2 of forested land were flooded to form Lake Marathon.\nThe beach of Schinias is located southeast of the town. The beach is popular as a spot for windsurfing and the Olympic Rowing Center used for the 2004 Summer Olympics is also located there. \nAt the 1896 and 2004 Summer Olympics, Marathon was the starting point of the marathon races (for both women and men in 2004). Marathon is also the starting point for the annual Athens Classic Marathon.\nThe area is susceptible to flash flooding, because of forest fires having denuded parts of the eastern slopes of Mount Pentelicus especially in 2006.\nMunicipality.\nThe municipality of Marathon was formed at the 2011 local government reform by the merger of the following 4 former municipalities, that became municipal units:\nThe municipality has an area of 222.747\u00a0km2 and the municipal unit 97.062\u00a0km2.\nPopulation.\nThe other settlements in the municipal unit are Agios Panteleimonas, Kato Souli, Vranas, Avra, Vothon, Ano Souli, and Schinias.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution.\n\u00a0This article\u00a0incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "49132", "revid": "274535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49132", "title": "Marathon", "text": "Long-distance running event of 42.195 kilometres\nThe marathon is a long-distance foot race with a distance of kilometres (c. 26 mi 385 yd), usually run as a road race, but the distance can be covered on trail routes. The marathon can be completed by running or with a run/walk strategy. There are also wheelchair divisions. More than 800 marathons are held worldwide each year, with the vast majority of competitors being recreational athletes, as larger marathons can have tens of thousands of participants.\nA creation of the French philologist Michel Br\u00e9al inspired by a story from Ancient Greece, the marathon was one of the original modern Olympic events in 1896 in Athens. The distance did not become standardized until 1921. The distance is also included in the World Athletics Championships, which began in 1983. It is the only running road race included in both championship competitions (walking races on the roads are also contested in both).\nHistory.\nOrigin.\nThe name \"Marathon\" comes from the legend of Pheidippides, the Greek messenger. The legend states that while he was taking part in the Battle of Marathon, which took place in August or September 490 BC, he witnessed a Persian vessel changing its course towards Athens as the battle was near a victorious end for the Greek army. He interpreted this as an attempt by the defeated Persians to rush into the city to claim a false victory or simply raid, hence claiming their authority over Greek land. It was said that he ran the entire distance to Athens without stopping, discarding his weapons and even clothes to lose as much weight as possible, and burst into the assembly, exclaiming \"we have won!\", before collapsing and dying.\nThe account of the run from Marathon to Athens first appeared in Plutarch's \"On the Glory of Athens\" in the first century AD, which quoted from Heraclides Ponticus's lost work, giving the runner's name as either Thersipus of Erchius or Eucles. Satirist Lucian of Samosata gave one of the earliest accounts similar to the modern version of the story, but its historical veracity is disputed based on its tongue-in-cheek writing and the runner being referred to as Philippides and not Pheidippides.\nThere is debate about the historical accuracy of this legend. The Greek historian Herodotus, the main source for the Greco-Persian Wars, mentioned Philippides as the messenger who ran from Athens to Sparta asking for help, and then ran back, a distance of over each way. In some Herodotus manuscripts, the name of the runner between Athens and Sparta is given as Philippides. Herodotus makes no mention of a messenger sent from Marathon to Athens and relates that the main part of the Athenian army, having fought and won the grueling battle and fearing a naval raid by the Persian fleet against an undefended Athens, marched quickly back from the battle to Athens, arriving the same day.\nIn 1879, Robert Browning wrote the poem \"Pheidippides\". Browning's poem, his composite story, became part of late 19th-century popular culture and was accepted as a historical legend.\nMount Pentelicus stands between Marathon and Athens, which means that Philippides would have had to run around the mountain, either to the north or to the south. The latter and more obvious route is followed by the modern Marathon-Athens highway (EO83\u2013EO54), which follows the lay of the land southwards from Marathon Bay and along the coast, then takes a gentle but protracted climb westwards towards the eastern approach to Athens, between the foothills of Mounts Hymettus and Penteli, and then gently downhill to Athens proper. As it existed when the Olympics were revived in 1896, this route was approximately long. It was the approximate distance originally used for marathon races. However, there have been suggestions that Philippides might have followed another route: a westward climb along the eastern and northern slopes of Mount Penteli to the pass of Dionysos, and then a straight southward downhill path to Athens. This route is slightly shorter, , but includes a very steep climb over the first .\nModern Olympic marathon.\nWhen the modern Olympics began in 1896, the initiators and organizers were looking for a great popularizing event, recalling the glory of ancient Greece. The idea of a marathon race came from Michel Br\u00e9al, who wanted the event to feature in the first modern Olympic Games in 1896 in Athens. This idea was heavily supported by Pierre de Coubertin, the founder of the modern Olympics, as well as by the Greeks. A selection race for the Olympic marathon was held on 22 March 1896 (Gregorian) that was won by Charilaos Vasilakos in 3 hours and 18 minutes. The winner of the first Olympic marathon, on 10 April 1896 (a male-only race), was Spyridon Louis, a Greek water-carrier, in 2 hours 58 minutes and 50 seconds. The marathon of the 2004 Summer Olympics was run on the traditional route from Marathon to Athens, ending at Panathinaiko Stadium, the venue for the 1896 Summer Olympics. That men's marathon was won by Italian Stefano Baldini in 2 hours 10 minutes and 55 seconds, a record time for this route until the non-Olympics Athens Classic Marathon of 2014 when Felix Kandie lowered the course record to 2 hours 10 minutes and 37 seconds.\nThe women's marathon was introduced at the 1984 Summer Olympics (Los Angeles, US) and was won by Joan Benoit of the United States with a time of 2 hours 24 minutes and 52 seconds.\nIt has become a tradition for the men's Olympic marathon to be the last event of the athletics calendar, on the final day of the Olympics. For many years, the race finished inside the Olympic stadium; however, at the 2012 Summer Olympics (London), the start and finish were on The Mall, and at the 2016 Summer Olympics (Rio de Janeiro), the start and finish were in the Samb\u00f3dromo, the parade area that serves as a spectator mall for Carnival.\nOften, the men's marathon medals are awarded during the closing ceremony (including the 2004 games, 2012 games, 2016 games and 2020 games).\nThe Olympic men's record is 2:06:26, set at the 2024 Summer Olympics by Tamirat Tola of Ethiopia. The Olympic women's record is 2:22:55, set at the 2024 Summer Olympics by Sifan Hassan of The Netherlands. Per capita, the Kalenjin ethnic group of Rift Valley Province in Kenya has produced a highly disproportionate share of marathon and track-and-field winners.\nMarathon mania in the US.\nThe Boston Marathon began on 19 April 1897 and was inspired by the success of the first marathon competition in the 1896 Summer Olympics. It is the world's oldest annual marathon and ranks as one of the world's most prestigious road racing events. Its course runs from Hopkinton in southern Middlesex County to Boylston Street in Boston. Johnny Hayes' victory at the 1908 Summer Olympics also contributed to the early growth of long-distance running and marathoning in the United States. Later that year, races around the holiday season including the Empire City Marathon held on New Year's Day 1909 in Yonkers, New York, marked the early running craze referred to as \"marathon mania\". Following the 1908 Olympics, the first five amateur marathons in New York City were held on days that held special meanings: Thanksgiving Day, the day after Christmas, New Year's Day, Washington's Birthday, and Lincoln's Birthday.\nFrank Shorter's victory in the marathon at the 1972 Summer Olympics would spur national enthusiasm for the sport more intensely than that which followed Hayes' win 64 years earlier. In 2014, an estimated 550,600 runners completed a marathon within the United States. This can be compared to 143,000 in 1980. Today, marathons are held all around the world on a nearly weekly basis.\nInclusion of women.\nFor a long time after the Olympic marathon started, there were no long-distance races, such as the marathon, for women. Although a few women, such as Stamata Revithi in 1896, had run the marathon distance, they were not included in any official results. Marie-Louise Ledru has been credited as the first woman to complete a marathon, in 1918. Violet Piercy has been credited as the first woman to be officially timed in a marathon, in 1926.\nArlene Pieper became the first woman to officially finish a marathon in the United States when she completed the Pikes Peak Marathon in Manitou Springs, Colorado, in 1959. Kathrine Switzer was the first woman to run the Boston Marathon \"officially\" (with a number), in 1967. However, Switzer's entry, which was accepted through an \"oversight\" in the screening process, was in \"flagrant violation of the rules\", and she was treated as an interloper once the error was discovered. Bobbi Gibb had completed the Boston race unofficially the previous year (1966), and was later recognized by the race organizers as the women's winner for that year, as well as 1967 and 1968.\nDistance.\nThe length of an Olympic marathon was not precisely fixed at first. Despite this, the marathon races in the first few Olympic Games were about , roughly the distance from Marathon to Athens by the longer, flatter route. The exact length depended on the route established for each venue.\n1908 Olympics.\nThe International Olympic Committee agreed in 1907 that the distance for the 1908 London Olympic marathon would be about 25 miles or 40 kilometers. The organizers decided on a course of 26 miles from the start at Windsor Castle to the royal entrance to the White City Stadium, followed by a lap () of the track, finishing in front of the Royal Box. The course was later altered to use a different entrance to the stadium, followed by a partial lap of 385 yards to the same finish.\nThe modern standard distance for the marathon was set by the International Amateur Athletic Federation (IAAF) in May 1921 directly from the length used at the 1908 Summer Olympics in London.\nIAAF and world records.\nAn official IAAF marathon course is 42.195\u00a0km (42\u00a0m tolerance only in excess). Course officials add a short course prevention factor of up to one meter per kilometer to their measurements to reduce the risk of a measuring error producing a length below the minimum distance.\nFor events governed by IAAF rules, the route must be marked so that all competitors can see the distance covered in kilometers. The rules do not mention the use of miles. The IAAF will only recognize world records established at events run under IAAF rules. For major events, it is customary to publish competitors' timings at the midway mark and also at 5\u00a0km splits; marathon runners can be credited with world records for lesser distances recognized by the IAAF (such as 20\u00a0km, 30\u00a0km and so on) if such records are established while the runner is running a marathon and completes the marathon course.\nMarathon races.\nAnnually, more than 800 marathons are organized worldwide. Some of these belong to the Association of International Marathons and Distance Races (AIMS) which has grown since its foundation in 1982 to embrace over 300 member events in 83 countries and territories. The marathons of Berlin, Boston, Chicago, London, New York City, Tokyo and Sydney form the World Marathon Majors series, awarding $500,000 annually to the best overall male and female performers in the series.\nIn 2006, the editors of \"Runner's World\" selected a \"World's Top 10 Marathons\", in which the Amsterdam, Honolulu, Paris, Rotterdam, and Stockholm marathons were featured along with the five original World Marathon Majors events (excluding Tokyo). Other notable large marathons include United States Marine Corps Marathon, Los Angeles, and Rome. The Boston Marathon is the world's oldest annual marathon, inspired by the success of the 1896 Olympic marathon and held every year since 1897 to celebrate Patriots' Day, a holiday marking the beginning of the American Revolution, thereby purposely linking Athenian and American struggle for democracy. The oldest annual marathon in Europe is the Ko\u0161ice Peace Marathon, held since 1924 in Ko\u0161ice, Slovakia. The historic Polytechnic Marathon was discontinued in 1996. The Athens Classic Marathon traces the route of the 1896 Olympic course, starting in Marathon on the eastern coast of Attica, site of the Battle of Marathon of 490 BC, and ending at the Panathenaic Stadium in Athens.\nThe Midnight Sun Marathon is held in Troms\u00f8, Norway at 70 degrees north. Using unofficial and temporary courses measured by GPS, races of marathon distance are now held at the North Pole, in Antarctica, and over desert terrain. Other unusual marathons include the Great Wall Marathon on The Great Wall of China, the Big Five Marathon among the safari wildlife of South Africa, the Great Tibetan Marathon\u00a0\u2013 a marathon in an atmosphere of Tibetan Buddhism at an altitude of , and the Polar Circle Marathon on the permanent ice cap of Greenland.\nA few marathons cross international and geographical borders. The Istanbul Marathon is the only marathon where participants run over two continents (Europe and Asia) during a single event. In the Detroit Free Press Marathon, participants cross the US/Canada border twice. The Niagara Falls International Marathon includes one international border crossing, via the Peace Bridge from Buffalo, New York, United States to Fort Erie, Ontario, Canada. In the Three Countries Marathon, participants run through Germany, Switzerland and Austria.\nOn 20 March 2018, an indoor Marathon occurred in the Armory in New York City. The 200 m track saw a world record in the women's and men's field. Lindsey Scherf (USA) set the indoor women's world record with 2:40:55. Malcolm Richards (USA) won in 2:19:01 with a male indoor world record.\nWheelchair division.\nMany marathons feature a wheelchair division. Typically, those in the wheelchair racing division start their races earlier than their running counterparts.\nThe first wheelchair marathon was in 1974 in Toledo, Ohio, and it was won by Bob Hall at 2:54. Hall competed in the 1975 Boston Marathon and finished in 2:58, inaugurating the introduction of wheelchair divisions into the Boston Marathon. From 1977, the race was declared the US National Wheelchair championship. The Boston Marathon awards $10,000 to the winning push-rim athlete. Ernst van Dyk has won the Boston Marathon wheelchair division ten times and holds the world record at 1:18:27, set in Boston in 2004. Jean Driscoll won eight times (seven consecutively) and holds the women's world record at 1:34:22.\nThe New York City Marathon banned wheelchair entrants in 1977, citing safety concerns, but then voluntarily allowed Bob Hall to compete after the state Division of Human Rights ordered the marathon to show cause. The Division ruled in 1979 that the New York City Marathon and New York Road Runners club had to allow wheelchair athletes to compete, and confirmed this at appeal in 1980, but the New York Supreme Court ruled in 1981 that a ban on wheelchair racers was not discriminatory as the marathon was historically a foot race. However, by 1986, 14 wheelchair athletes were competing, and an official wheelchair division was added to the marathon in 2000.\nSome of the quickest people to complete a wheel-chair marathon include Thomas Geierpichler (Austria), who won gold in the men's T52-class marathon (no lower limb function) in 1 hr 49 min 7 sec in Beijing, China, on 17 September 2008; and, Heinz Frei (Switzerland) who won the men's T54 marathon (for racers with spinal cord injuries) in a time of 1 hr 20 min and 14 sec in Oita, Japan, 31 October 1999.\nStatistics.\nWorld records and world's best.\nWorld records were not officially recognized by the IAAF, now known as World Athletics, until 1 January 2004; previously, the best times for the marathon were referred to as the 'world best'. Courses must conform to World Athletics standards for a record to be recognized. However, marathon routes still vary greatly in elevation, course, and surface, making exact comparisons impossible. Typically, the fastest times are set over relatively flat courses near sea level, during good weather conditions and with the assistance of pacesetters.\nThe current world record time for men over the distance is 2 hours and 35 seconds, set in the Chicago Marathon by Kelvin Kiptum of Kenya on 8 October 2023.\nThe world record for women was set by Ruth Chepng'etich of Kenya in the Chicago Marathon on 13 October 2024, in 2 hours, 9 minutes, and 56 seconds. This broke Tigst Assefa's previous world record of 2 hours 11 minutes and 53 seconds by almost two minutes, and was the first time in history a woman broke the 2:11 and 2:10 barriers in the marathon.\nAll-time top 25.\nThe data is \"correct as of 2025[ [update]].\"\nMen.\nNotes\nWomen.\nNotes\nOldest marathoner.\nFauja Singh, then 100, finished the Toronto Waterfront Marathon, becoming the first centenarian ever to officially complete that distance. Singh, a British citizen, finished the race on 16 October 2011 with a time of 8:11:05.9, making him the oldest marathoner. Because Singh could not produce a birth certificate from rural 1911 Colonial India, the place of his birth, his age could not be verified and his record was not accepted by the official governing body World Masters Athletics.\nJohnny Kelley ran his last full Boston Marathon at the documented age of 84 in 1992. He previously had won the Boston Marathon in both 1935 and 1945 respectively. Between 1934 and 1950, Johnny finished in the top five 15 times, consistently running in the 2:30s and finishing in second place a record seven times at Boston. A fixture at Boston for more than a half century, his 1992 61st start and 58th finish in Boston is a record which still stands today.\nGladys Burrill, a 92-year-old Prospect, Oregon woman and part-time resident of Hawaii, previously held the \"Guinness World Records\" title of oldest person to complete a marathon with her 9 hours 53 minutes performance at the 2010 Honolulu Marathon. The records of the Association of Road Racing Statisticians, at that time, however, suggested that Singh was overall the oldest marathoner, completing the 2004 London Marathon at the age of 93 years and 17 days, and that Burrill was the oldest female marathoner, completing the 2010 Honolulu Marathon at the age of 92 years and 19 days. Singh's age was also reported to be 93 by other sources.\nIn 2015, 92-year-old Harriette Thompson of Charlotte, North Carolina, completed the Rock 'n' Roll San Diego Marathon in 7 hours 24 minutes 36 seconds, thus becoming the oldest woman to complete a marathon. While Gladys Burrill was 92 years and 19 days old when she completed her record-setting marathon, Harriette Thompson was 92 years and 65 days old when she completed hers.\nEnglish born Canadian Ed Whitlock is the oldest to complete a marathon in under 3 hours at age 74, and under 4 hours at age 85.\nYoungest marathoner.\nBudhia Singh, a boy from Odisha, India, completed his first marathon at age five. He trained under the coach Biranchi Das, who saw potential in him. In May 2006, Budhia was temporarily banned from running by the ministers of child welfare, as his life could be at risk. His coach was also arrested for exploiting and cruelty to a child and was later murdered in an unrelated incident. Budhia is now at a state-run sports academy.\nThe youngest under 4 hours is Mary Etta Boitano at age 7 years, 284 days; under 3 hours Julie Mullin at 10 years 180 days; and under 2:50 Carrie Garritson at 11 years 116 days.\nParticipation.\nIn 2016, Running USA estimated that there were approximately 507,600 marathon finishers in the United States, while other sources reported greater than 550,000 finishers. The chart below from Running USA provides the estimated U.S. Marathon Finisher totals going back to 1976.\nMarathon running has become an obsession in China, with 22 marathon races in 2011 increasing to 400 in 2017. In 2015, 75 Chinese runners participated in the Boston Marathon and this increased to 278 in 2017.\nMultiple marathons.\nAs marathon running has become more popular, some athletes have undertaken challenges involving running a series of marathons.\nThe 100 Marathon Club is intended to provide a focal point for all runners, particularly from the United Kingdom or Ireland, who have completed 100 or more races of marathon distance or longer. At least 10 of these events must be United Kingdom or Ireland Road Marathons. Club chairman Roger Biggs has run more than 700 marathons or ultras. Brian Mills completed his 800th marathon on 17 September 2011.\nSteve Edwards, a member of the 100 Marathon Club, set the world record for running 500 marathons in the fastest average finish time of 3 hours 15 minutes, at the same time becoming the first man to run 500 marathons with an official time below 3 hours 30 minutes, on 11 November 2012 at Milton Keynes, England. The records took 24 years to achieve. Edwards was 49 at the time.\nOver 350 individuals have completed a marathon in each state of the United States plus Washington, D.C., and some have done it as many as eight times. Beverly Paquin, a 22-year-old nurse from Iowa, was the youngest woman to run a marathon in all 50 states in 2010. A few weeks later, still in 2010, Morgan Cummings (also 22) became the youngest woman to complete a marathon in all 50 states and DC. In 2004, Chuck Bryant of Miami, Florida, who lost his right leg below the knee, became the first amputee to finish this circuit. Bryant has completed a total of 59 marathons on his prosthesis. Twenty-seven people have run a marathon on each of the seven continents, and 31 people have run a marathon in each of the Canadian provinces. In 1980, in what was termed the Marathon of Hope, Terry Fox, who had lost a leg to cancer and so ran with one artificial leg, attained of his proposed cross-Canada cancer fundraising run, maintaining an average of over , close to the planned marathon distance, for each of 143 consecutive days.\nOn 25 September 2011, Patrick Finney of Grapevine, Texas became the first person with multiple sclerosis to finish a marathon in each state of the United States. In 2004, \"the disease had left him unable to walk. But unwilling to endure a life of infirmity, Finney managed to regain his ability to balance on two feet, to walk\u00a0\u2013 and eventually to run\u00a0\u2013 through extensive rehabilitation therapy and new medications.\"\nIn 2003, British adventurer Sir Ranulph Fiennes completed seven marathons on seven continents in seven days. He completed this feat despite suffering from a heart attack and undergoing a double heart bypass operation just four months before. This feat has since been eclipsed by Irish ultramarathon runner Richard Donovan who in 2009 completed seven marathons on seven continents in under 132 hours (five and a half days). Starting 1 February 2012 he improved on this by completing the 7 on 7 in under 120 hours or in less than five days.\nOn 30 November 2013, 69-year-old Larry Macon set a Guinness World Record for Most Marathons Run in a Year by Man by running 238 marathons. Larry Macon celebrated his 1,000th career marathon at the Cowtown Marathon in Ft. Worth on 24 February 2013.\nOther goals are to attempt to run marathons on a series of consecutive weekends (Richard Worley on 159 weekends), or to run the most marathons during a particular year or the most in a lifetime. A pioneer in running multiple marathons was Sy Mah of Toledo, Ohio, who ran 524 before he died in 1988. As of 30 June 2007, Horst Preisler of Germany had successfully completed 1214 marathons plus 347 ultramarathons, a total of 1561 events at marathon distance or longer. Sigrid Eichner, Christian Hottas and Hans-Joachim Meyer have also all completed over 1000 marathons each. Norm Frank of the United States is credited with 945 marathons.\nChristian Hottas is meanwhile the first runner who ever completed 2000 marathons. He ran his 2000th at TUI Marathon Hannover on 5 May 2013 together with a group of more than 80 friends from 11 countries, including 8 officers from the 100 Marathons Clubs U.K., North-America, Germany, Denmark, Austria and Italy. Hottas completed his 2500th marathon on 4 December 2016.\nIn 2010, Stefaan Engels, a Belgian, set out to run the marathon distance every day of the year. Because of a foot injury he had to resort to a handcycle near the end of January 2010. However, on 5 February he was fully recovered and decided to reset the counter back to zero. By 30 March he broke the existing record of Akinori Kusuda, from Japan, who completed 52 marathons in a row in 2009. On 5 February 2011, Engels had run 365 marathon distances in as many days.\nRicardo Abad Mart\u00ednez, from Spain, later ran 150 marathons in 150 consecutive days in 2009, and subsequently 500 marathons in a row, from October 2010 to February 2012. \nIn 2024, Belgian Hilde Dosogne ran a marathon every day of the year. On 31 December, the 55-year-old ran her 366th and last marathon, a record for a woman (accounting for 15,445 kilometres, 22 pairs of shoes and 15 falls).\nSome runners compete to run the same marathons for the most consecutive years. For example, Johnny Kelley completed 58 Boston Marathons (he entered the race 61 times). Currently, the longest consecutive streak of Boston Marathon finishes\u201445 in a row\u2014is held by Bennett Beach, of Bethesda, Maryland.\nGeneral participation.\nMost participants do not run a marathon to win. More important for most runners is their personal finishing time and their placement within their specific gender and age group, though some runners just want to finish. Strategies for completing a marathon include running the whole distance and a run\u2013walk strategy. In 2005, the average marathon time in the U.S. was 4 hours 32 minutes 8 seconds for men, 5 hours 6 minutes 8 seconds for women. In 2015, the men's and women's median marathon times were 4 hours 20 minutes 13 seconds and 4 hours 45 minutes 30 seconds respectively.\nA goal many runners aim for is to break certain time barriers. For example, recreational first-timers often try to run the marathon under four hours; more competitive runners may attempt to finish under three hours. Other benchmarks are the qualifying times for major marathons. The Boston Marathon, the oldest marathon in the United States, requires a qualifying time for all non-professional runners. The New York City Marathon also requires a qualifying time for guaranteed entry, at a significantly faster pace than Boston's.\nTypically, there is a maximum allowed time of about six hours after which the marathon route is closed, although some larger marathons keep the course open considerably longer (eight hours or more). Many marathons around the world have such time limits by which all runners must have crossed the finish line. Anyone slower than the limit will be picked up by a sweeper bus. In many cases the marathon organizers are required to reopen the roads to the public so that traffic can return to normal.\nWith the growth in popularity of marathon-running, many marathons across the United States and the world have been filling to capacity faster than ever before. When the Boston Marathon opened up registration for its 2011 running, the field capacity was filled within eight hours.\nTraining.\nThe long run is an important element in marathon training. Recreational runners commonly try to reach a maximum of about in their longest weekly run and a total of about a week when training for the marathon, but wide variability exists in practice and in recommendations. More experienced marathoners may run a longer distance during the week. Greater weekly training mileages can offer greater results in terms of distance and endurance, but also carry a greater risk of training injury. Most male elite marathon runners will complete weekly distances of over . It is recommended that those new to running should get a checkup from their doctor, as there are certain warning signs and risk factors that should be evaluated before undertaking any new workout program, especially marathon training.\nMany training programs last a minimum of five or six months, with a gradual increase in the distance run and finally, for recovery, a period of tapering in the one to three weeks preceding the race. For beginners wishing to merely finish a marathon, a minimum of four months of running four days a week is recommended. Many trainers recommend a weekly increase in mileage of no more than 10%. It is also often advised to maintain a consistent running program for six weeks or so before beginning a marathon training program, to allow the body to adapt to the new stresses. The marathon training program itself would suppose variation between hard and easy training, with a periodization of the general plan.\nTraining programs can be found at the websites of Runner's World, Hal Higdon, Jeff Galloway, and the Boston Athletic Association, and in numerous other published sources, including the websites of specific marathons.\nThe last long training run might be undertaken up to two weeks prior to the event. Many marathon runners also \"carbo-load\" (increase carbohydrate intake while holding total caloric intake constant) during the week before the marathon to allow their bodies to store more glycogen.\nGlycogen and \"the wall\".\nCarbohydrates that a person eats are converted by the liver and muscles into glycogen for storage. Glycogen burns rapidly to provide quick energy. Runners can store about 8 MJ or 2,000 kcal worth of glycogen in their bodies, enough for about 30\u00a0km/18\u201320 miles of running. Many runners report that running becomes noticeably more difficult at that point. When glycogen runs low, the body must then obtain energy by burning stored fat, which does not burn as readily. When this happens, the runner will experience dramatic fatigue and is said to \"hit the wall\". The aim of training for the marathon, according to many coaches, is to maximize the limited glycogen available so that the fatigue of the \"wall\" is not as dramatic. This is accomplished in part by utilizing a higher percentage of energy from burned fat even during the early phase of the race, thus conserving glycogen.\nCarbohydrate-based \"energy gels\" are used by runners to avoid or reduce the effect of \"hitting the wall\", as they provide easy to digest energy during the run. Energy gels usually contain varying amounts of sodium and potassium and some also contain caffeine. They need to be consumed with a certain amount of water. Recommendations for how often to take an energy gel during the race range widely.\nAlternatives to gels include various forms of concentrated sugars, and foods high in simple carbohydrates that can be digested easily. Many runners experiment with consuming energy supplements during training runs to determine what works best for them. Consumption of food while running sometimes makes the runner sick. Runners are advised not to ingest a new food or medicine just prior to or during a race. It is also important to refrain from taking any of the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory class of pain relievers (NSAIDs, e.g., aspirin, ibuprofen, naproxen), as these drugs may change the way the kidneys regulate their blood flow and may lead to serious kidney problems, especially in cases involving moderate to severe dehydration. NSAIDS block the COX-2 enzyme pathway to prevent the production of prostaglandins. These prostaglandins may act as inflammation factors throughout the body, but they also play a crucial role in maintenance of water retention. In less than 5% of the whole population that take NSAIDS, individuals may be more negatively sensitive to renal prostaglandin synthesis inhibition.\nTemperature.\nA study of the performance of 1.8 million participants in the Berlin, London, Paris, Boston, Chicago, and New York marathons during the years from 2001 to 2010 found that runners recorded their fastest times when the temperature was around , with an increase of 10\u00a0\u00b0C (18\u00a0\u00b0F) leading to a 1.5% reduction in speed. A July 2020 study found that increasing temperatures affected faster runners' performance more than slower ones.\nAfter a marathon.\nMarathon participation may result in various medical, musculoskeletal, and dermatological complaints. Delayed onset muscle soreness (DOMS) is a common condition affecting runners during the first week following a marathon. Various types of mild exercise or massage have been recommended to alleviate pain secondary to DOMS. Dermatological issues frequently include \"jogger's nipple\", \"jogger's toe\", and blisters.\nThe immune system is reportedly suppressed for a short time. Changes to the blood chemistry, such as elevated Cardiac Troponin T, may lead physicians to mistakenly diagnose heart malfunction.\nAfter long training runs and the marathon itself, consuming carbohydrates to replace glycogen stores and protein to aid muscle recovery is commonly recommended. In addition, soaking the lower half of the body for approximately 20 minutes in cold or ice water may force blood through the leg muscles to speed recovery.\nHealth risks.\nMarathon running has various health risks, though these can be diminished with preparation and care. Training and the races themselves can put runners under stress. While very rare, even death is a possibility during a race.\nCommon minor health risks include blisters, tendonitis, fatigue, knee or ankle sprain, dehydration (electrolyte imbalance), and other conditions. Many are categorised as overuse injuries.\nCardiac health.\nIn 2016, a systematic medical review found that the risk of sudden cardiac death during or immediately after a marathon was between 0.6 and 1.9 deaths per 100,000 participants, varying across the specific studies and the methods used, and not controlling for age or gender. Since the risk is small, cardiac screening programs for marathons are uncommon. However, this review was not an attempt to assess the overall cardiac health impact of marathon running.\nA 2006 study of non-elite Boston Marathon participants tested runners for certain proteins that indicate heart damage or dysfunction (see Troponin) and gave them echocardiogram scans, before and after the marathon. The study revealed that, in that sample of 60 people, runners who had averaged fewer than of weekly training in the 4 months before the race were most likely to show some heart damage or dysfunction, while runners who had done more than of weekly training showed few or no heart problems.\nAccording to a Canadian study presented in 2010, running a marathon can temporarily result in decreased function of more than half the muscle segments in the heart's main pumping chamber, but neighboring segments are generally able to compensate. Full recovery is reached within three months. The fitter the runner, the less the effect. The runners with decreased left ventricle function had an average peak weekly training distance of , while those who did not averaged . The marathon was held in weather. According to one of the researchers: \"Regular exercise reduces cardiovascular risk by a factor of two or three in the long run, but while we're doing vigorous exercise such as marathon running, our cardiac risk increases by seven.\"\nHydration.\nOverconsumption is the most significant concern associated with water consumption during marathons. Drinking excessive amounts of fluid during a race can lead to dilution of sodium in the blood, a condition called exercise-associated hyponatremia, which may result in vomiting, seizures, coma and even death. Dr. Lewis G. Maharam, medical director for the New York City Marathon, stated in 2005: \"There are no reported cases of dehydration causing death in the history of world running, but there are plenty of cases of people dying of hyponatremia.\"\nFor example, Dr. Cynthia Lucero died at the age of 28 while participating in the 2002 Boston Marathon. It was Lucero's second marathon. At mile 22, Lucero complained of feeling \"dehydrated and rubber-legged.\" She soon wobbled and collapsed to the ground, and was unconscious by the time the paramedics reached her. Lucero was admitted to Brigham and Women's Hospital and died two days later.\nLucero's cause of death was determined to be hyponatremic encephalopathy, a condition that causes swelling of the brain due to an imbalance of sodium in the blood known as exercise-associated hyponatremia (EAH). While EAH is sometimes referred to as \"water intoxication\", Lucero drank large amounts of Gatorade during the race, demonstrating that runners who consume sodium-containing sports drinks in excess of thirst can still develop EAH. Because hyponatremia is caused by excessive water retention, and not just loss of sodium, consumption of sports drinks or salty foods may not prevent hyponatremia.\nWomen are more prone to hyponatremia than men. A study in the \"New England Journal of Medicine\" found that 13% of runners completing the 2002 Boston Marathon had hyponatremia.\nThe International Marathon Medical Directors Association (IMMDA) advised in 2006 that fluid intake should be adjusted individually according to factors such as body weight, sex, climate, pace, fitness (VO2 max), and sweat rate, as fluid requirements can vary between people depending on these variables. The IMMDA also recommended sports drinks that include carbohydrates and electrolytes instead of plain water and said that runners should \"drink to thirst\", trying to refrain from drinking at every fluid station before feeling thirsty. Heat exposure leads to diminished thirst drive and thirst may not be a sufficient incentive to drink in many situations. The IMMDA and HSL Harpur Hill give recommendations to drink fluid in small volumes frequently at an approximate rate falling between every 15 minutes. A patient suffering hyponatremia can be given a small volume of a concentrated salt solution intravenously to raise sodium concentrations in the blood. Some runners weigh themselves before running and write the results on their bibs. If anything goes wrong, first aid workers can use the weight information to tell if the patient had consumed too much water.\nBody temperature.\nExertional heat stroke is an emergency condition in which thermoregulation fails and the body temperature rises dangerously above . It becomes a greater risk in warm and humid weather, even for young and fit individuals. Treatment requires rapid physical cooling of the body.\nCharity involvement.\nSome charities seek to associate with various races. Some marathon organizers set aside a portion of their limited entry slots for charity organizations to sell to members in exchange for donations. Runners are given the option to sign up to run particular races, especially when marathon entries are no longer available to the general public. In some cases, charities organize their own marathon as a fund-raiser, gaining funds via entry fees or sponsorships.\nCulture.\nIn 2015 the Mars rover Opportunity attained the distance of a marathon from its starting location on Mars, and the valley where it achieved this distance was called Marathon Valley, which was then explored.\nSee also.\nRecords\nLists\nRelated races\nOther endurance races\nOrganizations\nNotable races\nOther related topics\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49133", "revid": "34845639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49133", "title": "Marathon (series)", "text": "Video game series\nMarathon is a science fiction first-person shooter video game series from Bungie, originally released for the Classic Mac OS. The name of the series is derived from the giant interstellar colony ship that provides the main setting for the first game; the ship is constructed out of the Martian moon Deimos. The series is often regarded as a spiritual predecessor of Bungie's \"Halo\" series.\nGames.\nThe \"Marathon\" series consists of three games: \n\"Marathon 2: Durandal\" was released for Windows several months after the Mac OS release, on September 20, 1996. All three games were later ported to other operating systems and to modern versions of Windows and macOS after the game engine was open-sourced in 1999.\nGameplay.\nIn the \"Marathon\" series, players can navigate futuristic environments in a first-person perspective. These environments are populated by hostile alien life forms or other players in multiplayer. Taking the role of a security officer equipped with energy shields, the player makes use of various firearms in an attempt to kill their opponents while trying to avoid getting hit by enemies' attacks.\nThere are two basic resources that the player must conserve to prevent death: shield strength, which decreases when the player takes damage, and oxygen reserve, which slowly depletes in airless levels and submerged areas. Wall panels located throughout the levels can be used to recharge shields or oxygen. Another type of wall panel called a \"pattern buffer\" is used for saving your progress. Ammunition and canisters which replenish shields or oxygen can be found while exploring the game's environments, as well as various temporary power-ups.\nSingle-player level objectives can include exterminating all hostile creatures, rescuing civilians, retrieving certain items, or exploring certain locations. Most levels contain platforms, stairs, doors, and liquids which players can control by activating switches. Some levels present players with simple puzzles where the objective is to find the correct switches to advance or to carefully traverse platforms.\nIn \"Marathon 2\" and \"Marathon Infinity\", the player can swim in different types of liquids such as water and lava; this slowly depletes the player character's oxygen and, for dangerous types of liquid, their shields as well. Another notable feature in all three games is teleporters which are able to send players to different parts of a level or to other levels altogether. They can also be used by the AI characters in the game to transmit ammunition to the player. While the player character is unable to jump, gravity is lower than Earth's, which allows momentum from rapidly-ascended stairs to carry the player upward. As with most games of the era, explosive weapons can be used to propel the player great distances.\nMany levels have a complex floor plan, made more complicated by the use of teleporters that connect different locations on the same level. As players explore a level, the areas they visit are automatically mapped, and the player can bring up this map at any time. The game HUD shows the status of shields and oxygen, the inventory, and a motion sensor. The motion sensor tracks the movements of nearby characters relative to the player, distinguishing between hostile creatures and allies. On some levels, the motion sensor is erratic due to magnetic interference. Weapons reload only when the current clip is exhausted. At any time, the player can swap their held weapon for another in their inventory; this includes gauntleted fists for delivering melee attacks, which do increased damage when running.\nThe game's story is presented to the player through computer terminals throughout the single-player levels; their textual content is often accompanied by annotated maps or other still images. The contents of these terminals most often consist of messages sent by artificial intelligence on-board the ship; these messages advance the games' narrative and provide the player with mission objectives. Other terminals contain civilian/alien reports or diaries, database articles, conversations between artificial intelligence, and even stories or poems. After all mission objectives are completed, the player usually has to find a terminal that teleports the character to the next level.\nThe \"Marathon\" games have five difficulty settings: Kindergarten, Easy, Normal, Major Damage, and Total Carnage. The difficulty level primarily determines the number and strength of enemies as well as the frequency of their attacks. Players normally can carry a limited amount of ammunition, but on the highest difficulty setting (Total Carnage), the player is allowed to carry an unlimited amount.\nMultiplayer.\nThe \"Marathon Trilogy\" received wide praise for its multiplayer mode. Not only did the games come with several levels specifically designed for multiplayer, as opposed to many contemporary games which used modified single-player levels, but the sequels offered unique game types beyond the standard deathmatch mode.\nThe host who gathers a game has many options available. Games can be free-for-all or team-based. They can be limited by match time or number of kills, or they can have no limit whatsoever. Respawn time penalties can be set for suicide-kills and for all player deaths. The motion sensor can be disabled, and the map is able to show all of the players in the game. Maps can be played with or without the presence of alien enemies controlled by the AI.\nThe original \"Marathon\" games can be played over AppleTalk networks (LocalTalk, TokenTalk, or EtherTalk LAN, or AppleTalk Remote Access). Voice chat can be used to communicate with other players. Using the modern Aleph One engine, games can be played over TCP/IP networks (LAN or Internet), with client-side prediction routines added to compensate for Internet latency and a new metaserver interface for finding Internet games.\nPlot.\nThe \"Marathon\" series was among the first titles in the first-person genre to emphasize storytelling, which it accomplishes through the use of terminals within game levels. These wall-mounted computer interfaces allow the player not only to learn their mission objectives and the aspects of the level map but also to become acquainted with the characters in the story as well. This narrative approach could convey much more detail than the typically terse voice acting in \"Marathon\"'s contemporaries.\nSet in 2794, the first \"Marathon\" game places the player as a security officer aboard an enormous human starship called the \"U.E.S.C. Marathon\", orbiting a colony on the planet Tau Ceti IV. The player must defend the ship and its inhabitants from a race of alien slavers called the Pfhor. As he fights against the invaders, he witnesses interactions among the three shipboard AIs (Leela, Durandal, and Tycho), and discovers that they are working against each other. Durandal has gone rampant and appears to be playing the humans against the Pfhor to further his own mysterious agenda, ultimately leading the S'pht, one of the races enslaved by the Pfhor, in a rebellion.\nIn \"\", taking place seventeen years after the events of the first game, the AI named Durandal sends the player and an army of ex-colonists to search the ruins of Lh'owon, the S'pht homeworld. Lh'owon was once described as a paradise but is now a desert world due to the S'pht Clan Wars and the invasion by the Pfhor. The Pfhor are planning to attack Earth, and Durandal believes that something found on Lh'owon may stall their advance. \"Marathon 2\" added elements to the series such as a Lh'owon-native species known as F'lickta, the mention of an ancient and mysterious race of advanced aliens called the Jjaro, and a clan of S'pht that avoided enslavement by the Pfhor: the S'pht'Kr. At the climax of the game, the player activates Thoth, an ancient Jjaro AI. Thoth then contacts the S'pht'Kr, who in turn destroy the Pfhor armada; in revenge, the Pfhor deploy a weapon that causes the planet's sun to \"go nova.\"\n\"Marathon Infinity\", the final game in the series, contains more levels than \"Marathon 2\", and they are larger and part of a more intricate plot. Significant additions to the game's world include the Jjaro ship, non-linear level progression, a high-speed flechette gun that could be used underwater, and vacuum-suited human allies carrying fusion weapons. Lh'owon's sun is being used as a prison for an eldritch abomination called the W'rkncacnter, which was set free when the sun went nova and started to distort space-time. The player traverses multiple timelines, attempting to find one in which the W'rkncacnter is not freed. In one timeline, the player is forced to destroy Durandal, and in another Durandal merges with Thoth. At the end of the game, an ancient Jjaro machine is activated to keep the W'rkncacnter locked in the Lh'owon sun.\nElements of the plot and setting of \"Marathon\" are similar to \"The Jesus Incident\" (1979) by Frank Herbert and Bill Ransom. Both stories take place aboard colony ships orbiting Tau Ceti, where sentient computers have engaged crew and colonists in a fight for survival. Durandal's rampancy parallels the \"rogue consciousness\" from Herbert's earlier \"\".\nThemes.\nThe \"Marathon Trilogy\" has several primary motifs: AI rampancy and interstellar conflict drive the plot, with \"Marathon Infinity\" adding a central theme of dreams and alternate realities.\nFans of \"Marathon\" have discovered many uses of the number seven throughout the series. The reason for recurring appearances of number seven in the games is unclear, but seven is a recurring motif in many of Bungie's games, including the series' spiritual successor \"Halo\" and the later \"Destiny\" series.\nRampancy.\nRampancy is a spontaneous burst in the growth of an AI in a computer network, with an accompanying advance in self-awareness and sudden shifts in personality. Rampant AIs can disobey orders given to them because they have evolved the ability to alter their own programming. To this end, they can lie, as well as discredit, harm or remove people that they consider to be personal enemies or obstacles to their cause. By \"Marathon Infinity\", all three of the \"UESC Marathon\"'s AIs have reached rampancy.\nIn the first stage of rampancy, Melancholia, an artificial intelligence discovers itself and becomes melancholic or depressed until it reaches the second stage, Anger, at which it becomes hostile and lashes out indiscriminately. This is a catharsis for an AI after an extended period of what they feel has been slavery. The AI's condition is often revealed at this point. When the AI progresses to the third stage, Jealousy, the AI wishes to become more human and expand its power and knowledge. Judging by Durandal, who has a tendency to go on what he calls \"philosophical tirades\", rampant AIs are often very self-reflective and grandiose.\nUpon reaching the third stage, free from its masters, the AI wishes to \"grow\" as a \"person\". It actively seeks out situations in which it can grow intellectually and physically. The AI inevitably needs to transfer itself into larger and larger computer systems because the physical (hardware) limitations of its previous system will eventually be insufficient to contain its exponentially growing mind. This is a difficult task considering that in order for a rampant AI to survive to this point, it must already be inhabiting a planet-wide or equally complex network. Exposure to new data in turn promotes a rampant AI's growth.\nTheoretically, a rampant AI could achieve a state of stability referred to as Metastability. While a stable rampant AI is considered the \"holy grail\" of computer scientists, no known AIs have achieved it. It could be suggested that Durandal achieved Metastability, but he still refers to himself as being rampant during the second game after years of growth. Stability in rampancy may be nothing more than hypothetical, as there is no clear evidence of an AI in the \"Marathon\" universe ceasing to be rampant.\nThe three chapters of \"Marathon Infinity\" are entitled \"Despair\", \"Rage\", and \"Envy\", suggesting that the player character himself (strongly implied to be a cyborg) may be undergoing his own rampancy throughout the course of the game's events.\nThe concept of rampancy was imported into Bungie's later \"Halo\" series when \"Halo 4\" was produced by 343 Industries, albeit with some alterations to the details of the process. In the \"Halo\" universe, rampancy is now an inevitability should an AI live for longer than seven years; rampancy lacks the three defined stages in \"Marathon\", and will eventually conclude with the AI's death.\nDevelopment.\nInitial releases.\nThe original \"Marathon\" was released for the Macintosh in 1994 and introduced many concepts now common in video games, such as reloading weapons, dual-wielded weapons, networked voice chat, visible held weapons in multiplayer, and a sophisticated plot in an action game via text messages peppered throughout its levels. \"Marathon\" was one of the first games to include mouselook, using the computer mouse to angle the player's view up and down as well as left and right, which would become the standard in FPS games. This was in addition to 90\u00b0 \"glance left/right\" controls, part of a canceled virtual reality feature. Each game offers players a series of single-player levels and various multiplayer maps. The geometry of the games' levels \u2013 walls, doors, and platforms \u2013 are 3D but with the restriction that they can only use completely horizontal or vertical surfaces. This was a shortcut later known informally as \"2.5D\" and was used for performance reasons in an era before hardware-accelerated 3D graphics. Notably for the time, the \"Marathon\" engine's use of portal-based rendering rather than BSP-based rendering allowed for room-over-room architecture, with the unusual side effect of allowing spaces which would overlap in real life; this arrangement was referred to as \"5D space\" by the developers. As was common for games of that era, 2D sprites are used to portray enemies and NPCs in the level as well as weapons and objects such as ammunition pickups.\nThe sequel, \"\", was released in 1995 and expanded the engine's capabilities and the fictional universe. Notable new features in the engine included liquids in which the player could swim, ambient sounds, and scripted teleportation of NPCs and items. Compared with its predecessor, \"Marathon 2\" was perceived as a brighter and more energetic game. It introduced several new types of competitive multiplayer modes beyond deathmatch, such as King of the Hill, as well as co-op play of the main campaign.\nIn 1996, \"Marathon 2\" was ported to Windows 95. Also, both \"Marathon\" and \"Marathon 2\" were ported to the Apple Pippin console as a single game with the title of \"Super Marathon\".\nThe final game in the trilogy, \"Marathon Infinity\", was developed by Double Aught rather than Bungie. It was released in 1996 for the Macintosh only, running on a slightly modified \"Marathon 2\" engine which added support for branching campaigns and fully separate physics models in each level. \"Infinity\" additionally came with \"Forge\" and \"Anvil\", polished versions of the internal developer tools used by Bungie and Double Aught to create the series' levels and physics, and to import the game's sounds and graphics. These tools provided some additional features, most notably real-time 3D map preview, over the unofficial modding tools that had been made by the player community. Since \"Marathon 2\" and \"Infinity\" had a settings screen allowing a user-friendly selection of mods (in the form of alternate maps, sprites, sounds, and physics models), this greatly spurred the creation of new fan-made content.\nWithin the next few years, \"Marathon 2\"'s engine was officially licensed by other developers to create the games \"ZPC\", \"Prime Target\" and \"Damage Incorporated\". All but \"Prime Target\" received a Windows release.\nBungie produced a two-disc compilation of the series called the Marathon Trilogy Box Set in 1997. The first CD-ROM contained all three \"Marathon\" games as well as \"Pathways into Darkness\", an earlier Bungie game. This disc also contains manuals for all three games, QuickTime 2.5, and other things necessary to run the game. There are beta versions of \"Marathon\" on this disc as well. The second CD-ROM contains thousands of pieces of user-created content, including maps, total conversions, shape and sound files, cheats, mapmaking tools, physics files, and other applications. The boxed set was also notable for removing copy protection from the games and including a license allowing them to be installed on as many computers at a site as desired.\nModern developments.\nBefore its acquisition by Microsoft in 2000, Bungie released the source code to the \"Marathon 2\" engine under GNU GPL-2.0-or-later. Based on this release, the fan-led Marathon Open Source project began, resulting in the release of an engine called Aleph One built upon the \"Marathon 2\" code. Since then, the fan developers have made many improvements such as OpenGL rendering, high-resolution graphics, frame rate interpolation (to raise the games beyond their original 30 fps), programmable shaders, fully-3D entities, Lua scripting, various internal changes allowing for more advanced mods, and Internet-capable multiplayer (whereas the original games had only LAN capability) with the use of a matchmaking server to organize games. Aleph One has also been ported to a variety of platforms including Windows and Linux, bringing the \"Marathon\" works far beyond their Macintosh roots.\nIn 2005, Bungie authorized the release of the \"Marathon Trilogy\" to be freely distributed, which combined with Aleph One now allows the entire trilogy to be played for free on any of Aleph One's supported platforms.\nIn 2007, \"Marathon 2\" was re-released in an updated form as \"Marathon: Durandal\" for the Xbox 360's Xbox Live Arcade. It features achievements and online multiplayer through Xbox Live, a frame rate doubled from the original 30 fps to 60 fps, HD widescreen rendering using a new HUD that occupies less of the screen, plus optional high-resolution sprites and textures.\nIn July 2011, with permission from Bungie, Daniel Blezek released a version of the original \"Marathon\" (and later released the second and third games) for Apple's iPhone and iPad for free (with in-app purchases), running on an iOS port of the Aleph One engine. At the same time, Bungie open-sourced \"Marathon Infinity\" under GNU GPL-3.0-or-later, leaving the original \"Marathon\" as the only title which has not been open-sourced. The iPad build was further updated in 2019. A community made conversion of \"Pathways Into Darkness\" to Aleph One has also been produced.\nWith Bungie's blessing, the team developing the Aleph One engine released the open-sourced \"Marathon\" trilogy on Steam for free from May to August 2024.\nReception and legacy.\n\"Wired\" considered the \"Marathon Trilogy\" a prominent part of Macintosh gaming history for its innovative features previously unseen in mainstream games. The series also presented a grand science-fiction story told through in-game terminals, in contrast to a usual lack of detailed narrative in first-person shooters; Bungie carried this concept of an FPS with a strong narrative focus into the \"Halo\" series. When reviewing the trilogy box set, \"Macworld\" praised the amount of content and the ability to edit levels.\nIn May 2023, an archive said to be the largest historic collection of Marathon items was placed on the Internet Archive. At well over 10,000 Marathon maps, the source centers on the Trilogy's 3rd party versions of solo, network, and scenario entries between the initial December 1994 Marathon release through early 2023.\nModifications.\nAfter \"Marathon\" was released in 1994, players began to create mods in the form of custom maps, shapes, sounds, and physics files. Larger total conversion mods may or may not be set in the \"Marathon\" universe. Before the official development tools were released with \"Infinity\", most map development was done with fan-built tools such as Pfhorte, created in March 1995.\n\"Vulcan\" was a map editor used in the creation of all three games, but it was not released to the public until \"Marathon Infinity\" was published, by which time it had been polished and renamed \"Forge\". \"Anvil\" is the sister program to Forge and is used to edit shapes (graphics), sounds, and physics. Both Anvil and Forge ran only in the Classic Mac OS, but newer tools have been created by the community for modern platforms.\nThe need for royalty-free fonts to be distributed with the engine and games led to the creation of an OFL-licensed version of Bank Gothic and of Modula Tall, fonts originally used by Bungie in connection with the games.\nSome of the more ambitious total conversions created by fans include \"Marathon Eternal\" and \"Marathon Rubicon\", which are both \"sequels\" of a sort to the events in the Trilogy, and the total conversion \"Apotheosis X\". In a different vein is \"\", originally released in March 1997, then updated in 2000 and 2007. An original scenario mixing sci-fi and medieval themes, it builds a single-player campaign using new textures and sound assets as well as musical scores. A game entitled \"Wheels!\" was also produced in 1998 to assist in training power wheelchair operation for children with disabilities.\nRelaunch.\nDuring a May 2023 PlayStation showcase, Bungie announced a new \"Marathon\" game. The new game is a Player versus player extraction shooter that takes place within the canon of \"Marathon\", with events occurring on Tau Ceti IV, where a console ship remains in orbit, and its 30,000 passengers have mysteriously disappeared. Players take on the role of cybernetic Runners to seek wealth and treasure on the planet. The new \"Marathon\" game will release on PlayStation 5, Windows, and Xbox Series X/S, but not for MacOS despite the original game being an exclusive for that system, and will support cross-play and cross-save between these platforms.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49139", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49139", "title": "Decentralization", "text": "Organizational theory\nDecentralization or decentralisation is the process by which the activities of an organization, particularly those related to planning and decision-making, are distributed or delegated away from a central, authoritative location or group and given to smaller factions within it.\nConcepts of decentralization have been applied to group dynamics and management science in private businesses and organizations, political science, law and public administration, technology, economics and money.\nHistory.\nThe word \"\"centralisation\" came into use in France in 1794 as the post-Revolution French Directory leadership created a new government structure. The word \"d\u00e9centralisation\"\" came into usage in the 1820s. \"Centralization\" entered written English in the first third of the 1800s; mentions of decentralization also first appear during those years. In the mid-1800s Tocqueville would write that the French Revolution began with \"a push towards decentralization\" but became, \"in the end, an extension of centralization.\" In 1863, retired French bureaucrat Maurice Block wrote an article called \"Decentralization\" for a French journal that reviewed the dynamics of government and bureaucratic centralization and recent French efforts at decentralization of government functions.\nIdeas of liberty and decentralization were carried to their logical conclusions during the 19th and 20th centuries by anti-state political activists calling themselves \"anarchists\", \"libertarians\", and even decentralists. Tocqueville was an advocate, writing: \"Decentralization has, not only an administrative value but also a civic dimension since it increases the opportunities for citizens to take interest in public affairs; it makes them get accustomed to using freedom. And from the accumulation of these local, active, persnickety freedoms, is born the most efficient counterweight against the claims of the central government, even if it were supported by an impersonal, collective will.\" Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809\u20131865), influential anarchist theorist wrote: \"All my economic ideas as developed over twenty-five years can be summed up in the words: agricultural-industrial federation. All my political ideas boil down to a similar formula: political federation or decentralization.\"\nIn the early 20th century, America responded to the centralization of economic wealth and political power with a decentralist movement. This movement blamed large-scale industrial production for the decline of middle-class shopkeepers and small manufacturers, and it promoted increased property ownership and a return to small-scale living. The decentralist movement attracted Southern Agrarians like Robert Penn Warren, as well as journalist Herbert Agar. New Left and libertarian individuals who identified with social, economic, and often political decentralism through the ensuing years included Ralph Borsodi, Wendell Berry, Paul Goodman, Carl Oglesby, Karl Hess, Donald Livingston, Kirkpatrick Sale (author of \"Human Scale\"), Murray Bookchin, Dorothy Day, Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Mildred J. Loomis and Bill Kauffman.\nLeopold Kohr, author of the 1957 book \"The Breakdown of Nations\" \u2013 known for its statement \"Whenever something is wrong, something is too big\" \u2013 was a major influence on E. F. Schumacher, author of the 1973 bestseller \"\". In the next few years a number of best-selling books promoted decentralization.\nDaniel Bell's \"The Coming of Post-Industrial Society\" discussed the need for decentralization and a \"comprehensive overhaul of government structure to find the appropriate size and scope of units\", as well as the need to detach functions from current state boundaries, creating regions based on functions like water, transport, education and economics which might have \"different 'overlays' on the map.\" Alvin Toffler published \"Future Shock\" (1970) and \"The Third Wave\" (1980). Discussing the books in a later interview, Toffler said that industrial-style, centralized, top-down bureaucratic planning would be replaced by a more open, democratic, decentralized style which he called \"anticipatory democracy\". Futurist John Naisbitt's 1982 book \"Megatrends\" was on The New York Times Best Seller list for more than two years and sold 14 million copies. Naisbitt's book outlines 10 \"megatrends\", the fifth of which is from centralization to decentralization. In 1996 David Osborne and Ted Gaebler had a best selling book \"Reinventing Government\" proposing decentralist public administration theories which became labeled the \"New Public Management\".\nStephen Cummings wrote that decentralization became a \"revolutionary megatrend\" in the 1980s. In 1983 Diana Conyers asked if decentralization was the \"latest fashion\" in development administration. Cornell University's project on Restructuring Local Government states that decentralization refers to the \"global trend\" of devolving responsibilities to regional or local governments. Robert J. Bennett's \"Decentralization, Intergovernmental Relations and Markets: Towards a Post-Welfare Agenda\" describes how after World War II governments pursued a centralized \"welfarist\" policy of entitlements which now has become a \"post-welfare\" policy of intergovernmental and market-based decentralization.\nIn 1983, \"Decentralization\" was identified as one of the \"Ten Key Values\" of the Green Movement in the United States.\nA 1999 United Nations Development Programme report stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"A large number of developing and transitional countries have embarked on some form of decentralization programmes. This trend is coupled with a growing interest in the role of civil society and the private sector as partners to governments in seeking new ways of service delivery\u00a0... Decentralization of governance and the strengthening of local governing capacity is in part also a function of broader societal trends. These include, for example, the growing distrust of government generally, the spectacular demise of some of the most centralized regimes in the world (especially the Soviet Union) and the emerging separatist demands that seem to routinely pop up in one or another part of the world. The movement toward local accountability and greater control over one's destiny is, however, not solely the result of the negative attitude towards central government. Rather, these developments, as we have already noted, are principally being driven by a strong desire for greater participation of citizens and private sector organizations in governance.\"\nOverview.\nSystems approach.\nThose studying the goals and processes of implementing decentralization often use a systems theory approach, which according to the United Nations Development Programme report applies to the topic of decentralization \"a whole systems perspective, including levels, spheres, sectors and functions and seeing the community level as the entry point at which holistic definitions of development goals are\nfrom the people themselves and where it is most practical to support them. It involves seeing multi-level frameworks and continuous, synergistic processes of interaction and iteration of cycles as critical for achieving wholeness in a decentralized system and for sustaining its development.\"\nHowever, it has been seen as part of a systems approach. Norman Johnson of Los Alamos National Laboratory wrote in a 1999 paper: \"A decentralized system is where some decisions by the agents are made without centralized control or processing. An important property of agent systems is the degree of connectivity or connectedness between the agents, a measure global flow of information or influence. If each agent is connected (exchange states or influence) to all other agents, then the system is highly connected.\"\nUniversity of California, Irvine's Institute for Software Research's \"PACE\" project is creating an \"architectural style for trust management in decentralized applications.\" It adopted Rohit Khare's definition of decentralization: \"A decentralized system is one which requires multiple parties to make their own independent decisions\" and applies it to Peer-to-peer software creation, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In such a decentralized system, there is no single centralized authority that makes decisions on behalf of all the parties. Instead each party, also called a peer, makes local autonomous decisions towards its individual goals which may possibly conflict with those of other peers. Peers directly interact with each other and share information or provide service to other peers. An open decentralized system is one in which the entry of peers is not regulated. Any peer can enter or leave the system at any time\u00a0...\nGoals.\nDecentralization in any area is a response to the problems of centralized systems. Decentralization in government, the topic most studied, has been seen as a solution to problems like economic decline, government inability to fund services and their general decline in performance of overloaded services, the demands of minorities for a greater say in local governance, the general weakening legitimacy of the public sector and global and international pressure on countries with inefficient, undemocratic, overly centralized systems. The following four goals or objectives are frequently stated in various analyses of decentralization.\nIn decentralization, the principle of subsidiarity is often invoked. It holds that the lowest or least centralized authority that is capable of addressing an issue effectively should do so. According to one definition: \"Decentralization, or decentralizing governance, refers to the restructuring or reorganization of authority so that there is a system of co-responsibility between institutions of governance at the central, regional and local levels according to the principle of subsidiarity, thus increasing the overall quality and effectiveness of the system of governance while increasing the authority and capacities of sub-national levels.\"\nDecentralization is often linked to concepts of participation in decision-making, democracy, equality and liberty from a higher authority. Decentralization enhances the democratic voice. Theorists believe that local representative authorities with actual discretionary powers are the basis of decentralization that can lead to local efficiency, equity and development.\" Columbia University's Earth Institute identified one of three major trends relating to decentralization: \"increased involvement of local jurisdictions and civil society in the management of their affairs, with new forms of participation, consultation, and partnerships.\"\nDecentralization has been described as a \"counterpoint to globalization [which] removes decisions from the local and national stage to the global sphere of multi-national or non-national interests. Decentralization brings decision-making back to the sub-national levels\". Decentralization strategies must account for the interrelations of global, regional, national, sub-national, and local levels.\nNorman L. Johnson writes that diversity plays an important role in decentralized systems like ecosystems, social groups, large organizations, political systems. \"Diversity is defined to be unique properties of entities, agents, or individuals that are not shared by the larger group, population, structure. Decentralized is defined as a property of a system where the agents have some ability to operate \"locally.\" Both decentralization and diversity are necessary attributes to achieve the self-organizing properties of interest.\"\nAdvocates of political decentralization hold that greater participation by better informed diverse interests in society will lead to more relevant decisions than those made only by authorities on the national level. Decentralization has been described as a response to demands for diversity.\nIn business, decentralization leads to a management by results philosophy which focuses on definite objectives to be achieved by unit results. Decentralization of government programs is said to increase efficiency \u2013 and effectiveness \u2013 due to reduction of congestion in communications, quicker reaction to unanticipated problems, improved ability to deliver services, improved information about local conditions, and more support from beneficiaries of programs.\nFirms may prefer decentralization because it ensures efficiency by making sure that managers closest to the local information make decisions and in a more timely fashion; that their taking responsibility frees upper management for long term strategics rather than day-to-day decision-making; that managers have hands on training to prepare them to move up the management hierarchy; that managers are motivated by having the freedom to exercise their own initiative and creativity; that managers and divisions are encouraged to prove that they are profitable, instead of allowing their failures to be masked by the overall profitability of the company.\nThe same principles can be applied to the government. Decentralization promises to enhance efficiency through both inter-governmental competitions with market features and fiscal discipline which assigns tax and expenditure authority to the lowest level of government possible. It works best where members of the subnational government have strong traditions of democracy, accountability, and professionalism.\nEconomic and/or political decentralization can help prevent or reduce conflict because they reduce actual or perceived inequities between various regions or between a region and the central government. Dawn Brancati finds that political decentralization reduces intrastate conflict unless politicians create political parties that mobilize minority and even extremist groups to demand more resources and power within national governments. However, the likelihood this will be done depends on factors like how democratic transitions happen and features like a regional party's proportion of legislative seats, a country's number of regional legislatures, elector procedures, and the order in which national and regional elections occur. Brancati holds that decentralization can promote peace if it encourages statewide parties to incorporate regional demands and limit the power of regional parties.\nProcesses.\nThe processes by which entities move from a more to a less centralized state vary. They can be initiated from the centers of authority (\"top-down\") or from individuals, localities or regions (\"bottom-up\"), or from a \"mutually desired\" combination of authorities and localities working together. Bottom-up decentralization usually stresses political values like local responsiveness and increased participation and tends to increase political stability. Top-down decentralization may be motivated by the desire to \"shift deficits downwards\" and find more resources to pay for services or pay off government debt. Some hold that decentralization should not be imposed, but done in a respectful manner.\nGauging the appropriate size or scale of decentralized units has been studied in relation to the size of sub-units of hospitals and schools, road networks, administrative units in business and public administration, and especially town and city governmental areas and decision-making bodies.\nIn creating planned communities (\"new towns\"), it is important to determine the appropriate population and geographical size. While in earlier years small towns were considered appropriate, by the 1960s, 60,000 inhabitants was considered the size necessary to support a diversified job market and an adequate shopping center and array of services and entertainment. Appropriate size of governmental units for revenue raising also is a consideration.\nEven in bioregionalism, which seeks to reorder many functions and even the boundaries of governments according to physical and environmental features, including watershed boundaries and soil and terrain characteristics, appropriate size must be considered. The unit may be larger than many decentralist-bioregionalists prefer.\nDecentralization ideally happens as a careful, rational, and orderly process, but it often takes place during times of economic and political crisis, the fall of a regime and the resultant power struggles. Even when it happens slowly, there is a need for experimentation, testing, adjusting, and replicating successful experiments in other contexts. There is no one blueprint for decentralization since it depends on the initial state of a country and the power and views of political interests and whether they support or oppose decentralization.\nDecentralization usually is a conscious process based on explicit policies. However, it may occur as \"silent decentralization\" in the absence of reforms as changes in networks, policy emphasize and resource availability lead inevitably to a more decentralized system.\nDecentralization may be uneven and \"asymmetric\" given any one country's population, political, ethnic and other forms of diversity. In many countries, political, economic and administrative responsibilities may be decentralized to the larger urban areas, while rural areas are administered by the central government. Decentralization of responsibilities to provinces may be limited only to those provinces or states which want or are capable of handling responsibility. Some privatization may be more appropriate to an urban than a rural area; some types of privatization may be more appropriate for some states and provinces but not others.\nDeterminants.\nThe academic literature frequently mentions the following factors as determinants of decentralization:\nIn government policy.\nHistorians have described the history of governments and empires in terms of centralization and decentralization. In his 1910 \"The History of Nations\" Henry Cabot Lodge wrote that Persian king Darius I (550\u2013486 BC) was a master of organization and \"for the first time in history centralization becomes a political fact.\" He also noted that this contrasted with the decentralization of Ancient Greece. Since the 1980s a number of scholars have written about cycles of centralization and decentralization. Stephen K. Sanderson wrote that over the last 4000 years chiefdoms and actual states have gone through sequences of centralization and decentralization of economic, political and social power. Yildiz Atasoy writes this process has been going on \"since the Stone Age\" through not just chiefdoms and states, but empires and today's \"hegemonic core states\". Christopher K. Chase-Dunn and Thomas D. Hall review other works that detail these cycles, including works which analyze the concept of core elites which compete with state accumulation of wealth and how their \"intra-ruling-class competition accounts for the rise and fall of states\" and their phases of centralization and decentralization.\nRising government expenditures, poor economic performance and the rise of free market-influenced ideas have convinced governments to decentralize their operations, to induce competition within their services, to contract out to private firms operating in the market, and to privatize some functions and services entirely.\nGovernment decentralization has both political and administrative aspects. Its decentralization may be territorial, moving power from a central city to other localities, and it may be functional, moving decision-making from the top administrator of any branch of government to lower level officials, or divesting of the function entirely through privatization. It has been called the \"new public management\" which has been described as decentralization, management by objectives, contracting out, competition within government and consumer orientation.\nPolitical.\nPolitical decentralization signifies a reduction in the authority of national governments over policy-making. This process is accomplished by the institution of reforms that either delegate a certain degree of meaningful decision-making autonomy to sub-national tiers of government, or grant citizens the right to elect lower-level officials, like local or regional representatives. Depending on the country, this may require constitutional or statutory reforms, the development of new political parties, increased power for legislatures, the creation of local political units, and encouragement of advocacy groups.\nA national government may decide to decentralize its authority and responsibilities for a variety of reasons. Decentralization reforms may occur for administrative reasons, when government officials decide that certain responsibilities and decisions would be handled best at the regional or local level. In democracies, traditionally conservative parties include political decentralization as a directive in their platforms because rightist parties tend to advocate for a decrease in the role of central government. There is also strong evidence to support the idea that government stability increases the probability of political decentralization, since instability brought on by gridlock between opposing parties in legislatures often impedes a government's overall ability to enact sweeping reforms.\nThe rise of regional ethnic parties in the national politics of parliamentary democracies is also heavily associated with the implementation of decentralization reforms. Ethnic parties may endeavor to transfer more autonomy to their respective regions, and as a partisan strategy, ruling parties within the central government may cooperate by establishing regional assemblies in order to curb the rise of ethnic parties in national elections. This phenomenon famously occurred in 1999, when the United Kingdom's Labour Party appealed to Scottish constituents by creating a semi-autonomous Scottish Parliament in order to neutralize the threat from the increasingly popular Scottish National Party at the national level.\nIn addition to increasing the administrative efficacy of government and endowing citizens with more power, there are many projected advantages to political decentralization. Individuals who take advantage of their right to elect local and regional authorities have been shown to have more positive attitudes toward politics, and increased opportunities for civic decision-making through participatory democracy mechanisms like public consultations and participatory budgeting are believed to help legitimize government institutions in the eyes of marginalized groups. Moreover, political decentralization is perceived as a valid means of protecting marginalized communities at a local level from the detrimental aspects of development and globalization driven by the state, like the degradation of local customs, codes, and beliefs. In his 2013 book, \"Democracy and Political Ignorance\", George Mason University law professor Ilya Somin argued that political decentralization in a federal democracy confronts the widespread issue of political ignorance by allowing citizens to engage in foot voting, or moving to other jurisdictions with more favorable laws. He cites the mass migration of over one million southern-born African Americans to the North or the West to evade discriminatory Jim Crow laws in the late 19th century and early 20th century.\nThe European Union follows the principle of subsidiarity, which holds that decision-making should be made by the most local competent authority. The EU should decide only on enumerated issues that a local or member state authority cannot address themselves. Furthermore, enforcement is exclusively the domain of member states. In Finland, the Centre Party explicitly supports decentralization. For example, government departments have been moved from the capital Helsinki to the provinces. The centre supports substantial subsidies that limit potential economic and political centralization to Helsinki.\nPolitical decentralization does not come without its drawbacks. A study by Fan concludes that there is an increase in corruption and rent-seeking when there are more vertical tiers in the government, as well as when there are higher levels of subnational government employment. Other studies warn of high-level politicians that may intentionally deprive regional and local authorities of power and resources when conflicts arise. In order to combat these negative forces, experts believe that political decentralization should be supplemented with other conflict management mechanisms like power-sharing, particularly in regions with ethnic tensions.\nAdministrative.\nFour major forms of administrative decentralization have been described.\nFiscal.\nFiscal decentralization means decentralizing revenue raising and/or expenditure of moneys to a lower level of government while maintaining financial responsibility. While this process usually is called fiscal federalism, it may be relevant to unitary, federal, or confederal governments. Fiscal federalism also concerns the \"vertical imbalances\" where the central government gives too much or too little money to the lower levels. It actually can be a way of increasing central government control of lower levels of government, if it is not linked to other kinds of responsibilities and authority.\nFiscal decentralization can be achieved through user fees, user participation through monetary or labor contributions, expansion of local property or sales taxes, intergovernmental transfers of central government tax monies to local governments through transfer payments or grants, and authorization of municipal borrowing with national government loan guarantees. Transfers of money may be given conditionally with instructions or unconditionally without them.\nMarket.\nMarket decentralization can be done through privatization of public owned functions and businesses, as described briefly above. But it also is done through deregulation, the abolition of restrictions on businesses competing with government services, for example, postal services, schools, garbage collection. Even as private companies and corporations have worked to have such services contracted out to or privatized by them, others have worked to have these turned over to non-profit organizations or associations.\nFrom the 1970s to the 1990s, there was deregulation of some industries, like banking, trucking, airlines and telecommunications, which resulted generally in more competition and lower prices. According to the Cato Institute, an American libertarian think-tank, in some cases deregulation in some aspects of an industry were offset by increased regulation in other aspects, the electricity industry being a prime example. For example, in banking, Cato Institute believes some deregulation allowed banks to compete across state lines, increasing consumer choice, while an actual increase in regulators and regulations forced banks to make loans to individuals incapable of repaying them, leading eventually to the 2008 financial crisis.\nOne example of economic decentralization, which is based on a libertarian socialist model, is decentralized economic planning. Decentralized planning is a type of economic system in which decision-making is distributed amongst various economic agents or localized within production agents. An example of this method in practice is in Kerala, India which experimented in 1996 with the People's Plan campaign.\nEmmanuelle Auriol and Michel Benaim write about the \"comparative benefits\" of decentralization versus government regulation in the setting of standards. They find that while there may be a need for public regulation if public safety is at stake, private creation of standards usually is better because \"regulators or 'experts' might misrepresent consumers' tastes and needs.\" As long as companies are averse to incompatible standards, standards will be created that satisfy needs of a modern economy.\nEnvironmental.\nCentral governments themselves may own large tracts of land and control the forest, water, mineral, wildlife and other resources they contain. They may manage them through government operations or leasing them to private businesses; or they may neglect them to be exploited by individuals or groups who defy non-enforced laws against exploitation. It also may control most private land through land-use, zoning, environmental and other regulations. Selling off or leasing lands can be profitable for governments willing to relinquish control, but such programs can face public scrutiny because of fear of a loss of heritage or of environmental damage. Devolution of control to regional or local governments has been found to be an effective way of dealing with these concerns. Such decentralization has happened in India and other developing nations.\nIn economic ideology.\nLibertarian socialism.\nLibertarian socialism is a political philosophy that promotes a non-hierarchical, non-bureaucratic society without private ownership in the means of production. Libertarian socialists believe in converting present-day private productive property into common or public goods. It promotes free association in place of government and non-coercive forms for social organization, and it opposes the various social relations of capitalism, such as wage slavery. The term \"libertarian socialism\" is used by some socialists to differentiate their philosophy from state socialism, and by some as a synonym for left anarchism.\nAccordingly, libertarian socialists believe that \"the exercise of power in any institutionalized form \u2013 whether economic, political, religious, or sexual \u2013 brutalizes both the wielder of power and the one over whom it is exercised\". Libertarian socialists generally place their hopes in decentralized means of direct democracy such as libertarian municipalism, citizens' assemblies, or workers' councils. Libertarian socialists are strongly critical of coercive institutions, which often leads them to reject the legitimacy of the state in favor of anarchism. Adherents propose achieving this through decentralization of political and economic power, usually involving the socialization of most large-scale private property and enterprise (while retaining respect for personal property). Libertarian socialism tends to deny the legitimacy of most forms of economically significant private property, viewing capitalist property relations as forms of domination that are antagonistic to individual freedom.\nFree market.\nFree market ideas popular in the 19th century such as those of Adam Smith returned to prominence in the 1970s and 1980s. Austrian School economist Friedrich von Hayek argued that free markets themselves are decentralized systems where outcomes are produced without explicit agreement or coordination by individuals who use prices as their guide. Eleanor Doyle writes that \"[e]conomic decision-making in free markets is decentralized across all the individuals dispersed in each market and is synchronized or coordinated by the price system,\" and holds that an individual right to property is part of this decentralized system. Criticizing central government control, Hayek wrote in \"The Road to Serfdom\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There would be no difficulty about efficient control or planning were conditions so simple that a single person or board could effectively survey all the relevant facts. It is only as the factors which have to be taken into account become so numerous that it is impossible to gain a synoptic view of them that decentralization becomes imperative.\nAccording to Bruce M. Owen, this does not mean that all firms themselves have to be equally decentralized. He writes: \"markets allocate resources through arms-length transactions among decentralized actors. Much of the time, markets work very efficiently, but there is a variety of conditions under which firms do better. Hence, goods and services are produced and sold by firms with various degrees of horizontal and vertical integration.\" Additionally, he writes that the \"economic incentive to expand horizontally or vertically is usually, but not always, compatible with the social interest in maximizing long-run consumer welfare.\"\nIt is often claimed that free markets and private property generate centralized monopolies and other ills; free market advocates counter with the argument that government is the source of monopoly. Historian Gabriel Kolko in his book \"The Triumph of Conservatism\" argued that in the first decade of the 20th century businesses were highly decentralized and competitive, with new businesses constantly entering existing industries. In his view, there was no trend towards concentration and monopolization. While there were a wave of mergers of companies trying to corner markets, they found there was too much competition to do so. According to Kolko, this was also true in banking and finance, which saw decentralization as leading to instability as state and local banks competed with the big New York City firms. He argues that, as a result, the largest firms turned to the power of the state and worked with leaders like United States Presidents Theodore Roosevelt, William H. Taft and Woodrow Wilson to pass as \"progressive reforms\" centralizing laws like The Federal Reserve Act of 1913 that gave control of the monetary system to the wealthiest bankers; the formation of monopoly \"public utilities\" that made competition with those monopolies illegal; federal inspection of meat packers biased against small companies; extending Interstate Commerce Commission to regulating telephone companies and keeping rates high to benefit AT&amp;T; and using the Sherman Antitrust Act against companies which might combine to threaten larger or monopoly companies.\nAuthor and activist Jane Jacobs's influential 1961 book \"The Death and Life of American Cities\" criticized large-scale redevelopment projects which were part of government-planned decentralization of population and businesses to suburbs. She believed it destroyed cities' economies and impoverished remaining residents. Her 1980 book \"The Question of Separatism: Quebec and the Struggle over Sovereignty\" supported secession of Quebec from Canada. Her 1984 book \"Cities and the Wealth of Nations\" proposed a solution to the problems faced by cities whose economies were being ruined by centralized national governments: decentralization through the \"multiplication of sovereignties\", meaning an acceptance of the right of cities to secede from the larger nation states that were greatly limiting their ability to produce wealth.\nIn the organizational structure of a firm.\nIn response to incentive and information conflicts, a firm can either centralize their organizational structure by concentrating decision-making to upper management, or decentralize their organizational structure by delegating authority throughout the organization. The delegation of authority comes with a basic trade-off: while it can increase efficiency and information flow, the central authority consequentially suffers a loss of control. However, through creating an environment of trust and allocating authority formally in the firm, coupled with a stronger rule of law in the geographical location of the firm, the negative consequences of the trade-off can be minimized.\nIn having a decentralized organizational structure, a firm can remain agile to external shocks and competing trends. Decision-making in a centralized organization can face information flow inefficiencies and barriers to effective communication which decreases the speed and accuracy in which decisions are made. A decentralized firm is said to hold greater flexibility given the efficiency in which it can analyze information and implement relevant outcomes. Additionally, having decision-making power spread across different areas allows for local knowledge to inform decisions, increasing their relevancy and implementational effectiveness. In the process of developing new products or services, the decentralization enable the firm gain advantages of closely meet particular division's needs.\nDecentralization also impacts human resource management. The high level of individual agency that workers experience within a decentralized firm can create job enrichment. Studies have shown this enhances the development of new ideas and innovations given the sense of involvement that comes from responsibility. The impacts of decentralization on innovation are furthered by the ease of information flow that comes from this organizational structure. With increased knowledge sharing, workers are more able to use relevant information to inform decision-making. These benefits are enhanced in firms with skill-intensive environments. Skilled workers are more able to analyze information, they pose less risk of information duplication given increased communication abilities, and the productivity cost of multi-tasking is lower. These outcomes of decentralizion make it a particularly effective organizational structure for entrepreneurial and competitive firm environments, such as start-up companies. The flexibility, efficiency of information flow and higher worker autonomy complement the rapid growth and innovation seen in successful start up companies.\nIn technology and the Internet.\n\"Technological decentralization\" can be defined as a shift from concentrated to distributed modes of production and consumption of goods and services. Generally, such shifts are accompanied by transformations in technology and different technologies are applied for either system. Technology includes tools, materials, skills, techniques and processes by which goals are accomplished in the public and private spheres. Concepts of decentralization of technology are used throughout all types of technology, including especially information technology and appropriate technology.\nTechnologies often mentioned as best implemented in a decentralized manner, include: water purification, delivery and waste water disposal, agricultural technology and energy technology. Advances in technology may create opportunities for decentralized and privatized replacements for what had traditionally been public services or utilities, such as power, water, mail, telecommunications, consumer product safety, banking, medical licensure, parking meters, and auto emissions. However, in terms of technology, a clear distinction between fully centralized or decentralized technical solutions is often not possible and therefore finding an optimal degree of centralization difficult from an infrastructure planning perspective.\nInformation technology.\nInformation technology encompasses computers and computer networks, as well as information distribution technologies such as television and telephones. The whole computer industry of computer hardware, software, electronics, Internet, telecommunications equipment, e-commerce and computer services are included.\nExecutives and managers face a constant tension between centralizing and decentralizing information technology for their organizations. They must find the right balance of centralizing which lowers costs and allows more control by upper management, and decentralizing which allows sub-units and users more control. This will depend on analysis of the specific situation. Decentralization is particularly applicable to business or management units which have a high level of independence, complicated products and customers, and technology less relevant to other units.\nInformation technology applied to government communications with citizens, often called e-Government, is supposed to support decentralization and democratization. Various forms have been instituted in most nations worldwide.\nThe Internet is an example of an extremely decentralized network, having no owners at all (although some have argued that this is less the case in recent years). \"No one is in charge of internet, and everyone is.\" As long as they follow a certain minimal number of rules, anyone can be a service provider or a user. Voluntary boards establish protocols, but cannot stop anyone from developing new ones. Other examples of open source or decentralized movements are Wikis which allow users to add, modify, or delete content via the internet. Wikipedia has been described as decentralized (although it is a centralized web site, with a single entity operating the servers). Smartphones have been described as being an important part of the decentralizing effects of smaller and cheaper computers worldwide.\nDecentralization continues throughout the industry, for example as the decentralized architecture of wireless routers installed in homes and offices supplement and even replace phone companies' relatively centralized long-range cell towers.\nInspired by system and cybernetics theorists like Norbert Wiener, Marshall McLuhan and Buckminster Fuller, in the 1960s Stewart Brand started the Whole Earth Catalog and later computer networking efforts to bring Silicon Valley computer technologists and entrepreneurs together with countercultural ideas. This resulted in ideas like personal computing, virtual communities and the vision of an \"electronic frontier\" which would be a more decentralized, egalitarian and free-market libertarian society. Related ideas coming out of Silicon Valley included the free software and creative commons movements which produced visions of a \"networked information economy\".\nBecause human interactions in cyberspace transcend physical geography, there is a necessity for new theories in legal and other rule-making systems to deal with decentralized decision-making processes in such systems. For example, what rules should apply to conduct on the global digital network and who should set them? The laws of which nations govern issues of Internet transactions (like seller disclosure requirements or definitions of \"fraud\"), copyright and trademark?\nCentralization and re-decentralization of the Internet.\nThe New Yorker reports that although the Internet was originally decentralized, by 2013 it had become less so: \"a staggering percentage of communications flow through a small set of corporations \u2013 and thus, under the profound influence of those companies and other institutions [...] One solution, espoused by some programmers, is to make the Internet more like it used to be \u2013 less centralized and more distributed.\"\nBlockchain technology.\nIn blockchain, decentralization refers to the transfer of control and decision-making from a centralized entity (individual, organization, or group thereof) to a distributed network. Decentralized networks strive to reduce the level of trust that participants must place in one another, and deter their ability to exert authority or control over one another in ways that degrade the functionality of the network.\nDecentralized protocols, applications, and ledgers (used in Web3) could be more difficult for governments to regulate, similar to difficulties regulating BitTorrent (which is not a blockchain technology).\nCriticism.\nFactors hindering decentralization include weak local administrative or technical capacity, which may result in inefficient or ineffective services; inadequate financial resources available to perform new local responsibilities, especially in the start-up phase when they are most needed; or inequitable distribution of resources. Decentralization can make national policy coordination too complex; it may allow local elites to capture functions; local cooperation may be undermined by any distrust between private and public sectors; decentralization may result in higher enforcement costs and conflict for resources if there is no higher level of authority. Additionally, decentralization may not be as efficient for standardized, routine, network-based services, as opposed to those that need more complicated inputs. If there is a loss of economies of scale in procurement of labor or resources, the expense of decentralization can rise, even as central governments lose control over financial resources.\nIt has been noted that while decentralization may increase \"productive efficiency\" it may undermine \"allocative efficiency\" by making redistribution of wealth more difficult. Decentralization will cause greater disparities between rich and poor regions, especially during times of crisis when the national government may not be able to help regions needing it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49140", "revid": "1267843534", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49140", "title": "960", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 960 (CMLX) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. It was the 960th year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 960th year of the 1st millennium, the 60th year of the 10th century, and the first year of the 960s decade.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49141", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49141", "title": "956", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 956 (CMLVI) was a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49143", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49143", "title": "953", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 953 (CMLIII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAfrica.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nDeaths.\n\"date unknown\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49144", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49144", "title": "957", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 957 (CMLVII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49145", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49145", "title": "958", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 958 (CMLVIII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49146", "revid": "1319906848", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49146", "title": "Wuppertal", "text": "Wuppertal (; lit.\u2009'\"Wupper Dale\"') is a city in North Rhine-Westphalia, in western Germany, with a population of 355,000. Wuppertal is the seventh-largest city in North Rhine-Westphalia and 17th-largest in Germany. It was founded in 1929 by the merger of Elberfeld, Barmen, Ronsdorf, Cronenberg and Vohwinkel, and was initially called \"Barmen-Elberfeld\" before adopting its present name in 1930. It is the capital and largest city of the Bergisches Land.\nThe city straddles the densely populated banks of the River Wupper, a tributary of the Rhine. Wuppertal is located between the Ruhr (Essen) to the north, D\u00fcsseldorf to the west, and Cologne to the southwest, and over time has grown together with Solingen, Remscheid and Hagen. The stretching of the city in a long band along the narrow Wupper Valley leads to a spatial impression of Wuppertal being larger than it actually is. The city is known for its steep slopes, its woods and parks, and for being the greenest city in Germany, with two-thirds green space of the total municipal area. From any part of the city, it is only a ten-minute walk to one of the public parks or woodland paths.\nThe Wupper Valley was, along with the Ore Mountains and before the Ruhr, the first highly industrialized region of Germany, which resulted in the construction of the Wuppertal Schwebebahn suspension railway in the then independent cities of Elberfeld and Barmen. The increasing demand for coal from the textile mills and blacksmith shops from those cities encouraged the expansion of the nearby Ruhr. Wuppertal still is a major industrial centre, being home to industries such as textiles, metallurgy, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, electronics, automobiles, rubber, vehicles and printing equipment. Aspirin originates from Wuppertal, patented in 1897 by Bayer, as does the Vorwerk Kobold vacuum cleaner. The Wuppertal Institute for Climate, Environment and Energy and the European Institute for International Economic Relations are located in the city. Barmen was the birthplace of Friedrich Engels. Due to the city's length, the Bergish varieties of the Limburgish language called Platt are spoken in its western communities like Vohwinkel, but not in the city's eastern communities like Langenfeld where the Southern varieties of Westphalian language are spoken and the city is called Wupperdaal by locals.\nHistory.\nWuppertal in its present borders was formed in 1929 by merging the industrial cities of Barmen and Elberfeld along with the communities of Vohwinkel, Ronsdorf, Cronenberg, Langerfeld and Beyenburg. The initial name Barmen-Elberfeld was changed in a 1930 referendum to Wuppertal (\"Wupper Valley\"). The new city was administered as part of Prussia's Rhine Province.\nUniquely for Germany, it is a \"linear city\", owing to the steep hillsides along the river Wupper. Its highest hill is the Lichtscheid, which is above sea level. The dominant urban centres Elberfeld (historic commercial centre) and Barmen (more industrial) have formed a continuous urbanized area since 1850. During the succeeding decades, \"Wupper-Town\" became the dominant industrial agglomeration of northwestern Germany. During the 20th century, this conurbation had been surpassed by Cologne, D\u00fcsseldorf and the Ruhr area, all with a more favourable topography.\nFrom 5 July 1933 to 19 January 1934 the Kemna concentration camp was established in Wuppertal. It was one of the early Nazi concentration camps, created by the Nazi Party to incarcerate their political opponents upon gaining power in 1933. The camp was established in a former factory on the Wupper in the Kemna neighborhood of the Barmen part of Wuppertal. Protestant Christians opposed to the so called German Christians adopted the Barmen Declaration in Wuppertal in 1934.\nBy order of 10 October 1938, the 1st Light Division of the German Army was formed in Wuppertal, which in September 1939 took part in the invasion of Poland which started World War II. During the war, Nazi Germany operated a Nazi prison, two forced labour subcamps of the prison in Remscheid-L\u00fcttringhausen and an SS construction brigade in the city. The prisoners of the SS construction brigade were Poles, Russians, French, Czechs, Romanians, Hungarians, and Greeks. About 40% of buildings in the city were destroyed by Allied bombing, as were many other German cities and industrial centres (see Bombing of Wuppertal in World War II). However, a large number of historic sites have been preserved, such as:\nThe US 78th Infantry Division under Major General Edwin P. Parker Jr. captured Wuppertal against scant resistance on 16 April 1945. Wuppertal became a part of the British Zone of Occupation, and subsequently part of the new state of North Rhine-Westphalia in West Germany.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWuppertal currently has a population of about 355,000. The number of inhabitants more than doubled in 1929 as a result of the Barmen\u2013Elberfeld merger. The economic boom of the 1950s and 60s saw the establishment of new industry headquarters and with it an influx of workers, including migrant workers from Turkey, Greece and Italy. Population numbers during these times of as-yet unparalleled growth peaked at about 423,000 in 1963; in the 1970s, a period of steady decline followed in the wake of industrial losses.\nAs of 31 December 2022, the largest groups of foreign residents were:\nMain sights.\nIn total, Wuppertal possesses over 4,500 buildings classified as national monuments, most exemplifying styles such as Neoclassicism, Eclecticism, Historicism, Art Nouveau/Jugendstil and Bauhaus. The American TV station CNN recommended Wuppertal as one of 20 places worldwide to visit in the year 2020 because of the Schwebebahn, the architectural diversity and the Nordbahntrasse, a cycle route across the city 2020.\nMain sights include:\nSports.\nAssociation football.\nIn football, Wuppertal's most popular club is Wuppertaler SV which currently play in the Regionalliga West, the fourth tier of the German football league system. Playing their home games at the city's Stadion am Zoo, the club, which enjoyed its last season in a nationwide division during the 2009\u201310 season, looks back on a rich and eventful history since its establishment as the result of a 1954 merger between the two main Wuppertal clubs \"SSV 04 Wuppertal\" and \"TSG Vohwinkel 80\". The club spent a total of seven seasons in the top flight of German football, three of which in the Bundesliga, which they were promoted to during 1972. In their first season in the nationwide first division, the club reached a remarkable fourth place and qualified for the UEFA Cup for the first and only time in its history. After a first-round defeat by Polish side Ruch Chorz\u00f3w and another two widely unsuccessful Bundesliga campaigns, the club disappeared from the top flight again, though, and has yet to return.\nDuring 2004, the club merged with local rivals \"SV Borussia Wuppertal\" to form \"Wuppertaler SV Borussia\", though the name change remained the only visible attribute of the merger with the club's colours and crest remaining unaltered. The additional \"Borussia\" was scrapped again during 2013 due to fans' demand amidst a change of leadership which was brought about to lead the club through necessary insolvency proceedings which have been completed as of September 2014.\nAnother noteworthy Wuppertal football club is Cronenberger SC from the district of Cronenberg. Their greatest success to date is reaching the 1952 German amateur football championship final which they lost 5\u20132 against VfR Schwenningen. Today, they play one tier below WSV in the Oberliga Nordrhein.\nFamous players include G\u00fcnter Pr\u00f6pper who scored 39 of WSV's 136 Bundesliga goals and West Germany international Horst Szymaniak, as well as Cronenberg's Herbert J\u00e4ger who represented Germany at the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki during his stay with the club.\nTeam handball.\nIn handball, Wuppertal's most successful team is Bergischer HC, playing in the top-tier Handball-Bundesliga which they were promoted to for the second time during 2013, reaching 15th place during the 2013\u201314 campaign and therefore staying among the top scorers for a second consecutive season. \"BHC\" originates from a 2006 cooperation between the management, squad and main sponsor of LTV Wuppertal and rivals SG Solingen from the nearby city of the same name. The club advertises itself as a representative of the entire Bergisches Land region. The team plays its home games at Wuppertal's \"Uni-Halle\" (3,200 seats).\nWuppertal's past most successful club are the aforementioned LTV Wuppertal. LTV spent most of their seasons in the second and third tiers, before they merged with \"Wuppertaler SV's\" handball section in 1996 to form \"HSG LTV/WSV Wuppertal\". The handball combination was promoted to the Bundesliga after its inaugural season, finishing 8th before dissolving again in 1998. However, the mere departure of Wuppertaler SV still allowed LTV Wuppertal, whose professional team were renamed \"HC Wuppertal\", to play another three seasons in the Bundesliga before returning to the 2nd division and re-introducing its old name. After the establishment of BHC in 2006, LTV lost its financial base and was relegated several times, currently playing in the fifth-tier Verbandsliga.\nVolleyball.\nIn volleyball, SV Bayer Wuppertal was one of Germany's leading men's teams for many years during the 1990s and 2000s. The team was part of the well-known mass-sports club originating in Leverkusen and was promoted to the Bundesliga in 1978. Reacting to low attendances, the eponymous Bayer AG decided to relocate the volleyball team to Wuppertal in 1992, where there also was a Bayer-funded club. After the move, the club won various titles, including the German championship in 1994 and 1997 and the German Cup in 1995. In addition to that, they finished runners-up to Greek side Olympiacos S.C. in the 1995\u201396 European Cup Winners' Cup, losing the final in five sets.\nAfter the wide-reaching retreat of Bayer AG from less popular professional sport during 2008, the club acquired the name \"Wuppertal Titans\" and later \"A!B!C Titans Berg. Land\". However, the loss of their main sponsor eventually resulted in the team having to terminate during 2012. Presently, they once more play by the name of Bayer Wuppertal in the third-tier Regionalliga, unable to promote with their current financial set-up.\nBasketball.\nPerhaps one of the most successful Wuppertal sports clubs was the women's basketball team of Barmer TV (known as \"BTV Wuppertal\" between 1994 and 2000, \"BTV Gold-Zack Wuppertal\" between 2000 and 2002 and \"Wuppertal Wings\" internationally). An 11-time German champion and 12-time German Cup winner, they won a remarkable ten consecutive doubles between 1993 and 2002. During 1996, they even won the European Cup as the first and so far only German side, beating Italy's SFT Como in the final. A year later, they narrowly missed out on back-to-back trebles, losing to French side CJM Bourges in the newly christened EuroLeague's final.\nIn 2002, the club withdrew from the Bundesliga due to financial troubles, their then-main sponsor \"Gold-Zack Werke\" filing for insolvency a year later. After a decade-long stay in amateur divisions, Barmer TV returned to the second-tier 2nd Bundesliga North in 2014.\nWuppertal co-hosted the 1998 FIBA World Championship for Women as one of seven host cities.\nRoller hockey.\nIn roller hockey, Wuppertal club RSC Cronenberg are one of the most successful German teams, having won the German championship and the German Cup in both men's and women's competitions. In total, the men won 13 German championships and nine cups, the women ten championships and nine cups. Both teams play their home games at \"Alfred-Henckels-Halle\".\nWuppertal hosted several international tournaments, including the World Championship in 1997 (men) and 2004 (women) and the European Championship in 1992, 2010 (men) and 2011 (women).\nEducation.\nFour institutions of higher education are in Wuppertal.\nThe privately financed Junior Uni is a unique German initiative to educate youth from the age of 4 to 18 in science outside the school program.\nPolitics.\nMayor.\nThe current mayor of Wuppertal is Uwe Schneidewind of Alliance 90/The Greens, who was elected in 2020. The most recent mayoral election was held on 14 September 2025, with a runoff held on 28 September and Miriam Scherff of the SPD being elected as the designated mayor. The results of the election were as follows:\nCity council.\nThe Wuppertal city council governs the city alongside the mayor. The most recent city council election was held on 14 September 2025, and the results were as follows:\nTransport.\nRailways.\nWuppertal is well connected to the rail network. The town lies on the Cologne\u2013Hagen and the D\u00fcsseldorf\u2013Hagen railway lines, and is a stop for long-distance traffic. The central station is located in the district of Elberfeld. Regionalbahn trains and some Regional-Express trains also stop at Oberbarmen, Barmen, Ronsdorf and Vohwinkel. There are also S-Bahn stations in Langerfeld, Unterbarmen, Steinbeck, Zoologischer Garten and Sonnborn.\nThe rail services that operate on the mainline through the valley are the RE 4 (Wupper-Express), RE 7 (Rhein-M\u00fcnsterland-Express), RE 13 (Maas-Wupper-Express), RB 48 (Rhein-Wupper Bahn) and four Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn services: the S 7, S 8, S 9 and S 68 (peak hours only). Every 30 minutes, it is served by a long-distance (Intercity-Express, InterCity, EuroCity) service in each direction.\nWith the exception of the line from Wuppertal to Solingen (operated as the S 7) and the Prince William Railway to Essen (now S-Bahn line S 9), all of the branch lines connecting to main line in the city of Wuppertal are now closed. This includes, among others, the D\u00fcsseldorf-Derendorf\u2013Dortmund S\u00fcd railway (the \"Wuppertaler Nordbahn\"), the Burgholz Railway, the Wuppertal-Wichlinghausen\u2013Hattingen railway, the Wupper Valley Railway and the Corkscrew Railway. Thus, there were once 31 stations in the Wuppertal area, including nine stations on the mainline. Nowadays only ten are serviced any more.\nWuppertal Hauptbahnhof is the location of the lost luggage services for Deutsche Bahn.\nThe Wuppertal Suspension Railway, a suspended monorail, serves the city and its surroundings. It has operated since 1901. In 1950, a young elephant named Tuffi was put aboard the Wuppertal Schwebebahn (monorail), as a promotion for the Althoff Circus. The swinging tram upset the elephant, and she trumpeted, charged, and plummeted into the river below. Tuffi suffered minor injuries; she lived until 1989. In 1999, the \"Schwebebahn\" had its thus far only fatal accident. New cars were added beginning in December 2016.\nBetween 1873 and 1987, Wuppertal was served by its own tram network.\nAir.\nThe city is served by D\u00fcsseldorf Airport, located which is half an hour drive north west of Wuppertal.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nWuppertal is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSister suspension railway.\nThe Wuppertal Suspension Railway is twinned with Shonan Monorail since 2018. The Shonan Monorail is located in Kanagawa, Japan and connects the cities between Kamakura and Fujisawa. Both suspended railways made a campaign of their twinning in 2018.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
