{"id": "54253", "revid": "46274489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54253", "title": "Silk Road", "text": "Historical network of Eurasian trade routes\nThe Silk Road was a network of Asian trade routes active from the second century\u00a0BCE until the mid-15th century. Spanning over on land, it played a central role in facilitating economic, cultural, political, and religious interactions between the Eastern and Western worlds. The name \"Silk Road\" was coined in the late 19th century, but some 20th- and 21st-century historians instead prefer the term Silk Routes, on the grounds that it more accurately describes the intricate web of land and sea routes connecting Central, East, South, Southeast, and West Asia as well as East Africa and Southern Europe. In fact, some scholars criticise or even dismiss the idea of silk roads and call for a new definition or alternate term. According to them, the literature using this term has \"privileged the sedentary and literate empires at either end of Eurasia\" thereby ignoring the contributions of steppe nomads. In addition, the classic definition sidelines civilisations like India and Iran.\nThe Silk Road derives its name from the highly lucrative trade of silk textiles that were primarily produced in China. The network began with the expansion of the Han dynasty (202\u00a0BCE\u00a0\u2013 220\u00a0CE) into Central Asia around 114\u00a0BCE, through the missions and explorations of the Chinese imperial envoy Zhang Qian, which brought the region under unified control. The Chinese took great interest in the security of their trade products, and extended the Great Wall of China to ensure the protection of the trade route. The Parthian Empire provided a vital bridge connecting the network to the Mediterranean. Meanwhile, the rise of the Roman Empire in the west further established the western terminus of the interconnected trade system. By the first century\u00a0CE, Chinese silk was widely sought after in Rome, Egypt, and Greece. Other lucrative commodities from the East included tea, dyes, perfumes, and porcelain; among Western exports were horses, camels, honey, wine, and gold. Aside from generating substantial wealth for emerging mercantile classes, the proliferation of goods such as paper and gunpowder greatly affected the trajectory of political history in several theatres in Eurasia and beyond.\nThe Silk Road was utilized over a period that saw immense political variation across the continent, exemplified by major events such as the Black Death and the Mongol conquests. The network was highly decentralized, and security was sparse: travelers faced constant threats of banditry and nomadic raiders, and long expanses of inhospitable terrain. Few individuals traveled the entire length of the Silk Road, instead relying on a succession of middlemen based at various stopping points along the way. In addition to goods, the network facilitated an unprecedented exchange of religious (especially Buddhist), philosophical, and scientific thought, much of which was syncretised by societies along the way. Likewise, a wide variety of people used the routes. Diseases such as plague also spread along the Silk Road, possibly contributing to the Black Death.\nFrom 1453 onwards, the Ottoman Empire began competing with other gunpowder empires for greater control over the overland routes, which prompted European polities to seek alternatives while themselves gaining leverage over their trade partners. This marked the beginning of the Age of Discovery, European colonialism, and the further intensification of globalization. In the 21st century, the name \"New Silk Road\" is used to describe several large infrastructure projects along many of the historic trade routes; among the best known include the Eurasian Land Bridge and the Chinese Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). UNESCO designated the as a World Heritage Site in 2014, and the in 2023. The Fergana-Syrdarya Corridor, the Indian and Iranian portions, and the remaining sites in China remain on the tentative lists.\nDespite the popular imagination, Silk Road was never a singular east-west trade route that linked China to the Mediterranean, nor was there unrestricted trade before the Mongol Empire. It was a network of routes. Even Marco Polo, often linked to the Silk Road, never used the term despite traveling during a time of Mongol-enabled ease of movement.\nName and contested significance.\nThe Silk Road derives its name from the lucrative trade in silk, first developed in China, and a major reason for the connection of trade routes into an extensive transcontinental network. It derives from the German term (literally \"Silk Road\") and was first popularized in 1877 by Ferdinand von Richthofen, who made seven expeditions to China from 1868 to 1872. However, the term itself had been in use in decades prior to that. The alternative translation \"Silk Route\" is also used occasionally. Although the term was coined in the 19th century, it did not gain widespread acceptance in academia or popularity among the public until the 20th century. The first book entitled \"The Silk Road\" was by Swedish geographer Sven Hedin in 1938.\nThe use of the term 'Silk Road' is not without its detractors. For instance, Warwick Ball contends that the maritime spice trade with India and Arabia was far more consequential for the economy of the Roman Empire than the silk trade with China, which at sea was conducted mostly through India and on land was handled by numerous intermediaries such as the Sogdians. Going as far as to call the whole thing a \"myth\" of modern academia, Ball argues that there was no coherent overland trade system and no free movement of goods from East Asia to the West until the period of the Mongol Empire. He notes that traditional authors discussing east\u2013west trade such as Marco Polo and Edward Gibbon never labelled any route a \"silk\" one in particular. William Dalrymple points out that in pre-modern times, maritime travel cost only a fifth of overland transport, and argues for the pre-13th century primacy of an India-dominated \"\" extending from Rome to Japan.\nThe southern stretches of the Silk Road, from Khotan (Xinjiang) to Eastern China, were first used for jade and not silk, as long as 5000 BCE, and are still in use for this purpose. The term \"Jade Road\" would have been more appropriate than \"Silk Road\" had it not been for the far larger and geographically wider nature of the silk trade; the term is in current use in China.\nRoutes.\nTwo important Silk Road paths from Merv went through Nisa and Sarakhs. They joined together in Masshad, a big religious and trade city in Khurasan. The old road\u2014now a modern highway\u2014went from Masshad to Nishapur, then along the edge of the Dasht-e Kevir desert and the Alborz Mountains, reaching Tehran (called Ray in ancient times).\nThe Silk Road consisted of several routes. As it extended westwards from the ancient commercial centres of China, the overland, intercontinental Silk Road divided into northern and bypassing the Taklamakan Desert and Lop Nur. Merchants along these routes were involved in \"relay trade\" in which goods changed \"hands many times before reaching their final destinations\".\nNorthern route.\nThe northern route started at Chang'an (now called Xi'an), an ancient capital of China that was moved further east during the Later Han to Luoyang. The route was defined around the 1st century BCE when Han Wudi put an end to harassment by nomadic tribes.\nThe northern route travelled northwest through the Chinese province of Gansu from Shaanxi Province and split into three further routes, two of them following the mountain ranges to the north and south of the Taklamakan Desert to rejoin at Kashgar, and the other going north of the Tian Shan mountains through Turpan, Talgar, and Almaty (in what is now southeast Kazakhstan). The routes split again west of Kashgar, with a southern branch heading down the Alai Valley towards Termez (in modern Uzbekistan) and Balkh (Afghanistan), while the other travelled through Kokand in the Fergana Valley (in present-day eastern Uzbekistan) and then west across the Karakum Desert. Both routes joined the main southern route before reaching ancient Merv, Turkmenistan. Another branch of the northern route turned northwest past the Aral Sea and north of the Caspian Sea, then and on to the Black Sea.\nA route for caravans, the northern Silk Road brought to China many goods such as \"dates, saffron powder and pistachio nuts from Persia; frankincense, aloes and myrrh from Somalia; sandalwood from India; glass bottles from Egypt, and other expensive and desirable goods from other parts of the world.\" In exchange, the caravans sent back bolts of silk brocade, lacquer-ware, and porcelain.\nSouthern route.\nThe southern route or Karakoram route was mainly a single route from China through the Karakoram mountains, where it persists in modern times as the Karakoram Highway, a paved road that connects Pakistan and China. It then set off westwards, but with southward spurs so travelers could complete the journey by sea from various points. Crossing the high mountains, it passed through northern Pakistan, over the Hindu Kush mountains, and into Afghanistan, rejoining the northern route near Merv, Turkmenistan. From Merv, it followed a nearly straight line west through mountainous northern Iran, Mesopotamia, and the northern tip of the Syrian Desert to the Levant, where Mediterranean trading ships plied regular routes to Italy, while land routes went either north through Anatolia or south to North Africa. Another branch road travelled from Herat through Susa to Charax Spasinu at the head of the Persian Gulf and across to Petra and on to Alexandria and other eastern Mediterranean ports from where ships carried the cargoes to Rome.\nSouthwestern route.\nThe southwestern route is believed to be the Ganges/Brahmaputra Delta, which has been the subject of international interest for over two millennia. Strabo, the 1st-century Roman writer, mentions the deltaic lands: \"Regarding merchants who now sail from Egypt\u00a0... as far as the Ganges, they are only private citizens.\" His comments are interesting as Roman beads and other materials are being found at Wari-Bateshwar ruins, the ancient city with roots from much earlier, before the Bronze Age, presently being slowly excavated beside the Old Brahmaputra in Bangladesh. Ptolemy's map of the Ganges Delta, a remarkably accurate effort, showed that his informants knew all about the course of the Brahmaputra River, crossing through the Himalayas then bending westward to its source in Tibet. It is doubtless that this delta was a major international trading center, almost certainly from much earlier than the Common Era. Gemstones and other merchandise from Thailand and Java were traded in the delta and through it. Chinese archaeological writer Bin Yang and some earlier writers and archaeologists, such as Janice Stargardt, strongly suggest this route of international trade as Sichuan\u2013Yunnan\u2013Burma\u2013Bangladesh route. According to Bin Yang, especially from the 12th century, the route was used to ship bullion from Yunnan (gold and silver are among the minerals in which Yunnan is rich), through northern Burma, into modern Bangladesh, making use of the ancient route, known as the 'Ledo' route. The emerging evidence of the ancient cities of Bangladesh, in particular Wari-Bateshwar ruins, Mahasthangarh, Bhitagarh, Bikrampur, Egarasindhur, and Sonargaon, are believed to be the international trade centers in this route.\nMaritime route.\nThe Maritime Silk Road or Maritime Silk Route is the maritime section of the historic Silk Road that connected Southeast Asia, East Asia, the Indian subcontinent, the Arabian Peninsula, eastern Africa, and Europe. It began by the 2nd century BCE and flourished until the 15th century CE. The Maritime Silk Road was primarily established and operated by Austronesian sailors in Southeast Asia who sailed large long-distance ocean-going sewn-plank and lashed-lug trade ships.11 The route was also utilized by the dhows of the Persian and Arab traders in the Arabian Sea and beyond,13 and the Tamil merchants in South Asia.13 China also started building their own trade ships (\"chu\u00e1n\") and followed the routes in the later period, from the 10th to the 15th centuries CE.\nThe network followed the footsteps of older Austronesian jade maritime networks in Southeast Asia, as well as the maritime spice networks between Southeast Asia and South Asia, and the West Asian maritime networks in the Arabian Sea and beyond, coinciding with these ancient maritime trade roads by the current era.\nAustronesian thalassocracies controlled the flow of trade in the eastern regions of the Maritime Silk Road, especially the polities around the straits of Malacca and Bangka, the Malay Peninsula, and the Mekong Delta; through which passed the main routes of the Austronesian trade ships to Giao Ch\u1ec9 (in the Tonkin Gulf) and Guangzhou (southern China), the endpoints (later also including Quanzhou by the 10th century CE). Secondary routes also passed through the coastlines of the Gulf of Thailand; as well as through the Java Sea, Celebes Sea, Banda Sea, and the Sulu Sea, reconnecting with the main route through the northern Philippines and Taiwan. The secondary routes also continue onward to the East China Sea and the Yellow Sea for a limited extent.\nThe main route of the western regions of the Maritime Silk Road directly crosses the Indian Ocean from the northern tip of Sumatra (or through the Sunda Strait) to Sri Lanka, southern India and Bangladesh, and the Maldives. It branches from here into routes through the Arabian Sea entering the Gulf of Oman (into the Persian Gulf), and the Gulf of Aden (into the Red Sea). Secondary routes also pass through the coastlines of the Bay of Bengal, the Arabian Sea, and southwards along the coast of East Africa to Zanzibar, the Comoros, Madagascar, and the Seychelles.\nThe term \"Maritime Silk Road\" is a modern name, acquired from its similarity to the overland Silk Road. Like the overland routes, the ancient maritime routes through Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean had no particular name for the majority of its very long history. Despite the modern name, the Maritime Silk Road involved exchanges in a wide variety of goods over a very wide region, not just silk or Asian exports. It differed significantly in several aspects from the overland Silk Road, and thus should not be viewed as a mere extension of it. Traders traveling through the Maritime Silk Road could span the entire distance of the maritime routes, instead of through regional relays as with the overland route. Ships could carry far larger amounts of goods, creating greater economic impact with each exchange. Goods carried by the ships also differed from goods carried by caravans. Traders on the maritime route faced different perils like weather and piracy, but they were not affected by political instability and could simply avoid areas in conflict.\nHistory.\nPrecursors.\nChinese and Central Asian contacts (2nd millennium BCE).\nCentral Eurasia has been known from ancient times for its horse riding and horse breeding communities, and the overland Steppe Route across the northern steppes of Central Eurasia was in use long before that of the Silk Road. Archeological sites, such as the Berel burial ground in Kazakhstan, confirmed that the nomadic Arimaspians were not only breeding horses for trade but also produced great craftsmen able to propagate exquisite art pieces along the Silk Road. From the 2nd millennium BCE, nephrite jade was being traded from mines in the region of Yarkand and Khotan to China. Significantly, these mines were not very far from the lapis lazuli and spinel (\"Balas Ruby\") mines in Badakhshan, and, although separated by the formidable Pamir Mountains, routes across them were apparently in use from very early times.\nGenetic study of the Tarim mummies, found in the Tarim Basin, in the area of Loulan located along the Silk Road east of Yingpan, dating to as early as 1600 BCE, suggest very ancient contacts between East and West. These mummified remains may have been of people who spoke Indo-European languages, which remained in use in the Tarim Basin, in the modern day Xinjiang region, until replaced by Turkic influences from the Xiongnu culture to the north and by Chinese influences from the eastern Han dynasty, who spoke a Sino-Tibetan language.\nSome remnants of what was probably Chinese silk dating from 1070 BCE have been found in Ancient Egypt. The Great Oasis cities of Central Asia played a crucial role in the effective functioning of the Silk Road trade. The originating source seems sufficiently reliable, but silk degrades very rapidly, so it cannot be verified whether it was cultivated silk (which almost certainly came from China) or a type of \"wild silk\", which might have come from the Mediterranean or Middle East.\nFollowing contacts between China and nomadic groups along its western borders in the 8th century BCE, gold was introduced from Central Asia, and Chinese jade carvers began to imitate steppe designs, adopting the Scythian-style animal art depicting animals locked in combat. This style is particularly reflected in the rectangular belt plaques made of gold and bronze, with other versions in jade and steatite. An elite 6th century BCE burial near Stuttgart, Germany, contained Greek bronzes as well as Chinese silks. Similar animal-shaped pieces of art and wrestler motifs on belts have been found in Scythian grave sites stretching from the Black Sea region all the way to Warring States era archaeological sites in Inner Mongolia (at Aluchaideng) and Shaanxi (at Keshengzhuang) in China.\nThe expansion of Scythian cultures, stretching from the Hungarian plain and the Carpathian Mountains to the Chinese Gansu Corridor, and linking the Middle East with Northern India and the Punjab, undoubtedly played an important role in the development of the Silk Road. Scythians accompanied the Assyrian Esarhaddon on his invasion of Egypt, and their distinctive triangular arrowheads have been found as far south as Aswan. These nomadic peoples were dependent upon neighbouring settled populations for a number of important technologies, and in addition to raiding vulnerable settlements for these commodities, they also encouraged long-distance merchants as a source of income through the enforced payment of tariffs. Sogdians played a major role in facilitating trade between China and Central Asia along the Silk Roads as late as the 10th century, their language serving as a \"lingua franca\" for Asian trade as far back as the 4th century.\nInitiation in China (130 BCE).\nThe Silk Road was initiated and spread by China's Han dynasty through exploration and conquests in Central Asia. With the Mediterranean linked to the Fergana Valley, the next step was to open a route across the Tarim Basin and the Hexi Corridor to China Proper. This extension came around 130 BCE, with the embassies of the Han dynasty to Central Asia following the reports of the ambassador Zhang Qian (who was originally sent to obtain an alliance with the Yuezhi against the Xiongnu). Zhang Qian visited directly the kingdom of Dayuan in Ferghana, the territories of the Yuezhi in Transoxiana, the Bactrian country of Daxia with its remnants of Greco-Bactrian rule, and Kangju. He also made reports on neighbouring countries that he did not visit, such as Anxi (Parthia), Tiaozhi (Mesopotamia), Shendu (Indian subcontinent) and the Wusun. Zhang Qian's report suggested the economic reason for Chinese expansion and wall-building westward, and trail-blazed the Silk Road, making it one of the most famous trade routes in history and in the world.\nAfter winning the War of the Heavenly Horses and the Han\u2013Xiongnu War, Chinese armies established themselves in Central Asia, initiating the Silk Route as a major avenue of international trade. Some say that the Chinese Emperor Wu became interested in developing commercial relationships with the sophisticated urban civilizations of Ferghana, Bactria, and the Parthian Empire: \"The Son of Heaven on hearing all this reasoned thus: Ferghana (Dayuan \"Great Ionians\") and the possessions of Bactria (Ta-Hsia) and Parthian Empire (Anxi) are large countries, full of rare things, with a population living in fixed abodes and given to occupations somewhat identical with those of the Chinese people, but with weak armies, and placing great value on the rich produce of China\" (\"Hou Hanshu\", Later Han History). Others say that Emperor Wu was mainly interested in fighting the Xiongnu and that major trade began only after the Chinese pacified the Hexi Corridor.\nThe Chinese were also strongly attracted by the tall and powerful horses (named \"heavenly horses\") in the possession of the Dayuan (literally the \"Great Ionians,\" the Greek kingdoms of Central Asia), which were of capital importance in fighting the nomadic Xiongnu. They defeated the Dayuan in the Han-Dayuan war. The Chinese subsequently sent numerous embassies, around ten every year, to these countries and as far as Seleucid Syria.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thus more embassies were dispatched to Anxi [Parthia], Yancai [who later joined the Alans ], Lijian [Syria under the Greek Seleucids], Tiaozhi (Mesopotamia), and Tianzhu [northwestern India]\u00a0... As a rule, rather more than ten such missions went forward in the course of a year, and at the least five or six. (\"Hou Hanshu\", Later Han History).\nThese connections marked the beginning of the Silk Road trade network that extended to the Roman Empire.\nThe Chinese campaigned in Central Asia on several occasions, and direct encounters between Han troops and Roman legionaries (probably captured or recruited as mercenaries by the Xiong Nu) are recorded, particularly in the 36 BCE battle of Sogdiana (Joseph Needham, Sidney Shapiro). It has been suggested that the Chinese crossbow was transmitted to the Roman world on such occasions, although the Greek gastraphetes provides an alternative origin. R. Ernest Dupuy and Trevor N. Dupuy suggest that in 36 BCE,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[A] Han expedition into Central Asia, west of Jaxartes River, apparently encountered and defeated a contingent of Roman legionaries. The Romans may have been part of Antony's army invading Parthia. Sogdiana (modern Bukhara), east of the Oxus River, on the Polytimetus River, was apparently the most easterly penetration ever made by Roman forces in Asia. The margin of Chinese victory appears to have been their crossbows, whose bolts and darts seem easily to have penetrated Roman shields and armour.\nThe Han dynasty army regularly policed the trade route against nomadic bandit forces generally identified as Xiongnu. Han general Ban Chao led an army of 70,000 mounted infantry and light cavalry troops in the 1st century CE to secure the trade routes, reaching far west to the Tarim Basin. Ban Chao expanded his conquests across the Pamirs to the shores of the Caspian Sea and the borders of Parthia. It was from here that the Han general dispatched envoy Gan Ying to Daqin (Rome). The Silk Road essentially came into being from the 1st century BCE, following these efforts by China to consolidate a road to the Western world and India, both through direct settlements in the area of the Tarim Basin and diplomatic relations with the countries of the Dayuan, Parthians and Bactrians further west. The Silk Roads were a \"complex network of trade routes\" that gave people the chance to exchange goods and culture.\nA maritime Silk Route opened up between Chinese-controlled Giao Ch\u1ec9 (centred in modern Vietnam, near Hanoi), probably by the 1st century. It extended, via ports on the coasts of India and Sri Lanka, all the way to Roman-controlled ports in Roman Egypt and the Nabataean territories on the northeastern coast of the Red Sea. The earliest Roman glassware bowl found in China was unearthed from a Western Han tomb in Guangzhou, dated to the early 1st century BCE, indicating that Roman commercial items were being imported through the South China Sea. According to Chinese dynastic histories, it is from this region that the Roman embassies arrived in China, beginning in 166 CE during the reigns of Marcus Aurelius and Emperor Huan of Han. Other Roman glasswares have been found in Eastern-Han-era tombs (25\u2013220 CE) further inland in Luoyang, Nanyang, and Nanjing.\nRoman Empire (30 BCE \u2013 3rd century CE).\nSoon after the Roman conquest of Egypt in 30\u00a0BCE, regular communications and trade between China, Southeast Asia, India, the Middle East, Africa, and Europe blossomed on an unprecedented scale. The Roman Empire inherited eastern trade routes that were part of the Silk Road from the earlier Hellenistic powers and the Arabs. With control of these trade routes, citizens of the Roman Empire received new luxuries and greater prosperity for the Empire as a whole. The Roman-style glassware discovered in the archeological sites of Gyeongju, the capital of the Silla kingdom (Korea) showed that Roman artifacts were traded as far as the Korean peninsula. The Greco-Roman trade with India started by Eudoxus of Cyzicus in 130\u00a0BCE continued to increase, and according to Strabo (II.5.12), by the time of Augustus, up to 120 ships were setting sail every year from Myos Hormos in Roman Egypt to India. The Roman Empire connected with the Central Asian Silk Road through their ports in Barygaza (present-day Bharuch) and Barbarikon (near present-day Karachi) and continued along the western coast of India. An ancient \"travel guide\" to this Indian Ocean trade route was the Greek Periplus of the Erythraean Sea written in 60\u00a0CE.\nThe travelling party of Ma\u00ebs Titianus penetrated farthest east along the Silk Road from the Mediterranean world, probably with the aim of regularising contacts and reducing the role of middlemen, during one of the lulls in Rome's intermittent wars with Parthia, which repeatedly obstructed movement along the Silk Road. Intercontinental trade and communication became regular, organised, and protected by the \"Great Powers.\" Intense trade with the Roman Empire soon followed, confirmed by the Roman craze for Chinese silk (supplied through the Parthians), even though the Romans thought silk was obtained from trees. This belief was affirmed by Seneca the Younger in his Phaedra and by Virgil in his Georgics. Notably, Pliny the Elder knew better. Speaking of the \"bombyx\" or silk moth, he wrote in his Natural Histories \"They weave webs, like spiders, that become a luxurious clothing material for women, called silk.\" The Romans traded spices, glassware, perfumes, and silk.\nRoman artisans began to replace yarn with valuable plain silk cloths from China and the Silla Kingdom in Gyeongju, Korea. Chinese wealth grew as they delivered silk and other luxury goods to the Roman Empire, whose wealthy women admired their beauty. The Roman Senate issued, in vain, several edicts to prohibit the wearing of silk, on economic and moral grounds: the import of Chinese silk caused a huge outflow of gold, and silk clothes were considered decadent and immoral.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I can see clothes of silk, if materials that do not hide the body, nor even one's decency, can be called clothes.\u00a0... Wretched flocks of maids labour so that the adulteress may be visible through her thin dress, so that her husband has no more acquaintance than any outsider or foreigner with his wife's body. The Western Roman Empire, and its demand for sophisticated Asian products, collapsed in the fifth century.\nThe unification of Central Asia and Northern India within the Kushan Empire between the first and third centuries reinforced the role of the powerful merchants from Bactria and Taxila. They fostered multi-cultural interaction as indicated by their 2nd century treasure hoards filled with products from the Greco-Roman world, China, and India, such as in the archeological site of Begram.\nThe Silk Road trade did not sell only textiles, jewels, metal and cosmetic, but also slaves, connecting the Silk Road slave trade to the Bukhara slave trade as well as the Black Sea slave trade, particularly slave girls.\nByzantine Empire (6th\u201314th centuries).\nByzantine Greek historian Procopius stated that two Nestorian Christian monks eventually uncovered the way silk was made. From this revelation, monks were sent by the Byzantine Emperor Justinian (ruled 527\u2013565) as spies on the Silk Road from Constantinople to China and back to steal the silkworm eggs, resulting in silk production in the Mediterranean, particularly in Thrace in northern Greece, and giving the Byzantine Empire a monopoly on silk production in medieval Europe. In 568, the Byzantine ruler Justin II was greeted by a Sogdian embassy representing Ist\u00e4mi, ruler of the First Turkic Khaganate, who formed an alliance with the Byzantines against Khosrow I of the Sasanian Empire that allowed the Byzantines to bypass the Sasanian merchants and trade directly with the Sogdians for purchasing Chinese silk. Although the Byzantines had already procured silkworm eggs from China by this point, the quality of Chinese silk was still far greater than anything produced in the West, a fact that is perhaps emphasized by the discovery of coins minted by Justin II found in a Chinese tomb of Shanxi province dated to the Sui dynasty (581\u2013618).\nBoth the \"Old Book of Tang\" and \"New Book of Tang\", covering the history of the Chinese Tang dynasty (618\u2013907), record that a new state called \"Fu-lin\" (\u62c2\u83fb; i.e. Byzantine Empire) was virtually identical to the previous \"Daqin\" (\u5927\u79e6; i.e. Roman Empire). Several \"Fu-lin\" embassies were recorded for the Tang period, starting in 643 with an alleged embassy by Constans II (transliterated as \"Bo duo li\", \u6ce2\u591a\u529b, from his nickname \"K\u014dnstantinos Pogonatos\") to the court of Emperor Taizong of Tang. The \"History of Song\" describes the final embassy and its arrival in 1081, apparently sent by Michael VII Doukas (transliterated as \"Mie li yi ling kai sa\", \u6ec5\u529b\u4f0a\u9748\u6539\u6492, from his name and title Michael VII Parapinak\u0113s Caesar) to the court of Emperor Shenzong of the Song dynasty (960\u20131279).\nHowever, the \"History of Yuan\" claims that a Byzantine man became a leading astronomer and physician in Khanbaliq, at the court of Kublai Khan, Mongol founder of the Yuan dynasty (1271\u20131368) and was even granted the noble title 'Prince of Fu lin' (Chinese: \u62c2\u83fb\u738b; F\u00fa l\u01d0n w\u00e1ng). The Uyghur Nestorian Christian diplomat Rabban Bar Sauma, who set out from his Chinese home in Khanbaliq (Beijing) and acted as a representative for Arghun (a grandnephew of Kublai Khan), traveled throughout Europe and attempted to secure military alliances with Edward I of England, Philip IV of France, Pope Nicholas IV, as well as the Byzantine ruler Andronikos II Palaiologos. Andronikos II had two half-sisters who were married to great-grandsons of Genghis Khan, which made him an in-law with the Yuan-dynasty Mongol ruler in Beijing, Kublai Khan.\nThe \"History of Ming\" preserves an account where the Hongwu Emperor, after founding the Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644), had a supposed Byzantine merchant named Nieh-ku-lun (\u634f\u53e4\u502b) deliver his proclamation about the establishment of a new dynasty to the Byzantine court of John V Palaiologos in September 1371. Friedrich Hirth (1885), Emil Bretschneider (1888), and more recently Edward Luttwak (2009) presumed that this was none other than Nicolaus de Bentra, a Roman Catholic bishop of Khanbilaq chosen by Pope John XXII to replace the previous archbishop John of Montecorvino.\nTang dynasty (7th century).\nAlthough the Silk Road was initially formulated during the reign of Emperor Wu of Han (141\u201387 BCE), it was reopened by the Tang Empire in 639 when Hou Junji conquered the Western Regions, and remained open for almost four decades. It was closed after the Tibetans captured it in 678, but in 699, during Empress Wu's period, the Silk Road reopened when the Tang reconquered the Four Garrisons of Anxi originally installed in 640, once again connecting China directly to the West for land-based trade. The Tang captured the vital route through the Gilgit Valley from Tibet in 722, lost it to the Tibetans in 737, and regained it under the command of the Goguryeo General Gao Xianzhi.\nWhile the Turks were settled in the Ordos region (former territory of the Xiongnu), the Tang government took on the military policy of dominating the central steppe. The Tang dynasty (along with Turkic allies) conquered and subdued Central Asia during the 640s and 650s. During Emperor Taizong's reign alone, large campaigns were launched against not only the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks, but also separate campaigns against the Tuyuhun, the oasis states, and the Xueyantuo. Under Emperor Taizong, Tang general Li Jing conquered the Eastern Turkic Khaganate. Under Emperor Gaozong, Tang general Su Dingfang conquered the Western Turkic Khaganate, an important ally of the Byzantine empire. After these conquests, the Tang dynasty fully controlled the Xiyu, which was the strategic location astride the Silk Road. This led the Tang dynasty to reopen the Silk Road, with this portion named the Tang-Tubo Road (\"Tang-Tibet Road\") in many historical texts.\nThe Tang dynasty established a second Pax Sinica, and the Silk Road reached its golden age, whereby Persian and Sogdian merchants benefited from the commerce between East and West. At the same time, the Chinese empire welcomed foreign cultures, making it very cosmopolitan in its urban centres. In addition to the land route, the Tang dynasty also developed the maritime Silk Route. Chinese envoys had been sailing through the Indian Ocean to India since perhaps the 2nd century BCE, yet, it was during the Tang dynasty that a strong Chinese maritime presence could be found in the Persian Gulf and Red Sea into Persia, Mesopotamia (sailing up the Euphrates River in modern-day Iraq), Arabia, Egypt, Aksum (Ethiopia), and Somalia in the Horn of Africa.\nSogdian\u2013T\u00fcrkic tribes (4th\u20138th centuries).\nThe Silk Road represents an early phenomenon of political and cultural integration due to inter-regional trade. In its heyday, it sustained an international culture that strung together groups as diverse as the Magyars, Armenians, and Chinese. The Silk Road reached its peak in the west during the time of the Byzantine Empire; in the Nile-Oxus section, from the Sassanid Empire period to the Il Khanate period; and in the sinitic zone from the Three Kingdoms period to the Yuan dynasty period. Trade between East and West also developed across the Indian Ocean, between Alexandria in Egypt and Guangzhou in China. Persian Sassanid coins emerged as a means of currency, just as valuable as silk yarn and textiles.\nUnder its strong integrating dynamics on the one hand and the impacts of change it transmitted on the other, tribal societies previously living in isolation along the Silk Road, and pastoralists who were of barbarian cultural development, were drawn to the riches and opportunities of the civilisations connected by the routes, taking on the trades of marauders or mercenaries. \"Many barbarian tribes became skilled warriors able to conquer rich cities and fertile lands and to forge strong military empires.\"\nThe Sogdians dominated the east\u2013west trade after the 4th century up to the 8th century. They were the main caravan merchants of Central Asia. A.V. Dybo noted that \"according to historians, the main driving force of the Great Silk Road were not just Sogdians, but the carriers of a mixed Sogdian-T\u00fcrkic culture that often came from mixed families.\"\nThe Silk Road gave rise to the clusters of military states of nomadic origins in North China, ushered the Nestorian, Manichaean, Buddhist, and later Islamic religions into Central Asia and China.\nIslamic era (8th\u201313th centuries).\nBy the Umayyad era, Damascus had overtaken Ctesiphon as a major trade center until the Abbasid dynasty built the city of Baghdad, which became the most important city along the silk road.\nAt the end of its glory, the routes brought about the largest continental empire ever, the Mongol Empire, with its political centres strung along the Silk Road (Beijing) in North China, Karakorum in central Mongolia, Samarkand in Transoxiana, Tabriz in Northern Iran, realising the political unification of zones previously loosely and intermittently connected by material and cultural goods.\nThe Islamic world expanded into Central Asia during the 8th century, under the Umayyad Caliphate, while its successor the Abbasid Caliphate put a halt to Chinese westward expansion at the Battle of Talas in 751 (near the Talas River in modern-day Kyrgyzstan). However, following the disastrous An Lushan Rebellion (755\u2013763) and the conquest of the Western Regions by the Tibetan Empire, the Tang Empire was unable to reassert its control over Central Asia. Contemporary Tang authors noted how the dynasty had gone into decline after this point. In 848 the Tang Chinese, led by the commander Zhang Yichao, were only able to reclaim the Hexi Corridor and Dunhuang in Gansu from the Tibetans. The Persian Samanid Empire (819\u2013999) centered in Bukhara (Uzbekistan) continued the trade legacy of the Sogdians. The disruptions of trade were curtailed in that part of the world by the end of the 10th century and conquests of Central Asia by the Turkic Islamic Kara-Khanid Khanate, yet Nestorian Christianity, Zoroastrianism, Manichaeism, and Buddhism in Central Asia virtually disappeared.\nDuring the early 13th century Khwarezmia was invaded by the Mongol Empire. The Mongol ruler Genghis Khan had the once vibrant cities of Bukhara and Samarkand burned to the ground after besieging them. However, in 1370 Samarkand saw a revival as the capital of the new Timurid Empire. The Turko-Mongol ruler Timur forcefully moved artisans and intellectuals from across Asia to Samarkand, making it one of the most important trade centers and cultural \"entrep\u00f4ts\" of the Islamic world.\nMongol Empire (13th\u201314th centuries).\nThe Mongol expansion throughout the Asian continent from around 1207 to 1360 helped bring political stability and re-established the Silk Road (via Karakorum and Khanbaliq). It also brought an end to the dominance of the Islamic Caliphate over world trade. Because the Mongols came to control the trade routes, trade circulated throughout the region, though they never abandoned their nomadic lifestyle.\nThe Mongol rulers wanted to establish their capital on the Central Asian steppe, so to accomplish this goal, after every conquest they enlisted local people (traders, scholars, artisans) to help them construct and manage their empire. The Mongols developed overland and maritime routes throughout the Eurasian continent, Black Sea and the Mediterranean in the west, and the Indian Ocean in the south. In the second half of the thirteenth century Mongol-sponsored business partnerships flourished in the Indian Ocean connecting Mongol Middle East and Mongol China\nThe Mongol diplomat Rabban Bar Sauma visited the courts of Europe in 1287\u201388 and provided a detailed written report to the Mongols. Around the same time, the Venetian explorer Marco Polo became one of the first Europeans to travel the Silk Road to China. His tales, documented in \"The Travels of Marco Polo\", opened Western eyes to some of the customs of the Far East. He was not the first to bring back stories, but he was one of the most widely read. He had been preceded by numerous Christian missionaries to the East, such as William of Rubruck, Benedykt Polak, Giovanni da Pian del Carpine, and Andrew of Longjumeau. Later envoys included Odoric of Pordenone, Giovanni de' Marignolli, John of Montecorvino, Niccol\u00f2 de' Conti, and Ibn Battuta, a Moroccan Muslim traveller who passed through the present-day Middle East and across the Silk Road from Tabriz between 1325 and 1354. Some Europeans were also living in China for longer periods around this time. Tombstones of the siblings Caterina and Antonio Vilioni, who died in 1342 and 1344, respectively, were unearthed in the twentieth century in Yangzhou.\nIn the 13th century, efforts were made at forming a Franco-Mongol alliance, with an exchange of ambassadors and (failed) attempts at military collaboration in the Holy Land during the later Crusades. Eventually, the Mongols in the Ilkhanate, after they had destroyed the Abbasid and Ayyubid dynasties, converted to Islam and signed the 1323 Treaty of Aleppo with the surviving Muslim power, the Egyptian Mamluks.\nSome studies indicate that the Black Death, which devastated Europe starting in the late 1340s, may have reached Europe from Central Asia (or China) along the trade routes of the Mongol Empire. One theory holds that Genoese traders coming from the entrep\u00f4t of Trebizond in northern Turkey carried the disease to Western Europe; like many other outbreaks of plague, there is strong evidence that it originated in marmots in Central Asia and was carried westwards to the Black Sea by Silk Road traders.\nDecline (15th century\u2013present).\nThe fragmentation of the Mongol Empire loosened the political, cultural, and economic unity of the Silk Road. Turkmeni marching lords seized land around the western part of the Silk Road from the decaying Byzantine Empire. After the fall of the Mongol Empire, the great political powers along the Silk Road became economically and culturally separated. Accompanying the crystallisation of regional states was the decline of nomad power, partly due to the devastation of the Black Death and partly due to the encroachment of sedentary civilisations equipped with gunpowder.\nSignificant is Armenians' role in making Europe\u2013Asia trade possible by being located in the crossing roads between these two. Armenia had a monopoly on almost all trade roads in this area and a colossal network. From 1700 to 1765, the total export of Persian silk was entirely conducted by Armenians. They were also exporting raisins, coffee beans, figs, Turkish yarn, camel hair, various precious stones, rice, etc., from Turkey and Iran.\nThe silk trade continued to flourish until it was disrupted by the collapse of the Safavid Empire in the 1720s.\nExpansion of religions.\nRichard Foltz, Xinru Liu, and others have described how trading activities along the Silk Road over many centuries facilitated the transmission not just of goods but also ideas and culture, notably in the area of religions. Zoroastrianism, Judaism, Buddhism, Christianity, Manichaeism, and Islam all spread across Eurasia through trade networks that were tied to specific religious communities and their institutions. Notably, established Buddhist monasteries along the Silk Road offered a haven, as well as a new religion for foreigners.\nThe spread of religions and cultural traditions along the Silk Roads, according to Jerry H. Bentley, also led to syncretism. One example was the encounter with the Chinese and Xiongnu nomads. These unlikely events of cross-cultural contact allowed both cultures to adapt to each other as an alternative. The Xiongnu adopted Chinese agricultural techniques, dress style, and lifestyle, while the Chinese adopted Xiongnu military techniques, some dress style, music, and dance. Perhaps most surprising of the cultural exchanges between China and the Xiongnu, Chinese soldiers sometimes defected and converted to the Xiongnu way of life, and stayed in the steppes for fear of punishment.\nNomadic mobility played a key role in facilitating inter-regional contacts and cultural exchanges along the ancient Silk Roads.\nTransmission of Christianity.\nThe transmission of Christianity was primarily known as Nestorianism on the Silk Road. In 781, an inscribed stele shows Nestorian Christian missionaries arriving on the Silk Road. Christianity had spread both east and west, simultaneously bringing Syriac language and evolving the forms of worship.\nTransmission of Buddhism.\nThe transmission of Buddhism to China via the Silk Road began in the 1st century CE, according to a semi-legendary account of an ambassador sent to the West by the Chinese Emperor Ming (58\u201375). During this period Buddhism began to spread throughout Southeast, East, and Central Asia. Mahayana, Theravada, and Vajrayana are the three primary forms of Buddhism that spread across Asia via the Silk Road.\nThe Buddhist movement was the first large-scale missionary movement in the history of world religions. Chinese missionaries were able to assimilate Buddhism, to an extent, to native Chinese Daoists, which brought the two beliefs together. Buddha's community of followers, the Sangha, consisted of male and female monks and laity. These people moved through India and beyond to spread the ideas of Buddha. As the number of members within the Sangha increased, it became costly so that only the larger cities were able to afford having the Buddha and his disciples visit. It is believed that under the control of the Kushans, Buddhism was spread to China and other parts of Asia from the middle of the first century to the middle of the third century. Extensive contacts started in the 2nd century, probably as a consequence of the expansion of the Kushan empire into the Chinese territory of the Tarim Basin, due to the missionary efforts of a great number of Buddhist monks to Chinese lands. The first missionaries and translators of Buddhists scriptures into Chinese were either Parthian, Kushan, Sogdian, or Kuchean.\nOne result of the spread of Buddhism along the Silk Road was displacement and conflict. The Greek Seleucids were exiled to Iran and Central Asia because of a new Iranian dynasty called the Parthians at the beginning of the 2nd century BCE, and as a result, the Parthians became the new middlemen for trade in a period when the Romans were major customers for silk. Parthian scholars were involved in one of the first-ever Buddhist text translations into the Chinese language. Its main trade centre on the Silk Road, the city of Merv, in due course and with the coming of age of Buddhism in China, became a major Buddhist centre by the middle of the 2nd century. Knowledge among people on the silk roads also increased when Emperor Ashoka of the Maurya dynasty (268\u2013239 BCE) converted to Buddhism and raised the religion to official status in his northern Indian empire.\nFrom the 4th century CE onward, Chinese pilgrims also started to travel on the Silk Road to India to get improved access to the original Buddhist scriptures, with Fa-hsien's pilgrimage to India (395\u2013414), and later Xuanzang (629\u2013644) and Hyecho, who traveled from Korea to India. The travels of the priest Xuanzang were fictionalized in the 16th century in a fantasy adventure novel called \"Journey to the West\", which told of trials with demons and the aid given by various disciples on the journey.\nThere were many different schools of Buddhism travelling on the Silk Road. The Dharmaguptakas and the Sarvastivadins were two of the major Nikaya schools. These were both eventually displaced by the Mahayana, also known as \"Great Vehicle.\" This movement of Buddhism first gained influence in the Khotan region. The Mahayana, which was more of a \"pan-Buddhist movement\" than a school of Buddhism, appears to have begun in northwestern India or Central Asia. It formed during the 1st century BCE and was small at first, and the origins of this \"Greater Vehicle\" are not fully clear. Some Mahayana scripts were found in northern Pakistan, but the main texts are still believed to have been composed in Central Asia along the Silk Road. These different schools and movements of Buddhism were a result of the diverse and complex influences and beliefs on the Silk Road. With the rise of Mahayana Buddhism, the initial direction of Buddhist development changed. This form of Buddhism highlighted, as stated by Xinru Liu, \"the elusiveness of physical reality, including material wealth\". It also stressed getting rid of material desire to a certain point; this was often difficult for followers to understand.\nDuring the 5th and 6th centuries CE, merchants played a large role in the spread of religion, in particular Buddhism. Merchants found the moral and ethical teachings of Buddhism an appealing alternative to previous religions. As a result, merchants supported Buddhist monasteries along the Silk Road, and in return, the Buddhists gave the merchants somewhere to stay as they traveled from city to city. As a result, merchants spread Buddhism to foreign encounters as they traveled. Merchants also helped to establish diaspora within the communities they encountered, and over time their cultures became based on Buddhism. As a result, these communities became centers of literacy and culture with well-organized marketplaces, lodging, and storage. The voluntary conversion of Chinese ruling elites helped the spread of Buddhism in East Asia and led Buddhism to become widespread in Chinese society. The Silk Road transmission of Buddhism essentially ended around the 7th century with the rise of Islam in Central Asia.\nJudaism on the Silk Road.\nAdherents to the Jewish faith first began to travel eastward from Mesopotamia following the Persian conquest of Babylon in 559 by the armies of Cyrus the Great. Judean slaves freed after the Persian conquest of Babylon dispersed throughout the Persian Empire. Some Judeans could have traveled as far east as Bactria and Sogdia, though there is no clear evidence for this early settlement of Judeans. After settlement, it is likely that most Judeans took up trades in commerce. Trading along the silk trade networks by Judean merchants increased as the trade networks expanded. By the classical age, when trade goods traveled from as far east as China to as far west as Rome, Judean merchants in Central Asia would have been in an advantageous position to participate in trade along the Silk Road. A group of Judean merchants originating from Gaul known as the Radanites were one group of Judean merchants that had thriving trade networks from China to Rome. This trade was facilitated by a positive relationship the Radanites were able to foster with the Khazar Turks. The Khazar Turks served as a good spot in between China and Rome, and the Khazar Turks saw a relationship with the Radanites as a good commercial opportunity.\nAccording to Richard Foltz \"there is more evidence for Iranian influence on the formation of Jewish [religious] ideas than the reverse.\" Concepts of a paradise (heaven) for the good and a place of suffering (hell) for the wicked, and a form of world-ending apocalypse came from Iranian religious ideas, and this is supported by a lack of such ideas from pre-exile Judean sources. The origin of the devil is also said to come from the Iranian Angra Mainyu, an evil figure in Persian mythology.\nExpansion of the arts.\nMany artistic influences were transmitted via the Silk Road, particularly through Central Asia, where Hellenistic, Iranian, Indian and Chinese influences could intermix. Greco-Buddhist art represents one of the most vivid examples of this interaction. Silk was also a representation of art, serving as a religious symbol. Most importantly, silk was used as currency for trade along the silk road.\nThese artistic influences can be seen in the development of Buddhism where, for instance, Buddha was first depicted as human in the Kushan period. Many scholars have attributed this to Greek influence. The mixture of Greek and Indian elements can be found in later Buddhist art in China and throughout countries on the Silk Road.\nThe production of art consisted of many different items that were traded along the Silk Roads from the East to the West. One common product, the lapis lazuli, was a blue stone with golden specks, which was used as paint after it was ground into powder.\nCommemoration.\nOn 22 June 2014, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) named the Silk Road a World Heritage Site at the 2014 Conference on World Heritage. The United Nations World Tourism Organization has been working since 1993 to develop sustainable international tourism along the route with the stated goal of fostering peace and understanding.\nTo commemorate the Silk Road becoming a UNESCO World Heritage Site, the China National Silk Museum announced a \"Silk Road Week\" to take place 19\u201325 June 2020. Bishkek and Almaty each have a major east\u2013west street named after the Silk Road (, \"Jibek Jolu\" in Bishkek, and , \"Jibek Joly\" in Almaty).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54254", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54254", "title": "Silk road", "text": ""}
{"id": "54255", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54255", "title": "Euphorbiales", "text": "Order of flowering plants\nEuphorbiales is an order of flowering plants that is not currently recognized in the most authoritative modern treatment of plant taxonomy. In the APG II system (2003) the plants involved are mostly placed in the order Malpighiales. \nA well known system that did recognize the order was the Cronquist system (1981) which placed the order in subclass Rosidae and used this circumscription:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54256", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54256", "title": "Cementation", "text": "Cementation may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54257", "revid": "42342156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54257", "title": "Desktop publishing", "text": "Page layout using a personal computer\nDesktop publishing (DTP) is the creation of documents using dedicated software on a personal (\"desktop\") computer. It was first used almost exclusively for print publications, but now it also assists in the creation of various forms of online content. Desktop publishing software can generate page layouts and produce text and image content comparable to the simpler forms of traditional typography and printing. This technology allows individuals, businesses, and other organizations to self-publish a wide variety of content, from menus to magazines to books, without the expense of commercial printing.\nDesktop publishing often requires the use of a personal computer and WYSIWYG page layout software to create documents for either large-scale publishing or small-scale local printing and distribution\u00a0\u2013 although non-WYSIWYG systems such as TeX and LaTeX are also used, especially in scientific publishing. Originally, desktop publishing methods provided more control over design, layout, and typography than word processing software but the latter has evolved to include most, if not all, capabilities previously available only with dedicated desktop publishing software.\nThe same DTP skills and software used for common paper and book publishing are sometimes used to create graphics for point of sale displays, presentations, infographics, brochures, business cards, promotional items, trade show exhibits, retail package designs and outdoor signs.\nHistory.\nDesktop publishing was first developed at Xerox PARC in the 1970s. A contradictory claim states that desktop publishing began in 1983 with a program developed by James Davise at a community newspaper in Philadelphia. The program Type Processor One ran on a PC using a graphics card for a WYSIWYG display and was offered commercially by Best Info in 1984. Desktop \"typesetting\" with only limited page makeup facilities arrived in 1978\u20131979 with the introduction of TeX, and was extended in 1985 with the introduction of LaTeX. \nThe desktop publishing market took off in 1985 with the introduction in January of the Apple LaserWriter laser printer for the year-old Apple Macintosh personal computer. \nThis momentum was kept up with the release that July of PageMaker software from Aldus, which rapidly became the standard software application for desktop publishing. With its advanced layout features, PageMaker immediately relegated word processors like Microsoft Word to the composition and editing of purely textual documents. Word did not begin to acquire desktop publishing features until a decade later, and by 2003, it was regarded only as \"good\" and not \"great\" at desktop publishing tasks. The term \"desktop publishing\" is attributed to Aldus founder Paul Brainerd, who sought a marketing catchphrase to describe the small size and relative affordability of this suite of products, in contrast to the expensive commercial phototypesetting equipment of the day. \nBefore the advent of desktop publishing, the only option available to most people for producing typed documents (as opposed to handwritten documents) was a typewriter, which offered only a handful of typefaces (usually fixed-width) and one or two font sizes. Indeed, one popular desktop publishing book was titled \"The Mac is Not a Typewriter\", and it had to actually explain how a Mac could do so much more than a typewriter. The ability to create WYSIWYG page layouts on screen and then print pages containing text and graphical elements at 300 dpi resolution was a major development for the personal computer industry. The ability to do all this with industry standards like PostScript also radically changed the traditional publishing industry, which at the time was accustomed to buying end-to-end turnkey solutions for digital typesetting which came with their own proprietary hardware workstations. Newspapers and other print publications began to transition to DTP-based programs from older layout systems such as Atex and other programs in the early 1980s.\nDesktop publishing was still in its early stage in the early 1980s. Users of the PageMaker/LaserWriter/Macintosh 512K system endured frequent software crashes, Mac's low-resolution 512x342 1-bit monochrome screen, the inability to control letter spacing, kerning, and other typographic features, and the discrepancies between screen display and printed output. However, it was an unheard-of combination at the time, and was received with considerable acclaim.\nBehind the scenes, technologies developed by Adobe Systems set the foundation for professional desktop publishing applications. The LaserWriter and LaserWriter Plus printers included scalable Adobe PostScript fonts built into their ROM memory. The LaserWriter's PostScript capability allowed publication designers to proof files on a local printer, then print the same file at DTP service bureaus using optical resolution 600+ ppi PostScript printers such as those from Linotronic. \nLater, the Macintosh II was released, which was considerably more suitable for desktop publishing due to its greater expandability, support for large color multi-monitor displays, and its SCSI storage interface (which allowed hard drives to be attached to the system). Macintosh-based systems continued to dominate the market into 1986, when the GEM-based Ventura Publisher was introduced for MS-DOS computers. PageMaker's pasteboard metaphor closely simulated the process of creating layouts manually, but Ventura Publisher automated the layout process through its use of tags and style sheets and automatically generated indices and other body matter. This made it particularly suitable for the creation of manuals and other long-format documents.\nDesktop publishing moved into the home market in 1986 with Professional Page for the Amiga, Publishing Partner (now PageStream) for the Atari ST, GST's Timeworks Publisher on the PC and Atari ST, and Calamus for the Atari TT030. Software was published even for 8-bit computers like the Apple II and Commodore 64: Home Publisher, The Newsroom, and geoPublish. \nDuring its early years, desktop publishing acquired a bad reputation as a result of untrained users who created poorly organized, unprofessional-looking \"ransom note effect\" layouts. (Similar criticism was leveled again against early World Wide Web publishers a decade later.) However, some desktop publishers who mastered the programs were able to achieve near professional results. Desktop publishing skills were considered of primary importance in career advancement in the 1980s, but increased accessibility to more user-friendly DTP software has made DTP a secondary skill to art direction, graphic design, multimedia development, marketing communications, and administrative careers. DTP skill levels range from what may be learned in a couple of hours (e.g., learning how to put clip art in a word processor), to what's typically required in a college education. The discipline of DTP skills range from technical skills such as prepress production and programming, to creative skills such as communication design and graphic image development.\n, Apple computers remain dominant in publishing, even as the most popular software has changed from QuarkXPress \u2013 an estimated 95% market share in the 1990s \u2013 to Adobe InDesign. An Ars Technica writer said in an article: \"I've heard about Windows-based publishing environments, but I've never actually seen one in my 20+ years in design and publishing\".\nTerminology.\nThere are two types of pages in desktop publishing: digital pages and virtual paper pages to be printed on physical paper pages. All computerized documents are technically digital, which are limited in size only by computer memory or computer data storage space. Virtual paper pages will ultimately be printed, and will therefore require paper parameters coinciding with standard physical paper sizes such as A4, letter paper and legal paper. Alternatively, the virtual paper page may require a custom size for later trimming. Some desktop publishing programs allow custom sizes designated for large format printing used in posters, billboards and trade show displays. A virtual page for printing has a predesignated size of virtual printing material and can be viewed on a monitor in WYSIWYG format. Each page for printing has trim sizes (edge of paper) and a printable area if bleed printing is not possible as is the case with most desktop printers. A web page is an example of a digital page that is not constrained by virtual paper parameters. Most digital pages may be dynamically re-sized, causing either the content to scale in size with the page or the content to re-flow.\nMaster pages are templates used to automatically copy or link elements and graphic design styles to some or all the pages of a multipage document. Linked elements can be modified without having to change each instance of an element on pages that use the same element. Master pages can also be used to apply graphic design styles to automatic page numbering. Cascading Style Sheets can provide the same global formatting functions for web pages that master pages provide for virtual paper pages. Page layout is the process by which the elements are laid on the page orderly, aesthetically and precisely. The main types of components to be laid out on a page include text, linked images (that can only be modified as an external source), and embedded images (that may be modified with the layout application software). Some embedded images are rendered in the application software, while others can be placed from an external source image file. Text may be keyed into the layout, placed, or \u2013 with database publishing applications \u2013 linked to an external source of text which allows multiple editors to develop a document at the same time.\nGraphic design styles such as color, transparency and filters may also be applied to layout elements. Typography styles may be applied to text automatically with style sheets. Some layout programs include style sheets for images in addition to text. Graphic styles for images may include border shapes, colors, transparency, filters, and a parameter designating the way text flows around the object (also known as \"wraparound\" or \"runaround\").\nComparisons.\nWith word processing.\nAs desktop publishing software still provides extensive features necessary for print publishing, modern word processors now have publishing capabilities beyond those of many older DTP applications, blurring the line between word processing and desktop publishing. \nIn the early 1980s, the graphical user interface was still in its embryonic stage and DTP software was in a class of its own when compared to the leading word processing applications of the time. Programs such as WordPerfect and WordStar were still mainly text-based and offered little in the way of page layout, other than perhaps margins and line spacing. On the other hand, word processing software was necessary for features like indexing and spell checking \u2013 features that are common in many applications today. As computers and operating systems became more powerful, versatile, and user-friendly in the 2010s, vendors have sought to provide users with a single application that can meet almost all their publication needs.\nWith other digital layout software.\nIn earlier modern-day usage, DTP usually did not include digital tools such as TeX or troff, though both can easily be used on a modern desktop system, and are standard with many Unix-like operating systems and are readily available for other systems. The key difference between digital typesetting software and DTP software is that DTP software is generally interactive and \"What you see [onscreen] is what you get\" (WYSIWYG) in design, while other digital typesetting software, such as TeX, LaTeX and other variants, tend to operate in \"batch mode\", requiring the user to enter the processing program's markup language (e.g. HTML) without immediate visualization of the finished product. This kind of workflow is less user-friendly than WYSIWYG, but more suitable for conference proceedings and scholarly articles as well as corporate newsletters or other applications where consistent, automated layout is important. \nIn the 2010s, interactive front-end components of TeX, such as TeXworks and LyX, have produced \"what you see is what you mean\" (WYSIWYM) hybrids of DTP and batch processing. These hybrids are focused more on the semantics than the traditional DTP. Furthermore, with the advent of TeX editors the line between desktop publishing and markup-based typesetting is becoming increasingly narrow as well; a software which separates itself from the TeX world and develops itself in the direction of WYSIWYG markup-based typesetting is GNU TeXmacs.\nOn a different note, there is a slight overlap between desktop publishing and what is known as hypermedia publishing (e.g. web design, kiosk, CD-ROM). Many graphical HTML editors such as Microsoft FrontPage and Adobe Dreamweaver use a layout engine similar to that of a DTP program. However, many web designers still prefer to write HTML without the assistance of a WYSIWYG editor, for greater control and ability to fine-tune the appearance and functionality. Another reason that some Web designers write in HTML is that WYSIWYG editors often result in excessive lines of code, leading to code bloat that can make the pages hard to troubleshoot.\nWith web design.\nDesktop publishing produces primarily static print or digital media, the focus of this article. Similar skills, processes, and terminology are used in web design. Digital typography is the specialization of typography for desktop publishing. Web typography addresses typography and the use of fonts on the World Wide Web. Desktop style sheets apply formatting for print, Web Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) provide format control for web display. Web HTML font families map website font usage to the fonts available on the user's web browser or display device.\nSoftware.\nA wide variety of DTP applications and websites are available and are listed separately.\nFile formats.\nThe design industry standard is PDF. The older EPS format is also used and supported by most applications.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54259", "revid": "41376579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54259", "title": "Hamamelidales", "text": "Order of flowering plants\nHamamelidales is an order of flowering plants formerly accepted in a number of systems of plant taxonomy, including the Cronquist system published in 1968 and 1988. The order is not currently accepted in the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group III system of plant taxonomy, the most widely accepted system as molecular systematic studies have suggested that these families are not closely related to each other. The APG II system (2003) assigns them to several different orders: Hamamelidaceae and Cercidiphyllaceae to Saxifragales, Eupteleaceae to Ranunculales, Platanaceae to Proteales, and Myrothamnaceae to Gunnerales. Additional studies of the chloroplast genome have since confirmed that the families moved into the Saxifragales are closely related.\nThe Cronquist system (1981) included the order in subclass Hamamelidae with the circumscription:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54260", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54260", "title": "British sign language", "text": ""}
{"id": "54261", "revid": "28979433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54261", "title": "Nymphaeales", "text": "Order of flowering plants\nThe Nymphaeales are an order of flowering plants, consisting of three families of aquatic plants, the Hydatellaceae, the Cabombaceae, and the Nymphaeaceae (water lilies). It is one of the three orders of basal angiosperms, an early-diverging grade of flowering plants. At least 10 morphological characters unite the Nymphaeales. One of the traits is the absence of a vascular cambium, which is required to produce both xylem (wood) and phloem, which therefore are missing. Molecular synapomorphies are also known.\nThe Plant List, created by the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew and Missouri Botanical Garden recognizes about 70 species in 11 genera within the order, but a phylogenetic study of the genus \"Nymphaea\" implies that the number of species could be more than 90. The difference in species numbers is due almost entirely to the difficulty of delineating species in the genus \"Nymphaea\".\nMost of the species are rhizomatous aquatic herbs with a broad leaf base and large, showy flowers.\nDescription.\nVegetative characteristics.\nNymphaeales are rhizomatous or tuberous, aquatic or sub-aquatic, annual or perennial herbs. The leaves are submerged, floating, or emerged. The floating leaves are 1 mm to 3.2 m wide.\nGenerative characteristics.\nThe plants are bisexual, monoecious or dioecious.\nFossils.\nThe fossil record consists especially of seeds, but also pollen, stems, leaves, and flowers. It extends back to the Cretaceous. The crown group of the Nymphaeales has been estimated to be about 112 million years old. Some have suggested that this age might be too old.\nA basal member of Nymphaeales, \"Monetianthus\", is known from Early Cretaceous Portugal. A fossil member of the Nympheaceae is \"Jaguariba\" from the Early Cretaceous of Brazil. Several Cretaceous-age Cabombaceae genera are also known, including \"Scutifolium\" from Jordan, \"Pluricarpellatia\" from Brazil, and \"Brasenites\" from Kansas. The fossil genus \"Notonuphar\", thought to be a close relative of the modern \"Nuphar\", is known from Eocene-aged sediments from Seymour Island, Antarctica. The genus \"Brasipelta\" Krassilov has been described from the late Cretaceous of Israel. The aquatic plant fossil \"Archaefructus\" from the Early Cretaceous of Liaoning, China possibly also belongs to this group.\nClassification.\nThe Nymphaeales currently include three families and about 70 to 90 species.\nThis order was not part of the APG II system's 2003 plant classification (unchanged from the APG system of 1998), which instead had a broadly circumscribed family Nymphaeaceae (including Cabombaceae) unplaced in any order. The APG III system did separate the Cabombaceae from the Nymphaeaceae and placed them in the order Nymphaeales together with the Hydatellaceae. The family Hydatellaceae was placed among the monocots in previous systems, but a 2007 study found that the family belongs to the Nymphaeales. In the APG IV system, Hydatellaceae, Cabombaceae and Nymphaeaceae are the three families included in the Nymphaeales.\nSome earlier systems, such as Cronquist's system of 1981, often included the Ceratophyllaceae and Nelumbonaceae in the Nymphaeales. Although, the Takhtajan system of 1980 separated the Nelumbonales, the new order was retained alongside the Nymphaeales in the superorder Nymphaeanae.\nThe Cronquist system placed the Nymphaeales in subclass Magnoliidae, in class Magnoliopsida [=dicotyledons]. In addition, Cronquist included the Ceratophyllaceae and split the family Barclayaceae from the Nymphaeaceae. Under the APG II system, the family Cabombaceae was included within the Nymphaeaceae, but could optionally be recognized separately. As of APG III, the two families are recognized separately.\nThe Dahlgren system placed the Nymphaeales with the Piperales in superorder Nymphaeanae, within subclass Magnoliideae (dicotyledons). Thorne's 1992 system (and 2000 revision) placed the Nymphaeales as the sole order in the superorder Nymphaeanae within subclass Magnoliideae (=dicotyledons).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54263", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54263", "title": "Portable document format", "text": ""}
{"id": "54264", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54264", "title": "Peoples Republic of China/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "54266", "revid": "43056943", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54266", "title": "Partition function", "text": "Partition function may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54267", "revid": "14672439", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54267", "title": "Floor and ceiling functions", "text": "Nearest integers from a number\nIn mathematics, the floor function is the function that takes as input a real number x, and gives as output the greatest integer less than or equal to x, denoted \u230a\"x\"\u230b or floor(\"x\"). Similarly, the ceiling function maps x to the least integer greater than or equal to \"x\", denoted \u2308\"x\"\u2309 or ceil(\"x\").\nFor example, for floor: \u230a2.4\u230b \n 2, \u230a\u22122.4\u230b \n \u22123, and for ceiling: \u23082.4\u2309 \n 3, and \u2308\u22122.4\u2309 \n \u22122. \nThe floor of x is also called the integral part, integer part, greatest integer, or entier of x, and was historically denoted [\"x\"] (among other notations). However, the same term, \"integer part\", is also used for truncation towards zero, which differs from the floor function for negative numbers.\nFor an integer n, \u230a\"n\"\u230b \n \u2308\"n\"\u2309 \n \"n\".\nAlthough floor(\"x\" + 1) and ceil(\"x\") produce graphs that appear exactly alike, they are not the same when the value of x is an exact integer. For example, when \"x\" \n 2.0001, \u230a2.0001 + 1\u230b \n \u23082.0001\u2309 \n 3. However, if \"x\" \n 2, then \u230a2 + 1\u230b \n 3, while \u23082\u2309 \n 2. \nNotation.\nThe \"integral part\" or \"integer part\" of a number ( in the original) was first defined in 1798 by Adrien-Marie Legendre in his proof of the Legendre's formula.\nCarl Friedrich Gauss introduced the square bracket notation [\"x\"] in his third proof of quadratic reciprocity (1808). This remained the standard in mathematics until Kenneth E. Iverson introduced, in his 1962 book \"A Programming Language\", the names \"floor\" and \"ceiling\" and the corresponding notations \u230a\"x\"\u230b and \u2308\"x\"\u2309. (Iverson used square brackets for a different purpose, the Iverson bracket notation.) Both notations are now used in mathematics, although Iverson's notation will be followed in this article.\nIn some sources, boldface or double brackets \u27e6\"x\"\u27e7 are used for floor, and reversed brackets \u27e7\"x\"\u27e6 or ]\"x\"[ for ceiling.\nThe fractional part is the sawtooth function, denoted by {\"x\"} for real x and defined by the formula\n{\"x\"} = \"x\" \u2212 \u230a\"x\"\u230b\nFor all \"x\",\n0 \u2264 {\"x\"} &lt; 1.\nThese characters are provided in Unicode: \nIn the LaTeX typesetting system, these symbols can be specified with the codice_1 and codice_2 commands in math mode. LaTeX has supported UTF-8 since 2018, so the Unicode characters can now be used directly. Larger versions arecodice_3 and codice_4.\nDefinition and properties.\nGiven real numbers \"x\" and \"y\", integers \"m\" and \"n\" and the set of integers formula_1, floor and ceiling may be defined by the equations\nformula_2\nformula_3\nSince there is exactly one integer in a half-open interval of length one, for any real number \"x\", there are unique integers \"m\" and \"n\" satisfying the equation\nformula_4\nwhere formula_5\u00a0and formula_6\u00a0may also be taken as the definition of floor and ceiling.\nEquivalences.\nThese formulas can be used to simplify expressions involving floors and ceilings.\nformula_7\nIn the language of order theory, the floor function is a residuated mapping, that is, part of a Galois connection: it is the upper adjoint of the function that embeds the integers into the reals.\nformula_8\nThese formulas show how adding an integer n to the arguments affects the functions:\nformula_9\nThe above are never true if n is not an integer; however, for every x and y, the following inequalities hold:\nformula_10\nMonotonicity.\nBoth floor and ceiling functions are monotonically non-decreasing functions:\nformula_11\nRelations among the functions.\nIt is clear from the definitions that\nformula_12 with equality if and only if \"x\" is an integer, i.e.\nformula_13\nIn fact, for integers \"n\", both floor and ceiling functions are the identity:\nformula_14\nNegating the argument switches floor and ceiling and changes the sign:\nformula_15\nand:\nformula_16\nformula_17\nNegating the argument complements the fractional part:\nformula_18\nThe floor, ceiling, and fractional part functions are idempotent:\nformula_19\nThe result of nested floor or ceiling functions is the innermost function:\nformula_20\ndue to the identity property for integers.\nQuotients.\nIf \"m\" and \"n\" are integers and \"n\" \u2260 0,\nformula_21\nIf \"n\" is positive\nformula_22\nformula_23\nIf \"m\" is positive\nformula_24\nformula_25\nFor \"m\" = 2 these imply\nformula_26\nMore generally, for positive \"m\" (See Hermite's identity)\nformula_27\nformula_28\nThe following can be used to convert floors to ceilings and vice versa (with \"m\" being positive)\nformula_29\nformula_30\nFor all \"m\" and \"n\" strictly positive integers:\nformula_31\nwhich, for positive and coprime \"m\" and \"n\", reduces to\nformula_32\nand similarly for the ceiling and fractional part functions (still for positive and coprime \"m\" and \"n\"),\nformula_33\nformula_34\nSince the right-hand side of the general case is symmetrical in \"m\" and \"n\", this implies that\nformula_35\nMore generally, if \"m\" and \"n\" are positive,\nformula_36\nThis is sometimes called a reciprocity law.\nDivision by positive integers gives rise to an interesting and sometimes useful property. Assuming formula_37,\nformula_38\nSimilarly,\nformula_39\nIndeed,\nformula_40 \nkeeping in mind that formula_41\nThe second equivalence involving the ceiling function can be proved similarly.\nFor \"d\" being a positive integer with \"x\" greater than \"d\". Then \nformula_42\n where formula_43 is the remainder of dividing formula_44 by \"d\"\nNested divisions.\nFor a positive integer \"n\", and arbitrary real numbers \"m\" and \"x\":\n formula_45\nContinuity and series expansions.\nNone of the functions discussed in this article are continuous, but all are piecewise linear: the functions formula_46, formula_47, and formula_48 have discontinuities at the integers.\nformula_46 is upper semi-continuous and formula_47 and formula_48 are lower semi-continuous.\nSince none of the functions discussed in this article are continuous, none of them have a power series expansion. Since floor and ceiling are not periodic, they do not have uniformly convergent Fourier series expansions. The fractional part function has Fourier series expansion\nformula_52\nfor x not an integer.\nAt points of discontinuity, a Fourier series converges to a value that is the average of its limits on the left and the right, unlike the floor, ceiling and fractional part functions: for \"y\" fixed and \"x\" a multiple of \"y\" the Fourier series given converges to \"y\"/2, rather than to \"x\"\u00a0mod\u00a0\"y\"\u00a0=\u00a00. At points of continuity the series converges to the true value.\nUsing the formula formula_53 gives\nformula_54 \nfor x not an integer.\nApplications.\nMod operator.\nFor an integer \"x\" and a positive integer \"y\", the modulo operation, denoted by \"x\" mod \"y\", gives the value of the remainder when \"x\" is divided by \"y\". This definition can be extended to real \"x\" and \"y\", \"y\" \u2260 0, by the formula\nformula_55\nThen it follows from the definition of floor function that this extended operation satisfies many natural properties. Notably, \"x\" mod \"y\" is always between 0 and \"y\", i.e.,\nif \"y\" is positive,\nformula_56\nand if \"y\" is negative,\nformula_57\nQuadratic reciprocity.\nGauss's third proof of quadratic reciprocity, as modified by Eisenstein, has two basic steps.\nLet \"p\" and \"q\" be distinct positive odd prime numbers, and let formula_58 formula_59\nFirst, Gauss's lemma is used to show that the Legendre symbols are given by\nformula_60\nThe second step is to use a geometric argument to show that\nformula_61\nCombining these formulas gives quadratic reciprocity in the form\nformula_62\nThere are formulas that use floor to express the quadratic character of small numbers mod odd primes \"p\":\nformula_63\nRounding.\nFor an arbitrary real number formula_64, rounding formula_64 to the nearest integer with tie breaking towards positive infinity is given by\nformula_66\nrounding towards negative infinity is given as\nformula_67\nIf tie-breaking is away from 0, then the rounding function is\nformula_68\n(where formula_69 is the sign function), and rounding towards even can be expressed with the more cumbersome\nformula_70\nwhich is the above expression for rounding towards positive infinity formula_71 minus an integrality indicator for formula_72.\nRounding a real number formula_64 to the nearest integer value forms a very basic type of quantizer \u2013 a \"uniform\" one. A typical (\"mid-tread\") uniform quantizer with a quantization \"step size\" equal to some value formula_74 can be expressed as\nformula_75,\nNumber of digits.\nThe number of digits in base \"b\" of a positive integer \"k\" is\nformula_76\nNumber of strings without repeated characters.\nThe number of possible strings of arbitrary length that doesn't use any character twice is given by \nformula_77\nwhere:\nFor \"n\" = 26, this comes out to 1096259850353149530222034277.\nFactors of factorials.\nLet \"n\" be a positive integer and \"p\" a positive prime number. The exponent of the highest power of \"p\" that divides \"n\"! is given by a version of Legendre's formula\nformula_79\nwhere formula_80 is the way of writing \"n\" in base \"p\". This is a finite sum, since the floors are zero when \"p\"\"k\" &gt; \"n\".\nBeatty sequence.\nThe Beatty sequence shows how every positive irrational number gives rise to a partition of the natural numbers into two sequences via the floor function.\nEuler's constant (\u03b3).\nThere are formulas for Euler's constant \u03b3 = 0.57721 56649 ... that involve the floor and ceiling, e.g.\nformula_81\nformula_82\nand\nformula_83\nRiemann zeta function (\u03b6).\nThe fractional part function also shows up in integral representations of the Riemann zeta function. It is straightforward to prove (using integration by parts) that if formula_84 is any function with a continuous derivative in the closed interval [\"a\", \"b\"],\nformula_85\nLetting formula_86 for real part of \"s\" greater than 1 and letting \"a\" and \"b\" be integers, and letting \"b\" approach infinity gives\nformula_87\nThis formula is valid for all \"s\" with real part greater than \u22121, (except \"s\" = 1, where there is a pole) and combined with the Fourier expansion for {\"x\"} can be used to extend the zeta function to the entire complex plane and to prove its functional equation.\nFor \"s\" = \"\u03c3\" + \"it\" in the critical strip 0 &lt; \"\u03c3\" &lt; 1,\nformula_88\nIn 1947 van der Pol used this representation to construct an analogue computer for finding roots of the zeta function.\nFormulas for prime numbers.\nThe floor function appears in several formulas characterizing prime numbers. For example, since\nformula_89\nit follows that a positive integer \"n\" is a prime if and only if\nformula_90\nOne may also give formulas for producing the prime numbers. For example, let \"p\"\"n\" be the \"n\"-th prime, and for any integer \"r\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a01, define the real number \"\u03b1\" by the sum\nformula_91\nThen\nformula_92\nA similar result is that there is a number \"\u03b8\" = 1.3064... (Mills' constant) with the property that\nformula_93\nare all prime.\nThere is also a number \"\u03c9\" = 1.9287800... with the property that\nformula_94\nare all prime.\nLet \u03c0(\"x\") be the number of primes less than or equal to \"x\". It is a straightforward deduction from Wilson's theorem that\nformula_95\nAlso, if \"n\" \u2265 2,\nformula_96\nNone of the formulas in this section are of any practical use.\nSolved problems.\nRamanujan submitted these problems to the \"Journal of the Indian Mathematical Society\".\nIf \"n\" is a positive integer, prove that\nSome generalizations to the above floor function identities have been proven.\nUnsolved problem.\nThe study of Waring's problem has led to an unsolved problem:\nAre there any positive integers \"k\" \u2265 6 such that\nformula_97 \nMahler has proved there can only be a finite number of such \"k\"; none are known.\nComputer implementations.\nIn most programming languages, the simplest method to convert a floating point number to an integer does not do floor or ceiling, but truncation. The reason for this is historical, as the first machines used ones' complement and truncation was simpler to implement (floor is simpler in two's complement). FORTRAN was defined to require this behavior and thus almost all processors implement conversion this way. Some consider this to be an unfortunate historical design decision that has led to bugs handling negative offsets and graphics on the negative side of the origin.\nAn arithmetic right-shift of a signed integer formula_64 by formula_99 is the same as formula_100. Division by a power of 2 is often written as a right-shift, not for optimization as might be assumed, but because the floor of negative results is required. Assuming such shifts are \"premature optimization\" and replacing them with division can break software.\nMany programming languages (including C, C++, C#, Java,\nJulia,\nPHP, R, and Python) provide standard functions for floor and ceiling, usually called codice_5 and codice_6, or less commonly codice_7. The language APL uses codice_8 for floor. The J Programming Language, a follow-on to APL that is designed to use standard keyboard symbols, uses codice_9 for floor and codice_10 for ceiling.\nALGOL usescodice_11 for floor.\nIn Microsoft Excel the function codice_12 rounds down rather than toward zero, while codice_13 rounds toward zero, the opposite of what \"int\" and \"floor\" do in other languages. Since 2010 codice_13 has been changed to error if the number is negative. The OpenDocument file format, as used by OpenOffice.org, Libreoffice and others, codice_12 and codice_13 both do floor, and codice_13 has a third argument to reproduce Excel's earlier behavior.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54268", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54268", "title": "John Paul Jones (musician)", "text": "British bassist (born 1946)\nJohn Paul Jones (born John Baldwin; 3 January 1946) is an English musician and record producer who was the bassist and keyboardist for the rock band Led Zeppelin. He was a session musician and arranger when he formed the band with Jimmy Page in 1968. Jones developed a solo career after drummer John Bonham died and Led Zeppelin disbanded in 1980. He has collaborated with musicians in a variety of genres, including the supergroup Them Crooked Vultures with Dave Grohl, Josh Homme, and Alain Johannes. He was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1995 as a member of Led Zeppelin.\nEarly years.\nJohn Baldwin was born in Sidcup, Kent, on 3 January 1946. He started playing piano when he was six, learning from his father, Joe Baldwin, a pianist and arranger for big bands in the 1940s and 1950s, notably with Ambrose and his Orchestra. His mother was also in the music business, which allowed the family to often perform together touring around England as a vaudeville comedy act. His influences ranged from the blues of Big Bill Broonzy and the jazz of Charles Mingus to the classical piano of Sergei Rachmaninoff.\nBecause his parents often toured, Baldwin was sent to boarding school at a young age. He was a student at Christ's College, Blackheath, London where he studied music formally. At the age of 14, Baldwin became choirmaster and organist at a local church. That year, he bought his first bass guitar, a Dallas Tuxedo solid-body electric; later, he bought other basses that he part-exchanged until he bought the 1962 Fender Jazz Bass that he used until 1976. Jones has said he was inspired to take up the bass by the fluid playing of Chicago musician Phil Upchurch on his \"You Can't Sit Down\" LP, which includes a memorable bass solo.\nCareer.\nSession work.\nBaldwin joined his first band, The Deltas, at the age of 15. He then played bass for jazz-rock London group, Jett Blacks, a collective that included guitarist John McLaughlin. His big break came in 1962, when he was hired by Jet Harris and Tony Meehan of the successful British group the Shadows for a two-year stint. Shortly before hiring Baldwin, Harris and Meehan had just had a number 1 hit with \"Diamonds\" (a track on which Jones' bandmate-to-be Jimmy Page had played). Baldwin's collaboration with the Shadows nearly prevented the future formation of Led Zeppelin, when the parties engaged in talks about the possibility of Baldwin replacing their bassist Brian Locking, who left the band in October 1963, but John Rostill was ultimately chosen to fill the position.\nIn 1964, on the recommendation of Meehan, Baldwin began studio session work with Decca Records. From then until 1968, he played on hundreds of recording sessions. He soon expanded his studio work by playing keyboards, arranging and undertaking general studio direction, resulting in his services coming under much demand. He worked with numerous artists including the Rolling Stones on \"Their Satanic Majesties Request\" (Jones' string arrangement is heard on \"She's a Rainbow\"); Herman's Hermits; Donovan (on \"Sunshine Superman\", \"Hurdy Gurdy Man\", and \"Mellow Yellow\"); Jeff Beck; Fran\u00e7oise Hardy; Cat Stevens (on \"Matthew and Son\"); Rod Stewart; Shirley Bassey; Lulu; and numerous others. As well as recording sessions with Dusty Springfield, Jones also played bass for her \"Talk of the Town\" series of performances. His arranging and playing on Donovan's \"Sunshine Superman\" resulted in producer Mickie Most using his services as choice arranger for many of his own projects, with Tom Jones, Nico, Wayne Fontana, the Walker Brothers, and many others. In 1967, Most, as music supervisor, also tasked Jones with arranging the music for Herman's Hermits' theatrical film \"Mrs. Brown, You've Got a Lovely Daughter\", released in January 1968. Such was the extent of Jones' studio work \u2013 amounting to hundreds of sessions \u2013 that he said years later that \"I can't remember three-quarters of the sessions I was on.\"\nIt was during his time as a session player that Baldwin adopted the stage name John Paul Jones. This name was suggested to him by a friend, Andrew Loog Oldham, who had seen a poster for the 1959 film \"John Paul Jones\" in France. He released his first solo recording as John Paul Jones, \"Baja\" (written by Lee Hazlewood and produced by Oldham) / \"A Foggy Day in Vietnam\", as a single on Pye Records in April 1964.\nJones has stated that, as a session musician, he was completing two or three sessions a day, working six or seven days a week. However, by 1968 he was feeling burned out by the heavy workload: \"I was arranging 50 or 60 things a month and it was starting to kill me.\"\nLed Zeppelin.\nFormation.\nDuring his time as a session player, Jones often crossed paths with guitarist Jimmy Page, a fellow session veteran. In June 1966, Page joined the Yardbirds, and in 1967 Jones contributed to that band's \"Little Games\" album. The following winter, during the sessions for Donovan's \"The Hurdy Gurdy Man\", Jones expressed to Page a desire to be part of any projects the guitarist might be planning. Later that year, the Yardbirds disbanded, leaving Page and bassist Chris Dreja to complete previously booked Yardbirds dates in Scandinavia. Before a new band could be assembled, Dreja left to take up photography. Jones, at the suggestion of his wife, asked Page about the vacant position, and the guitarist eagerly invited Jones to collaborate. Page later explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was working at the sessions for Donovan's \"Hurdy Gurdy Man\", and John Paul Jones was looking after the musical arrangements. During a break, he asked me if I could use a bass player in the new group I was forming. He had a proper music training, and he had quite brilliant ideas. I jumped at the chance of getting him.\nVocalist Robert Plant and drummer John Bonham joined the two to form a quartet. Initially dubbed the \"New Yardbirds\" for the Scandinavian dates, the band soon became known as Led Zeppelin.\nContributions.\nJones was responsible for the classic bass lines of the group, notably those in \"Ramble On\" and \"The Lemon Song\" (\"Led Zeppelin II\"), and shifting time signatures, such as those in \"Black Dog\" (\"Led Zeppelin IV\"). As half of Led Zeppelin's rhythm section with drummer John Bonham, Jones shared an appreciation for funk and soul rhythmic grooves which strengthened and enhanced their musical affinity. In an interview he gave to \"Global Bass\" magazine, Jones remarked on this common musical interest:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Yeah, we were both huge Motown and Stax fans and general soul music fans, James Brown fans. Which is one of the reasons why I've always said that Zeppelin was one of the few bands to \"swing\". We actually had a groove in those days. People used to come to our shows and dance, which was great. To see all the women dancing, it was really brilliant. You didn't necessarily see that at a Black Sabbath show or whatever: So we were different in that way. We were a groovy band. We used all our black pop music influences as a key to the rock that went over the top.\nAfter retiring his Fender Jazz Bass (which he had been using since his days with The Shadows in the early 1960s) from touring in 1975, Jones switched to using custom-designed Alembic basses for touring.\nHowever, he still preferred to use the Jazz Bass in the studio and in a 2010 interview mentioned that he still had that bass at the time.\nJones' keyboard skills added an eclectic dimension that realised Led Zeppelin as more than just a hard rock band. Keyboard highlights include the delicate \"The Rain Song\" (\"Houses of the Holy\") played on a Mellotron; the funky \"Trampled Under Foot\", played on a Clavinet (\"Physical Graffiti\"); and the eastern scales of \"Kashmir\", also played on a Mellotron (also on \"Physical Graffiti\"). In live performances, Jones' keyboard showpiece was \"No Quarter\", often lasting for up to half-an-hour and sometimes including snatches of \"Amazing Grace\", Joaqu\u00edn Rodrigo's \"Concierto de Aranjuez\", which had inspired Miles Davis' \"Sketches of Spain\", and variations of classical pieces by composers such as Rachmaninoff.\nJones' diverse contributions to the group extended to the use of other instruments including mandolin, recorder, and an unusual triple-necked acoustic instrument consisting of a six and a twelve string guitar. Jones often used bass pedals to supplement the band's sound while he was playing keyboards and mandolin. On the band's 1977 tour of the United States, Jones would sing lead vocals on \"The Battle of Evermore\", filling in for Sandy Denny, who had sung on the studio version.\nProfile.\nWhile all members of Led Zeppelin had a reputation for off-stage excess (a label that has been claimed was exaggerated), Jones was widely seen as the quietest and most reserved member of the group. For his part, Jones has claimed that he had just as much fun on the road as his bandmates but was more discreet about it, stating \"I did more drugs than I care to remember. I just did it quietly.\" Benoit Gautier, an employee of Atlantic Records in France, echoed this impression, stating that \"The wisest guy in Led Zeppelin was John Paul Jones. Why? He never got caught in an embarrassing situation.\"\nIn an interview, Jones explained that fame with Led Zeppelin was not something that he ever became preoccupied with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Not really; I'd done it all before ... I would like to think that I wasn't too stupid either. I tried to stay out of the drift of the rock star's path, mainly because I needed my sanity and freedom on the road. So generally, I used to check out of the hotel, and then get out on the street. I'd go walking ... I'm not as recognizable as Plant and Page. Plus, I used to change my appearance all the time just to make sure I wasn't as recognizable ... Generally, I'm pretty quickly into the shadows ... I once read the Beatles did a whole tour of America and never left their hotel rooms. And I thought, \"I can't see the point of travelling around the world and not seeing anything.\"\nFollowing exhausting tours and extended periods of time away from his family, by late 1973 Jones was beginning to show signs of disillusionment. He considered quitting Led Zeppelin to spend more time with his family, but was talked into returning by the band's manager, Peter Grant. He joked that he was interested in becoming the choirmaster of Winchester Cathedral, which was reported as fact in several sources. Jones later explained his reservations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I didn't want to harm the group, but I didn't want my family to fall apart either. We toured a huge amount in those early days. We were all very tired and under pressure and it just came to a head. When I first joined the band, I didn't think it would go on for that long, two or three years perhaps, and then I'd carry on with my career as a musician and doing movie music.\n\"Royal Orleans\".\nIt is rumoured that the Led Zeppelin song \"Royal Orleans\", from their album \"Presence\", is about an experience Jones once had on tour in the United States. The song is about a person who mistakenly takes a drag queen up to his hotel room, who then falls asleep with a joint of marijuana in hand, lighting the room on fire. \"Royal Orleans\" was the name of a hotel where the members of Led Zeppelin would stay when they visited New Orleans, because not as many people asked for autographs there. In an interview he gave to \"Mojo magazine\" in 2007, Jones clarified the reliability of this rumour, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The transvestites were actually friends of Richard Cole's; normal friendly people and we were all at some bar. That I mistook a transvestite for a girl is rubbish; that happened in another country to somebody else ... Anyway 'Stephanie' ended up in my room and we rolled a joint or two and I fell asleep and set fire to the hotel room, as you do, ha ha, and when I woke up it was full of firemen!\nOther work.\nJones's involvement with Led Zeppelin did not put a halt to his session work. In 1969 he returned to the studio to play bass guitar on the Family Dogg's \"A Way of Life\" album. Jones was Madeline Bell's first choice to produce and arrange her 1974 album \"Comin' Atcha\". He has also played bass on the opening track for the Roy Harper album \"HQ\", which also featured guitarist David Gilmour. Other contributions include playing bass on Wings' Rockestra, \"Back to the Egg\" along with Zeppelin's drummer John Bonham.\nAfter Led Zeppelin.\n1980\u20132000.\nLed Zeppelin dissolved in 1980 with the death of John Bonham. \"At the time that John died, I had just moved to Devon to bring up my family\", Jones said. \"So, after the split, I was completely out of everything. And I must say I didn't miss it.\"\nJones subsequently collaborated with artists including Diamanda Gal\u00e1s, R.E.M., Jars of Clay, Heart, Ben E. King, Peter Gabriel, Foo Fighters, Lenny Kravitz, Cinderella, The Mission, La Fura dels Baus, the Harp Consort, Brian Eno, the Butthole Surfers, and Uncle Earl.\nHe appeared on sessions and videos for Paul McCartney and was involved in the soundtrack of the film \"Give My Regards to Broad Street\". In 1985, Jones was asked by director Michael Winner to provide the soundtrack for the film \"Scream for Help\", with Jimmy Page appearing on two tracks. Jones provides vocals for two of the songs. He recorded and toured with singer Diamanda Gal\u00e1s on her 1994 album, \"The Sporting Life\" (co-credited to John Paul Jones). In 1985, Jones joined Page and Plant for the Live Aid concert, with Phil Collins and Tony Thompson on drums. The former members again re-formed for the Atlantic Records 40th Anniversary concert on 14 May 1988. Page, Plant and Jones, with John Bonham's son Jason, closed the event. In 1992, Jones arranged the orchestration on the R.E.M. album \"Automatic for the People\".\nIn 1995, the band Heart released a live acoustic album called \"The Road Home\". It was produced by Jones, and featured him playing several instruments. Also in 1995, Andrew Lawrence-King's Harp Consort released a set of three Spanish language songs in 17th-century style of Jones's own composition, accompanied by baroque instruments including harps, chitarrone, guitars, lirone, viola da gamba and percussion (this 10-minute CD, titled \"Amores Pasados\", was coupled with The Harp Consort's debut record, \"Luz y Norte\").\n2000\u2013present.\n\"Zooma\", his debut solo album, was released in September 1999 on Robert Fripp's DGM label and followed up in 2001 by \"The Thunderthief\". Both albums were accompanied by tours, in which he played with Nick Beggs (Chapman Stick) and Terl Bryant (drums).\nIn 2004, he toured as part of the group Mutual Admiration Society, along with Glen Phillips (the front man for the band Toad the Wet Sprocket) and the members of the band Nickel Creek.\nJones plays on two tracks on the Foo Fighters' album \"In Your Honor\". He plays mandolin on \"Another Round\" and piano on \"Miracle\", both of which are on the acoustic disc. The band's frontman Dave Grohl (a big Led Zeppelin fan) has described Jones' guest appearance as the \"second greatest thing to happen to me in my life\".\nHe has also branched out as a record producer, having produced such albums as the Mission's album \"Children\", the Datsuns' second album \"Outta Sight, Outta Mind\" (2004) and Uncle Earl's \"Waterloo, Tennessee\" album of Old-time music, released in March 2007 on Rounder Records.\nIn May 2007, he accompanied Robyn Hitchcock and Ruby Wright in performing the song \"Gigolo Aunt\" at a tribute for Pink Floyd founder Syd Barrett in London, which he did on mandolin.\nHe played at Bonnaroo 2007 in a collaboration with Ben Harper and the Roots' drummer Questlove as part of the festival's all-star Super-Jam, which is the festival's annual tradition of bringing together famous, world-class musicians to jam on stage for a few hours.\nJones appeared and played mandolin with Gillian Welch during the festival during the song \"Look at Miss Ohio\" and a cover of the Johnny Cash song \"Jackson\". He also appeared during the set of Ben Harper &amp; the Innocent Criminals where they played a cover of \"Dazed and Confused\". Jones then closed Gov't Mule's first set, playing part of \"Moby Dick\" and then \"Livin Lovin Maid\" on bass, then proceeded to play keyboards on the songs \"Since I've Been Loving You\" and \"No Quarter\". Jones also performed on mandolin with the all-female bluegrass group Uncle Earl, whose album he had produced in 2007.\nMandolin-slinging Jones jammed on Led Zeppelin's \"Whole Lotta Love\" with Winnipeg's energetic Duhks at April 2007's MerleFest in North Carolina.\nJones played in the Led Zeppelin reunion show at London's O2 Arena on 10 December 2007 with the other remaining members of Led Zeppelin as part of a tribute to Ahmet Ertegun.\nIn 2008, Jones produced Nickel Creek singer-fiddler Sara Watkins' debut solo album. As previously mentioned, Jones toured with Watkins, Glen Phillips, and the rest of Nickel Creek in late 2004 in a collaboration entitled Mutual Admiration Society.\nOn 10 February 2008, Jones appeared with the Foo Fighters on the Grammy Awards conducting the orchestral part to the song \"The Pretender\". On 7 June 2008, Jones and Jimmy Page appeared with the Foo Fighters to close out the band's concert at Wembley Stadium. Jones performed with Sonic Youth and Takehisa Kosugi, providing the stage music for Merce Cunningham's \"Nearly 90\", which ran 16\u201319 April 2009 at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.\nIn 2009\u20132010 he was part of a supergroup with Dave Grohl and Queens of the Stone Age frontman Josh Homme named Them Crooked Vultures. The trio played their first show together on 9 August 2009 at the Metro in Chicago, and their first album\" \"was released on 17 November 2009.\nIn February and March 2011, he appeared in the onstage band in Mark-Anthony Turnage's opera \"Anna Nicole\", about the \"Playboy\" model Anna Nicole Smith, at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, in London. In August 2011, he appeared at Reading and Leeds Festivals to play alongside Seasick Steve. On 16 September 2012, Jones appeared at the Sunflower Jam charity concert at the Royal Albert Hall, London, performing alongside guitarist Brian May of Queen, drummer Ian Paice of Deep Purple, and vocalists Bruce Dickinson of Iron Maiden and Alice Cooper.\nIn November 2012, Jones toured the UK with the Norwegian avant-garde/improvisational band Supersilent. On 6 December 2012, Jones performed on bass, guitar and mandolin with Robyn Hitchcock as 'Biscotti' at Cecil Sharp House, London.\nOn 30 April 2013, Jones appeared live on the BBC TV Show \"Later... with Jools Holland\", playing bass for Seasick Steve on \"Down on the Farm\" from Seasick Steve's new album \"Hubcap Music\". On 1 May 2013, Jones appeared with Seasick Steve at a concert at the Roundhouse in Camden, London. Introduced by Seasick Steve as a member \"of the best rock band ever\", Jones played bass, mandolin, and steel guitar, and provided vocals.\nOn Saturday 29 June 2013, Jones played guitar whilst appearing with Rokia Traor\u00e9, who opened the Pyramid Stage that morning at Glastonbury 2013. He also supported Seasick Steve on the West Holt's stage at the same festival.\nDuring November 2013, Jones joined a seven-day tour of the Southeast US, playing mandolin with the Dave Rawlings Machine. The Atlanta show (21 November 2013) included a rendition Led Zeppelin's \"Going to California.\" Jones also toured with the Dave Rawlings Machine in autumn 2014. On 5 and 6 September 2015, Jones, along with Queen drummer Roger Taylor, joined Foo Fighters on stage in Milton Keynes to perform a cover of Queen's \"Under Pressure,\" with Taylor Hawkins and Dave Grohl singing. Stepping outside his normal genre, he composed three lute songs for the 2015 album Amores Pasados by John Potter, Anna Maria Friman, Ariel Abramovich and Jacob Herringman.\nIn 2017, Jones formed a trio, the \"Tres Coyotes\" with the Finnish composer, Magnus Lindberg and the Finnish cellist, Anssi Karttunen, they have performed in Helsinki (Savoy Theatre 2017), Torino (Torino Jazz Festival 2019) and Strasbourg (Festival Musica 2022). In 2019 he formed a duo, called the \"Sons of Chipotle\" with Anssi Karttunen. The group premiered with a tour in Asia in Seoul at Place Vib and in Tokyo at the Pit Inn in Tokyo, Japan in September of that year. For the Tokyo shows they were joined by musicians Jim O'Rourke and Otomo Yoshihide The band's first scheduled US date at the Big Ears Festival in Knoxville, Tennessee was cancelled in March 2020, due to the COVID-19 outbreak and finally took place at the Big Ears in 2024.\nLegacy.\nJones is widely considered to be one of the most highly influential and important bassists, keyboard players and arrangers in the history of rock music. Many notable rock bassists have been influenced by Jones, including John Deacon of Queen, Tom Hamilton of Aerosmith, Geddy Lee of Rush, Steve Harris of Iron Maiden, Flea of Red Hot Chili Peppers, Gene Simmons of Kiss, and Krist Novoselic of Nirvana. Chris Dreja, the rhythm guitarist and bassist of the Yardbirds, has described him as \"the best bass player in Europe\". Music publications and magazines have ranked Jones among the best rock bassists of all time. He was named the best bassist on \"Creem Magazine\"'s 1977 Reader Poll. In 2000, \"Guitar\" magazine ranked him third in the \"Bassist of the Millennium\" readers' poll. \"Rolling Stone\" magazine ranked him number 14 on its list of the \"50 Greatest Bassists of All Time\" in 2020.\nIn October 2010, Jones was awarded a \"Gold Badge Award\" by The British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors for his outstanding contribution to Britain's music and entertainment industry. On 10 November 2010, he was honoured with the \"Outstanding Contribution Award\" at the Marshall \"Classic Rock\" Roll of Honour Awards. In 2014, Jones ranked first on \"Paste\" magazine's list of \"20 Most Underrated Bassists.\"\nPersonal life.\nJones married Maureen Hegarty in 1967; they reside in west London. They have three daughters. According to \"The Sunday Times\" Rich List 2009, Jones's net worth was \u00a340\u00a0million.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54272", "revid": "15371737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54272", "title": "Sevilla", "text": ""}
{"id": "54273", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54273", "title": "Repertory theatre", "text": "Theatre in which a resident company presents works from a specified repertoire\nA repertory theatre, also called repertory, rep, true rep or stock, which are also called producing theatres, is a theatre in which a resident company presents works from a specified repertoire, usually in alternation or rotation.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAnnie Horniman founded the first modern repertory theatre in Manchester after withdrawing her support from the Abbey Theatre in Dublin. Horniman's Gaiety Theatre opened its first season in September 1908. The opening of the Gaiety was followed by the Citizens' Theatre in Glasgow, the Liverpool Repertory Theatre and the Birmingham Repertory Theatre. Previously, regional theatre relied on mostly London touring ensembles. During the time the theatre was being run by Annie Horniman, a wide variety of types of plays were produced. Horniman encouraged local writers who became known as the Manchester School of playwrights. They included Allan Monkhouse, Harold Brighouse\u2014writer of \"Hobson's Choice\"\u2014and Stanley Houghton, who wrote \"Hindle Wakes\". Actors who performed at the Gaiety early in their careers included Sybil Thorndike and Basil Dean. \nFrom the 1930s to the 1960s, two impresarios dominated the field of British rep, mostly in the North. They were Harry Hanson and his Court players, and Frank H. Fortescue's Famous Players, with the Arthur Brough Players in Folkestone in the South. When an actor joined one of their companies, it could mean \"twice-nightly\" shows, and a new play to learn every week. Actress Rosemary Harris has told of her 50 consecutive weeks of doing that at Bedford rep. However, this is no longer possible, owing to restrictions from British Equity, which came to mandate just eight shows a week, including perhaps two matin\u00e9es.\nThe practice of repertory (\"rep\") is still seen in large cities. Actors now have the luxury of at least three weeks of rehearsal, however. Repertory can still be found in the UK in a variation of guises: in Sidmouth (12 plays), Wolverhampton (eight), and Burslem and Taunton (four each). The Sheringham Little Theatre produces an in-house repertory season each summer, running from June until September. Weekly repertory theatre is also produced by the Summer Theatre season at Frinton-on-Sea.\nCanada.\nOrganizations in Canada include North America's largest classical repertory theatre company, the Stratford Festival, founded in 1953 primarily to present productions of William Shakespeare's plays. Canada also hosts North America's second largest repertory theatre company, the Shaw Festival, founded in 1962, which presents plays written by or set during the lifetime of Bernard Shaw, or that follow Shaw's ideal of socially provocative theatre. However, Canadian repertory companies follow a model that differs somewhat from the years-long rotation repertory system found in Europe. In Canada, productions often stay on the repertory for one season, running in repertory with other productions in the same year. The actors are not employed full time long term, but instead work on contracts usually maximum 8 months long.\nThe Vagabond Repertory Theatre Company was formed in March 2009 by artistic directors Nathaniel Fried and Ryan LaPlante, and currently resides and performs in Kingston, Ontario. It shuttered in 2019. The old English-style repertory theatres such as Ottawa's CRT (Canadian Repertory Theatre) and Toronto's Crest Theatre no longer exist\u2014although they did have a version of summer theatre in smaller holiday districts, such as the \"Straw Hat\" players of Gravenhurst and Port Carling at Ontario's vacation Muskoka Lakes area.\nState-subsidized theatres on continental Europe have been suggested as the origin of the repertoire tradition.\nOne of the earliest examples of this system is the Moscow Art Theatre circa 1898. An even earlier example are the theatres of Germany. See the Deutsches Theater, a privately owned German theatre founded in 1883 to produce plays in rep. While variations appeared before, the modern repertory system did not become popular until the twentieth century.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the repertory system has also found a base to compete with commercial theatre. Many summer stock theatre companies are repertory in nature. College students and young professionals making up much of the acting company are supported by guest stars or actors who are further along in their careers.\nRepertory theatre with mostly changing casts and longer-running plays, perhaps better classed as \"provincial\" or \"non-profit\" theatre, has made a big comeback in cities such as Little Rock, AR, Washington, DC, Minneapolis, Indianapolis, Milwaukee, Cincinnati, Chicago, Los Angeles, Nashville, New York, Houston, Boston, San Francisco, San Diego, Buffalo, Kansas City, and Seattle. Festival theatre now provides actors with work in the summer. There are many ways to rehearse repertory theatre. The most prolific American repertory theatres are an example of that. Utah Shakespeare Festival rehearses two plays a day split between an eight hour period. This is common. Some theatres only rehearse one play a day and add shows into rotation as the season progresses, like The American Shakespeare Center. They rehearse one play for a little over two weeks before it opens; then, they begin the next one. The length of rehearsal also varies. American Players Theatre has a six-week-long rehearsal period compared to Oregon Shakespeare Festival's eleven-week-long one.\nAmerica's oldest resident repertory theatre, Hedgerow Theatre, is located in Rose Valley, Pennsylvania. It was founded by actor Jasper Deeter in 1923. The present producing artistic director is actress and director Penelope Reed. Other notable repertory theatres include the Guthrie Theater, which was set up as a regional repertory theatre concept that is free from commercial constraints in the choice of repertoire. It is aligned in objectives to the repertory and resident theatre movement that emerged in the United States in the 1960s. This sought to establish an alternative and decentralized theatre network outside of New York, one which would have non-profit-making status and would be focused on the art of the theatre as well as the development of artists, craftsmen, and administrators. Publicly funded theatres that belong to this type have been receiving erratic support since the 1980s.\nThe Association of Producing Artists (APA) was one of the most successful repertory theatres in the United States, touring for four years and holding residencies in several cities before finally joining the Phoenix Theatre in New York City, where it was known for staging plays with modest prices. Currently, the American Repertory Theatre is considered one of the most distinguished repertory theatres in the United States. Since its foundation in 1979, it has earned several awards including a Pulitzer Prize (1982), a Tony Award (1986), and a Jujamcyn Award (1985).\nEastern Europe.\nIn Russia and much of Eastern Europe, repertory theatre is based on the idea that each company maintains a number of productions that are performed on a rotating basis. Each production's life span is determined by its success with the audience. However, many productions remain in repertory for years as this approach presents each piece a few times in a given season, not enough to exhaust the potential audience pool. After the fall of the Soviet regime and the substantial diminution of government subsidy, the repertory practice has required re-examination. Moscow Art Theatre and Lev Dodin's Maly Drama Theatre of St. Petersburg are the world's most notable practitioners of this approach.\nRotation Repertory system is still the most commonly used business model of live theatre in Eastern and Central Europe, specifically in countries such as Austria, Serbia, Croatia, Slovenia, Slovakia and Czech Republic.\nIn Germany, most publicly funded theatres and some private theatres (such as the Schaub\u00fchne Berlin) run on a repertory system. See (page in German).\nWeekly rep.\nA combination company was a touring theater company which performed only one play. Unlike repertory companies, which performed multiple plays in rotation, combination companies used more elaborate and specialised scenery in their productions.\nA similar term, \"weekly rep,\" denotes a British movement started in the early 1900s that focused on shorter runs of a single new work, rather than having several plays ready to perform at any given time. \nFor weekly rep and for a typical three-act play, the actors' week would start on Tuesday, and go as follows:\nResident company.\nToday, repertory theatres employ a wide range of actors, who can play a variety of types. \nBefore the modern repertory system, acting ensembles were normally made up of the standard stock company and later the touring company. The stock company would usually consist of a leading man and lady, a character actor and actress, younger actors to play romantic roles, and the rest of the actors would be a variety of ages and body types. The acting ensemble was typically around twelve. This was most popular prior to the Restoration. Post Restoration and into the nineteenth century, stock companies remained, but they were joined and then replaced by traveling companies. These ensembles consisted of the stars and actors hired to play a very specific role as a single production toured around. \nExamples of rep performers who went on to become well-known are John Gielgud, Ralph Richardson, Laurence Olivier, Rosemary Harris, Christopher Plummer, Harold Pinter, Peter O'Toole, Jeremy Brett, Geraldine McEwan, Vanessa Redgrave, Judi Dench, Ian McKellen, Michael Gambon, Imelda Staunton and Patrick Stewart. Dirk Bogarde wrote about his start at Amersham rep in 1939, and Michael Caine has recounted his time spent at Horsham rep in the early 1950s.\nThere are many noted Resident companies or repertory companies, such as the Artists Repertory Theatre.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMurray, Stephen. \"Taking Our Amusements Seriously\". LAP, 2010. ."}
{"id": "54275", "revid": "1319461132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54275", "title": "Tisza", "text": "River in Central and Eastern Europe\nThe Tisza, Tysa or Tisa (see below) is one of the major rivers of Central and Eastern Europe. It was once called \"the most Hungarian river\" because it flowed entirely within the territory of the Kingdom of Hungary. Today, it crosses several national borders.\nThe Tisza begins near Rakhiv in Ukraine, at the confluence of the White Tisza and Black Tisza, which is at coordinates (the former springs in the Chornohora mountains; the latter in the Gorgany range). From there, the Tisza flows west, roughly following Ukraine's borders with Romania and Hungary, then briefly forming the border between Slovakia and Hungary, before entering into Hungary, and finally into Serbia. The Tisza enters Hungary at Tiszabecs, traversing the country from north to south. A few kilometers south of the Hungarian city of Szeged, it enters Serbia. Finally, it joins the Danube near the village of Stari Slankamen in Vojvodina, Serbia.\nThe Tisza drains an area of about and has a length of Its mean annual discharge is seasonally to . It contributes about 13% of the Danube's total runoff.\nAttila the Hun is said to have been buried under a diverted section of the river Tisza.\nNames and etymology.\nThe river was known as the \"Tisia\" in antiquity; other ancient names for it included \"Pathissus\" (; later ). It may be referred to as the \"Theiss\" in older English references, after the German name for the river, . It is known as the in Italian, and in older French references (as for instance in relation to the naval battles on the Danube between the Ottoman Empire and the Habsburg Empire in the 17th and 18th centuries) it is often referred to as the .\nAnother theory is that it is derived from Proto-Balto-Slavic meaning 'still, quiet' to describe the river.\nModern names for the Tisza in the languages of the countries it flows through include:\nRegulation.\nThe length of the Tisza in Hungary used to be . It flowed through the Great Hungarian Plain, which is one of the largest flat areas in central Europe. Since plains can cause a river to flow very slowly, the Tisza used to follow a path with many curves and turns, which led to many large floods in the area.\nAfter several small-scale attempts, Istv\u00e1n Sz\u00e9chenyi organised the \"regulation of the Tisza\" () which started on August 27 1846, and substantially ended in 1880. The new length of the river in Hungary was reduced to in total, with of dead channels and of new riverbed.\nLake Tisza.\nIn the 1970s, the building of the Tisza Dam at Kisk\u00f6re started with the purpose of helping to control floods as well as storing water for drought seasons. However, the resulting Lake Tisza became one of the most popular tourist destinations in Hungary since it had similar features to Lake Balaton at drastically cheaper prices and was not crowded.\nNavigation.\nThe Tisza is navigable over much of its course. The river opened up for international navigation only recently; previously, Hungary distinguished \"national rivers\" and \"international rivers\", indicating whether non-Hungarian vessels were allowed or not. After Hungary joined the European Union, this distinction was lifted and vessels were allowed on the Tisza.\nWildlife.\nThe Tisza has a rich and varied wildlife. Over 200 species of birds reside in the bird reserve of Tiszaf\u00fcred. The flood plains along the river boast large amounts of diverse plant and animal life. In particular, the yearly \"flowering\" of the Tisza is considered a local natural wonder. The flowering attracts vast numbers of mayflies which is a well known spectacle.\nIn September 2020, colonies of magnificent bryozoans were discovered in the river.\nPollution.\nIn early 2000, there was a sequence of serious pollution incidents originating from accidental industrial discharges in Romania. The first, in January 2000, occurred when there was a release of sludge containing cyanide from a Romanian mine and killed 2000 tons of fish. The second, from a mine pond at Baia Borsa, northern Romania, resulted in the release of of sludge containing zinc, lead and copper occurred in early March 2000. A week later, the third spill occurred at the same mining site at Baia Borsa, staining the river black, possibly including heavy metals.\nThis series of incidents were described at the time as the most serious environmental disaster to hit central Europe since the Chernobyl disaster. Usage of river water for any purpose was temporarily banned and the Hungarian government pressed the Romanians and the European Union to close all installations that could lead to further pollution.\nExamination of river sediments indicates that pollution incidents from mines have occurred for over a century.\nGeography.\nDrainage basin.\nThe Tisza River is part of the Danube River catchment area. It is the tributary with the largest catchment area (~157,000 km2). It accounts for more than 19% of the Danube river basin. The Tisza water system is shared by five countries: Ukraine (8%), Slovakia (10%), Hungary (29%), Romania (46%) and Serbia (7%).\nThe Tisza River Basin area and average discharge (period from 1946\u20132006) by country\nThe 1800\u20132500 m high ridge of the Carpathian Mountains create in a semi circle the northern, eastern and southeastern boundary of the Tisza catchment. The western - southwestern reach of the watershed is comparatively low in some places \u2013 on its Hungarian and Serbian parts it is almost flat. The area is divided roughly along the centreline by the Carpathian Mountains, east of which lies the 400\u2013600 m high plateau of the Transylvanian Basin, and the plains to the west. The highest summits of the river basin reach 1948 m in the Low Tatras (Kr\u00e1\u013eova ho\u013ea), 2061 m in the Chornohora Mountains (Hoverla), 2303 m in the Rodna Mountains (Pietrosul Rodnei) and even higher in the Retezat Mountains of the Southern Carpathians (Peleaga, 2509 m). Areas above elevations higher than 1600 m occupy only 1% of the total; 46% of the territory lies below 200 m. The Tisza River Basin in Slovakia is predominantly hilly area and the highest mountain peak in Kr\u00e1\u013eova ho\u013ea - in the Low Tatras Mountain Range at 1948 m. The lowland area lies in the south, forming the northern edge of the Hungarian Lowland. The lowest point in Slovakia is the village of Streda nad Bodrogom in the eastern Slovak lowland (96 m) in the Bodrog River Basin. The Hungarian and Vojvodina (Serbia) part of the Tisza River Basin is a flat area bordered by small ranges of hills and mountains from the north and dominated by the Hungarian lowland.\nImportant hydrographic stations along the Tisza (full list):\nDischarge.\nAverage, minimum and maximum discharge of the Tisza River at Tiszabecs (Upper Tisza), Szolnok (Middle Tisza) and Senta (Lower Tisza).\nSzeged.\nWater discharge of the Tisza River at the Szeged gauging station. Complete series from starting 1921.\nSzolnok.\nWater discharge of the Tisza River at the Szolnok gauging station. Period 1953\u20132022.\nTributaries.\nThe following rivers are tributaries to the river Tisza:\nThe main tributaries of the Tisza:\nCities and towns.\nThe Tisza (\"Tisa\") flows through the following countries and cities (ordered from the source to mouth):\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54277", "revid": "20319727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54277", "title": "C-130", "text": ""}
{"id": "54280", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54280", "title": "Mimeo", "text": "Mimeo (possibly derived from the Greek word \"mimema\" for \"something imitated\") may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54282", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54282", "title": "William ODwyer", "text": ""}
{"id": "54286", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54286", "title": "Haloragales", "text": "Order of flowering plants\nHaloragales is an order of flowering plants. In the Cronquist system of classification of 1981, it was placed in subclass Rosidae and had this circumscription:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54287", "revid": "29495429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54287", "title": "Hiram (given name)", "text": ""}
{"id": "54288", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54288", "title": "Return Of The Jedi", "text": ""}
{"id": "54292", "revid": "19545412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54292", "title": "Spanish euro coins", "text": "Designs of Spanish currency\nSpanish euro coins feature three different designs for each of the three series of coins. The minor series of 1, 2, and 5 cent coins were designed by Garcilaso Roll\u00e1n, the middle series of 10, 20, and 50 cent coins by Bego\u00f1a Castellanos, and the two major coins feature the portrait of King Felipe VI of Spain. All designs feature the 12 stars of the EU, the year of minting, and the word \"Espa\u00f1a\" (Spanish for Spain).\nFirst series (1999\u20132009).\nFor images of the common side and a detailed description of the coins, see euro coins.\nThe first sets of euro coins were minted in 1999 and the euro was put into circulation in the eurozone in 2002. Like Belgium, Finland, France and the Netherlands, the first euro coins of Spain are marked 1999, not 2002.\nSecond series (2010\u20132014).\nIn 2010, Spain updated their national sides in order to comply with the European commission recommendations. In the \u20ac1 and \u20ac2 coins, the same portrait of king Juan Carlos I was used, but the year position was placed in the inner part of the coin. Moreover, the twelve star ring no longer contained chiselled sections. The chiselled sections were also removed from designs for the other coins.\nThird series (2015\u2013present): King Felipe VI.\nIn 2015, the portrait on the \u20ac1 and \u20ac2 coins was changed to that of the new King Felipe VI following his father's abdication the previous year.\n\u20ac2 commemorative coins.\nSpanish UNESCO World Heritage Sites series.\nSpain started the commemorative coin series (UNESCO World Heritage) in 2010, commemorating all of Spain's UNESCO World Heritage Sites, which could continue until 2058. The order in which the coin for a specific site is issued coincides with the order in which they were declared a UNESCO World Heritage site. The coins issued are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54293", "revid": "37599202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54293", "title": "Web portal", "text": "Website that integrates applications, processes and services\nA web portal is a specially designed website that brings information from diverse sources, like emails, online forums and search engines, together in a uniform way. Usually, each information source gets its dedicated area on the page for displaying information (a portlet); often, the user can configure which ones to display. Variants of portals include mashups and intranet dashboards for executives and managers. The extent to which content is displayed in a \"uniform way\" may depend on the intended user and the intended purpose, as well as the diversity of the content. Very often design emphasis is on a certain \"metaphor\" for configuring and customizing the presentation of the content (e.g., a dashboard or map) and the chosen implementation framework or code libraries. In addition, the role of the user in an organization may determine which content can be added to the portal or deleted from the portal configuration.\nA portal may use a search engine's application programming interface (API) to permit users to search intranet content as opposed to extranet content by restricting which domains may be searched. Apart from this common search engines feature, web portals may offer other services such as e-mail, news, stock quotes, information from databases and even entertainment content. Portals provide a way for enterprises and organizations to provide a consistent \"look and feel\" with access control and procedures for multiple applications and databases, which otherwise would have been different web entities at various URLs. The features available may be restricted by whether access is by an authorized and authenticated user (employee, member) or an anonymous website visitor.\nHistory.\nThe term \"portal\" emerged in the late 1990s to describe a new genre of website. After the proliferation of Web browsers in the late-1990s, many companies tried to build or acquire a portal to attempt to obtain a share of an Internet market. The Web portal gained special attention because it was, for many users, the starting point of their Web browsing if it was set as their home page. The content and branding of a portal could change as Internet companies merged or were acquired. Netscape became a part of America Online, the Walt Disney Company launched Go.com. Portal metaphors are widely used by public library sites for borrowers using a login as users and by university intranets for students and for faculty. Vertical markets remain for independent software vendors (ISVs) offering management and executive intranet \"dashboards\" for corporations and government agencies in areas such as governance, risk management, and compliance.\nClassification.\nWeb portals are sometimes classified as \"horizontal\" or \"vertical\". A horizontal portal is used as a platform to several companies in the same economic sector or to the same type of manufacturers or distributors. A vertical portal (also known as a \"vortal\") is a specialized entry point to a specific market or industry niche, subject area, or interest. Some vertical portals are known as \"vertical information portals\" (VIPs). VIPs provide news, editorial content, digital publications, and e-commerce capabilities. In contrast to traditional vertical portals, VIPs also provide dynamic multimedia applications including social networking, video posting, and blogging.\nTypes.\nNews portal.\nA news portal is an online gallery, index and search engine for news published online. It may cater to specific interest or language or target a wider market.For example, in India, the news portal named NS NOW, especially Uttar Pradesh, serves the news online on its website.\nWeb portal.\nA web portal is a website that provides a broad array of services, such as search engines, e-mail, online shopping, and forums. American web portals included Pathfinder, Excite, Netscape's Net Center, Go, NBC, MSN, Lycos, Voila, Yahoo!, and Google Search.\nPersonal portal.\nA personal portal is a Web Page at a Website on the World Wide Web or a local HTML home page including JavaScript and perhaps running in a modified Web browser. A personal portal typically provides personalized capabilities to its visitors or its local user, providing a pathway to other content. It may be designed to use distributed applications, different numbers and types of middleware and hardware to provide services from a number of different sources and may run on a non-standard local Web server. In addition, business portals can be designed for sharing and collaboration in workplaces. A further business-driven requirement of portals is that the content be presented on multiple platforms such as personal computers, laptops, tablet computers, personal digital assistants (PDAs), cell phones and smartphones.\nInformation, news, and updates are examples of content that could be delivered through such a portal. Personal portals can be related to any specific topic such as providing friends information on a social network or providing links to outside content that may help others beyond the reach of services. Portals are not limited to simply providing links. Outside of business intranet user, very often simpler portals become replaced with richer mashup designs. Within enterprises, early portals were often replaced by much more powerful \"dashboard\" designs. Some also have relied on newer protocols such as some version of RSS aggregation and may or may not involve some degree of Web harvesting.\nGovernment.\nAt the end of the dot-com boom in the 1990s, many governments had already committed to creating government web portal sites for their citizens. These included primary portals to the governments as well as portals developed for specific branches (e.g., a particular government ministry, department or agency), or for specific sub-audiences (e.g., senior citizens, parents, post-secondary students, etc.). Notable government web portals include:\nCultural.\nCultural portals aggregate digitised cultural collections of galleries, libraries (see: library portal), archives and museums. This type of portal provides a point of access to invisible Web cultural content that may not be indexed by standard search engines. Digitised collections can include scans or digital photos of books, artworks, photography, journals, newspapers, maps, diaries and letters and digital files of music, sound recordings, films, and archived websites as well as the descriptive metadata associated with each type of cultural work (e.g., metadata provides information about the author, publisher, etc.). These portals are often based around a specific national or regional groupings of institutions. Notable cultural portals include:\nCorporate.\nCorporate intranets became common during the 1990s. As intranets grew in size and complexity, organization webmasters were faced with increasing content and user management challenges. A consolidated view of company information was judged insufficient; users wanted personalization and customization. Webmasters, if skilled enough, were able to offer some capabilities, but for the most part ended up driving users away from using the intranet. Many companies began to offer tools to help webmasters manage their data, applications and information more easily, and by providing different users with personalized views. Portal solutions can also include workflow management, collaboration between work groups or branches, and policy-managed content publication. Most can allow internal and external access to specific corporate information using secure authentication or single sign-on.\nJSR168 Standards emerged around 2001. Java Specification Request (JSR) 168 standards allow the interoperability of portlets across different portal platforms. These standards allow portal developers, administrators and consumers to integrate standards-based portals and portlets across a variety of vendor solutions. The concept of content aggregation seems to still gain momentum and portal solution will likely continue to evolve significantly over the next few years. The Gartner Group predicts generation 8 portals to expand on the Business Mashups concept of delivering a variety of information, tools, applications and access points through a single mechanism.\nWith the increase in user-generated content (blog posts, comments, photos), disparate data silos, and file formats, information architects and taxonomists will be required to allow users the ability to tag (classify) the data or content. For example, if a vice-president makes a blog post, this post could be tagged with their name, title, and the subject of the post. Tagging makes it easier for users of the intranet to find the content they are interested in. This will ultimately cause a ripple effect where users will also be generating ad hoc navigation and information flows. Corporate portals also offer customers and employees self-service opportunities.\nSearch.\nSearch portals aggregate results from several search engines into one page. Users can find search portals specialized in a product, for example property search portals. Library search portals are also known as discovery interfaces.\nProperty search.\nProperty search portals aggregate data about properties for sale or rent by real estate agents or vendors. Notable agent search portals in the UK include Nestoria, Nuroa, OnTheMarket, Rightmove and Zoopla. Notable vendor (seller or landlord) portals in the UK include OpenRent and Gumtree.\nTender.\nA tender portal is a gateway for government suppliers to bid on providing goods and services. Tender portals allow users to search, modify, submit, review and archive data in order to provide a complete online tendering process.\nUsing online tendering, bidders can do any of the following:\nHosted.\nHosted Web portals gained popularity and a number of companies began offering them as a hosted service. The hosted portal market fundamentally changed the composition of portals. In many ways they served simply as a tool for publishing information instead of the loftier goals of integrating legacy applications or presenting correlated data from distributed databases. The early hosted portal companies such as Hyperoffice.com or the now defunct InternetPortal.com focused on collaboration and scheduling in addition to the distribution of corporate data. As hosted Web portals have risen in popularity their feature set has grown to include hosted databases, document management, email, discussion fora and more. Hosted portals automatically personalize the content generated from their modules to provide a personalized experience to their users. In this regard they have remained true to the original goals of the earlier corporate Web portals.\nEmerging new classes of Internet portals called Cloud Portals are showcasing the power of API (Application Programming Interface) rich software systems leveraging SOA (service-oriented architecture, Web services, and custom data exchange) to accommodate machine to machine interaction creating a more fluid user experience for connecting users spanning multiple domains during a given \"session\". Cloud portals like Nubifer Cloud Portal show what is possible using Enterprise Mashup and Web Service integration approaches to building cloud portals.\nDomain-specific.\nA number of portals have come about which are specific to a particular domain, offering access to related companies and services; a prime example of this trend would be the growth in property portals that give access to services such as estate agents, removal firm, and solicitors that offer conveyancing. Along the same lines, industry-specific news and information portals have appeared, such as the clinical trials-specific portal.\nEngineering aspects.\nOverview.\nThe main concept is to present the user with a single Web page that brings together or aggregates content from a number of other systems or servers. The application server or architecture performs most of the crucial functions of the application. This application server is in turn connected to database servers, and may be part of a clustered server environment. High-capacity portal configurations may include load balancing strategies. For portals that present application functionality to the user, the portal server is in reality the front piece of a server configuration that includes some connectivity to the application server. For early Web browsers permitting HTML frameset and iframe elements, diverse information could be presented without violating the browser same-source security policy (relied upon to prevent a variety of cross-site security breaches). More recent client-side technologies rely on JavaScript frameworks and libraries that rely on more recent Web functionality such as WebSockets and asynchronous callbacks using XMLHttpRequests.\nThe server hosting the portal may only be a \"pass through\" for the user. By use of portlets, application functionality can be presented in any number of portal pages. For the most part, this architecture is transparent to the user. In such a design, security and concurrent user capacity can be important issues, and security designers need to ensure that only authenticated and authorized users can generate requests to the application server. If the security design and administration does not ensure adequate authentication and authorization, then the portal may inadvertently present vulnerabilities to various types of attacks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54294", "revid": "23326194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54294", "title": "Hello kitty", "text": ""}
{"id": "54295", "revid": "299135", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54295", "title": "Hello Kitty", "text": "Fictional character by Sanrio\n, also known by her real name , is a fictional character created by Yuko Shimizu, currently designed by Yuko Yamaguchi, and owned by the Japanese company Sanrio. Sanrio depicts Hello Kitty as a British anthropomorphized white cat with a red bow and no visible mouth. According to her backstory, she lives in a London suburb with her family, and is close to her twin sister Mimmy, who is depicted with a yellow bow.\nHello Kitty was created in 1974 and the first item, a vinyl coin purse, was introduced in 1975. Originally, Hello Kitty was only marketed towards pre-teenage girls, but beginning in the 1990s, the brand found commercial success among teenage and adult consumers as well. Hello Kitty's popularity also grew with the emergence of \"kawaii\" (cute) culture. The brand went into decline in Japan after the 1990s, but continued to grow in the international market. By 2010, the character was worth $ a year and \"The New York Times\" called her a \"global marketing phenomenon\". She did about $ at retail in 2013.\nUNICEF has appointed Hello Kitty children's ambassador and the Japanese government appointed her ambassador of tourism. There are Sanrio theme parks based on Hello Kitty: Harmonyland in Hiji, \u014cita, Japan, Sanrio Puroland in Tama New Town, Tokyo, Japan, and Hello Kitty Shanghai Times in Shanghai, China. The Hello Kitty media franchise has grown to include a number of animated series targeted towards children, as well as several comics, animated films, video games, books, music albums and other media productions. A variety of products have featured the character over the years, like school supplies, clothing, accessories, and toys, along with other items. In 2008, there were over 50,000 different Hello Kitty branded products.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCreation and design.\nIn 1962, Shintaro Tsuji, founder of Sanrio, began selling rubber sandals with flowers painted on them. Tsuji noted the profits gained by adding a cute design to the shoes and hired cartoonists to design cute characters for his merchandise. Hello Kitty was designed by Yuko Shimizu and was added to the lineup of early Sanrio characters in 1974.\nHello Kitty was initially known only as . Shimizu got the name \"Kitty\" from Lewis Carroll's \"Through the Looking-Glass\"; during a scene early in the book, Alice plays with a cat she calls \"Kitty\". Sanrio's motto is \"social communication\", and Tsuji wanted the brand name to reflect that by including a greeting. He first considered \"Hi Kitty\" before finally settling on \"Hello Kitty\", her current name. Sanrio decided to make Hello Kitty British because foreign countries, in particular Britain, were trendy in Japan at the time of Hello Kitty's creation. Sanrio already had several characters set in the US, and it wanted Hello Kitty to be different.\nIn 1976 Setsuko Yonekubo temporarily took over as lead designer for Hello Kitty, after Shimizu left Sanrio. In 1980 Yuko Yamaguchi became lead designer and has remained in charge since. Yamaguchi has said that fashion, movies, and TV inspire her in creating new designs. New series involving Hello Kitty with different themed designs are released regularly, following current trends.\nSpokespeople for Sanrio have said that Hello Kitty has no mouth, as they want people to \"project their feelings onto the character\" and \"be happy or sad together with Hello Kitty.\" Another explanation Sanrio has given for Hello Kitty's lack of a mouth is that she \"speaks from the heart. She's Sanrio's ambassador to the world and isn't bound to any particular language.\" However, Yuko Yamaguchi has also said that \"Kitty has a mouth\" that is \"hidden in the fur\". Representatives for Sanrio have said that they see Hello Kitty as a symbol of friendship, which they hope she will foster between people across the world. There has been speculation that Hello Kitty has her origins in Maneki Neko, a traditional Japanese cat figurine. The name \"Hello Kitty\" is a back-translation of \"Maneki Neko\", meaning \"beckoning cat\" in English. Despite this, no definitive statement supports that speculation. Hello Kitty has also instead been put forth as an early example of \"mukokuseki\", a Japanese term meaning \"stateless\" or \"nationless\" in reference to characters lacking any identifiable national background.\nHistory and reception.\nThe character's first appearance on an item was in March 1975 on a vinyl coin purse sold in Japan, where she was pictured sitting between a bottle of milk and a goldfish bowl. She first appeared in the United States in 1976 when Sanrio opened a Gift Gate store in San Jose, California.\nHello Kitty sold well immediately after her 1975 launch, and Sanrio's sales increased sevenfold. Due to Japan's growing economy, many Japanese children could afford to buy Hello Kitty products. Her popularity also grew with the emergence of \"kawaii\" culture, which embraces cuteness.\nUNICEF named Hello Kitty as children's ambassador to the United States in 1983, children's ambassador in Japan in 1994, and gave her the title of \"UNICEF Special Friend of Children\" in 2004, a title unique to her.\nOriginally, Hello Kitty was only marketed towards a child and preteen audience. In the 1990s, the target market for Hello Kitty was broadened to include teenagers and adults as a retro brand. Marketing to those who could not get Hello Kitty merchandise as children, and those who fondly remember items they had, Sanrio began selling Hello Kitty branded products such as purses and laptops. The 1994\u20131996 \"Face\" series was the first to be designed specifically for mature consumers.\nThe Hello Kitty brand rose to greater prominence internationally during the late 1990s. At that time, several celebrities, such as Mariah Carey, had adopted Hello Kitty as a fashion statement. New products featuring the character were made available in a large variety of American department stores.\nHello Kitty's popularity in Japan peaked in the late 1990s when she was the country's top-grossing character. In 2002, Hello Kitty lost her place as the top-grossing character in Japan in the Character Databank popularity chart. In a 2010 survey, she was in third place behind Anpanman and Pikachu from \"Pok\u00e9mon\". In 2010, \"The New York Times\" attributed the character's relative decline in Japan to her biography not being \"compelling enough to draw many fans.\" The newspaper later wrote that analysts called the characterization \"weak\", and that Hello Kitty not having a mouth has dampened her success as an animated TV character. According to Character Databank, Hello Kitty was the third highest-grossing character in Japan as of 2013. In 2019 and 2020, Character Databank ranked her fifth, and as of 2021 she was out of the top five.\nOverseas, her global popularity has increased over the years. According to Sanrio, Hello Kitty was appearing on 12,000 new products each year as of 1999. Beginning in 2007, following trends in Japan, Sanrio began using darker designs for Hello Kitty with more black and less pink and pulled away from \"kawaii\" styles. By 2008, Hello Kitty was responsible for half of Sanrio's $1 billion net income, and there were over 50,000 different Hello Kitty branded products in more than 60 countries. By 2010 the character was worth $ a year and \"The New York Times\" called her a \"global marketing phenomenon\". Worldwide annual sales reached $ in 2013.\nIn July 2008, the Dutch artist Dick Bruna, creator of Miffy, alleged that Hello Kitty is a copy of Miffy, being rendered in a similar style. He stated disapprovingly in an interview for the British newspaper \"The Daily Telegraph\": \"That [...] is a copy [of Miffy], I think. I don't like that at all. I always think, 'No, don't do that. Try to make something that you think of yourself'.\" Mercis, the firm that managed copyrights for Bruna, took Sanrio to court over their Hello Kitty-associated character Cathy, a rabbit which made her first appearance in 1976 and which Mercis argued infringed the copyright for Miffy. A court in Amsterdam ruled in favour of Mercis in November 2010 and ordered Sanrio to stop the production and sale of merchandise featuring Cathy in the Benelux countries. However, in June 2011, the two companies announced that they had reached a settlement agreement to end their legal dispute. Sanrio stopped using the Cathy character, and the two firms jointly donated \u20ac150,000 for reconstruction after the 2011 T\u014dhoku earthquake and tsunami.\nAs of 2014, 90% of the profits from Hello Kitty came from licensing of products for the international market. She has been particularly popular in other Asian countries for decades, such as in China, where her cultural impact is comparable to that of Barbie in the Western world. In 2008, Japan named Hello Kitty the ambassador of Japanese tourism in both China and Hong Kong, marking the first time Japan's tourism ministry had appointed a fictional character to the role. Sharon Kinsella, a lecturer at Oxford University on Japanese sociology, called the selection of Hello Kitty \"a bit farcical ... as if a dumbed-down cultural icon ... can somehow do something significant to alter the gnarly and difficult state of China\u2013Japan relations.\"\nIn the United States, Hello Kitty is recognized by more than 80% of young adults in the 18\u201323 age group, as of 2016[ [update]]. In 2014 a four-day convention, Hello Kitty Con in Los Angeles, attracted over 25,000 visitors. The convention was held in celebration of Hello Kitty's 40th anniversary. Sanrio's Puroland Tokyo theme park also held a celebration spanning several days in November 2014.\nCharacter.\nHello Kitty is a \"gijinka\", an anthropomorphism or personification of a Japanese Bobtail cat. Official character profiles list her full name as , born in the suburbs of London, England, on November 1. Her height is described as five apples and her weight as three apples. She is portrayed as a bright and kind-hearted girl, very close to her twin sister Mimmy. She is good at baking cookies and loves her mama's homemade apple pie. She likes to play the piano and collect cute things, and her favorite subjects in school are English, music, and art.\nHello Kitty is portrayed with a large family with the surname \"White\". Her twin sister Mimmy is described as \"shy and very girly\", interested in sewing and dreaming of marriage. While Hello Kitty wears a red bow on her left ear, Mimmy wears a yellow one on her right. Their papa George is described as dependable, humorous but also absent-minded. Their mama Mary is portrayed as a good cook who loves doing housework. Grandpa Anthony likes to tell stories and grandma Margaret likes sewing. In addition to family, Hello Kitty is also depicted with several animal friends, including the mice Joey and Judy, the bears Tippy and Thomas, the raccoon Tracy and the squirrel Rorry.\nAside from the core Hello Kitty characters, several spinoff characters have been created: Hello Kitty's boyfriend Dear Daniel in 1999, Charmmy Kitty, Hello Kitty's pet cat, and Sugar, her pet hamster, both in 2004, and her superhero alter-ego Ichigoman in 2011.\nSFGATE said in 2004 that in light of the level of success of Hello Kitty, her fictional biography \"seems almost too modest \u2013 or irrelevant\" and \"doesn't seem to have played much of a part\" in the success.\nIn 2014 an anthropologist was told by Sanrio that Kitty White was not simply a cat (i.e. \"depicted on all fours\"), describing her as a little English girl called Kitty White, from outside London. Following reports that interpreted this to mean she was human, a Sanrio PR representative said that the organization had \"never said she was a human\", explaining anthropomorphization by comparing the character to Mickey Mouse: \"No one would mistake the Disney character for a human\u2013but at the same time he's not quite a mouse. Just like Hello Kitty isn't a human, she's not quite a cat either.\" Sanrio stated further, \"Hello Kitty was done in the motif of a cat. It's going too far to say that Hello Kitty is not a cat.\"\nMedia.\nAnimated series.\nThere have been several different animated series starring Hello Kitty. The first was \"Hello Kitty's Furry Tale Theater\", an animated television series with 13 22-minute episodes that premiered in 1987. The next, an OVA titled \"Hello Kitty and Friends\", spanned 30 entries originally released in Japan between 1989 and 1994. \"Hello Kitty's Paradise\" came out in 1999 and was 16 episodes long. \"Hello Kitty's Stump Village\" came out in 2005, and \"The Adventures of Hello Kitty &amp; Friends\" came out in 2008 and has aired 52 episodes. A crossover series under the name \"Kiss Hello Kitty\" (that paired animated versions of the members of the rock band KISS with Hello Kitty) was announced in March 2013. Produced by Gene Simmons, this show was supposed to air on The Hub Network (now Discovery Family), but it never came to fruition.\n\"Hello Kitty's Paradise\" was a long-running live-action children's program that aired on TV Tokyo from January 1999 to March 2011. It was the longest-running weekly kids' television program in the network's history. In January 2011, the show's creators mutually agreed to end the series after twelve seasons, with the final episode being broadcast on 29 March 2011.\nIn August 2018, Sanrio began streaming a CGI animated series on YouTube. It features Hello Kitty talking to the camera about her life in the style of vlogging YouTubers.\nSanrio began streaming the newest 2D animated Hello Kitty series \"Hello Kitty and Friends Supercute Adventures\" on YouTube on 26 October 2020.\nComics.\nHello Kitty had two Japanese comic series serialized in \"Ribon\", a sh\u014djo manga magazine - \"Hello Kitty Doki\" (ran from May 2007 to April 2008) and \"Hello Kitty Peace\" (released in June 2008).\nIn March 2016, Sanrio launched a webcomic featuring Hello Kitty as a strawberry-themed superhero called Ichigoman (\"ichigo\" meaning strawberry). The webcomic is created by Toshiki Inoue and Shakua Sinkai and updates once a month. Ichigoman first appeared in 2011 in an exhibition with Yuko Yamaguchi's art.\nMusic.\nHello Kitty has her own branded album, \"Hello World\", featuring Hello Kitty-inspired songs performed by a collection of artists including Keke Palmer, Cori Yarckin, and Ainjel Emme under Hello Kitty's Lakeshore Records record label. Hello Kitty was also chosen by AH Software to be the basis of the new Vocaloid to celebrate the 50th anniversary of Sanrio.\nMusician Yoshiki unveiled the Hello Kitty theme song \"Hello Hello\" in November 2014 at the first Hello Kitty Con. Yoshiki, who was the first celebrity to have his own Hello Kitty doll, \"Yoshikitty\", was approached by Yamaguchi to compose the song seven years prior.\nVideo games.\nThere are numerous \"Hello Kitty\" games starting with the release of the first title for Famicom in 1992; however, the majority of these games were never released outside of Japan. Hello Kitty also has made cameo appearances in games featuring other Sanrio characters, such as the Keroppi game, \"Kero Kero Keroppi no B\u014dken Nikki: Nemureru Mori no Keroleen\". Special-edition consoles such as the Hello Kitty Dreamcast, Hello Kitty Game Boy Pocket, and Hello Kitty Crystal Xbox have also been released exclusively in Japan.\nHello Kitty appeared as a guest character in Sega's \"Sonic Dash\" in 2016, as part of Sega's partnership with Sanrio. Hello Kitty and My Melody (another Sanrio character) appeared together in \"Super Mario Maker\" as unlockable Mystery Mushroom costumes. Hello Kitty appears as a playable character via downloadable content in \"Super Monkey Ball Banana Mania\". A costume based on Hello Kitty, as well as a Hello Kitty-inspired costume known as \"Cutest Friend\", were available as rewards in \"Fall Guys\" as part of the first Season 4: Creative Construction Fame Pass.\nFilms.\nThree \"Hello Kitty\" anime films were released in Japan. \"Hello Kitty: Cinderella\" released in 1989, \"Hello Kitty no Oyayubi Hime\" released in 1990, and \"Hello Kitty no Mah\u014d no Mori no Ohime-sama\" released in 1991.\nOn 3 July 2015, Sanrio announced a full-length animated Hello Kitty theatrical feature initially planned for 2019. In early 2019, it was revealed that New Line Cinema would be teaming up alongside Sanrio and Flynn Picture Company for an \"English language film based on the venerable kid brand.\" In 2021, it was reported that Jennifer Coyle and Leo Matsuda had been hired to direct the film with Lindsey Beer set to pen the script. In 2025, a release date was set for July 21, 2028.\nProducts.\nOriginally aimed at the pre-adolescent female market, the Hello Kitty product range has expanded from dolls, stickers, greeting cards, board games, clothes, backpacks, lunch boxes, piggy banks, pencils, erasers, accessories, school supplies and stationery to purses, toasters, televisions, other home appliances, massagers, motor oil and computer equipment. These products range from mass market items to high-end consumer products and rare collectibles. As of 2014[ [update]], more than 50,000 Hello Kitty product lines were available in over 130 countries.\nHigh-end.\nSanrio and various corporate partners have released Hello Kitty-branded products, including the Hello Kitty Stratocaster electric guitar (since 2005, with Fender, under its Squier sub-brand, in the US) and an Airbus A330-200 commercial passenger jet airliner, dubbed the Hello Kitty Jet (2005\u20132009, with EVA Airways in Taiwan). In late 2011 and early 2012, EVA Air revived their \"Hello Kitty Jets\" with their three new A330-300s. However, due to high demand, the airline added two more alongside their existing A330-200s in mid-2012. A year later, EVA Air introduced one of their 777-300ERs as another Hello Kitty Jet, which featured other Sanrio characters as well as Hello Kitty.\nIn 2009, Hello Kitty entered the wine market with a collection of four wines available for purchase online. The collection included a sparkling ros\u00e9, a sparkling white wine, a red wine, and a white wine, each adorned with Hello Kitty branding and packaging. This venture marked a strategic move to expand the product lines targeted at older audiences, combining the iconic character's charm with the sophistication of wine.\nEstablishments.\nHello Kitty is included as part of the Sanrio livery at the Japanese theme parks Harmonyland and Sanrio Puroland. The Hello Kitty Shanghai Times theme park in Shanghai, China opened in 2019. A theme park called Hello Kitty Town existed in Iskandar Puteri, Johor, Malaysia from 2012 to 2019. In 2014, Sanrio partnered with the Indonesian theme park Dufan to introduce Hello Kitty Adventure, a cinema based attraction.\nHello Kitty caf\u00e9s have opened around the world, including in Seoul and other locations in South Korea; Bangkok, Thailand; Adelaide, Australia; Irvine, California; the Santa Anita Mall in California, and the Park MGM in Las Vegas, Nevada.\nThere is a themed restaurant named Hello Kitty Sweets in Taipei, Taiwan, which opened in 2008. The restaurant's decor and many of its dishes are patterned after the Hello Kitty characters. Another restaurant called the Hello Kitty Diner opened in the Chatswood area of Sydney, Australia, and a Hello Kitty dim sum restaurant opened in Kowloon, Hong Kong.\nIn 2008, a Hello Kitty-themed maternity hospital opened in Yuanlin, Taiwan. Hello Kitty is featured on the receiving blankets, room decor, bed linens, birth certificate covers, and nurses' uniforms. The hospital's owner explained that he hoped that the theme would help ease the stress of childbirth.\nClothing.\nDr. Martens collaborated with Hello Kitty in 2010 and 2020. The 2020 collaboration includes platform boots, platform sandals as well as a satchel. Forever 21 collaborated with Hello Kitty on clothing collections several times, the first one in 2011. In 2018, Puma collaborated with Hello Kitty to create a collection which features sneakers for both children and adults. Also in 2018, Converse collaborated with Sanrio to create a collection which includes shoes ranging from kids' to adult sizes as well as clothing and bags. In 2020, Skechers collaborated with Hello Kitty releasing chunky-soled style shoes with brand's logo and Hello Kitty's face and bow. Hello Kitty is used as a brand for sanitary pads in Asia and Latin America.\nLegacy and impact.\nIn 1994, artist Tom Sachs was invited to create a scene for Barneys New York Christmas displays and titled it \"Hello Kitty Nativity\". In the scene, the Virgin Mary was replaced by Madonna with an open Chanel bra, the three Kings were all Bart Simpson, the stable was marked by a McDonald's logo, and the Christ Child was replaced by Hello Kitty. This contemporary revision of the nativity scene demonstrated Sachs' interest in the phenomena of consumerism, branding, and the cultural fetishization of products. Many audiences instead took offense to the artwork, which received backlash from Catholic organizations for its misuse of Christian symbolism.\nIn 2009, Tom Sachs' \"Bronze Collection\" was shown at the Public art space in Manhattan's Lever House, as well as in the Baldwin Gallery in Aspen, Colorado, and the Trocad\u00e9ro in Paris. The collection featured white bronze casts of a foam core Hello Kitty sculpture \u2013 a style distinctive to the artist. As of April 2010, the \"Wind-Up Hello Kitty\" sculpture is still on display at Lever House. Although Sachs did not seek permission to use the character in his work, a brand marketing manager for Sanrio was quoted as saying \"You know, there was Marilyn Monroe and Andy Warhol, and then Michael Jackson and Jeff Koons. When you're an icon, that's what happens.\" In 2013 \"The Wall Street Journal\" said Sanrio's attitude to copyright was \"laissez-faire\" compared to companies like Disney, and that they have let artists use Hello Kitty's likeness without interfering.\nIn 2015, a nine-foot tall pearlescent Hello Kitty sculpture by artist Sebastian Masuda was exhibited at the Dag Hammarskj\u00f6ld Plaza in New York City, as part of the Japan Society's exhibition: \"Life of Cats: Selections from the Hiraki Ukiyo-e Collection\".\nCanadian singer-songwriter Avril Lavigne wrote and recorded a song called \"Hello Kitty\" for her fifth studio album, \"Avril Lavigne\", released in 2013. The Hello Kitty Stratocaster guitar, originally released in 2005, was initially aimed at pre-teen girls, but has since been used by notable guitarists including Krist Novoselic, Courtney Love, Dave Navarro, and Lisa Loeb. In 2022, vintage Hello Kitty Stratocasters were among the most popular musical instruments sold on the marketplace Reverb.com. While it originally retailed for $230, some re-sold for over $1,000.\nIn 2022, \"Saturday Night Live\" aired a sketch parodying Hello Kitty's backstory (described by \"The A.V. Club\" as \"incongruous, corporate-sanctioned\") and Sanrio's handling of it. The sketch centers on managers at a fictional Hello Kitty store. They describe the character in contradictory terms as a \"human little girl\" who is in third grade and also 48 years old. \"The Atlantic\" described the sketch as both \"a skewering of the ever-expanding Hello Kitty commercial universe\" and as capturing the gaslighting and manipulation of truth of the time.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54296", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54296", "title": "Oppossum", "text": ""}
{"id": "54297", "revid": "19545412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54297", "title": "French euro coins", "text": "Designs of French currency\nFrench euro coins feature three separate designs for the three series of coins. The minor series was designed by Fabienne Courtiade, the middle one by Laurent Jurio and the major two coins are by Joaquin Jimenez. All designs share the 12 stars of the EU and the year of imprint as well as the letters \"RF\" for \"R\u00e9publique Fran\u00e7aise\" (French Republic).\nFrench euro design.\nFor images of the common side and a detailed description of the coins, see euro coins.\nThe first sets of euro coins were minted in 1999 and the euro was put into circulation in the eurozone in 2002. Like Belgium, Finland, the Netherlands and Spain, the first euro coins of France are marked 1999, not 2002.\nTo coincide with the French Presidency of the Council of the European Union, and the 20th anniversary of euro coins, the French national designs on the 1 and 2 euro coins have been changed. The new designs were approved by the Council of the European Union on 26 July 2021 and have been revealed to the public on 16 December 2021 ahead of their entry into circulation in 2022.\nIn 2024, new designs for the 10-, 20-, and 50-cent coins will be introduced, featuring Simone Veil on the 10-cent, Josephine Baker on the 20-cent, and Marie Curie on the 50-cent coin.\nCirculating Mintage quantities.\nThe following table shows the mintage quantity for all French euro coins, per denomination, per year.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54298", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54298", "title": "PCOS", "text": ""}
{"id": "54299", "revid": "47684007", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54299", "title": "Irish euro coins", "text": "Designs of Irish currency\nIrish euro coins all share the same design by Jarlath Hayes, that of the harp, a traditional symbol for Ireland since the Middle Ages, based on that of the Brian Boru harp, housed in Trinity College Dublin. The same harp is used as on the official seals of the Taoiseach, and government ministers and the seal of the president of Ireland. The coins' design also features the 12 stars of the EU, the year of issue and the Irish name for Ireland, \"\u00c9ire\", in a traditional Gaelic script.\nIrish euro design.\nAll Irish euro coins bear the same design on their obverse side: a Celtic harp based on the Trinity College Harp, flanked to the left and right by the word \"\u00c9IRE\" (Irish for Ireland) and the year the coin was struck, written in Gaelic type. These in turn are surrounded by the 12 stars of the flag of Europe. On the one-euro coin the stars appear on the gold coloured surround with the harp and words in the silver coloured centre. The colours are in the reverse for the two euro coin.\nCirculating mintage quantities.\nThe following table shows the mintage quantity for all Irish euro coins, per denomination, per year.\nCommemorative coins.\nLimited release in 2010, featuring an Irish hunter horse and foal.\nLimited release in 2011, featuring a salmon and smolt.\nLimited release in 2012, featuring an Irish wolfhound and pup.\nWide release (in common with all Euro nations) in 2007, commemorating the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome.\nWide release (in common with all Euro nations) in 2009, commemorating the 10th anniversary of the Economic and Monetary Union.\nWide release (in common with all Euro nations) in 2012, commemorating the 10th anniversary of the euro coins and banknotes.\nWide release (in common with all Euro nations) in 2015, commemorating the 30th anniversary of adoption of the European flag by the European Economic Community.\nWide release in 2016, with the figure of Hibernia on top of the Dublin G.P.O. Building, commemorating the centenary of the Easter Rising.\nWide release in 2019, commemorating the centenary of the First D\u00e1il.\nCommemorative \u20ac2 in 2023, commemorating 50 Years of Ireland's E.U. membership.\nUsage of 1 cent and 2 cent coins.\nAs 1c and 2c coins are of comparatively low value, a National Payments Plan prepared by the Central Bank of Ireland approved by the Government in April 2013 plans \"to trial the use of a rounding convention in a pilot project in a mid-size Irish town\", with the 1c and 2c no longer being minted while remaining legal tender. The cost of producing a 1 cent coin is 1.65c and the cost of producing a 2 cent coin is 1.94c.\nBeginning on Wednesday 28 October 2015 Ireland followed The Netherlands, Sweden, Finland, Denmark, Hungary and, in introducing so-called Swedish rounding. While individual prices are still shown and summed up with 1-cent precision, the total sum is then rounded to the nearest 5 cents when paying with cash. Sums ending in 1, 2, 6 and 7 cents are rounded down; sums ending in 3, 4, 8 and 9 cents are rounded up.\nThe 1 cent and 2 cent coins remain legal tender, and rounding is voluntary for both the customer and retailer, the Central Bank of Ireland advises \"for Rounding to happen, both the retailer and the customer must accept it; both will have the right to use exact change\".\nRounding applies only to cash payments and does not apply to bills paid electronically - by debit card, credit card or by store card.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54300", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54300", "title": "Surrealist", "text": ""}
{"id": "54301", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54301", "title": "Polycystic ovary syndrome", "text": "Hormone disorder in females\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nPolycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the most common hormonal disorder in women of reproductive age. The name comes from the observation of small follicles (or \"cysts\") that often appear on the ovaries. However, not everyone with PCOS has these follicles, and they are not the cause of the condition.\nPCOS is diagnosed when a person has at least two of the following three features: irregular menstrual periods, high testosterone or related symptoms (like excess facial hair), or polycystic ovaries found on an ultrasound. A blood test for high levels of anti-M\u00fcllerian hormone can replace the ultrasound in the diagnosis. Other symptoms associated with PCOS are heavy periods, acne, difficulty getting pregnant, and patches of darker skin.\nThe exact cause of PCOS remains uncertain. There is a clear genetic component, but environmental factors are also thought to contribute. PCOS occurs in between 5% and 18% of women. The disorder is linked to insulin resistance, which is made worse by obesity. Insulin resistance and related excess insulin levels increase the risk of complications such as type 2 diabetes and liver disease. Women with PCOS also have higher risk of endometrial cancer.\nManagement focuses on relieving symptoms and reducing long-term risks. A healthy lifestyle and weight control are recommended for general management. In addition, hormonal contraception can help to regulate menstrual cycles, to reduce acne and excess hair growth. Metformin, a common anti-diabetes drug, increases insulin sensitivity. For fertility, ovulation can be induced with letrozole, among other methods. In addition, women can be monitored for cardiometabolic risks, and during pregnancy.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nPCOS has a wide variety of signs and symptoms. They include issues with ovulation (such as irregular periods), excess levels of androgens (hormones that trigger male characteristics, such as facial hair growth), and metabolism (such as weight gain). Symptoms usually start in puberty, but may be masked if oral contraceptives are started early.\nCommon signs and symptoms of PCOS are:\nThe ovaries might be larger than normal, with many small fluid-filled sacs that surround eggs (\"cysts\"). Testosterone levels are usually elevated: one meta-analysis showed testosterone levels to be 1.5 times higher in women with PCOS compared to women without PCOS.\nAssociated conditions.\nWomen with PCOS have an increased risk of a range of metabolic, cardiovascular, reproductive and mental health conditions. The likelihood of developing metabolic disorders is about three to seven times higher than in women without PCOS. Insulin resistance is common, even in lean women with PCOS. Overweight or obese women with PCOS are at higher risk of type 2 diabetes than women without PCOS at the same BMI. Lean women with PCOS do not appear to be at higher risks of developing diabetes. Other metabolic and cardiovascular complications commonly associated with PCOS include:\nPCOS increases the risk of pregnancy complications, such as gestational diabetes, high blood pressure, low blood sugar levels and pre-eclampsia. Miscarriages are more likely, and when a baby is delivered, they are more likely to require admission to the neonatal intensive care unit.\nPCOS is associated with mental health-related conditions including depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder, and obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder. Those with PCOS often report reduced quality of life due to excess body weight, and to a lesser extent due to hirsutism, infertility and menstrual cycles. In regions where infertility or hirsutism are stigmatised, the impact on mental health is more severe. Body image can be negatively affected and PCOS increases the risk of eating disorders, for instance binge eating. In addition, sexual wellbeing is often lower in women with PCOS.\nWomen with PCOS are about three times more likely to develop endometrial cancer than other women. This is linked to a lack of periods, and lower levels of sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and progesterone. Women with PCOS more often have sleep apnea, particularly if obesity is present.\nCause.\nThe root cause of PCOS is unknown. Risk factors include a family history of PCOS, early development of pubic hair and sweat gland development (adrenarche) and obesity. A low birth weight, exposure to androgens in the womb, and exposure to hormone disruptors (endocrine disruptors) may also predispose people to developing PCOS.\nGenetics.\nPCOS has a clear genetic component and high heritability. Evidence of the genetic basis comes from family and twin studies, as well as from large genome-wide association studies. The correlation in PCOS occurrence between identical twin sisters was found to be twice as high as that between non-identical twins, suggesting a significant genetic influence. Twenty-five different genetic loci have been found to correlate with PCOS in genome-wide association studies, of which thirteen were replicated in at least one other study. Genes near some of these loci imply neuroendocrine and metabolic dysfunction, but the role of other genes is not yet clear.\nMen with a family history of PCOS also display some of the symptoms associated with the syndrome. For instance, brothers of women with PCOS show a higher likelihood of high AMH levels, insulin resistance and abnormal lipid levels in the blood. Men with the genetic risk factors associated with PCOS also have higher levels of obesity, type-2 diabetes, male pattern hair loss and cardiovascular disease. Not all similarities between family members are likely due to genetics, as PCOS and obesity in mothers can have an impact on fetal development, making it more likely for men to get metabolic disorders with age.\nMendelian randomization is a method in genetic epidemiology that seeks to identify causal relationships between risk factors and diseases. It uses the randomness of inheriting different genes to do so. Using Mendelian randomization, it was found that PCOS has causal links to sex hormone-binding globulin level, anti-M\u00fcllerian hormone (AMH) level, menopause age, body fat percentage, insulin resistance, depression, breast cancer, ovarian cancer, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and lung capacity. Other factors do not seem causally linked: anxiety disorder, schizophrenia, type 2 diabetes, coronary heart disease, stroke, or birth weight.\nEnvironment.\nPCOS may also be impacted by epigenetics, which regulates how active genes are. High levels of androgens and AMH during pregnancy and early weight gain can negatively impact the fetal environment. In studies of PCOS in mice, exposure to AMH or the androgen dihydrotestosterone, still has an effect three generations later. If that were the same in humans, it implies that PCOS can be inherited via epigenetic changes. Blood in the umbilical cord of babies whose mothers have PCOS show specific epigenetic changes suggestive of PCOS.\nThere is little evidence on the effect of environmental pollutants on PCOS risk. Hormone disruptors are chemicals that disturb the hormonal system, by blocking or mimicking natural hormones. Of these, bisphenol A and phthalates (both used in plastics) and possibly octocrylene exposure may raise the risks of PCOS.\nObesity is implicated in PCOS development. As fat tissue can produce androgens, obesity leads to increased androgen levels. It also leads to suppression of the SHBG hormone, increased insulin resistance and abnormally increased insulin levels. Some of the effects go two ways: PCOS might impact appetite, so that weight gain becomes more likely. Weight loss using diet is equally effective in people with and without PCOS.\nMechanism.\nPCOS involves both hormonal and metabolic changes. Women with PCOS often have higher levels of androgens, mainly produced by the ovaries, as part of a disrupted hypothalamus\u2013pituitary\u2013ovarian axis. In the brain, the hypothalamus sends out gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) pulses with higher frequency. This raises luteinising hormone (LH), while follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) stays the same or is slightly lower. The higher LH stimulates theca cells in the ovary to produce more androgens.\nThe disrupted hormonal environment, including high levels of androgens, suppresses the growth and development of ovarian follicles (\"cysts\"). This leads to an accumulation of many small follicles, a feature referred to as polycystic ovarian morphology. The lack of ovarian follicle development also leads to a reduction in ovulation. Granulosa cells in these small follicles produce high levels of anti-M\u00fcllerian hormone, which reduces the conversion of testosterone to oestradiol (oestrogen).\nMetabolic changes are common in PCOS. Many women develop insulin resistance, which causes the pancreas to produce extra insulin. High insulin levels reduce liver production of sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), increasing free circulating androgens. Low-grade inflammation can worsen insulin resistance, creating a reinforcing loop between metabolic and reproductive disturbances. Insulin resistance is present not only in overweight women with PCOS, but also in lean women; however, obesity makes it worse.\nPCOS is associated with cardiovascular and liver dysfunction. For instance, women with PCOS can have coronary and aortic calcification. Obesity, impaired glucose metabolism and excess androgens are all risk factors for liver dysfunction (MASLD).\nDiagnosis.\nDiagnostic criteria.\nDifferent criteria are used for diagnosing PCOS, but the (revised) Rotterdam criteria are recommended by clinical guidelines. According to these criteria, an adult woman is diagnosed with PCOS if she meets two out of the following three:\nOther causes of these issues need to be excluded for diagnosis. In adolescents, both androgen excess and irregular or absent periods are required, as it is normal for adolescents to have many follicles (\"cysts\") visible in their ovaries, so it does not help with diagnosis. Adolescents who only meet one criterion are considered 'at risk', and are to be reassessed when they are adults. \nOlder criteria are the 1990 NIH criteria and the 2006 Androgen Excess Society criteria. The Androgen Excess criteria were never adopted widely. The old NIH criteria are stricter than the Rotterdam criteria, as both infrequent or irregular cycles and signs of androgen excess need to be present:\nAssessment and testing.\nThere is a three-step algorithm to diagnose PCOS. Step one assesses signs of androgen excess and irregular menstrual cycles. If someone has both, and other causes are excluded, PCOS is diagnosed. In step two, those with only irregular cycles undergo a blood test for testosterone. If elevated, again excluding other causes of the symptoms, PCOS is diagnosed. For adolescents, step two is the final step. Step three applies to adults with either irregular cycles or androgen excess. An ultrasound or AMH test (but not both, to avoid overdiagnosis) is performed. If polycystic ovaries or elevated AMH levels are detected, PCOS is diagnosed.\nClinical androgen excess in adults can result in acne, hirsutism (male pattern of hair growth, such as on the chin or chest) and female pattern hair loss. Hirsutism can be assessed using the standardised Ferriman\u2013Gallwey visual scoring system, with a score above four to six indicating clinical significance. The recommended cut-off score depends on ethnicity, with a lower cut-off for Asian women, and a higher cut-off for Hispanic and Middle Eastern women. Assessment may be complicated by self-treatment. Hair loss can be assessed with the Ludwig visual score. In adolescents, androgen excess shows as severe acne and hirsutism.\nFor individuals who had their first menstrual cycle more than three years ago, menstrual cycles are considered irregular if they occur less than 21 days apart or more than 35 days apart. For those whose first menstrual cycle was between one and three years ago, the cycle is considered irregular if it is less than 21 days apart or more than 45 days apart. Finally, for anyone whose first cycle was over a year ago, a single cycle lasting over 90 days is considered irregular.\nBiochemical androgen excess in PCOS is assessed using total and free testosterone. Accurate measurement requires tandem mass spectrometry assays, as direct free testosterone tests are not reliable. Interpretation is based on laboratory reference ranges. Hormonal contraception can interfere with hormone levels, so a withdrawal period of at least three months with alternative contraception may be needed. Severely elevated androgen levels may indicate other conditions. \nIn adults, an ultrasound can be used to look for small ovarian follicles. In adolescents, this is not assessed, because larger numbers of follicles are normal at that age. In PCOS, these follicles are often on the periphery of the ovary, forming a \"string of pearls\". To count as polycystic ovaries, at least 20 follicles need to be present, smaller than 9 mm. This used to be 12 in older diagnostic criteria. A less clear marker of PCOS is enlarged ovaries. Ovaries need to be at least 10 cm3 to count as enlarged. For sexually active individuals and those who consent, a transvaginal ultrasound approach is preferred. If transvaginal ultrasound is unacceptable (for personal or cultural reasons), a transabdominal ultrasound can be performed. Alternatively, AMH levels can be tested in the blood.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nTo diagnose PCOS, other conditions must first be ruled out. These include thyroid disease (assessed via thyroid stimulating hormone), hyperprolactinemia (assessed via prolactin), and non-classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia (tested via 17-hydroxy progesterone). For those without any periods whatsoever or more severe signs or symptoms, further tests are recommended to exclude hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, any androgen-producing tumors or Cushing's disease. Overt virilisation (development of male sex characteristics) is not characteristic of PCOS and indicates that another underlying condition may be responsible.\nManagement.\nPCOS has no cure, and management is focused on the relief of symptoms. Treatment usually involves lifestyle changes such as diet and exercise of moderate intensity. Metabolic issues can further be treated with metformin or GLP-1 receptor agonists. For women with a BMI over 35, bariatric surgery may be a further option. Combined oral contraceptives are especially effective and used as the first line of treatment to reduce acne and hirsutism and regulate the menstrual cycle. Other typical acne treatments and hair removal techniques may be used. First-line treatment for fertility issues uses ovulation induction with clomiphene or letrozole. As PCOS is associated with psychological disorders and cardiovascular risk, screening for both is recommended.\nLifestyle.\nWeight management and a healthy lifestyle are first-line treatments for PCOS. Weight management includes the prevention of weight gain, losing some weight or maintaining weight loss. Limited weight loss of 5% shows metabolic benefits, and possibly benefits for reproductive health. There is little evidence that one type of healthy diet is better than another in PCOS. In terms of exercise, the general population guidance of 150 minutes of exercise of moderate intensity per week is recommended to prevent weight gain. For weight loss, 250 minutes of moderate exercise is recommended.\nLifestyle changes for people with PCOS have been proven to be difficult due to various factors. Some studies indicate that women with PCOS might have problems with feeling sated after eating, making weight loss more challenging. Sleep disorders, more prevalent in women with PCOS, cause fatigue which further makes a healthy lifestyle more difficult. Finally, issues with body image, eating disorders, depression or lack of intrinsic motivation (not enjoying exercise) may make lifestyle interventions more difficult.\nLifestyle interventions for women with PCOS may include strategies such as setting goals, tracking progress, learning assertiveness, and relapse prevention. These approaches aim to support weight control, a healthy lifestyle, and emotional wellbeing. Support may also involve using SMART goals (specific, measurable, achievable, realistic, and timely). Broader behavioural or cognitive behavioural programmes may help increase motivation, continued participation, and long-term healthy habits.\nMedications.\nMedications for PCOS include metformin and oral contraceptives. Metformin is a medication commonly used in type 2 diabetes mellitus, and is used frequently off-label in the management of PCOS. It is recommended for those with a BMI over 25 to treat insulin resistance and normalise lipid profiles, and can also be considered for the treatment of irregular periods in adolescents and for those with a BMI under 25. Metformin is associated with several side effects, including abdominal pain, metallic taste in the mouth, diarrhoea and vomiting. It can also be used to help women get pregnant, but is not the most effective drug for it.\nCombined oral contraceptives (COCs) can be used to reduce the symptoms of hirsutism and regulate menstrual periods. They increase sex hormone binding globulin production, and reduce levels of androgens. A regular cycle reduces risks of endometrial cancer. Contraceptive pills with only progestogens can be used to improve menstrual regularity, but not for symptoms of androgen excess. Anti-androgens such as finasteride and flutamide do not show advantages over COCs for treating hirsutism, but can be an option for people for whom COCs are contraindicated or who do not tolerate them. It may take six to twelve months for COCs to be effective for hirsutism. For the treatment of androgenic alopecia, a combination of anti-androgens and combined oral contraceptives can be tried, but it is difficult to treat.\nGLP-1 receptor agonists, such as liraglutide and semaglutide, may be more effective than metformin alone in terms of metabolic improvements. Their combination has stronger effects than either therapy alone. Small trials have found positive effects on menstrual regularity and androgen levels. These drugs are not recommended when trying to conceive. There is some evidence inositol may have positive effects on metabolic issues in PCOS. However, metformin is recommended above inositol supplements for hirsutism and abdominal fat reduction.\nInfertility.\nIt can be difficult to become pregnant with PCOS due to irregular ovulation. The first management step is to improve general health of the mother, such as through lifestyle interventions. GLP-1 agonist for weight loss can be used, but should be stopped at least 2 months before conception. As of 2025[ [update]], there is not enough data to know if they are safe in pregnancy. Pregnancy in PCOS is more risky than normal, and treatment is focused on getting a single pregnancy, rather than, for instance, twins (multiple pregnancy). With treatment, the eventual family size of women with PCOS does not seem different to those without.\nThe first-line medical treatment for infertility in women with PCOS is letrozole (Femara) to induce ovulation. This is in general more effective than clomiphene citrate to improve both pregnancy rates and live births. Other medications that can be used to treat infertility, listed from more to less effective, are metformin + clomiphene citrate, clomiphene citrate alone and metformin alone. Women may be more likely to experience gastrointestinal side effects with metformin. Gonadotrophin therapy may be effective too, but requires monitoring and increases the risks of multiple pregnancies.\nWhen medication and lifestyle interventions are ineffective, infertility can be treated with a laparoscopic procedure called \"ovarian drilling\", which involves puncture of 4\u201310 small follicles with electrocautery, laser, or biopsy needles. This procedure can induce ovulation, typically leads to a single pregnancy, but other risks may be higher compared to medication. The procedure might lead to lower chance of live births compared to medication alone. Ovarian wedge resection is no longer used as much due to complications such as adhesions and the presence of frequently effective medications.\nAs a final treatment option, in vitro fertilisation (IVF) can be considered. IVF does increase the risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Using a 'freeze all' strategy makes it easier to transfer a single embryo and provides time for the ovaries to recover from hyperstimulation. A less effective alternative, but with much lower risks of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, is in vitro maturation instead of full IVF. This option avoids high-dose gonadotropin therapy.\nHirsutism and acne.\nManagement of hirsutism involves lowering androgen levels and removing existing hair, for example, by laser treatment or shaving. A standard contraceptive pill is frequently effective in reducing hirsutism and acne. Progestogens such as norgestrel and levonorgestrel should be avoided due to their androgenic effects. Metformin combined with an oral contraceptive may be more effective than the oral contraceptive on its own. Although oral contraceptives have shown significant efficacy in clinical trials (60\u2013100% of individuals for treatment of hirsutism), severe acne or hirsutism might require additional treatment.\nOther medications with anti-androgen effects include flutamide, and spironolactone, which can improve hirsutism. Antiandrogens are sometimes used, such as finasteride, but they are contraindicated in pregnancy. Finasteride inhibits the conversion of testosterone to its stronger form dihydrotestosterone.\nMental health.\nWomen with PCOS are far more likely to have depression than women without PCOS. Symptoms of depression might be heightened by certain symptoms of the condition, such as hirsutism or obesity, that can lead to low self-esteem or poor body image. Screening\u00a0for depression and anxiety disorders is recommended using validated questionnaires, for instance at diagnosis as well as afterwards, based on clinical judgement. For eating disorders and body image distress, screening is only recommended when clinically indicated. For sexually active women who give permission to discuss it, psychosexual dysfunction can be assessed too.\nTreatment of PCOS shows no to moderate effect on depression or anxiety, and standard therapies (such a psychotherapy and anti-depressants) are recommended instead. Cognitive behaviour therapy can be used for girls and women with low self-esteem, poor body image, disordered eating or psychosexual dysfunction.\nScreening for cardiometabolic issues.\nGiven the higher risk of cardiometabolic conditions, monitoring is recommended. This includes testing of glucose tolerance, using a two-hour oral glucose tolerance test (GTT) in all women with PCOS. After initial testing at diagnosis, follow-up assessments are advised every one to three years, depending on the presence of diabetes risk factors. Screening for cardiovascular risk factors includes lipid profile tests and yearly blood pressure measurements.\nEpidemiology.\nPCOS is the most common hormonal disorder (endocrine disorder) among women of reproductive age. When someone is infertile due to lack of ovulation, PCOS is the most common cause. \nAccording to the World Health Organization (WHO), PCOS affects over 6 to 13% of reproductive-aged women. A 2022 review noted a prevalence between 5% and 18%. The prevalence of PCOS depends on the choice of diagnostic criteria. Using the Rotterdam criteria, around 10\u201313% of women have PCOS. Based on the NIH criteria, the global prevalence was 5.5%, increasing to approximately 7.1% when using the Androgen Excess Society criteria. Irrespective of the criteria, the prevalence of PCOS is increasing, likely due to an aging population, more awareness, and increasing obesity rates. \nPrevalence seems fairly even among people with different ethnicities, but is perhaps higher in people from South East Asia and the Eastern Mediterranean. However, PCOS may express differently. For instance, in African and Hispanic American people with PCOS, there is more insulin resistance compared to other ethnic groups. The same is true for South Asian people with PCOS, who also have more metabolic symptoms and higher BMIs. East Asian women typically have less hirsutism and lower BMI compared to other groups. While early small-scale studies found that transmasculine individuals were more likely to have PCOS than cis women, this was not found in a larger, more rigorous study.\nHistory.\nHistorical descriptions of possible PCOS symptoms date back to ancient Greece, where Hippocrates described women with \"thick, oily skin and absence of menstruation.\" The earliest known description of what is now recognized as PCOS dates from 1721 in Italy, which described \"Young married peasant women, moderately obese and infertile, with two larger than normal ovaries, bumpy, shiny and whitish, just like pigeon eggs\". Polycystic ovaries were likely first formally described in 1844 by the French doctor Achille Chereau.\nIn 1935, American gynecologists Irving F. Stein and Michael L. Leventhal published a report linking polycystic ovaries to hirsutism, infertility and lack of periods. The report also hypothesised that PCOS results from endocrine dysfunction, initiating research into its hormonal causes and giving rise to the term \"Stein\u2013Leventhal syndrome\". By the 1980s, the metabolic side of PCOS started to be studied, before the start of genetics research in the 1990s.\nTerminology.\nThe name \"polycystic ovary syndrome\" derives from a typical finding on medical images called polycystic ovary morphology. A polycystic ovary has an abnormally large number of developing follicles, looking like many small cysts. There are various objections to the name polycystic ovary syndrome: the \"cysts\" are not truly cysts, but arrested follicles. Having many follicles in the ovaries is also not unique to PCOS, and is often seen in women without PCOS, particularly adolescents. Furthermore, the name implies that PCOS is a gynecological condition only, rather than a metabolic and endocrine condition.\nPrevious names for PCOS are Stein-Leventhal syndrome and polycystic ovary disease. Suggested names include hyperandrogenic (chronic) anovulation, estrogenic ovulatory dysfunction or functional female hyperandrogenism. For specific subgroups, suggested names include multi-follicular ovarian disorder for those with polycystic ovary morphology, and metabolic hyperandrogenic syndrome for those meeting the NIH PCOS criteria. A majority of clinicians and people with PCOS are in favour of renaming the condition, and, as of 2025[ [update]], a survey is underway to find a new name.\nResearch directions.\nKey research questions in PCOS focus on the best way to manage the condition, including with new anti-obesity drugs. In terms of criteria for diagnosis, age-specific levels of AMH need to be specified. Biomarkers are needed for early diagnosis, and to guide drug development. Another open question is how to define the male phenotype to assess male relatives of women with PCOS.\nResearch is exploring better ways to assess and predict metabolic complications. Current clinical tests for insulin resistance lack accuracy and standardisation, and the gold-standard method is impractical in clinical settings. Emerging approaches include multi-omics, which may uncover biomarkers for diagnosis and subtyping, and artificial intelligence (AI)-based methods, which can identify patterns in medical data and also classify patients into subgroups. Combining AI with omics might improve early diagnosis, risk prediction, personalised treatment, and long-term monitoring, though robust validation in large, diverse cohorts remains necessary.\n, studies have successfully developed in vitro PCOS disease models through human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cell technology (iPSC). Both can be derived from individuals with PCOS and can differentiate into various cell types. Using adult somatic cells, iPSCs can reprogram the cells into a pluripotent state, which can then be specified to replicate PCOS-like traits. Furthermore, 3D \"organoid\" models of female reproductive tissue, such as the uterus and ovaries, produced from iPSCs, present a way to stimulate the development of reproductive disorders such as PCOS in vitro.\nSociety and culture.\nThe direct economic costs of PCOS in the United States are estimated to be over $15 billion per year (in 2021 USD). This includes the costs of managing PCOS, treating its complications such as strokes, and its mental health costs. Compared to arthritis, lupus, and tuberculosis\u2014diseases with a similar or lower prevalence and similar severity\u2014PCOS got lower NIH research funding between 2005 and 2015. This possible underfunding reflects a gender bias in health care, where conditions mostly affecting women get less research funding.\nThere is substantial misinformation on PCOS in social media. For example, some health influencers promote restrictive diets, such as eliminating gluten or dairy, for which there is no evidence of effectiveness. Others recommend against intensive exercise, despite its usefulness. Some social media influencers without medical qualifications, including those with large followings, have presented themselves as authorities on PCOS to promote their unproven treatments, taking advantage of the limited medical options available for treating the condition.\nResearch has identified notable gaps in physician knowledge and education related to PCOS, which may contribute to challenges in timely diagnosis and treatment. For instance, health care professionals in primary care, but also in gynaecology and reproductive specialists, are often unfamiliar with the precise diagnostic criteria. In terms of management, many professionals have limited knowledge of associated metabolic conditions, recommended screening, and psychological impacts. Diagnosis is often delayed, and those with PCOS are usually dissatisfied with care.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54303", "revid": "50536052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54303", "title": "Raymond Queneau", "text": "French novelist and poet (1903\u20131976)\nRaymond Auguste Queneau (; ; 21 February 1903 \u2013 25 October 1976) was a French novelist, poet, critic, editor and co-founder and president of Oulipo (), notable for his wit and cynical humour.\nBiography.\nQueneau, the only child of Auguste Queneau and Jos\u00e9phine Mignot, was born at 47, rue Thiers (now Avenue Ren\u00e9-Coty), Le Havre, Seine-Inf\u00e9rieure. He received his middle name Auguste as a patronymic. After studying in Le Havre, Queneau moved to Paris in 1920 and received his first baccalaur\u00e9at in 1925 for philosophy from the University of Paris. Queneau performed military service as a \"zouave\" in Algeria and Morocco during the years 1925\u201326.\nFrom the 1920s through 1930s, Queneau took odd jobs for income, working as a bank teller, tutor, translator and hackwriting in a column entitled, ('Do you know Paris?') for the daily newspaper \"L'Intransigeant\".\nHe married Janine Kahn (1903\u20131972) in 1928 after returning to Paris from his first military service. Kahn was the sister-in-law of Andr\u00e9 Breton, leader of the surrealist movement. In 1934 they had a son, Jean-Marie, who became a painter.\nQueneau was drafted in August 1939 and served in small provincial towns before his promotion to corporal just before demobilisation in 1940. Following a prolific career of writing, editing and critique, Queneau died on 25 October 1976, taking last rites. He is buried with his parents in the old cemetery of Juvisy-sur-Orge, in Essonne.\nCareer.\nQueneau spent much of his life working for the Gallimard publishing house, where he began as a reader in 1938. He later rose to be general secretary and eventually became director of \"l'Encyclop\u00e9die de la Pl\u00e9iade\" in 1956. During some of this time, he also taught at l'\u00c9cole Nouvelle de Neuilly. He entered the Coll\u00e8ge de 'Pataphysique in 1950, where he became Satrap.\nIn 1950, Juliette Gr\u00e9co recorded \"Si tu t'imagines\", a song by Joseph Kosma with lyrics by Queneau.\nDuring this time, Queneau also acted as a translator, notably for Amos Tutuola's \"The Palm-Wine Drinkard\" () in 1953. Additionally, he edited and published Alexandre Koj\u00e8ve's lectures on Hegel's \"Phenomenology of Spirit\". Queneau had been a student of Koj\u00e8ve during the 1930s and was, during this period, also close to writer Georges Bataille.\nAs an author, Queneau came to general attention in France with the publication in 1959 of his novel \"Zazie dans le m\u00e9tro\". In 1960 the film adaptation directed by Louis Malle was released during the \"Nouvelle Vague\" movement. \"Zazie\" explores colloquial language as opposed to \"standard\" written French. The first word of the book, the alarmingly long \"Doukipudonktan\" is a playful phonetic transcription of \"D'o\u00f9 qu'il pue / qu'ils puent donc tant?\" \u2013 \"Why does it / does he / do they stink so much?\"\nBefore he founded the (Oulipo) in 1960, Queneau was attracted to mathematics as a source of inspiration. He became a member of la Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Math\u00e9matique de France in 1948. In Queneau's mind, elements of a text, including seemingly trivial details such as the number of chapters, were things that had to be predetermined, perhaps calculated. This was an issue during the writing of \"A Hundred Thousand Billion Poems\", also known as \"100,000,000,000,000 Poems\". Queneau wrote 140 lines in 10 individual sonnets that could all be taken apart and rearranged in any order. Queneau calculated that anyone reading the book 24 hours a day would need 190,258,751 years to finish it. While Queneau was completing this work, he asked mathematician Fran\u00e7ois Le Lionnais for help with issues he was having, and their conversation led to a role of mathematics in literature, which led to the creation of the Oulipo. His work encouraged Jacques Lacan to pursue his pioneering work on game theory and the use of mathematics in psychoanalysis.\nA later work, (1976), alludes to the mathematician David Hilbert, and attempts to explore the foundations of literature by quasi-mathematical derivations from textual axioms. Queneau claimed this final work would prove \"a hidden master of the automaton.\" Pressed by GF, his interlocutor, Queneau confided that the text \"could never appear, but had to hide to glorify that without agency.\"\nOne of Queneau's most influential works is \"Exercises in Style\", which tells the simple story of a man's seeing the same stranger twice in one day. It tells that short story in 99 different ways, demonstrating the tremendous variety of styles in which storytelling can take place. An excerpt from this piece was published in 0 to 9 magazine, a 1960s publication which experimented with language and meaning-making.\nQueneau's works are published by Gallimard in the collection \"Biblioth\u00e8que de la Pl\u00e9iade\".\nQueneau and Surrealists.\nIn 1924 Queneau met and briefly joined the Surrealists, but never fully shared their penchants for automatic writing or ultra-left politics. Like many surrealists, he entered psychoanalysis\u2014however, not in order to stimulate his creative abilities, but for personal reasons, as with Leiris, Bataille, and Crevel.\nMichel Leiris describes, in \"Bris\u00e9es\", how he first met Queneau in 1924, while vacationing in Nemours with Andr\u00e9 Masson, Armand Salacrou and Juan Gris. A common friend, Roland Tual, met Queneau on a train from Le Havre and brought him over. Queneau was a few years younger and felt less accomplished than the other men. He did not make a big impression on the young bohemians. After Queneau came back from the army, around 1926\u20137, he and Leiris met at the Caf\u00e9 Certa, near L'Opera, a Surrealist hang-out. On this occasion, when conversation delved into Eastern philosophy, Queneau's comments showed a quiet superiority and erudite thoughtfulness. Leiris and Queneau became friends later while writing for Bataille's \"Documents\".\nQueneau questioned Surrealist support of the USSR in 1926. He remained on cordial terms with Andr\u00e9 Breton, although he also continued associating with Simone Kahn after Breton split up with her. Breton usually demanded that his followers ostracize his former girlfriends. It would have been difficult for Queneau to avoid Simone, however, since he married her sister, Janine, in 1928. The year that Breton left Simone, she sometimes traveled around France with her sister and Queneau.\nBy 1930, Queneau separated himself significantly from Breton and the Surrealists. \u00c9luard, Aragon and Breton had joined the French Communist party in 1927; Queneau did not, and instead participated in \"Un Cadavre\" (A Corpse, 1930), a vehemently anti-Breton pamphlet co-written by Bataille, Leiris, Pr\u00e9vert, Alejo Carpentier, Jacques Baron, J.-A. Boiffard, Robert Desnos, Georges Limbour, Max Morise, Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes, and Roger Vitrac.\nQueneau also joined the Democratic Communist Circle founded by Boris Souvarine and took up numerous left-wing and anti-fascist causes. He defended the Popular Front in France and the Republicans during the Spanish Civil War. Under the Nazi occupation of France, he published in many left-wing journals associated with the Resistance. After World War II, Queneau continued to lend his support left-wing manifestos and petitions, and condemned McCarthyism and anti-communist persecution in Greece.\nHe wrote more scientific than literary reviews: on Pavlov, Vernadsky (from whom he got a circular theory of sciences), and a review of a book on the history of equestrian caparisons by an artillery officer. He also helped with writing passages on Engels and a mathematical dialectic for Bataille's article, \"A critique of the foundations of Hegelian dialectic.\"\nJacques Lacan became seriously interested in mathematics, and made early contributions to game theory, after reading Queneau's works.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54305", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54305", "title": "Pelvic ultrasound", "text": ""}
{"id": "54306", "revid": "20685249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54306", "title": "Samuel L. Jackson", "text": "American actor (born 1948)\nSamuel Leroy Jackson (born December 21, 1948) is an American actor and film producer. He is one of the most widely recognized actors of his generation. The films in which he has appeared have collectively grossed more than $27 billion worldwide, making him the highest-grossing actor of all time. In 2022, he received the Academy Honorary Award as \"a cultural icon whose dynamic work has resonated across genres and generations and audiences worldwide\".\nJackson made his professional theater debut in \"Mother Courage and Her Children\" in 1980 at The Public Theater in New York City. From 1981 to 1983, he originated the role of Private Louis Henderson in Charles Fuller's \"A Soldier's Play\" off-Broadway. He also originated the role of Boy Willie in August Wilson's \"The Piano Lesson\" in 1987 at the Yale Repertory Theatre. He portrayed Martin Luther King Jr. in the Broadway play \"The Mountaintop\" (2011). He returned to Broadway in the 2022 revival of \"The Piano Lesson\" playing Doaker Charles, for which he received a Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play nomination.\nJackson's early film roles include \"Coming to America\" (1988), \"Juice\" (1992), \"True Romance\" (1993), \"Jurassic Park\" (1993), \"Menace II Society\" (1993), and \"Fresh\" (1994). His early collaborations with Spike Lee led to greater prominence with films such as \"School Daze\" (1988), \"Do the Right Thing\" (1989), \"Mo' Better Blues\" (1990), and \"Jungle Fever\" (1991). Jackson's breakout performance was as Jules Winnfield in Quentin Tarantino's crime drama \"Pulp Fiction\" (1994), for which he won the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role and received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. He has continued to collaborate with Lee (\"Oldboy\" in 2013 and \"Chi-Raq\" in 2015) and Tarantino, with the latter including prominent roles in \"Jackie Brown\" (1997), \"\" (2004), \"Django Unchained\" (2012), and \"The Hateful Eight\" (2015).\nHe also gained widespread recognition as the Jedi Mace Windu in the \"Star Wars\" prequel trilogy (1999\u20132005), and Nick Fury in 11 Marvel Cinematic Universe films, beginning with \"Iron Man\" (2008), as well as in the Disney+ series \"Secret Invasion\" (2023) and \"What If...?\" (2021\u20132024) and guest-starring in the ABC series \"Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.\" (2013\u20132014). Jackson has provided his voice for Lucius Best / Frozone in the Pixar films \"The Incredibles\" (2004) and \"Incredibles 2\" (2018). He has also acted in a number of big-budget films, including \"Die Hard with a Vengeance\" (1995), \"A Time to Kill\" (1996), \"Unbreakable\" (2000), \"Shaft\" (2000) and its reboot (2019), \"XXX\" (2002), \"Coach Carter\" (2005), \"Snakes on a Plane\" (2006), ' (2014), ' (2017), and \"Glass\" (2019).\nEarly life, family and education.\nJackson was born on December 21, 1948, in Washington, D.C., the only child of Elizabeth Harriett (\"n\u00e9e\" Montgomery) and Roy Henry Jackson. He grew up in Chattanooga, Tennessee. His father lived away from the family in Kansas City, Missouri, and later died of alcoholism. Jackson met him only twice during his life. He was raised by his mother, a factory worker and later a supplies buyer for a psychiatric hospital; he was also raised by his maternal grandparents, Edgar and Pearl Montgomery, as well as extended family. According to DNA tests, Jackson partially descends from the Benga people of Gabon, and he became a naturalized citizen of Gabon in 2019. He developed a stutter during childhood and learned to \"pretend to be other people who didn't stutter\". \nJackson attended several segregated schools and graduated from Riverside High School in Chattanooga. He played the French horn, piccolo, trumpet, and flute in the school orchestra. Initially intent on pursuing a degree in marine biology, he attended Morehouse College in Atlanta, Georgia, where he was a cheerleader. After joining a local acting group to earn extra points in a class, he found an interest in acting and switched his major. Before graduating in 1972, he co-founded the Just Us Theatre.\nAfter Martin Luther King Jr.'s assassination in 1968, Jackson attended King's funeral in Atlanta as an usher. He then traveled to Memphis, Tennessee, to join an equal rights protest march. In a 2005 \"Parade\" interview, he said, \"I was angry about the assassination, but I wasn't shocked by it. I knew that change was going to take something different\u2014not sit-ins, not peaceful coexistence.\" In 1969, Jackson and several other students held hostage the members of the Morehouse College Board of Trustees (including Martin Luther King Sr.) on the campus, demanding reform in the school's curriculum and governance. The college eventually agreed to change its policy, but Jackson was charged with and eventually convicted of unlawful confinement, a second-degree felony. He was suspended for two years for his criminal record and his actions. He would later return to the college to earn a BA in drama in 1972. \nWhile he was suspended, he worked as a social worker in Los Angeles. He decided to return to Atlanta, where he met with Stokely Carmichael, H. Rap Brown, and others active in the black power movement. He began to feel empowered with his involvement in the movement, especially when the group began buying guns. However, before he could become involved with any significant armed confrontations, his mother sent him to Los Angeles after the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) warned her that he would die within a year if he remained with the group. In a 2018 interview with \"Vogue\", he denied having been a member of the Black Panther Party.\nCareer.\n1972\u20131987: Early roles and theater work.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCasting black actors is still strange for Hollywood. Denzel gets the offer first. Then it's Danny Glover, Forest Whitaker, and Wesley Snipes. Right now, I'm the next one on the list.\n\u2014 Jackson discussing his new fame in 1993\nJackson initially majored in marine biology at Morehouse College before switching to architecture. He later settled on drama after taking a public speaking class and appearing in a version of \"The Threepenny Opera\". Jackson began acting on the stage, including \"Home\" and \"A Soldier's Play\", which was the inspiration for the 1984 film \"A Soldier's Story\". He appeared in several television films, and made his feature film debut in the blaxploitation independent film \"Together for Days\" (1972). After these initial roles, Jackson moved from Atlanta to New York City in 1976, and spent the next decade appearing in stage plays, including the premieres of \"The Piano Lesson\" and \"Two Trains Running\" at the Yale Repertory Theater. To supplement his income while auditioning, he worked at the Manhattan Plaza apartment complex as an overnight security guard. Jackson developed addictions to alcohol and cocaine, which prevented him from proceeding with the two plays to Broadway (actors Charles S. Dutton and Anthony Chisholm took his place).\n1988\u20131993: Rise to prominence.\nAfter a 1981 performance in the play \"A Soldier's Play\", Jackson was introduced to director Spike Lee, who cast him for small roles in \"School Daze\" (1988) and \"Do the Right Thing\" (1989). He also worked for three years as a stand-in for Bill Cosby on \"The Cosby Show\". Throughout his early film career, mainly in minimal roles in films such as \"Coming to America\" (1988) and various television films, Jackson was mentored by Morgan Freeman.\nJackson played a minor role in the 1990 Martin Scorsese film \"Goodfellas\", as real-life Mafia associate Stacks Edwards. Having overdosed on heroin several times, he switched to cocaine. His family entered him into a New York rehabilitation clinic. After he completed rehabilitation, he appeared in \"Jungle Fever\" as a crack cocaine addict. Jackson said that the role was cathartic, commenting, \"It was a funny kind of thing. By the time I was out of rehab, about a week or so later I was on set and we were ready to start shooting.\" His performance was so acclaimed that the jury of 1991 Cannes Film Festival added a special \"Supporting Actor\" award just for him. Following this role, Jackson became involved with the comedy \"Strictly Business\" and dramas \"Juice\" and \"Patriot Games\". He then moved on to two other comedies: \"National Lampoon's Loaded Weapon 1\" (his first starring role) and \"Amos &amp; Andrew\". Jackson worked with the director Steven Spielberg in 1993's \"Jurassic Park\".\n1994\u20131998: Career breakthrough.\nAfter a turn as the criminal Big Don in 1993's \"True Romance\"\u2014written by Quentin Tarantino and directed by Tony Scott\u2014Tarantino asked Jackson to play Jules Winnfield in \"Pulp Fiction\" (1994). Jackson was surprised to learn that the part had been specifically written for him: \"To know that somebody had written something like Jules for me. I was overwhelmed, thankful, arrogant\u2014this whole combination of things that you could be, knowing that somebody's going to give you an opportunity like that.\" \"Pulp Fiction,\" Jackson's thirtieth film, made him internationally recognized and he received praise from critics. \"Entertainment Weekly\" wrote: \"As superb as Travolta, Willis, and Keitel are, the actor who reigns over \"Pulp Fiction\" is Samuel L. Jackson. He just about lights fires with his gremlin eyes and he transforms his speeches into hypnotic bebop soliloquies.\" For the Academy Awards, Miramax Films pushed for, and received, the Best Supporting Actor nomination for Jackson. He also received a Golden Globe nomination and won the BAFTA Award for Best Supporting Role.\nAfter \"Pulp Fiction\", Jackson received multiple scripts to review: \"I could easily have made a career out of playing Jules over the years. Everybody's always sending me the script they think is the new \"Pulp Fiction\".\" With a succession of poor-performing films such as \"Kiss of Death\", \"The Great White Hype\", and \"Losing Isaiah\", Jackson began to receive poor reviews from critics who had praised his performance in \"Pulp Fiction\". This ended with his involvement in two box-office successes: \"Die Hard with a Vengeance\", in which he starred alongside Bruce Willis in the third installment of the \"Die Hard\" series; and \"A Time to Kill\", where he played a father put on trial for killing two men who raped his daughter. For \"A Time to Kill\", Jackson earned an NAACP Image for Best Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture and a Golden Globe nomination for a Best Supporting Actor.\nQuickly becoming a box office star, Jackson continued with three starring roles in 1997. In \"187\" he played a dedicated teacher striving to leave an impact on his students. He received an Independent Spirit award for Best First Feature alongside first-time writer/director Kasi Lemmons in the drama \"Eve's Bayou\", for which he also served as executive producer. He worked again with Tarantino on \"Jackie Brown\" and received the Silver Bear for Best Actor at the Berlin Film Festival and a fourth Golden Globe nomination for his portrayal of the arms merchant Ordell Robbie. In 1998, he worked with established actors: Sharon Stone and Dustin Hoffman in \"Sphere\", and Kevin Spacey in \"The Negotiator\", playing a hostage negotiator who resorts to taking hostages himself when he is falsely accused of murder and embezzlement. In 1999, Jackson starred in the horror film \"Deep Blue Sea\", and as Jedi Master Mace Windu in George Lucas' \"\". In an interview, Jackson claimed that he did not have a chance to read the script for the film and did not learn he was playing the character Mace Windu until he was fitted for his costume (though he later said that he was eager to accept any role, just for the chance to be a part of the \"Star Wars\" saga).\n1999\u20132007: Established actor.\nOn June 13, 2000, Jackson was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 7018 Hollywood Blvd. He began the next decade of his film career playing a Marine colonel put on trial in \"Rules of Engagement\", co-starred with Bruce Willis for a third time in the supernatural thriller \"Unbreakable\", and starred in the 2000 remake of the 1971 film \"Shaft\". He reprised both of the latter roles in 2019, his \"Unbreakable\" character Mr. Glass in \"Glass\" and Shaft in another film titled \"Shaft\". Jackson's sole film in 2001 was \"The Caveman's Valentine\", a murder thriller directed by Lemmons in which he played a homeless musician. In 2002, he played a recovering alcoholic, attempting to keep custody of his kids while fighting a battle of wits in \"Changing Lanes\", co-starring Ben Affleck. He returned for \"\", seeing his minor supporting role develop into a major character. Mace Windu's purple lightsaber in the film was the result of Jackson's suggestion; he wanted to be sure that his character would stand out in a crowded battle scene. Jackson then acted as an NSA agent, alongside Vin Diesel in \"XXX\", and as a kilt-wearing drug dealer in \"The 51st State\". In 2003, Jackson again worked with John Travolta in \"Basic\" and then as a police sergeant alongside Colin Farrell in the television show remake \"S.W.A.T.\" A song within the soundtrack was named after him, entitled \"Sammy L. Jackson\" by Hot Action Cop. Jackson also appeared in HBO's documentary \"Unchained Memories\", as a narrator along many other stars like Angela Bassett and Whoopi Goldberg.\nBased on reviews gathered by Rotten Tomatoes, in 2004 Jackson starred in both his lowest and highest ranked films in his career. In the thriller \"Twisted\", Jackson played a mentor to Ashley Judd. The film garnered a 2% approval rating on the website, with reviewers calling his performance \"lackluster\" and \"wasted\". He then lent his voice to the animated film \"The Incredibles\" as the superhero Frozone. The film received a 97% approval rating, and Jackson's performance earned him an Annie Award nomination for Best Voice Acting. He made a cameo in another Quentin Tarantino film, \"\".\nIn 2005, he starred in the sports drama \"Coach Carter\", where he played a coach (based on the actual coach Ken Carter) dedicated to teaching his players that education is more important than basketball. Although the film received mixed reviews, Jackson's performance was praised despite the film's storyline. Bob Townsend of the \"Atlanta Journal-Constitution\" commended Jackson's performance, \"He takes what could have been a cardboard clich\u00e9 role and puts flesh on it with his flamboyant intelligence.\" Jackson also returned for two sequels: ', this time commanding Ice Cube, and the final \"Star Wars\" prequel film, '. His last film for 2005 was \"The Man\" alongside comedian Eugene Levy. On November 4, 2005, he was presented with the Hawaii International Film Festival Achievement in Acting Award.\nOn January 30, 2006, Jackson was honored with a hand and footprint ceremony at Grauman's Chinese Theatre; he is the seventh African American and 191st actor to be recognized in this manner. In an interview that year, he said that he chooses roles that are \"exciting to watch\" and have an \"interesting character inside of a story\", and that in his roles he wanted to \"do things [he hasn't] done, things [he] saw as a kid and wanted to do and now [has] an opportunity to do\". He next starred opposite actress Julianne Moore in the box-office bomb \"Freedomland\", where he depicted a police detective attempting to help a mother find her abducted child while quelling a citywide race riot. Jackson's second film of the year, \"Snakes on a Plane\", gained cult film status months before it was released based on its title and cast. Jackson's decision to star in the film was solely based on the title. To build anticipation for the film, he also cameoed in the 2006 music video \"Snakes on a Plane (Bring It)\" by Cobra Starship. On December 2, 2006, Jackson won the German Bambi Award for International Film, based on his many film contributions. In December 2006, Jackson starred in \"Home of the Brave\", as a doctor returning home from the Iraq War.\nOn January 30, 2007, Jackson was featured as narrator in Bob Saget's direct-to-DVD \"Farce of the Penguins\". The film was a spoof of the box office success \"March of the Penguins\" (which was narrated by Morgan Freeman). Also in 2007, he portrayed a blues player who imprisons a young woman (Christina Ricci) addicted to sex in \"Black Snake Moan\", and the horror film \"1408\", an adaptation of the Stephen King short story. Later the same year, Jackson portrayed an athlete who impersonates former boxing heavyweight Bob Satterfield in director Rod Lurie's drama, \"Resurrecting the Champ\". In 2008, Jackson reprised his role of Mace Windu in the CGI film, \"\", followed by \"Lakeview Terrace\" where he played a racist cop who terrorizes an interracial couple. In November of the same year, he starred along with Bernie Mac and Isaac Hayes (who both died before the film's release) in \"Soul Men\".\n2008\u20132019: Career expansion.\nIn 2008, he portrayed the villain in \"The Spirit\", which was poorly received by critics and the box office. In 2009, he again worked with Quentin Tarantino when he narrated several scenes in the World War II film \"Inglourious Basterds\".\nIn 2010, he starred in the drama \"Mother and Child\" and portrayed an interrogator who attempts to locate several nuclear weapons in the direct-to-video film \"Unthinkable\". Alongside Dwayne Johnson, Jackson again portrayed a police officer in the opening scenes of the comedy \"The Other Guys\". He also co-starred with Tommy Lee Jones for a film adaptation of \"The Sunset Limited\".\nThroughout Jackson's career, he has appeared in many films alongside mainstream rappers. These include Tupac Shakur (\"Juice\"), Queen Latifah (\"Juice\"/\"Sphere\"/\"Jungle Fever\"), Method Man (\"One Eight Seven\"), LL Cool J (\"Deep Blue Sea\"/\"S.W.A.T.\"), Busta Rhymes (\"Shaft\"), Eve (\"xXx\"), Ice Cube (\"xXx: State of the Union\"), Xzibit (\"xXx: State of the Union\"), David Banner (\"Black Snake Moan\"), and 50 Cent (\"Home of the Brave\"). Additionally, Jackson has appeared in five films with actor Bruce Willis (National Lampoon's \"Loaded Weapon 1\", \"Pulp Fiction\", \"Die Hard with a Vengeance\", \"Unbreakable\", and \"Glass\") and the actors were slated to work together in \"Black Water Transit\" before both dropped out.\nIn 2002, Marvel Comics designed their \"Ultimate\" version of the character Nick Fury after his likeness without his consent. Jackson, an active comic book reader, recognized his image in the comics and had his agents contact the publisher who pledged to cast him in future adaptations as Fury In the 2008 film \"Iron Man\", he made a cameo as the character in a post-credit scene. In February 2009, Jackson signed on to a nine-picture deal with Marvel Studios which would see him appear as the character in \"Iron Man 2\", \"Thor\", ', and \"The Avengers\", as well as any other subsequent film they would produce. He reprised the role in ' (2014) and ' (2015). In 2018 and 2019, Jackson made cameo appearances as Fury in the Avengers sequels ' and \"\", and starred as a younger, de-aged Fury in \"Captain Marvel\" alongside Brie Larson.\nAmong his more recent film roles, Jackson appeared in Quentin Tarantino's \"Django Unchained\", which was released December 25, 2012, Tarantino's \"The Hateful Eight\", which was released in 70mm on December 25, 2015, and Jordan Vogt-Roberts' ', which was released on March 10, 2017. In 2019, Jackson reprised his \"Unbreakable\" role as Mr. Glass in the film \"Glass\", and his Shaft role in \"Shaft\", both sequels to his 2000 films. Also in 2019, he appeared in the Brie Larson film \"Unicorn Store\", and had a prominent role as Fury in the Marvel film '. Additionally, he reprised his role as Fury in a cameo appearance on the ABC television series \"Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.\" in 2013 and the season finale in 2014. In 2020, archival footage of Jackson from \"Revenge of the Sith\" was used in the episode \"\".\n2020\u2013present: Return to theater.\nIn 2020, he appeared in the television documentary series \"Enslaved\", with investigative journalist Afua Hirsch as co-presenter. He also appeared in the 2021 movie \"Spiral: From the Book of Saw\" alongside Chris Rock. After an 11-year absence from the stage, Jackson returned to Broadway as Doaker Charles in a revival of August Wilson's \"The Piano Lesson\", opposite John David Washington and Danielle Brooks. The 2022 production was directed by Jackson's wife, LaTanya Richardson Jackson. For his performance, he received a Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play nomination. He reprised his role as Nick Fury in the Disney+ series \"Secret Invasion\", and in \"The Marvels\", the sequel to \"Captain Marvel\". The following year, Jackson had a minor role in the Matthew Vaughn-directed spy comedy \"Argylle\" (2024).\nUpcoming projects.\nJackson is set to produce a live-action film adaptation of \"Afro Samurai\", and will play the role of Sho'nuff in a remake of \"The Last Dragon\". He is also appeared opposite Pierce Brosnan in \"The Unholy Trinity\".\nFilming began for \"Last Meals\" in late November 2023.\nOn June 5, 2025 it was announced that \"NOLA King\", a spin-off series of \"Tulsa King\" set in New Orleans, was in the works at Paramount+ and would star Jackson in a similar role as the mobster character Slyvester Stallone plays in \"Tulsa King\". Jackson's character will be introduced in the upcoming 3rd season of \"Tulsa King\" which is currently in production.\nOther appearances.\nJackson is known for his extensive voice roles including Whiplash in \"Turbo\" (2013), the title character of the anime series \"Afro Samurai\" (2007), and Frank Tenpenny in the video game \"\" (2004). He also narrated the acclaimed documentary \"I Am Not Your Negro\" (2016).\nIn addition to films, Jackson also appeared in several television shows, a video game, music videos, as well as audiobooks. Jackson had a small part in the Public Enemy music video for \"911 Is a Joke\". Jackson voiced several television show characters, including the lead role in the anime series, \"Afro Samurai\", in addition to a recurring part as the voice of Gin Rummy in several episodes of the animated series \"The Boondocks\". He was in the pilot for \"Ghostwriter\". He guest-starred as himself in an episode of the BBC/HBO sitcom \"Extras\". He voiced the main antagonist, Officer Frank Tenpenny, in the video game \"\". Jackson also hosted a variety of awards shows. He has hosted the MTV Movie Awards (1998), the ESPYs (1999, 2001, 2002, and 2009), and the Spike TV Video Game Awards (2005, 2006, 2007, and 2012). In November 2006, he provided the voice of God for \"The Bible Experience\", the New Testament audiobook version of the Bible. He was given the lead role because producers believed his deep, authoritative voice would best fit the role. He also recorded the Audible.com audiobook of \"Go the Fuck to Sleep\". For the Atlanta Falcons' 2010 season, Jackson portrayed Rev. Sultan in the Falcons \"Rise Up\" commercial.\nJackson appeared in the Capital One cash-back credit card commercials, and he also appeared in a Sky Broadband Shield commercial, Sky UK's broadband service as Nick Fury to promote Captain America: The Winter Soldier. Additionally, he played Nick Fury in an ad for the video game Marvel Snap. Jackson released a song about social justice with KRS-One, Sticky Fingaz, Mad Lion and Talib Kweli about violence in America called \"I Can't Breathe\", which were the last words said by Eric Garner.\nJackson was a special guest in Kendrick Lamar's Super Bowl LIX halftime show portraying \"Uncle Sam\".\nBox-office performance.\nThroughout the 1990s, A.C. Neilson E.C.I., a box office\u2013tracking company, determined that Jackson appeared in more films than any other actor who grossed $1.7\u00a0billion domestically. By 2011, the films that featured Jackson as a leading actor or supporting co-star had grossed a total of $2.81 to $4.91\u00a0billion at the North American box office. This placed him as the seventh-highest-grossing lead actor and the second-highest-grossing actor, behind only voice actor Frank Welker. The 2009 edition of \"The Guinness World Records\", which uses a different calculation to determine film grosses, stated that Jackson is the world's highest-grossing actor, with $7.42\u00a0billion generated across 68 films. Subsequently, as of 2022, according to data calculated by the Golden Globes, this total has grown to more than $27 billion grossed across 152 movies, making him the highest-grossing actor, and second-highest grossing person in film in general behind Stan Lee, who was primarily known for his cameo work.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1980, Jackson married actress LaTanya Richardson, whom he met while attending Morehouse College in Atlanta, Georgia. The couple have a daughter named Zoe (b. 1982). In 2009, they started their own charity to help support education. Jackson has said that he watches his own films in cinemas: \"Even during my theater years, I wished I could watch the plays I was in\u2014while I was in them! I dig watching myself work.\" He also enjoys collecting the action figures of the characters he portrays in his films, including Jules Winnfield, Shaft, Mace Windu, and Frozone. \nJackson is known for his use of the word \"motherfucker\". He has explained he utilizes the word to get through a speech block as he still has days where he stutters. A fundraising campaign of his, Motherfunder, alludes to this reputation. Articles and references to Jackson acknowledge this speech connection.\nHe is bald but often wears wigs for his roles. He said about his decision to shave his head, \"I keep ending up on those 'bald is beautiful' lists. It's cool. You know, when I started losing my hair, it was during the era when everybody had lots of hair. All of a sudden, I felt this big hole in the middle of my afro. I couldn't face having a comb over so I had to quickly figure what the haircut for me was.\" His first bald role was in \"The Great White Hype\" (1996). He usually gets to pick his own hairstyles for each character he portrays. He poked fun at his baldness the first time he appeared bald on \"The Tonight Show\", explaining that he had to shave his head for one role, but then kept receiving more and more bald roles and had to keep shaving his head so that wigs could be made for him. He joked that \"the only way [he's] gonna have time to grow [his] hair back is if [he's] not working\". He is noted for often wearing a Kangol hat in public.\nJackson is an avid golfer. He has a clause in his contracts that allows him to play golf during film shoots. He has played in the Gary Player Invitational charity golf tournament to assist Player in raising funds for children in South Africa. He is a keen basketball fan, supporting the Toronto Raptors and the Harlem Globetrotters. Jackson has supported English football team Liverpool FC since appearing in \"The 51st State\" (2001), which was shot in Liverpool. He also supports Irish football team Bohemian FC. He is fan of the American football team Atlanta Falcons.\nHe was granted Gabonese citizenship in 2019 after the results of a DNA test claimed to link him to the country's Benga ethnic group. Jackson stopped drinking alcohol after having problems with addiction.\nPolitics and activism.\nJackson campaigned during the 2008 Democratic Party presidential primaries for Barack Obama in Texarkana, Texas. He said, \"Barack Obama represents everything I was told I could be growing up. I am a child of segregation. When I grew up and people told me I could be president, I knew it was a lie. But now we have a representative... the American Dream is a reality. Anyone can grow up to be a president.\" He also said, \"I voted for Barack because he was black. That's why other folks vote for other people\u2014because they look like them.\" In December 2012, he compared his \"Django Unchained\" character, a villainous house slave who sides with his white oppressors, to black conservative Justice Clarence Thomas and said that the character had \"the same moral compass as Clarence Thomas does\". Following the Supreme Court's decision to overturn \"Roe v. Wade\" in June 2022, he again criticized Thomas, referring to him as \"Uncle Clarence\" and asking how Thomas\u2014who is married to white attorney Ginni Thomas\u2014feels about overturning \"Loving v. Virginia\", a Supreme Court ruling that prohibited states from outlawing interracial marriages.\nIn June 2013, Jackson launched a joint campaign with Prizeo in an effort to raise money to fight Alzheimer's disease. As part of the campaign, he recited various fan-written monologues and a popular scene from the AMC series \"Breaking Bad\". In August 2013, he started following a vegan diet for health reasons, explaining that he is \"just trying to live forever\". He attributed his weight loss to the diet. He had largely abandoned the diet by March 2017, but still praised and recommended it. He launched a campaign called \"One for the Boys\", which teaches men about testicular cancer and urges them to \"get themselves checked out\".\nIn 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Jackson encouraged people to wear face masks as part of California's \"Your Actions Save Lives\" campaign. Along with Dwayne Johnson, he also encouraged those who had recovered from COVID-19 to donate their blood to help others fighting the virus. He additionally appeared on \"Jimmy Kimmel Live!\" to read a satirical book, \"Stay the Fuck at Home\", which spread awareness of social distancing.\nJackson endorsed Kamala Harris in the 2024 United States presidential election and spoke at one of her campaign rallies on October 24, 2024.\nAwards and honors.\nOver the course of his career, Jackson has received various awards for his performances on film. At the 44th Cannes Film Festival he received the Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actor for his performance in Spike Lee's \"Jungle Fever\" (1991). He received the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role and the Independent Spirit Award for Best Male Lead for his performance in Quentin Tarantino's \"Pulp Fiction\" (1994). He also received Academy Award, Golden Globe Award, and Screen Actors Guild Award nominations for the performance as well. At the 48th Berlin International Film Festival, he received Silver Bear for Best Actor for his leading performance in Tarantino's \"Jackie Brown\" (1997). In 2021, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences named Jackson as one of its Academy Honorary Award recipients as \"A cultural icon whose dynamic work has resonated across genres and generations and audiences worldwide.\" At the 12th Annual Governors Awards in 2022, friend and actor Denzel Washington presented Jackson with his Oscar.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54309", "revid": "36320931", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54309", "title": "Ectopic pregnancy", "text": "Female reproductive system health issue\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nEctopic pregnancy is a complication of pregnancy in which the embryo attaches outside the uterus. This complication has also been referred to as an extrauterine pregnancy ( EUP). Signs and symptoms classically include abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding, but fewer than 50 percent of affected women have both of these symptoms. The pain may be described as sharp, dull, or crampy. Pain may also spread to the shoulder if bleeding into the abdomen has occurred. Severe bleeding may result in a fast heart rate, fainting, or shock. With very rare exceptions, the fetus is unable to survive.\nOverall, ectopic pregnancies annually affect less than 2% of pregnancies worldwide. Risk factors for ectopic pregnancy include pelvic inflammatory disease, often due to chlamydia infection; tobacco smoking; endometriosis; prior tubal surgery; a history of infertility; and the use of assisted reproductive technology. Those who have previously had an ectopic pregnancy are at much higher risk of having another one. Most ectopic pregnancies (90%) occur in the fallopian tube, which are known as tubal pregnancies, but implantation can also occur on the cervix, ovaries, caesarean scar, or within the abdomen. Detection of ectopic pregnancy is typically by blood tests for human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and ultrasound. This may require testing on more than one occasion. Other causes of similar symptoms include: miscarriage, ovarian torsion, and acute appendicitis.\nPrevention is by decreasing risk factors, such as chlamydia infections, through screening and treatment. While some ectopic pregnancies will miscarry without treatment, the standard treatment for ectopic pregnancy is a procedure to either remove the embryo from the fallopian tube or to remove the fallopian tube altogether. The use of the medication methotrexate works as well as surgery in some cases. Specifically, it works well when the beta-HCG is low and the size of the ectopic is small. Surgery such as a salpingectomy is still typically recommended if the tube has ruptured, there is a fetal heartbeat, or the woman's vital signs are unstable. The surgery may be laparoscopic or through a larger incision, known as a laparotomy. Maternal morbidity and mortality are reduced with treatment.\nThe rate of ectopic pregnancy is about 11 to 20 per 1,000 live births in developed countries, though it may be as high as 4% among those using assisted reproductive technology. It is the most common cause of death among women during the first trimester at approximately 6-13% of the total. In the developed world outcomes have improved while in the developing world they often remain poor. The risk of death among those in the developed world is between 0.1 and 0.3 percent while in the developing world it is between one and three percent. The first known description of an ectopic pregnancy is by Al-Zahrawi in the 11th century. The word \"ectopic\" means 'out of place'.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nUp to 10% of those with ectopic pregnancy have no symptoms, and one-third have no medical signs. In many cases the symptoms have low specificity, and can be similar to those of other genitourinary and gastrointestinal disorders, such as appendicitis, salpingitis, rupture of a corpus luteum cyst, miscarriage, ovarian torsion or urinary tract infection. Clinical presentation of ectopic pregnancy occurs at a mean of 7.2 weeks after the last normal menstrual period, with a range of four to eight weeks. Later presentations are more common in communities deprived of modern diagnostic abilities.\nSigns and symptoms of ectopic pregnancy include increased hCG, vaginal bleeding (in varying amounts), sudden lower abdominal pain, pelvic pain, a tender cervix, an adnexal mass, or adnexal tenderness. In the absence of ultrasound or hCG assessment, heavy vaginal bleeding may lead to a misdiagnosis of miscarriage. Nausea, vomiting and diarrhea are more rare symptoms of ectopic pregnancy.\nRupture of an ectopic pregnancy can lead to symptoms such as abdominal distension, tenderness, peritonism and hypovolemic shock. Someone with a ruptured ectopic pregnancy may experience pain when lying flat and may prefer to maintain an upright posture, as intrapelvic blood flow can lead to swelling of the abdominal cavity and cause additional pain.\nComplications.\nThe most common complication is rupture with internal bleeding, which may lead to hypovolemic shock. Damage to the fallopian tubes can lead to difficulty becoming pregnant in the future. The woman's other fallopian tube may function sufficiently for pregnancy. After the removal of one damaged fallopian tube, pregnancy remains possible in the future. If both are removed, in-vitro fertilization remains an option for women hoping to become pregnant.\nCauses.\nThere are several risk factors for ectopic pregnancies. However, in as many as one-third to one-half no risk factors can be identified. Risk factors include: pelvic inflammatory disease, infertility, use of an intrauterine device (IUD), previous exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES), tubal surgery, intrauterine surgery (e.g. D&amp;C), smoking, previous ectopic pregnancy, endometriosis, and tubal ligation. A previous induced abortion does not appear to increase the risk. The IUD does not increase the risk of ectopic pregnancy, but with an IUD if pregnancy occurs it is more likely to be ectopic than intrauterine. The risk of ectopic pregnancy after chlamydia infection is low. The exact mechanism through which chlamydia increases the risk of ectopic pregnancy is uncertain, though some research suggests that the infection can affect the structure of fallopian tubes.\nTube damage.\nTubal pregnancy is when the egg is implanted in the fallopian tubes. Hair-like cilia located on the internal surface of the fallopian tubes carry the fertilized egg to the uterus. Fallopian cilia are sometimes seen in reduced numbers after an ectopic pregnancy, leading to a hypothesis that cilia damage in the fallopian tubes is likely to lead to an ectopic pregnancy. Women who smoke have a higher chance of an ectopic pregnancy in the fallopian tubes. Smoking leads to risk factors of damaging and destroying cilia. As cilia degenerate, the amount of time it takes for the fertilized egg to reach the uterus will increase. The fertilized egg, if it does not reach the uterus in time, will hatch from the non-adhesive zona pellucida and implant itself inside the fallopian tube, thus causing ectopic pregnancy.\nWomen with pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) have a high occurrence of ectopic pregnancy. This results from the build-up of scar tissue in the fallopian tubes, causing damage to the cilia. However, if both tubes were completely blocked, so that sperm and egg were physically unable to meet, then fertilization of the egg would naturally be impossible, and neither normal pregnancy nor ectopic pregnancy could occur. Intrauterine adhesions (IUA) present in Asherman's syndrome can cause ectopic cervical pregnancy or, if adhesions partially block access to the tubes via the ostia, ectopic tubal pregnancy. Asherman's syndrome usually occurs from intrauterine surgery, most commonly after D&amp;C. Endometrial/pelvic/genital tuberculosis, another cause of Asherman's syndrome, can also lead to ectopic pregnancy as infection may lead to tubal adhesions in addition to intrauterine adhesions.\nTubal ligation can predispose to ectopic pregnancy. Reversal of tubal sterilization (tubal reversal) carries a risk for ectopic pregnancy. This is higher if more destructive methods of tubal ligation (tubal cautery, partial removal of the tubes) have been used than less destructive methods (tubal clipping). A history of a tubal pregnancy increases the risk of future occurrences to about 10%. This risk is not reduced by removing the affected tube, even if the other tube appears normal. The best method for diagnosing this is to perform an early ultrasound.\nEndometriosis.\nEndometriosis is a disease in which cells similar to those of the endometrium, the tissue covering the inside of the uterus, grow outside the uterus. An embryo attaching to such lesions leads to an ectopic pregnancy. The results of a 30-year study of reproductive and pregnancy outcomes, involving 14,000+ women of childbearing age, were presented at the 2015 European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) annual congress. 39% of the study group had surgically confirmed endometriosis. Compared to their peers, the endometriosis subgroup had a 76% higher risk for miscarriage and a 270% higher risk for ectopic pregnancy. The higher risk of endometriosis was attributed to increased pelvic inflammation and structural and functional changes in the uterine lining.\nOther.\nAlthough some investigations have shown that patients may be at higher risk for ectopic pregnancy with advancing age, it is believed that age is a variable that could act as a surrogate for other risk factors. Vaginal douching is thought by some to increase ectopic pregnancies. Women exposed to DES in utero (also known as \"DES daughters\") also have an elevated risk of ectopic pregnancy. However, DES has not been used since 1971 in the United States. It has also been suggested that pathologic generation of nitric oxide through increased iNOS production may decrease tubal ciliary beats and smooth muscle contractions and thus affect embryo transport, which may consequently result in ectopic pregnancy. Low socioeconomic status may also be a risk factor for ectopic pregnancy.\nDiagnosis.\nAn ectopic pregnancy should be considered as the cause of abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding in everyone who has a positive pregnancy test. The primary goal of diagnostic procedures in possible ectopic pregnancy is to triage according to risk rather than establishing pregnancy location.\nTransvaginal ultrasonography.\nAn ultrasound showing a gestational sac with the fetal heart in the fallopian tube has a very high specificity for ectopic pregnancy. It involves a long, thin transducer, covered with the conducting gel and a plastic/latex sheath and inserted into the vagina. Transvaginal ultrasonography has a sensitivity of at least 90% for ectopic pregnancy. The diagnostic ultrasonographic finding in ectopic pregnancy is an adnexal mass that moves separately from the ovary. In around 60% of cases, it is an inhomogeneous or a noncystic adnexal mass, sometimes known as the \"blob sign\". It is generally spherical, but a more tubular appearance may be seen in the case of hematosalpinx. This sign has been estimated to have a sensitivity of 84% and a specificity of 99% in diagnosing ectopic pregnancy. In the study estimating these values, the blob sign had a positive predictive value of 96% and a negative predictive value of 95%. The visualization of an empty extrauterine gestational sac is sometimes known as the \"bagel sign\", and is present in around 20% of cases. In another 20% of cases, there is visualization of a gestational sac containing a yolk sac or an embryo. Ectopic pregnancies where there is visualization of cardiac activity are sometimes termed \"viable ectopic\".\nThe combination of a positive pregnancy test and the presence of what appears to be a normal intrauterine pregnancy does not exclude ectopic pregnancy, since there may be either a heterotopic pregnancy or a \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;pseudosac\", which is a collection of within the endometrial cavity that may be seen in up to 20% of women.\nA small amount of anechogenic-free fluid in the recto-uterine pouch is commonly found in both intrauterine and ectopic pregnancies. The presence of echogenic fluid is estimated at between 28 and 56% of women with an ectopic pregnancy, and strongly indicates the presence of hemoperitoneum. However, it does not necessarily result from tubal rupture but is commonly a result from leakage from the distal tubal opening. As a rule of thumb, the finding of free fluid is significant if it reaches the fundus or is present in the vesico-uterine pouch. A further marker of serious intra-abdominal bleeding is the presence of fluid in the hepatorenal recess of the subhepatic space.\nCurrently, Doppler ultrasonography is not considered to significantly contribute to the diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy.\nA common misdiagnosis is of a normal intrauterine pregnancy is where the pregnancy is implanted laterally in an arcuate uterus, potentially being misdiagnosed as an interstitial pregnancy.\nUltrasonography and \u03b2-hCG.\nWhere no intrauterine pregnancy (IUP) is seen on ultrasound, measuring \u03b2-human chorionic gonadotropin (\u03b2-hCG) levels may aid in the diagnosis. The rationale is that a low \u03b2-hCG level may indicate that the pregnancy is intrauterine but yet too small to be visible on ultrasonography. While some physicians consider that the threshold where an intrauterine pregnancy should be visible on transvaginal ultrasound is around 1500\u00a0mIU/mL of \u03b2-hCG, a review in the JAMA Rational Clinical Examination Series showed that there is no single threshold for the \u03b2-human chorionic gonadotropin that confirms an ectopic pregnancy. Instead, the best test for a pregnant woman is a high-resolution transvaginal ultrasound. The presence of an adnexal mass in the absence of an intrauterine pregnancy on transvaginal sonography increases the likelihood of an ectopic pregnancy 100-fold (LR+ 111). When there are no adnexal abnormalities on transvaginal sonography, the likelihood of an ectopic pregnancy decreases (LR- 0.12). An empty uterus with levels higher than 1500 mIU/mL may be evidence of an ectopic pregnancy, but may also be consistent with an intrauterine pregnancy, which is too small to be seen on ultrasound. If the diagnosis is uncertain, it may be necessary to wait a few days and repeat the blood work. This can be done by measuring the \u03b2-hCG level approximately 48 hours later and repeating the ultrasound. The serum hCG ratios and logistic regression models appear to be better than absolute single serum hCG level. If the \u03b2-hCG falls on repeat examination, this strongly suggests a spontaneous abortion or rupture. The fall in serum hCG over 48 hours may be measured as the hCG ratio, which is calculated as:\nformula_1\nAn hCG ratio of 0.87 \u2013 a decrease in hCG of 13% over 48 hours \u2013 has a sensitivity of 93% and specificity of 97% for predicting a failing pregnancy of unknown location (PUL). The majority of cases of ectopic pregnancy will have serial serum hCG levels that increase more slowly than would be expected with an IUP (known as a suboptimal rise), or decrease more slowly than would be expected with a failing PUL. However, up to 20% of cases of ectopic pregnancy have serum hCG doubling times similar to that of an IUP, and around 10% of EP cases have hCG patterns similar to a failing PUL.\nOther methods.\nDirect examination.\nA laparoscopy or laparotomy can also be performed to confirm an ectopic pregnancy visually. This is generally reserved for women presenting with signs of an acute abdomen and hypovolemic shock. Often, if a tubal abortion or tubal rupture has occurred, it is difficult to find the pregnancy tissue. A laparoscopy in very early ectopic pregnancy rarely shows a normal-looking fallopian tube.\nCuldocentesis.\nCuldocentesis, in which fluid is retrieved from the space separating the vagina and rectum, is a less commonly performed test that may be used to look for internal bleeding. In this test, a needle is inserted into the space at the very top of the vagina, behind the uterus, and in front of the rectum. Any blood or fluid found may have been derived from a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.\nProgesterone levels.\nProgesterone levels of less than 20\u00a0nmol/L have a high predictive value for failing pregnancies, whilst levels over 25 nmol/L are likely to predict viable pregnancies, and levels over 60\u00a0nmol/L are strongly so. This may help identify failing PUL that are at low risk and thereby require less follow-up. Inhibin A may also be useful for predicting spontaneous resolution of PUL, but is not as effective as progesterone for this purpose.\nMathematical models.\nThere are various mathematical models, such as logistic regression models and Bayesian networks, for the prediction of PUL outcomes based on multiple parameters. Mathematical models also aim to identify PULs that are \"low risk\", that is, failing PULs and IUPs.\nDilation and curettage.\nDilation and curettage (D&amp;C) is sometimes used to diagnose pregnancy location to differentiate between an EP and a non-viable IUP in situations where a viable IUP can be ruled out. Specific indications for this procedure include either of the following:\nClassification.\nTubal pregnancy.\nThe vast majority of ectopic pregnancies implant in the fallopian tube. Pregnancies can grow in the fimbrial end (5% of all ectopic pregnancies), the ampullary section (80%), the isthmus (12%), and the cornual and interstitial part of the tube (2%). Mortality of a tubal pregnancy at the isthmus or within the uterus (interstitial pregnancy) is higher as there is increased vascularity that may result more likely in sudden major internal bleeding. A review published in 2010 supports the hypothesis that tubal ectopic pregnancy is caused by a combination of retention of the embryo within the fallopian tube due to impaired embryo-tubal transport and alterations in the tubal environment allowing early implantation to occur.\nNontubal ectopic pregnancy.\nTwo percent of ectopic pregnancies occur in the ovary, cervix, or are intra-abdominal. Transvaginal ultrasound examination is usually able to detect a cervical pregnancy. An ovarian pregnancy is differentiated from a tubal pregnancy by the Spiegelberg criteria.\nWhile a fetus of ectopic pregnancy is typically not viable, very rarely, live babies have been delivered from abdominal pregnancy or C-section scar ectopic pregnancy. In the former situation, the placenta sits on the intra-abdominal organs or the peritoneum and has found sufficient blood supply. This is generally bowel or mesentery, but other sites, such as the renal (kidney), liver or hepatic (liver) artery, or even the aorta, have been described. Support to near viability has occasionally been described, but even in Third World countries, the diagnosis is most commonly made at 16 to 20 weeks' gestation. Such a fetus would have to be delivered by laparotomy. Maternal morbidity and mortality from extrauterine pregnancy are high, as attempts to remove the placenta from the organs to which it is attached usually lead to uncontrollable bleeding from the attachment site. If the organ to which the placenta is attached is removable, such as a section of the bowel, then the placenta should be removed together with that organ. This is such a rare occurrence that true data is unavailable, and reliance must be made on anecdotal reports. However, the vast majority of abdominal pregnancies require intervention well before fetal viability because of the risk of bleeding.\nWith the increase in Cesarean sections performed worldwide, Cesarean section ectopic pregnancies (CSP) are rare, but becoming more common. The incidence of CSP is not well known; however, there have been estimates based on different populations of 1:1800\u20131:2216. CSP are characterized by abnormal implantation into the scar from a previous cesarean section, and allowed to continue can cause serious complications such as uterine rupture and hemorrhage. Patients with CSP generally present without symptoms, however symptoms can include vaginal bleeding that may or may not be associated with pain. The diagnosis of CSP is made by ultrasound and four characteristics are noted: (1) Empty uterine cavity with bright hyperechoic endometrial stripe (2) Empty cervical canal (3) Intrauterine mass in the anterior part of the uterine isthmus, and (4) Absence of the anterior uterine muscle layer, and/or absence or thinning between the bladder and gestational sac, measuring less than 5\u00a0mm. Given the rarity of the diagnosis, treatment options tend to be described in case reports and series, ranging from medical with methotrexate or KCl to surgical with dilation and curettage, uterine wedge resection, or hysterectomy. A double-balloon catheter technique has also been described, allowing for uterine preservation. The recurrence risk for CSP is unknown, and early ultrasound in the next pregnancy is recommended.\nHeterotopic pregnancy.\nIn rare cases of ectopic pregnancy, there may be two fertilized eggs, one outside the uterus and the other inside. This is called a heterotopic pregnancy. Often, the intrauterine pregnancy is discovered later than the ectopic, mainly because of the painful emergency nature of ectopic pregnancies. Since ectopic pregnancies are normally discovered and removed very early in the pregnancy, an ultrasound may not find the additional pregnancy inside the uterus. When hCG levels continue to rise after the removal of the ectopic pregnancy, there is a chance that a pregnancy inside the uterus is still viable. This is normally discovered through an ultrasound.\nAlthough rare, heterotopic pregnancies are becoming more common, likely due to increased use of IVF. The survival rate of the uterine fetus of a heterotopic pregnancy is around 70%.\nRudimentary horn pregnancy.\nA pregnancy in a rudimentary horn refers to a rare and life-threatening condition that occurs when a fertilized egg implants inside the small rudimentary horn of a unicornuate uterus, which is a type of congenital uterine abnormality caused by the incomplete development of one of the M\u00fcllerian ducts. This type of ectopic pregnancy is often results in rupture of the rudimentary horn between 10 and 15 weeks of gestation, leading to a high risk of morbidity and mortality.\nPersistent ectopic pregnancy.\nA persistent ectopic pregnancy refers to the continuation of trophoblastic growth after a surgical intervention to remove an ectopic pregnancy. After a conservative procedure that attempts to preserve the affected fallopian tube such as a salpingotomy, in about 15\u201320%, the major portion of the ectopic growth may have been removed, but some trophoblastic tissue, perhaps deeply embedded, has escaped removal and continues to grow, generating a new rise in hCG levels. After weeks, this may lead to new clinical symptoms, including bleeding. For this reason, hCG levels may have to be monitored after the removal of an ectopic pregnancy to ensure their decline, also methotrexate can be given at the time of surgery prophylactically.\nPregnancy of unknown location.\nPregnancy of unknown location (PUL) is the term used for a pregnancy where there is a positive pregnancy test but no pregnancy has been visualized using transvaginal ultrasonography. Specialized early pregnancy departments have estimated that between 8% and 10% of women attending for an ultrasound assessment in early pregnancy will be classified as having a PUL. The true nature of the pregnancy can be an ongoing viable intrauterine pregnancy, a failed pregnancy, an ectopic pregnancy or rarely a persisting PUL.\nBecause of frequent ambiguity on ultrasonography examinations, the following classification is proposed:\nIn women with a pregnancy of unknown location, between 6% and 20% have an ectopic pregnancy. In cases of pregnancy of unknown location and a history of heavy bleeding, it has been estimated that approximately 6% have an underlying ectopic pregnancy. Between 30% and 47% of women with pregnancy of unknown location are ultimately diagnosed with an ongoing intrauterine pregnancy, whereof the majority (50\u201370%) will be found to have failed pregnancies where the location is never confirmed.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Persisting PUL is where the hCG level does not spontaneously decline and no intrauterine or ectopic pregnancy is identified on follow-up transvaginal ultrasonography. A persisting PUL is likely either a small ectopic pregnancy that has not been visualized, or a retained trophoblast in the endometrial cavity. Treatment should only be considered when a potentially viable intrauterine pregnancy has been definitively excluded. A \"treated persistent PUL\" is defined as one managed medically (generally with methotrexate) without confirmation of the location of the pregnancy, such as by ultrasound, laparoscopy, or uterine evacuation. A \"resolved persistent PUL\" is defined as serum hCG reaching a non-pregnant value (generally less than 5\u00a0IU/L) after expectant management, or after uterine evacuation without evidence of chorionic villi on histopathological examination. In contrast, a relatively low and unresolving level of serum hCG indicates the possibility of an hCG-secreting tumor.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nOther conditions that cause similar symptoms include: miscarriage, ovarian torsion, acute appendicitis, ruptured ovarian cyst, kidney stone, and pelvic inflammatory disease, among others.\nTreatment.\nExpectant management.\nMost women with a PUL are followed up with serum hCG measurements and repeat TVS examinations until a final diagnosis is confirmed. Low-risk cases of PUL that appear to be failing pregnancies may be followed up with a urinary pregnancy test after two weeks and get subsequent telephone advice. Low-risk cases of PUL that are likely intrauterine pregnancies may have another TVS in two weeks to assess viability. High-risk cases of PUL require further assessment, either with a TVS within 48 h or additional hCG measurement.\nMedical.\nEarly treatment of ectopic pregnancy with methotrexate is a viable alternative to surgical treatment which was developed in the 1980s. If administered early in the pregnancy, methotrexate terminates the growth of the developing embryo; the developing embryo may then be either resorbed by the woman's body or pass with a menstrual period. Contraindications include ectopic embryonic mass &gt;\u00a03.5\u00a0cm and evidence of ruptured fallopian tube, as well as renal or hepatic dysfunction.\nAlso, it may lead to the inadvertent termination of an undetected intrauterine pregnancy or severe abnormality in any surviving pregnancy. Therefore, it is recommended that methotrexate should only be administered when hCG has been serially monitored with a rise of less than 35% over 48 hours, which practically excludes a viable intrauterine pregnancy.\nFor nontubal ectopic pregnancy, evidence from randomized clinical trials in women with CSP is uncertain regarding treatment success, complications and side effects of methotrexate compared with surgery (uterine arterial embolization or uterine arterial chemoembolization).\nThe United States uses a multi-dose protocol of methotrexate (MTX), which involves four doses of intramuscular MTX along with an intramuscular injection of folinic acid to protect cells from the effects of the drug and to reduce side effects. In France, the single-dose protocol is followed, but a single dose has a greater chance of failure.\nSurgery.\nIf bleeding has already occurred, surgical intervention may be necessary. However, whether to pursue surgical intervention is an often difficult decision in a stable patient with minimal evidence of a blood clot on ultrasound.\nSurgeons use laparoscopy or laparotomy to gain access to the pelvis and can either incise the affected fallopian tube and remove only the pregnancy (salpingostomy) or remove the affected tube with the pregnancy (salpingectomy). The first successful surgery for an ectopic pregnancy was performed by Robert Lawson Tait in 1883. It is estimated that an acceptable rate of PULs that eventually undergo surgery is between 0.5 and 11%. People that undergo salpingectomy and salpingostomy have a similar recurrent ectopic pregnancy rate of 5% and 8% respectively. Additionally, their intrauterine pregnancy rates are also similar, 56% and 61%.\nAutotransfusion of a woman's own blood as drained during surgery may be useful in those who have a lot of bleeding into their abdomen.\nNo technique exists to re-implant an ectopic embryo in the uterus \u2013 all interventions, whether surgical or pharmaceutical, result in the termination of the ectopic pregnancy. Published reports that a re-implanted embryo survived to birth were debunked as false.\nPrognosis.\nWhen ectopic pregnancies are treated, the prognosis for the mother is very good in Western countries; maternal death is rare, although treatment nearly always requires the removal of the nonviable fetus. For instance, in the UK, between 2003 and 2005, there were 32,100 ectopic pregnancies resulting in 10 maternal deaths (meaning that 1 in 3,210 women with an ectopic pregnancy died). In 2006\u20132008 the UK Confidential Enquiry into Maternal Deaths found that ectopic pregnancy was the cause of 6 maternal deaths out of 2.3 million pregnancies in that period (0.26/100,000 pregnancies).\nIn the developing world, however, especially in Africa, the death rate is substantially higher at around 1\u20133% case fatality rate. The burden of ectopic pregnancy is much higher in developing countries, causing the deaths of 3478 (95% confidence interval: 2849 to 4187) people in low income countries in 2019, or 0.68 (95% CI: 0.56 to 0.82) per 100,000 population, and was responsible for the loss of 37.69 (95% CI: 30.83 to 45.33) disability adjusted life years per 100,000, indicating that it is a significant cause of death and disease burden among women of child-bearing age in these countries.\nIn women who have had an ectopic pregnancy, the risk of another one in the next pregnancy is around 10%.\nFuture fertility.\nFertility following ectopic pregnancy depends upon several factors, the most important of which is a prior history of infertility. The treatment choice does not play a major role; a randomized study in 2013 concluded that the rates of intrauterine pregnancy two years after treatment of ectopic pregnancy are approximately 64% with radical surgery, 67% with medication, and 70% with conservative surgery. In comparison, the cumulative pregnancy rate of women under 40 years of age in the general population over two years is over 90%.\nMethotrexate does not affect future fertility treatments. The number of oocytes that were retrieved before and after treatment with methotrexate does not change.\nIn case of ovarian ectopic pregnancy, the risk of subsequent ectopic pregnancy or infertility is low.\nThere is no evidence that massage improves fertility after ectopic pregnancy.\nEpidemiology.\nThe rate of ectopic pregnancy is about 1% and 2% of live births in developed countries, though it is as high as 4% in pregnancies involving assisted reproductive technology. Between 93% and 97% of ectopic pregnancies are located in a fallopian tube. Of these, in turn, 13% are located in the isthmus, 75% are located in the ampulla, and 12% in the fimbriae. Ectopic pregnancy is responsible for 6% of maternal deaths during the first trimester of pregnancy making it the leading cause of maternal death during this stage of pregnancy.\nBetween 5% and 42% of women seen for ultrasound assessment with a positive pregnancy test have a pregnancy of unknown location, that is a positive pregnancy test but no pregnancy visualized at transvaginal ultrasonography. Between 6% and 20% of pregnancy of unknown location are subsequently diagnosed with actual ectopic pregnancy.\nSociety and culture.\nSalpingectomy as a treatment for ectopic pregnancy is one of the common cases when the principle of double effect can be used to justify accelerating the death of the embryo by doctors and patients opposed to outright abortions.\nIn the Catholic Church, there are moral debates on certain treatments. A significant number of Catholic moralists consider the use of methotrexate and the salpingostomy procedure to be not \"morally permissible\" because they destroy the embryo; however, situations are considered differently in which the mother's health is endangered, and the whole fallopian tube with the developing embryo inside is removed.\nOrganizations exist that provide information and support to help those who experience ectopic pregnancy. Studies show that people can experience post-traumatic stress, depression, and anxiety for which they would need specialist therapies. Partners can also experience post-traumatic stress.\nLive birth.\nThere have been cases where ectopic pregnancy lasted many months and ended in a live baby delivered by laparotomy.\nIn July 1999, Lori Dalton gave birth by caesarean section in Ogden, Utah, United States, to a healthy baby girl, Sage, who had developed outside of the uterus. Previous ultrasounds had not discovered the problem, and the doctor performing the Caesarean was surprised to find the baby \"within the amniotic membrane outside the womb\". The baby had had a solid blood supply outside the womb due to the presence of a uterine fibroid on the outer wall of the uterus, and suffered no ill effects as a result.\nIn September 1999, an English woman, Jane Ingram (age 32), gave birth to triplets: Olivia, Mary, and Ronan, with an extrauterine fetus (Ronan) below the womb and twins in the womb. All three survived. The twins in the womb were taken out first.\nOn May 29, 2008, an Australian woman, Meera Thangarajah (age 34), who had an ectopic pregnancy in the ovary, gave birth to a healthy full-term baby girl, Durga, via Caesarean section. She had no problems or complications during the 38\u2011week pregnancy.\nAnimals.\nEctopic gestation exists in mammals other than humans. In sheep, it can go to term, with mammary preparation to parturition, and expulsion efforts. The fetus can be removed by caesarean section. Pictures of the caesarian section of a euthanized ewe, five days after parturition signs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54310", "revid": "19275268", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54310", "title": "Kaiser Wilhelm", "text": "Kaiser Wilhelm is a common reference to two German emperors:\nKaiser Wilhelm may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54311", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54311", "title": "Union of Utrecht", "text": "1579 treaty unifying the northern Netherlands provinces\nThe Union of Utrecht () was an alliance based on an agreement concluded on 23 January 1579 between a number of Dutch provinces and cities, to reach a joint commitment against the king, Philip II of Spain. By joining forces, they hoped to force him to stop his harsh administrative measures. In addition, some important political matters were regulated in areas such as defence, taxation and religion, which is why the treaty in question is also seen as a first version or precursor of a later constitution. The Union of Utrecht complemented the so-called General Union of 1576, established by the Pacification of Ghent, which is why it is also referred to as the Further Union.\nPrevious history.\nEarlier alliances.\nThe signing of the treaty for the Union of Utrecht, during the Eighty Years' War (1568\u20131648), was preceded by a whole series of unions, edicts and covenants. At the Union of Dordrecht, on 4 July 1575, William of Orange was appointed stadholder of Holland and Holland and Zeeland decided to cooperate. These areas \u2013 except for Amsterdam and Middelburg, among others \u2013 were largely free of Spanish troops in the years 1572\u20131576, and there leaders with the Calvinist faith gained the upper hand. The Spanish sack of Antwerp on 4 November 1576, in which Spanish troops looted and reduced the city to ashes and killed thousands of citizens, caused a stir in the Netherlands. The States of Holland, the States of Zeeland and the other regions, which were predominantly Catholic, reconciled on 8 November with the Pacification of Ghent in their aversion to the Spanish presence. They declared at the Pacification that they would cooperate in resisting interventions by King Philip II but remain obedient to him. There was no final settlement of the religious issue. For the time being, the Calvinist religion would be leading in Holland and Zeeland, the Catholic religion in the other regions, but religious peace would be sought in all regions.\nIn Holland and Zeeland, however, Calvinists took little notice of the agreements. And returning Calvinist exiles who had once fled from Alva sometimes caused serious religious disturbances in the then church- and king-faithful regions outside Holland and Zeeland after 1576.\nThe agreements of the Pacification of Ghent were confirmed at the first Union of Brussels on 6 January 1577, by which the regions wanted to force the new governor Don Juan of Austria to recognise the Pacification; the Spanish soldiers were to leave the country and the regions themselves would take care of maintaining Catholicism, much against the wishes of the Calvinists. The governor finally agreed by signing the Eternal Edict on 12 February, after which Spanish troops began to withdraw, largely to the Duchy of Luxembourg, which had always remained royalist. That same month, William of Orange urged Guelders to \"form a good, firm alliance and bond in private with those of Holland and Zeeland, as well as other provinces with some of the leading lords and nobles.\" Rather than break the Pacification, the prince wanted to raise a second line of defence in a \u2018further union\u2019. The concept of the Union of Utrecht was already contained in this proposal to Gelre. However, the predominantly Catholic Gelre saw little point in it; it did not want to depend on intransigent, Calvinist Holland for a possible reconciliation with the king.\nHistory.\nThe Union of Utrecht is regarded as the foundation of the Republic of the Seven United Provinces, which was not recognized by the Spanish Empire until the Twelve Years' Truce in 1609.\nThe treaty was signed on 23 January by Holland, Zeeland, Utrecht (but not all of Utrecht), and the province (but not the city) of Groningen. The treaty was a reaction of the Protestant provinces to the 1579 Union of Arras (Dutch: \"Unie van Atrecht\"), in which two southern provinces and a city declared their support for Roman Catholic Spain.\nDuring the following months of 1579, other states signed the treaty as well, such as Ghent, cities from Friesland, as well as three of the quarters of Guelders (Nijmegen Quarter, Veluwe Quarter, Zutphen County). In the summer of 1579, Amersfoort from the province of Utrecht also joined, together with Ypres, Antwerp, Breda and Brussels. In February 1580, Lier, Bruges and the surrounding area also signed the treaty. The city of Groningen shifted in favor under influence of the stadtholder for Friesland, George van Rennenberg, and also signed the treaty. The fourth quarter of Guelders, Upper Guelders, never signed the treaty. In April 1580, Overijssel and Drenthe signed on.\nThe parts of the Low Countries that joined:\nAntwerp was the capital of the union until its fall to the Spanish.\nFlanders was almost entirely conquered by the Spanish troops, as was half of Brabant. The United Provinces still recognized Spanish rule after the Union of Utrecht. However, the union contributed to the deterioration in the relationship between the provinces and their lord, and in 1581 the United Provinces declared their independence of the king in the Act of Abjuration.\nThe Twelve Years' Truce of 1609 marked a pause in what became known as the Eighty Years' War, effectively acknowledging Dutch independence. As Pieter Geyl puts it, the truce marked \"an astonishing victory for the Dutch,\" who surrendered no lands and did not agree to halt their attacks on Spanish colonies and the Spanish trade empire. In return the Spanish granted the United Provinces \"de facto\" independence by describing them as \"Free lands, provinces and states against whom they make no claim\" for the duration of the truce.\nReligious tolerance.\nThe Union of Utrecht allowed complete personal freedom of religion and was thus one of the first unlimited edicts of religious toleration. An additional declaration allowed provinces and cities that wished to remain Roman Catholic to join the union.\nLater reflection.\nMany people view the Union of Utrecht as the beginning of the Netherlands as a single state. This is not entirely accurate. It can be said that the Union of Utrecht laid the foundation for the Dutch Republic, also known as the Seven United Provinces, which would be formed a few years later. However, these seven states within a state only became a centralised state during the time of the Batavian Republic two centuries later.\nUntil the early 20th century, most Dutch and Belgian historians, such as P. L. Muller (1867) and Henri Pirenne (1911), believed that the Union of Utrecht was initially intended as a \"Calvinist alliance\" of the \"seven\" \"Northern provinces\" that separated themselves from the General Union (the Pacification of Ghent and the Unions of Brussels), and \"seceded from the South\". The few Southern cities that joined the Union of Utrecht were considered more like \"honorary members\" rather than fully integrated members of the \"Northern\" Union. Flemish researcher Leo Delfos further investigated and openly challenged this view from 1929 onwards. He concluded that the Union of Utrecht actually sought to uphold the General Union / Pacification of Ghent of 1576 and did not intend to geographically limit itself to the North, but aimed to include all provinces in the Netherlands. Both the Pacification and the Union of Utrecht were, in fact, treaties between two parties: the Calvinist-governed provinces of Holland and Zeeland and the other 'fifteen' provinces dominated by Catholics. Even Alexander Farnese (Parma), the archenemy of the Union of Utrecht, denied in a letter to the States of Artois dated January 27, 1579, that the newly established Union of Utrecht had a Calvinist foundation. It was only through Parma's military conquests in the 1580s and the political developments in the rebellious region that it gradually became, in practice, a 'Northern Calvinist alliance', but it certainly did not start that way.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54312", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54312", "title": "Nappy (disambiguation)", "text": "Nappy is a term in the English language in Australia, Ireland, New Zealand, South Africa, United Kingdom, and Zimbabwe for a diaper.\nNappy may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54314", "revid": "50982400", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54314", "title": "Orange Group", "text": "French multinational telecommunications corporation\nOrange S.A. (; formerly , stylised as france telecom) is a French multinational telecommunications corporation founded in 1988 and headquartered in Issy-les-Moulineaux, near Paris.\n\"Orange\" has been the corporation's main brand for mobile, landline, internet and Internet Protocol television (IPTV) services since 2006. It traces its origins back to Hutchison Whampoa acquiring a controlling stake in Microtel Communications in 1994 in the United Kingdom. Microtel Communications became a subsidiary of Mannesmann in 1999 and then was acquired by \"France T\u00e9l\u00e9com\" in 2000. The former French public telecoms monopoly thus became internationalized following this takeover and has pursued an expansionist policy since. The group now operates in many countries in Europe, Africa and in the French West Indies. Since February 2012, as a result of the company's decision to transfer its fixed-line telephony operations to its \"Orange\" brand, all offers marketed by France T\u00e9l\u00e9com are \"Orange\"-branded; and on July 1, 2013, France T\u00e9l\u00e9com itself was rebranded \"Orange S.A.\". In 2019, \"Orange S.A.\" employed nearly 148,000 people worldwide, including 88,000 in France.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe corporation has throughout the years expanded its activities to include content sales (music, cinema, downloads, etc.), e-commerce, online advertising, M2M, home automation and remote assistance solutions. In 2023, it generated over \u20ac43\u00a0billion in revenue across all its businesses.\nHistory.\nNationalised service (1878\u20131980s).\nIn 1792, under the French Revolution, the first communication network was developed to enable the rapid transmission of information in a warring and unsafe country. That was the optical telegraphy network of Claude Chappe.\nIn 1878, after the invention of the electrical telegraph and then the invention of the telephone, the French State created a Ministry of Posts and Telegraphs. Telephone services were nationalised and added to the ministry in 1889. However, it was not until 1923 that the second 'T' (for 'telephones') appeared and the department of P&amp;T (Posts and Telegraphs) became PTT.\nIn 1941, a General Direction of Telecommunications was created within this ministry. Then, in 1944, the National Centre of Telecommunications Studies (CNET) was created to develop the telecommunications industry in France.\nIn the 1970s, France attempted to make up for its delay in developing communications infrastructure, compared to other countries, by launching the programme \"Delta LP\" (increasing the main lines). It was at that time that the majority of the local loop was built (that is all the cables linking the users to the operator). Moreover, with the help of French manufacturers, digital switching -- Minitel and the GSM standard\u2014were invented by engineers and CNET researchers.\nIn 1982, Telecom introduced Minitel online ordering for its customers.\nCreation of France T\u00e9l\u00e9com (1988\u20131997).\nUntil 1988, France T\u00e9l\u00e9com was known as the \"direction g\u00e9n\u00e9rale des T\u00e9l\u00e9communications\", a division of the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications. It became autonomous in 1990. This was in response to a European directive, aimed at making competition mandatory in public services from 1 January 1998. The 2 July 1990 Bill changed France T\u00e9l\u00e9com into an operator of public law, with Marcel Roulet as the first Chairman. Since then, the company has had a separate body corporate from the State and acquired financial autonomy. It was privatised by Lionel Jospin's Plural Left government starting on 1 January 1998. The French government, both directly and through its holding company ERAP, continues to hold a stake of almost 27% in the company. In addition, the French government has a role in naming the CEO.\nIn September 1995, Michel Bon was appointed to run France T\u00e9l\u00e9com Group.\n'Roaring Nineties' (1997\u20132000).\nIn 1997, the capital of the new public company was successfully floated whereas the dot-com bubble phenomenon made the stock exchanges bullish. A second share offering occurred in 1998. France T\u00e9l\u00e9com got behind in the internationalisation launched by its international competitors such as Vodafone, thus, it started looking for targets at the highest speculation rate of the dot-com bubble. Moreover, its alliance with Deutsche Telekom based on a reciprocal capital contribution of 2% broke off when Deutsche Telekom announced that they were planning to do business with Telecom Italia without letting the French know; even if this project ended up failing.\nAcquisition of Orange and privatisation.\nIn July 1991, Hutchison Telecom, a UK subsidiary of the Hong Kong-based conglomerate Hutchison Whampoa, acquired a controlling stake in Microtel Communications Ltd, which by then had acquired a licence to develop a mobile network in the United Kingdom. Hutchison renamed Microtel to Orange Personal Communications Services Ltd, and on 28 April 1994 the Orange brand was launched in the UK mobile phone market. A holding company structure was adopted in 1995 with the establishment of Orange plc. In April 1996, Orange went public and floated on the London Stock Exchange and NASDAQ, majority-owned by Hutchison (48.22%), followed by BAe (21.1%). In June 1996, it became the youngest company to enter the FTSE 100, valued at \u00a32.4 billion.\nIn October 1999, the German conglomerate Mannesmann AG acquired Orange for a price equivalent to \u20ac7,900 per customer, i.e. US$33\u00a0billion. Mannesmann's acquisition of Orange triggered Vodafone to make a hostile takeover bid for Mannesmann. Shortly thereafter, in February 2000, Vodafone acquired Mannesmann for US$183\u00a0billion, and decided to divest Orange because EU regulations would not allow it to hold two mobile licences.\nIn August 2000, France T\u00e9l\u00e9com bought Orange plc from Vodafone for a total estimated cost of \u20ac39.7\u00a0billion. At the time, France T\u00e9l\u00e9com also bought stakes in several other international firms (GlobalOne, Equant, Internet Telecom, Freeserve, EresMas, NTL and Mobilcom), of which some have since been sold back. Through this process, France T\u00e9l\u00e9com became the fourth-biggest global operator. The mobile telephone operations of Orange plc were merged with the majority of the mobile operations of France T\u00e9l\u00e9com, forming the new group Orange S.A.\nOn 13 February 2001, Orange S.A. was listed on the Euronext Paris stock exchange with an initial public offering of \u20ac95 per share, with a secondary listing in London. In May 2001, Orange S.A. was listed on the CAC 40, the benchmark stock market index of the top 40 French companies in terms of market capitalisation.\nIn June 2001, the France Telecom Mobile brands Itin\u00e9ris, OLA, and Mobicarte were replaced by the Orange brand. On 21 November 2003, France Telecom withdrew the 13.7% of Orange's shares traded on the Paris stock exchange.\nOn 2 October 2002, the CEO, Thierry Breton was given the task of turning the company around after the company became crippled by debt following the drop of the company's stock price. On 30 September 2002, the company's stock price was \u20ac6.94, down from \u20ac219 on 2 March 2000. France T\u00e9l\u00e9com was the second most indebted company worldwide in terms of short-term liabilities. The company obtained \u20ac15\u00a0billion of debt adjustment that needed to be borne by banks and investors, another \u20ac15\u00a0billion as a capital increase from the French State since it was still the majority shareholder, and an additional 15bn in cash from internal savings. On 25 February 2005, Thierry Breton was appointed Minister of Finance and Industry and Didier Lombard, who had been head of the firm's new technologies division, replaced him as CEO.\nNeXT scheme and rebranding to Orange (2006\u2013present).\nThe NeXT scheme was the recovery plan for France T\u00e9l\u00e9com which aimed at, among other things, reducing costs, especially wage costs, carrying on a converging policy for its products and services, and grouping together all the brands under a single brand, except for the activities dealing with fixed-line telephone which would stay under the designation 'France T\u00e9l\u00e9com'. Consequently, this led to the disappearance of a number of brands.\nFrom 1 June 2006, France T\u00e9l\u00e9com tried to commercialise all its products under a single worldwide brand, becoming the sole brand of the France Telecom group for Internet, television and mobile services in the majority of countries in which Orange operated. Orange Business Services became the brand for all its business services offerings worldwide, replacing the Equant brand. In June 2007, Orange and Mid Europa Partners acquired Austrian mobile network company One, re-branding it as Orange Austria. In 2012, it was sold to Hutchison 3G and the Orange Austria brand was terminated.\nIn November 2008, Orange launched five Orange Cinema Series channels. To do so, Orange bought the exclusive rights from Warner Bros. for first runs of all new films, previously held by TPS Star (a subsidiary of the Canal+ Group), as well as all films in its catalogue and rights to the film catalogues of Gaumont, HBO and MGM. Orange also secured exclusive rights to broadcast Saturday evening Ligue 1 football matches from the French Football Federation. Free accused Orange of tied-selling as the Orange channels were only available to its subscribers. In June 2008, the firm abandoned a \u20ac27\u00a0billion bid for Swedish operator TeliaSonera after the two companies failed to agree terms.\nIn 2008, Orange was given permission from Apple to sell the iPhone in Austria, Belgium, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Jordan, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Switzerland and Orange's African markets. On 8 September 2009, Orange and T-Mobile parent Deutsche Telekom announced they were in advanced talks to merge their UK operations to create the largest mobile operator with 37% of the market. Both T-Mobile and Orange brands were kept due to differences in their targeted markets. T-Mobile remained the budget-conscious offering and Orange the premium one, although there was some overlap as of February 2011.\nOn 5 April 2009, Orange won an Arbitration Court case against Orascom Telecom, forcing Orascom to transfer its stake in Mobinil to Orange at a price of E\u00a3 per Mobinil share. On 28 October 2009, Orange changed the name of its Luxembourgish telecommunication company VOXMobile to Orange. On 5 November 2009, Orange Armenia launched telecommunication services in Armenia. On 11 December 2009, Egypt's regulator approved an offer from a unit of France Telecom (Orange) to buy Mobinil. In 2010, Orange's CEO, Didier Lombard, was replaced by St\u00e9phane Richard. The company was also reorganised internally, most notably with the arrival of former Culture Minister Christine Albanel as head of communications for the group. In mid-April 2010, Orange UK announced that it would outsource the management of its broadband network to BT. This announcement was greeted positively by broadband commentators, who felt that the move was likely to improve Orange's broadband quality and customer services.\nOn 2 March 2012, Didier Lombard, who remained special advisor to St\u00e9phane Richard, left the company. His departure was shadowed by controversy over his stock options: he was suspected of having stayed with the company longer to wait for the France Telecom share to recover and then exercise his stock option. The share was trading at around \u20ac16, whereas his stock options were at \u20ac23. On 3 February 2012, Hutchison Whampoa announced that it would buy Orange Austria for US$1.7\u00a0billion. The deal closed on 3 January 2013, and the Orange brand was phased out on 19 August 2013, when its operations were merged into 3. In March 2012, France T\u00e9l\u00e9com bought 93.9% of Mobinil, an Egyptian mobile operator, from Naguib Sawiris's Orascom Telecom Media and Technology (OTMT) in an effort to double its revenue in MENA by 2015. On 28 May 2013 at the Annual Shareholders' Meeting, shareholders approved changing the name of the group to Orange S.A. This became effective on 1 July 2013. In September 2014, Orange agreed a deal to acquire Spanish firm Jazztel for a fee of around \u20ac3.4\u00a0billion.\nAs of October 2018, Orange has teamed up with Google in order to install a transatlantic undersea cable, Dunant, to share data between the United States and France at faster speeds. Planned to begin operation in 2020, the fibre-based cable has a design capacity of 250 terabits per second (Tbit/s) and will span approximately 6600 kilometres in length.\nIn July 2020, Orange launched a satellite-based home broadband service utilising the Eutelsat Konnect satellite.\nShareholders.\nThe major shareholders of Orange as of 2015[ [update]] are the state of France through Agence des participations de l'\u00c9tat and Banque publique d'investissement (replacing Fonds strat\u00e9gique d'investissement) for 23.04%. As of mid-2013, Orange employees owned 4.81%, and the company itself owned 0.58%.\nOperations.\nMobile.\nOrange is the sole brand used in the marketing of the company's mobile offers; the Itineris, Ola and Mobicarte brands have been combined since 2001, and Mobicarte became a special prepaid calling offer. As of 2010,[ [update]] Orange has 150 million mobile customers worldwide, 17.9% of whom are in France. Orange France is the leading mobile telecommunications operator in France, with a market share of 45.38% as of 2009.[ [update]]\nThe Orange brand name was previously licensed to a number of operators which Orange S.A. did not own. These include:\nLandline and Internet.\nOrange took over the landline and Internet businesses of France Telecom and Wanadoo in 2006. Since then, Orange is the sole brand of France Telecom for landline and Internet services worldwide, with a few exceptions, such as Mobistar in Belgium and TPSA in Poland. Orange's triple-play broadband Internet offers are supplied through the Livebox. As of 2010,[ [update]] Orange has 13.7 million broadband ADSL customers worldwide, 67% of whom are in France40.\nThe Livebox is the ADSL modem supplied to Orange's ADSL and FTTH customers in France, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Spain and Tunisia, and to WiMAX customers in Cameroon. It serves as a bridge between the Internet access and the home network through several communication interfaces (Bluetooth, Ethernet, Wi-Fi). The Livebox has evolved over time. The Livebox 1.0 was replaced by version 1.1, the Mini Livebox, followed by the Livebox 2.0. The newest version was scheduled to be rolled out in 2012. The Livebox is offered on a monthly contract for \u20ac3 per month or for purchase for \u20ac59. The Number of Liveboxes rented in 2008,this statistic reflects Orange's significant market penetration and growth in the broadband internet sector. With 7.3 million Liveboxes rented out, Orange experienced a notable 12.3% increase in just one year.\nBroadcasting.\nBeginning in 2003, Orange's strategy has centred on the acquisition, creation and diffusion of content. This starts with the creation of MaLigne.tv in 2003, later renamed Orange TV, an ADSL television access service and a video-on-demand service. In 2004, Orange organised a television access service for mobile phones. In 2007, Orange created Studio 37 and, in 2008, entered into a partnership with France Televisions to broadcast pre-recorded programming from the public national television and to roll out themed channels for sports, cinema and television series. Orange dubbed the strategy Content Everywhere in 2008, announcing it simultaneously with the launch of the Orange cinema series television channels and aimed to offer customers access to all content available through Orange's services, anywhere and from any device.\nOCS.\nOrange Cinema Series is launched 13 November 2008, along with Orange Sport; it comprises five channels devoted to movies (Orange Cin\u00e9 Max, Cin\u00e9 Happy, Cin\u00e9 Choc, Cin\u00e9 Novo, Cin\u00e9 G\u00e9ant). The channels primarily show films from the Warner Bros. and HBO catalogues. Orange installs additional VOD services on its channels, allowing viewers to watch programmes broadcast in the previous 30 days whenever they like, as well as supplementary programmes from the previous month.\nOrange Sport.\nOrange Sport is launched 13 November 2008. Orange secures the broadcast rights for the Saturday evening line-up of Ligue 1 matches from season 2008/2009 to season 2011/2012, and the rights to home matches of eight Serie A clubs (Sampdoria, Atalanta, Chievo, Reggina, Siena, Palermo, Udinese and Napoli). The acquisition of these rights marks the start of competition for sports programs with the Canal+ group.\nVideo on demand.\nOrange offers services for video on demand access using the Orange decoder, a computer or a mobile phone. Orange offers free programming from the catalogues of available works of France Television, M6 and TF1 for one week after their initial broadcast.\nOnline entertainment.\nIn 1997, France Telecom created Goa, an online entertainment subsidiary. The site is launched as a platform for players of massively multiplayer online games. In 2002, Goa acquires the operating license for Dark Age of Camelot. In 2007 Goa ceases to be a subsidiary and is merged into Orange. In 2009 Orange refocuses Goa.com on online entertainment and gradually ceases to operate massively multiplayer online games. In August 2010, goa.com disappears to become the Orange Jeux portal.\nMusic.\nLiveradio: Created by Orange in 2008, Liveradio is a free, live, on-demand IP radio streaming service. Users gain access through this service to more than 10,000 FM and web radio stations and 11,000 podcasts from 100 countries.\nSubsidiaries, joint ventures and holdings.\nOrange is a communications access provider offering customers access through multiple platforms. The four key platforms Orange operates are:\nFrance T\u00e9l\u00e9com merged the different internal divisions managing each platform and now all operate under the Orange brand.\nOrange Business.\nOrange is present in the U.S. through its Orange Business division and its venture capital historical partner Innovacom as well as two R&amp;D labs: one in Boston, Massachusetts and the other in South San Francisco, California.\n\"OpenTransit\" is Orange's backbone network. It covers Europe, the United States, Japan, Hong Kong, and loops back to Paris.\nBT Group.\nOrange and Deutsche Telekom merged their UK businesses in 2010 to form a joint venture branded as EE. In December 2014, Orange were in talks with BT Group regarding the acquisition of EE for an estimated \u00a312.5\u00a0billion. On 5 February 2015, it was announced that BT would be acquiring EE in a \u00a312.5\u00a0billion deal, in which Orange S.A would take a 4% stake in the BT Group. The acquisition of EE was completed on 29 January 2016.\nGlobecast.\nGlobecast is a provider of managed services for the media and broadcast industry, such as TV channel distribution via satellite and Internet, live event production, contribution and distribution services, channel content preparation and playout. GlobeCast World TV was a brand by Globecast for its north-american direct-to-home satellite broadcast of international channels. In 2012, Globecast also began launching a direct-to-consumer OTT IPTV service called MyGlobeTV in the United States using NetGem set top boxes. The MyGlobeTV service was discontinued In December 2013.\nViaccess Orca.\nViaccess Orca is a provider of IPTV and OTT TV service platforms and security services. It is headquartered in Paris La Defense. Viaccess-orca acquired Squadeo company in 2017 and is able to supply video secured player. Viaccess Orca is also involved in content tracking over internet, providing anti-piracy services.\nOrange Labs.\nOrange Labs (formerly France T\u00e9l\u00e9com R&amp;D) is the research and development division of Orange. This division was derived from different previous entities, such as CNET (Centre national d'\u00e9tudes des t\u00e9l\u00e9communications) created in 1944, the CCETT created in 1972, as well as other entities. In 2007, France T\u00e9l\u00e9com R&amp;D became known as Orange Labs, a global network of R&amp;D entities.\nCCETT/France T\u00e9l\u00e9com R&amp;D contributed to various international standards, such as ISO/IEC MPEG and JPEG standards or DAB and DVB standards. CCETT, IRT and Philips developed a digital audio two-channel compression system known as Musicam or MPEG Audio Layer II (Emmy Award in Engineering 2000).\nIn 2010, Orange devoted 1.9% of its revenue, or \u20ac845\u00a0million, to research and development. Since January 2007 Orange has unified its research laboratories and technocentres in the Orange Labs network. As of 2010[ [update]] Orange held a portfolio of 7,892 patents, 327 which were filed in 2010. Orange employs 3,700 people in research and development per year throughout the organisation, including more than 200 doctoral candidates and post-doctorates. Orange's research and development is based on partnerships with industry, suppliers and operators, universities and schools, academic institutes and research programs such as the following:\nTwo types of infrastructure coexist in Orange's research and development: the research laboratories and the technocentres. The latter are responsible for Orange innovations and consist of multidisciplinary teams of researchers, engineers, and marketing and sales personnel.\nCityvox.\nCityvox is a network of websites with local content (restaurants, cultural happenings, etc.) created in 1999. Orange purchased the network site in 2008.\nDeezer.\nIn late August 2010 Orange acquired an 11% share in the streaming site Deezer. With this acquisition, the operator offered its subscribers a new \"Deezer Premium\" option: paid streaming music service with no advertising and 7 million titles. In 2016 Orange sold Deezer to Access Industries, the parent of Warner Music Group.\nDailymotion.\nOn 25 January 2011 Orange announced the acquisition of 49% of Dailymotion, a French online video platform, at a cost of \u20ac58.8\u00a0million. The group also secured an option to acquire all of the shares in the platform in 2013. This is indicative of a new strategy by Orange, which seeks to offer a full range of multi-screen video to its subscribers. In 2015 Vivendi acquired 90% of Dailymotion.\nStudio 37.\nCreated in 2007 Studio 37 co-produces and acquires films. The producer Fr\u00e9d\u00e9rique Dumas starts the studio, which has an initial budget of 30 million Euros. For its growth, Orange negotiates exclusivity agreements with Warner, HBO, Fid\u00e9lit\u00e9 Films and Gaumont, ensuring a stream of films for its TV Orange Cinema Series package. In 2011, Studio 37 co-produced The Artist which went on to win best picture and four further awards at the 84th Academy Awards. This makes it the first silent film to win an award since the original ceremony in 1929.\nCloudwatt.\nCloudwatt is a cloud services provider set up in 2012 by Orange (44%), the French government through Caisse des D\u00e9p\u00f4ts (33%) and Thales (22%). In March 2015, Orange acquired all remaining shares of Cloudwatt to strengthen its enterprise cloud services offering.\nAire.\nIn January 2019 Orange acquired a minority shareholding in Aire Labs, a credit data platform in the UK.\nSecureData.\nIn February 2019 Orange acquired UK cybersecurity provider SecureData for an undisclosed sum, merging it with Orange Cyberdefense Division.\nSecureLink.\nOrange acquired SecureLink, a Netherlands-based cybersecurity company, in 2019 for \u20ac515 million.\nSUMA Movil.\nIn November 2019 Orange Espa\u00f1a, a subsidiary of Orange, acquired SUMA M\u00f3vil Spain from Grupo-Ingenium for an undisclosed sum.\nTelekom Romania.\nIn early August 2020 Orange reached an agreement with the Ministry of Communications and Information Society (MCSI) to purchase Telekom Romania and establish a new telecommunications entity. As part of this agreement, the Romanian government would own a 20% stake in the new entity, and Orange would take over fixed operations. The MCSI had first entered talks to sell Telekom Romania in September 2019, when Deutsche Telekom announced that it was prepared to sell its stake in Telekom Romania to Orange.\nFuture4care.\nIn June 2021, Orange partners with Sanofi, Capgemini and Generali to launch Future4care. This all-European start-up accelerator will help develop upcoming companies focused on digital health.\nOpenAI.\nIn November, 2024, Orange announced its multi-year partnership with OpenAI in Europe which will give the French Telecoms access to the pre-release AI models. Orange signed an agreement with both Meta and OpenAI for the purposes of translating regional African languages for the telecom groups.\nControversies.\nStaff suicides.\nBetween January 2008 and April 2011, more than 60 France T\u00e9l\u00e9com employees died by suicide, some leaving notes blaming stress and misery at work. In October 2009, the wave of suicides led then Deputy CEO Louis-Pierre Wenes to resign under trade union pressure, to be replaced by St\u00e9phane Richard. Faced with multiple suicides of employees, the company promoted St\u00e9phane Richard to the chief executive officer on 1 February 2010, while Didier Lombard remained as chairman.\nThe suicide rate among France T\u00e9l\u00e9com's 102,000 domestic employees was 15.3 per year in that year, compared with an average of 14.7 suicides per 100,000 in the overall French population.\nFollowing an investigation, the Inspection du travail (Labour Inspection) told the labour union Sud-PTT that the work organisation at France T\u00e9l\u00e9com \"was conducive to generating suffering at work\" and \"health risks\" for employees. An investigation was conducted by the audit firm Technologia at the request of France T\u00e9l\u00e9com's management. Of the 102,843 employees in the group's parent company, 80,080 responded, i.e. a response rate of 77.9%. The fact-finding report revealed a \"very poor general feeling\", \"strained physical and mental health\", and a \"tense and even violent working environment\" for some categories of personnel. Working conditions were deemed difficult, mainly for personnel in charge of sales and customer interventions. Given heavy media coverage, these findings were the source of major contention about working conditions.\nOn 20 December 2019, former CEO Didier Lombard and Orange were found guilty of moral harassment towards their employees.\nAccess to some sites limited.\nIn 2011, following complaints by Internet users, Megaupload accused Orange of not providing sufficient connectivity to its site, thus severely limiting throughput from France, an allegation Orange denied.\nAccusations of false advertising in France.\nIn November 2009, three users lodged a complaint against Orange for false advertising concerning its \"Unlimited 3G Key\" service. These customers criticised the operator for the misleading way in which this service is presented, since it isn't in fact unlimited. While it is true that there is no time limit, the user cannot download more than 1 gigabyte per month, thus limiting browsing. Unaware of this, the three plaintiffs browsed beyond plan limits and had to pay additional fees as a result.\nCorruption in Tunisia.\nIn March 2011, the information website OWNI uncovered a questionable financial deal that enabled the Orange group to acquire a 3G license.\nAnticompetitive practices in French overseas departments.\nOn 28 July 2011, the Competition Authority fined France T\u00e9l\u00e9com \u20ac27.6 million for having improperly impeded the development of new competing operators in the French overseas departments (primarily R\u00e9union).\nFrance T\u00e9l\u00e9com used its dominant position, resulting in particular from its former monopoly, to take unfair advantage of its competitors.\nThe practices identified by the Authority were: \nSMS and MMS propagation of 1 January 2011 in France.\nOn 1 January 2011, Orange users' SMS and MMS were sent and billed multiple times. The operator agreed to reimburse the excess costs to consumers, explaining that the error came from a \"third party operator\" (which turned out to be Bouygues Telecom), said not to have sent acknowledgements, which caused the messages to be resent. A computer problem at the Bouygues platform was blamed. During the night of 31 December 2010 to 1 January 2011, more than 930 million text messages were exchanged in France (for the three operators combined), setting a new record compared with the peaks of the previous years.\nControversies in UK regarding the quality of service.\nOn 21 March 2007 \"Watchdog\", a BBC television series focusing on consumer protection, published the results of a broadband survey they carried out. According to the survey Orange was the worst ISP in the UK. 68% of Orange customers that took part in the survey said they were unsatisfied with Orange's customer service, it was voted as the most unreliable broadband provider, and it had the highest number of dissatisfied customers. Two thirds of Orange customers experienced problems cancelling their Orange broadband.\nIn response to the problems with Orange UK broadband and 3G broadband during March 2009 and April 2009 the 3G data network has been upgraded to 3.5G and increased signal coverage. 3G networks for all telecommunication suppliers still struggle to get the throughput that was originally advertised when these networks were announced. The UK Telecoms Regulator has reported on the challenges for all suppliers.\nA consumer organisation forum web site known as OrangeProblems.co.uk focuses on the poor level of service provided by Orange Broadband in the UK. Initially set up as WanadooProblems.co.uk, the site focuses on the infamous Orange local loop unbundling and poor customer service but covers a wider range of Orange operations such as lost email, significantly delayed SMTP and outages, suspicions of eavesdropping, et al.\nOrange Mobile was criticised during a Channel 4 News investigation for a lack of security, which potentially exposed customer records to fraud.\nIn August 2007 Orange was criticised for summarily deleting email accounts tied to old Freeserve and Wanadoo 'pay as you go' dial-up accounts with no warning.\nIn August 2008, after well-publicised problems with iPhone 3G performances, customers compared their download speed and discovered that Orange in France was capping 3G download bandwidth. Orange admitted capping to 384\u00a0kbit/s, well below the theoretical 7.2\u00a0Mbit/s provided by the iPhone. Orange uncapped 3G and 3G+ by mid-September 2008.\nAccusations of antisemitism and calls for boycott.\nThe French chairman and CEO of the Orange telecommunications company, St\u00e9phane Richard said in Cairo regarding his company operations in Israel, \"Believe me, I would cancel the contract tomorrow if I could. We want to end this and to fix this; we don't want it.\" Later, Orange announced its desire to discontinue use of its popular brand name by its Israeli operator Partner Communications Company. The president of the State of Israel Reuven Rivlin said in response \"Just yesterday Israel faced attacks from anti-Israel and anti-Semitic bodies, who have chosen to delegitimise the state of Israel, and to launch rockets at us from the Gaza Strip. We must face these challenges together, right and left,\" Rivlin said.\nIsraeli culture minister Miri Regev said, \"I call on Jews of France and the world to disconnect from Orange unless St\u00e9phane Richard takes back his words. The time has come for them to understand that Jews in the world and sane voices that oppose anti-Semitism and racism also have power.\" The statement on the company's website announced in response that \"The Orange Group is a telecoms operator and as such its primary concern is to defend and promote the value of its brand in markets in which it is present,\" the statement began. \"The Group does not engage in any kind of political debate under any circumstance.\" Later, Richard visited Israel to clarify his remarks. He met Israeli PM Benyamin Netanyahu and former president, Shimon Peres. Richard told both Netanyahu and Peres that Orange has not and will not support anti-Israel boycott efforts, and insisted that its announced decision to abrogate its relationship with Partner was purely commercial and not political.\nOn 30 June 2015, Orange and Partner announced a change to their 10-year licensing agreement. Orange paid Partner \u20ac40\u00a0million to add an opt out clause to the contract, with which Partner conducted a market survey which is determine the best course of action moving forward. In the first year only Partner can opt out, with either party being able to opt out in the second year. Regardless of which party opts to exercise the out clause, Orange will pay Partner an additional \u20ac50\u00a0million to end the arrangement. Orange stated that the money paid to Partner was purely for re-branding purposes and affirmed their previous statement that their wish to leave Israel is based on desire to discontinue license agreements and maintain only subsidiaries that they control, rather than a boycott. Orange would make the relevant payments over the course of two years and charge it to their books as a mix of marketing, sales, customer services and related expenses. As part of the agreement Orange's research and development activities within Israel would transition to the Orange name, but would be restricted from entering the telecommunications services market.\nIn September 2015, Orange reaffirmed their commitment to Israel with an investment in Hola, a video distribution network.\nIn February 2016, Orange and Partner decided to terminate their agreement. As a result, Orange Israel has become part of Partner.\nConviction for infringement and violation of free licenses.\nIn 2024, after twelve years of proceedings, Orange was fined \u20ac860,000 for infringement and violation of the GNU general public license, and therefore of the copyright of https://, the cooperative company that authored the free identity management library LASSO. The https:// produced several text explanations to comment on the case.\nGovernance.\nOverview of governance.\nGovernance of the Orange group is centered in its board of directors, executive committee and three committees that steer Orange's strategy:\nChief executive officers.\nThe company is headed either by the chairman of the board of directors, whose title in that case is the chairman and chief executive officer, or by another person appointed by the board of directors and given the title of chief executive officer.\nBoard of directors.\nThe Orange group is governed by a board of directors composed of a minimum of twelve members and a maximum of twenty-two members, divided as follows: three are appointed by the French State, three are elected by the employees, one is elected by the shareholders and represents employee shareholders, the fifteen other members are appointed by the shareholders. The board members serve for a term of four years. In 2011, the board of directors was composed of 15 members:\nExecutive committee.\nThe executive committee reports to the chairman and CEO. Its purpose is to coordinate the implementation of Orange's strategic orientations and to oversee the achievement of operational, social, technical and financial resource allocation objectives. It comprises fifteen members.\nHead office.\nOrange's head office, since 2012, is based at 78, Rue Olivier de Serres in the 15th arrondissement of Paris.\nThe company's former head office was based at 6, Place d'Alleray in the 15th arrondissement of Paris. The building was the head office from 1998 until 2012. Eight hundred employees worked at the site.\nOrange Foundation.\nIn 1987 France T\u00e9l\u00e9com established the France T\u00e9l\u00e9com Foundation. On 16 January 2007, the foundation changed its name to Orange Foundation. In 1990 France Telecom Foundation received the top award for corporate philanthropy from ADMICAL. In 1995 France Telecom Foundation received the top award for solidarity from ADMICAL. The board of directors of Orange Foundation consists of representatives of Orange, independent personalities and employee representatives. Its purpose is to support projects related to health, particularly autism; education, particularly schooling for girls in developing countries; and culture, particularly group vocal music. Projects supported by Orange Foundation are chosen by committees of experts devoted to each major theme. The Foundation has been involved in 300 to 400 projects per year since 1987. The Foundation works with international NGOs and local associations involved in long-term projects in countries in which Orange is based for better follow-up of these projects.\nSponsorship.\nFrom 2000 to 2002, Orange was a major sponsor of British Formula One team Arrows.\nOrange was the sponsor for UEFA Euro 2012 and UEFA Euro 2016.\nThe company was the official jersey sponsor of the national basketball teams of the Central African Republic and Senegal at the 2015 FIBA Africa Championship.\nOrange was the kit sponsor of the French association football club Olympique de Marseille for the 2017/18 and 2018/19 seasons.\nThe company became a sponsor of esports organisation Team Vitality in 2018.\nPrices and distinctions.\nIn 2021, the application for Orange customers called \"My Orange\" was named winner of the \"Janus of the digital experience\" by the French Institute of Design. In the same year, this application won the \"Red Dot\" award. In 2023, the demo application of the https:// also won this award in the \"Brand and Communication Design\" category.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54316", "revid": "50086806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54316", "title": "List of mathematical functions", "text": "In mathematics, some functions or groups of functions are important enough to deserve their own names. This is a listing of articles which explain some of these functions in more detail. There is a large theory of special functions which developed out of statistics and mathematical physics. A modern, abstract point of view contrasts large function spaces, which are infinite-dimensional and within which most functions are \"anonymous\", with special functions picked out by properties such as symmetry, or relationship to harmonic analysis and group representations.\nSee also List of types of functions\nElementary functions.\nElementary functions are functions built from basic operations (e.g. addition, exponentials, logarithms...)\nAlgebraic functions.\nAlgebraic functions are functions that can be expressed as the solution of a polynomial equation with polynomial coefficients.\nElementary transcendental functions.\nTranscendental functions are functions that are not algebraic."}
{"id": "54317", "revid": "49566734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54317", "title": "Fairy", "text": "Mythical being or legendary creature in European folklore\nA fairy (also called fay, fae, fae folk, fey, fair folk, or faerie) is a type of mythical being or legendary creature, generally described as anthropomorphic, found in the folklore of multiple European cultures (including Celtic, Slavic, Germanic, and French folklore), a form of spirit, often with magical, metaphysical, supernatural, or preternatural qualities.\nMyths and stories about fairies do not have a single origin but are rather a collection of folk beliefs from disparate sources. Various folk theories about the origins of fairies include casting them as either demoted angels or demons in a Christian tradition, as deities in pagan belief systems, as spirits of the dead, as prehistoric precursors to humans, or as spirits of nature.\nThe label of \"fairy\" has at times applied only to specific magical creatures with human appearance, magical powers, and a penchant for trickery. At other times, it has been used to describe any magical creature, such as goblins and gnomes. \"Fairy\" has at times been used as an adjective, with a meaning equivalent to \"enchanted\" or \"magical\". It was also used as a name for the place these beings come from: Fairyland.\nA recurring motif of legends about fairies is the need to ward off fairies using protective charms. Common examples of such charms include church bells, wearing clothing inside out, four-leaf clover, and food. Fairies were also sometimes thought to haunt specific locations and to lead travelers astray using will-o'-the-wisps. Before the advent of modern medicine, fairies were often blamed for sickness, particularly tuberculosis and birth deformities.\nIn addition to their folkloric origins, fairies were a common feature of Renaissance literature and Romantic art and were especially popular in the United Kingdom during the Victorian and Edwardian eras. The Celtic Revival also saw fairies established as a canonical part of Celtic cultural heritage.\nEtymology.\nThe English \"fairy\" derives from the Early Modern English \"faerie\", meaning 'realm of the \"fays\"'. \"Faerie\", in turn, derives from the Old French form , a derivation from (from Vulgar Latin , 'the fates'), with the abstract noun suffix .\nIn Old French romance, a or was a woman skilled in magic, and who knew the power and virtue of words, of stones, and of herbs.\n\"Fairy\" was used to represent: an illusion or enchantment; the land of the Faes; collectively the inhabitants thereof; an individual such as a fairy knight. became Modern English \"fay\", while became \"fairy\", but this spelling almost exclusively refers to one individual (the same meaning as \"fay\"). In the sense of 'land where fairies dwell', archaic spellings \"faery\" and \"faerie\" are still in use.\nLatinate , from which \"fairy\" derives, is distinct from English (from Old English ), which means 'fated to die'. However, this unrelated Germanic word may have been influenced by Old French (fay or fairy) as the meaning had shifted slightly to 'fated' from the earlier 'doomed' or 'accursed'.\nVarious folklore traditions refer to fairies euphemistically as \"wee folk\", \"good folk\", \"people of peace\", \"fair folk\" (Welsh: ), etc.\nHistorical development.\nThe term \"fairy\" is sometimes used to describe any magical creature, including goblins and gnomes, while at other times, the term describes only a specific type of ethereal creature or sprite.\nExplanations for the origins of fairies range from Persian mythology to the folklore of the Brythonic (Bretons, Welsh, Cornish), Gaelic (Irish, Scots, Manx), and Germanic peoples, and from the pages of Middle French medieval romances.\nAccording to some historians, such as Barth\u00e9lemy d'Herbelot, fairies were adopted from and influenced by the of Persian mythology. Peris were angelic beings that were mentioned in antiquity in pre-Islamic Persia as early as the Achaemenid Empire. Peris were later described in various Persian works in great detail such as the Shahnameh by Ferdowsi. A peri was illustrated to be fair, beautiful, and extravagant nature spirits that were supported by wings. This may have influenced migratory Germanic and Eurasian settlers into Europe, or been transmitted during early exchanges. The similarities could also be attributed to a shared Proto-Indo-European mythology.\nIn the Middle Ages, \"fairie\" was used adjectivally, meaning \"enchanted\" (as in \"fairie knight\", \"fairie queene\"), but also became a generic term for various \"enchanted\" creatures during the Late Middle English period. Literature of the Elizabethan era conflated elves with the fairies of Romance culture, rendering these terms somewhat interchangeable. The modern concept of \"fairy\" in the narrower sense is unique to English folklore, later made diminutive in accordance with prevailing tastes of the Victorian era, as in \"fairy tales\" for children.\nThe Victorian era and Edwardian era saw a heightened increase of interest in fairies. The Celtic Revival cast fairies as part of Ireland's cultural heritage. Carole Silver and others suggested this fascination of English antiquarians arose from a reaction to greater industrialization and loss of older folk ways.\nDescriptions.\nFairies are generally described as human in appearance and having magical powers. Diminutive fairies of various kinds have been reported through centuries, ranging from quite tiny to the size of a human. These small sizes could be magically assumed, rather than constant. Some smaller fairies could expand their figures to imitate humans. On Orkney, fairies were described as short in stature, dressed in dark grey, and sometimes seen in armour. In some folklore, fairies have green eyes. Some depictions of fairies show them with footwear, others as barefoot. Wings, while common in Victorian and later artworks, are rare in folklore; fairies flew by means of magic, sometimes perched on ragwort stems or the backs of birds. Modern illustrations often include dragonfly or butterfly wings.\nOrigins.\nEarly modern \"fairies\" does not derive from a single origin; the term is a conflation of disparate elements from folk belief sources, influenced by literature and speculation. In the folklore of Ireland, the mythic , or 'people of the fairy hills', have come to a modern meaning somewhat inclusive of fairies. The Scandinavian elves also served as an influence. Folklorists and mythologists have variously depicted fairies as the unworthy dead, the children of Eve, a kind of demon, a species independent of humans, an older race of humans, and fallen angels. The folkloristic or mythological elements combine Celtic, Germanic and Greco-Roman elements. Folklorists have suggested that 'fairies' arose from various earlier beliefs, which lost currency with the advent of Christianity. These disparate explanations are not necessarily incompatible, as 'fairies' may be traced to multiple sources.\nDemoted angels.\nA Christian tenet held that fairies were a class of \"demoted\" angels. One story described a group of angels revolting, and God ordered the gates of heaven shut; those still in heaven remained angels, those in hell became demons, and those caught in between became fairies. Others wrote that some angels, not being godly enough, yet not evil enough for hell, were thrown out of heaven. This concept may explain the tradition of paying a \"teind\" or tithe to hell; as fallen angels, although not quite devils, they could be viewed as subjects of Satan.\nKing James I, in his dissertation \"Daemonologie\", stated the term \"faries\" referred to illusory spirits (demonic entities) that prophesied to, consorted with, and transported the individuals they served; in medieval times, a witch or sorcerer who had a pact with a familiar spirit might receive these services.\nIn England's Theosophist circles of the 19th century, a belief in the \"angelic\" nature of fairies was reported. Entities referred to as Devas were said to guide many processes of nature, such as evolution of organisms, growth of plants, etc., many of which resided inside the Sun (Solar Angels). The more Earthbound Devas included \"nature spirits\", \"elementals\", and \"fairies\", which were described as appearing in the form of colored flames, roughly the size of a human.\nArthur Conan Doyle, in his 1922 book \"The Coming of the Fairies\"; \"The Theosophic View of Fairies\", reported that eminent theosophist E. L. Gardner had likened fairies to butterflies, whose function was to provide an essential link between the energy of the sun and the plants of Earth, describing them as having no clean-cut shape ... small, hazy, and somewhat luminous clouds of colour with a brighter sparkish nucleus. \"That growth of a plant which we regard as the customary and inevitable result of associating the three factors of sun, seed, and soil would never take place if the fairy builders were absent.\"\nFor a similar concept in Persian mythology, see Peri.\nDemoted pagan deities.\nAt one time it was thought that fairies were initially worshiped as deities, such as nymphs and tree spirits, and with the burgeoning predominance of the Christian Church, reverence for these deities carried on, but in a dwindling state of perceived power. Many deprecated deities of older folklore and myth were repurposed as fairies in Victorian fiction (See the works of W. B. Yeats for examples).\nFairies as demons.\nA recorded Christian belief of the 17th century cast all fairies as demons. This perspective grew more popular with the rise of Puritanism among the Reformed Church of England (See: Anglicanism). The hobgoblin, once a friendly household spirit, became classed as a wicked goblin. Dealing with fairies was considered a form of witchcraft and punished as such. In William Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\", Oberon, king of the faeries, states that neither he nor his court fears the church bells, which the author and Christian apologist C. S. Lewis cast as a politic disassociation from faeries although Lewis makes it clear that he himself does not consider fairies to be demons in his chapter on the topic (\"The Longaevi\" or \"long-livers\") from \"The Discarded Image\". In an era of intellectual and religious upheaval, some Victorian reappraisals of mythology cast deities in general as metaphors for natural events, which was later refuted by other authors (See: \"The Triumph of the Moon\", by Ronald Hutton). This contentious thought environment contributed to the modern meaning of 'fairies'.\nSpirits of the dead.\nOne belief held that fairies were spirits of the dead. This derived from many factors common in various folklore and myths: same or similar tales of both ghosts and fairies; the Irish , origin of their term for fairies, were ancient burial mounds; deemed dangerous to eat food in Fairyland and Hades; the dead and fairies depicted as living underground. Diane Purkiss observed an equating of fairies with the untimely dead who left \"unfinished lives\". One tale recounted a man caught by the fairies, who found that whenever he looked steadily at a fairy, it appeared as a dead neighbor of his. This theory was among the more common traditions related, although many informants also expressed doubts.\nHidden people.\nThere is an outdated theory that fairy folklore evolved from folk memories of a prehistoric race: newcomers superseded a body of earlier human or humanoid peoples, and the memories of this defeated race developed into modern conceptions of fairies. Proponents find support in the tradition of cold iron as a charm against fairies, viewed as a cultural memory of invaders with iron weapons displacing peoples who had just stone, bone, wood, etc., at their disposal, and were easily defeated. 19th-century archaeologists uncovered underground rooms in the Orkney islands that resembled the Elfland described in Childe Rowland, which lent additional support. In folklore, flint arrowheads from the Stone Age were attributed to the fairies as \"elfshot\", while their green clothing and underground homes spoke to a need for camouflage and covert shelter from hostile humans, their magic a necessary skill for combating those with superior weaponry. In a Victorian tenet of evolution, mythic cannibalism among ogres was attributed to memories of more savage races practicing alongside \"superior\" races of more refined sensibilities. The most important modern proponent of the 'hidden people' theory was the Scottish folklorist and antiquarian David MacRitchie.\nElementals.\nA theory that fairies were an intelligent species, distinct from humans and angels. An alchemist, Paracelsus, classed gnomes and sylphs as elementals, meaning magical entities who personify a particular force of nature and exert powers over these forces. Folklore accounts have described fairies as \"spirits of the air\".\nCharacteristics.\nMuch folklore of fairies involves methods of protecting oneself from their malice, by means such as cold iron, charms (see amulet, talisman) of rowan trees or various herbs, or simply shunning locations \"known\" to be theirs, ergo avoiding offending any fairies. Less harmful pranks ascribed to fairies include: tangling the hair of sleepers into fairy-locks (aka elf-locks), stealing small items, and leading a traveler astray. More dangerous behaviors were also attributed to fairies; any form of sudden death might have stemmed from a fairy kidnapping, the evident corpse a magical replica of wood. Consumption (tuberculosis) was sometimes blamed on fairies who forced young men and women to dance at revels every night, causing them to waste away from lack of rest. Rowan trees were considered sacred to fairies, and a charm tree to protect one's home.\nClassifications.\nVarious folklorists have proposed classification systems for fairies. Using terms popularized by W. B. Yeats, \"trooping fairies\" are those who appear in groups and might form settlements, as opposed to \"solitary fairies,\" who do not live or associate with others of their kind. In this context, the term \"fairy\" is usually held in a wider sense, including various similar beings, such as dwarves and elves of Germanic folklore.\nIn Scottish folklore, fairies are divided into the \"Seelie Court\" (more beneficently inclined, but still dangerous), and the \"Unseelie Court\" (more malicious). While fairies of the Seelie Court enjoyed playing generally harmless pranks on humans, those of the Unseelie Court often brought harm to humans for entertainment. Both could be dangerous to humans if offended.\nSome scholars have cautioned against the overuse of dividing fairies into types. British folklore historian Simon Young noted that classification varies widely from researcher to researcher, and pointed out that it does not necessarily reflect old beliefs, since \"those people living hundreds of years ago did not structure their experience as we do.\"\nChangelings.\nA considerable amount of lore about fairies revolves around changelings, fairies left in the place of stolen humans. In particular, folklore describes how to prevent the fairies from stealing babies and substituting changelings, and abducting older people as well. The theme of the swapped child is common in medieval literature and reflects concern over infants thought to be afflicted with unexplained diseases, disorders, or developmental disabilities. In pre-industrial Europe, a peasant family's subsistence frequently depended upon the productive labor of each member, and a person who was a permanent drain on the family's scarce resources could pose a threat to the survival of the entire family.\nProtective charms.\nIn terms of protective charms, wearing clothing inside out, church bells, St. John's wort, and four-leaf clovers are regarded as effective. In Newfoundland folklore, the most popular type of fairy protection is bread, varying from stale bread to hard tack or a slice of fresh homemade bread. Bread is associated with the home and the hearth, as well as with industry and the taming of nature, and as such, seems to be disliked by some types of fairies. On the other hand, in much of the Celtic folklore, baked goods are a traditional offering to the folk, as are cream and butter. \"The prototype of food, and therefore a symbol of life, bread was one of the commonest protections against fairies. Before going out into a fairy-haunted place, it was customary to put a piece of dry bread in one's pocket.\" In County Wexford, Ireland, in 1882, it was reported that: \"if an infant is carried out after dark a piece of bread is wrapped in its bib or dress, and this protects it from any witchcraft or evil.\"\nBells also have an ambiguous role; while they protect against fairies, the fairies riding on horseback\u00a0\u2014 such as the fairy queen\u00a0\u2014 often have bells on their harness. This may be a distinguishing trait between the Seelie Court from the Unseelie Court, such that fairies use them to protect themselves from more wicked members of their race. Another ambiguous piece of folklore revolves about poultry: a cock's crow drove away fairies, but other tales recount fairies keeping poultry.\nWhile many fairies will confuse travelers on the path, the will-o'-the-wisp can be avoided by not following it. Certain locations, known to be haunts of fairies, are to be avoided; C. S. Lewis reported hearing of a cottage more feared for its reported fairies than its reported ghost. In particular, digging in fairy hills was unwise. Paths that the fairies travel are also wise to avoid. Home-owners have knocked corners from houses because the corner blocked the fairy path, and cottages have been built with the front and back doors in line, so that the owners could, in need, leave them both open and let the fairies troop through all night. Locations such as fairy forts were left undisturbed; even cutting brush on fairy forts was reputed to be the death of those who performed the act. Fairy trees, such as thorn trees, were dangerous to chop down; one such tree was left alone in Scotland, though it prevented a road from being widened for seventy years.\nOther actions were believed to offend fairies. Brownies were known to be driven off by being given clothing, though some folktales recounted that they were offended by the inferior quality of the garments given, and others merely stated it, some even recounting that the brownie was delighted with the gift and left with it. Other brownies left households or farms because they heard a complaint, or a compliment. People who saw the fairies were advised not to look closely, because they resented infringements on their privacy. The need to not offend them could lead to problems: one farmer found that fairies threshed his corn, but the threshing continued after all his corn was gone, and he concluded that they were stealing from his neighbors, leaving him the choice between offending them, dangerous in itself, and profiting by the theft.\nMillers were thought by the Scots to be \"no canny\", owing to their ability to control the forces of nature, such as fire in the kiln, water in the burn, and for being able to set machinery a-whirring. Superstitious communities sometimes believed that the miller must be in league with the fairies. In Scotland, fairies were often mischievous and to be feared. No one dared to set foot in the mill or kiln at night, as it was known that the fairies brought their corn to be milled after dark. So long as the locals believed this, the miller could sleep secure in the knowledge that his stores were not being robbed. John Fraser, the miller of Whitehill, claimed to have hidden and watched the fairies trying unsuccessfully to work the mill. He said he decided to come out of hiding and help them, upon which one of the fairy women gave him a \"gowpen\" (double handful of meal) and told him to put it in his empty \"girnal\" (store), saying that the store would remain full for a long time, no matter how much he took out.\nIt is also believed that to know the name of a particular fairy, a person could summon it and force it to do their bidding. The name could be used as an insult towards the fairy in question, but it could also rather contradictorily be used to grant powers and gifts to the user.\nBefore the advent of modern medicine, many physiological conditions were untreatable and when children were born with abnormalities, it was common to blame the fairies.\nLegends.\nSometimes fairies are described as assuming the guise of an animal. In Scotland, it was peculiar to the fairy women to assume the shape of deer; while witches became mice, hares, cats, gulls, or black sheep. In \"The Legend of Knockshigowna\", in order to frighten a farmer who pastured his herd on fairy ground, a fairy queen took on the appearance of a great horse, with the wings of an eagle, and a tail like a dragon, hissing loud and spitting fire. Then she would change into a little man lame of a leg, with a bull's head, and a lambent flame playing round it.\nIn the 19th-century Child ballad \"Lady Isabel and the Elf-Knight\", the elf-knight is a Bluebeard figure, and Isabel must trick and kill him to preserve her life. The child ballad \"Tam Lin\" reveals that the title character, though living among the fairies and having fairy powers, was, in fact, an \"earthly knight\" and though his life was pleasant \"now\", he feared that the fairies would pay him as their teind (tithe) to hell.\n\"Sir Orfeo\" tells how Sir Orfeo's wife was kidnapped by the King of Faerie and only by trickery and an excellent harping ability was he able to win her back. \"Sir Degare\" narrates the tale of a woman overcome by her fairy lover, who in later versions of the story is unmasked as a mortal. \"Thomas the Rhymer\" shows Thomas escaping with less difficulty, but he spends seven years in Elfland. Ois\u00edn is harmed not by his stay in Faerie but by his return; when he dismounts, the three centuries that have passed catch up with him, reducing him to an aged man. King Herla (O.E. \"Herla cyning\"), originally a guise of Woden but later Christianised as a king in a tale by Walter Map, was said, by Map, to have visited a dwarf's underground mansion and returned three centuries later; although only some of his men crumbled to dust on dismounting, Herla and his men who did not dismount were trapped on horseback, this being one account of the origin of the Wild Hunt of European folklore.\nA common feature of the fairies is the use of magic to disguise their appearance. \"Fairy gold\" is notoriously unreliable, appearing as gold when paid but soon thereafter revealing itself to be leaves, gorse blossoms, gingerbread cakes, or a variety of other comparatively worthless things.\nThese illusions are also implicit in the tales of \"fairy ointment\". Many tales from Northern Europe tell of a mortal woman summoned to attend a fairy birth \u2014 sometimes attending a mortal, kidnapped woman's childbed. Invariably, the woman is given something for the child's eyes, usually an ointment; through mischance, or sometimes curiosity, she uses it on one or both of her own eyes. At that point, she sees where she is; one midwife realizes that she was not attending a great lady in a fine house but her own runaway maid-servant in a wretched cave. She escapes without making her ability known but sooner or later betrays that she can see the fairies. She is invariably blinded in that eye or in both if she used the ointment on both.\nThere have been claims by people in the past, like William Blake, to have seen fairy funerals. Allan Cunningham in his \"Lives of Eminent British Painters\" records that William Blake claimed to have seen a fairy funeral:\n'Did you ever see a fairy's funeral, madam?' said Blake to a lady who happened to sit next to him. 'Never, sir!' said the lady. 'I have,' said Blake, 'but not before last night.' And he went on to tell how, in his garden, he had seen 'a procession of creatures of the size and colour of green and grey grasshoppers, bearing a body laid out on a rose-leaf, which they buried with songs, and then disappeared.' They are believed to be an omen of death.\n\nThe are a race of supernaturally-gifted people in Irish mythology. They are thought to represent the main deities of pre-Christian Ireland. Many of the Irish modern tales of the refer to these beings as fairies, though in more ancient times they were regarded as goddesses and gods. The were spoken of as having come from islands in the north of the world or, in other sources, from the sky. After being victorious in a series of battles with other otherworldly beings, and then being defeated by the ancestors of the current Irish people, they were said to have withdrawn to the (fairy mounds), where they lived on in popular imagination as \"fairies\".\nThey are associated with several Otherworld realms including ('the Pleasant Plain'), ('the place of apples'), and ('the Land of Youth').\nThe is the Irish term for a supernatural race in Irish, comparable to the fairies or elves. They are variously said to be ancestors, the spirits of nature, or goddesses and gods. A common theme found among the Celtic nations describes a race of people who had been driven out by invading humans. In old Celtic fairy lore the ('people of the fairy mounds') are immortals living in the ancient barrows and cairns. The Irish banshee (Irish Gaelic , previously , 'woman of the fairy mound') is sometimes described as a ghost.\nScottish.\nIn the 1691 \"The Secret Commonwealth of Elves, Fauns and Fairies\", Reverend Robert Kirk, minister of the Parish of Aberfoyle, Stirling, Scotland, wrote:\nThese Siths or Fairies they call or the Good People...are said to be of middle nature between Man and Angel, as were Daemons thought to be of old; of intelligent fluidous Spirits, and light changeable bodies (lyke those called Astral) somewhat of the nature of a condensed cloud, and best seen in twilight. These bodies be so pliable through the sublety of Spirits that agitate them, that they can make them appear or disappear at pleasure\nIn literature.\nThe word \"fairy\" was used to describe an individual inhabitant of Faerie before the time of Chaucer.\nFairies appeared in medieval romances as one of the beings that a knight errant might encounter. A fairy lady appeared to Sir Launfal and demanded his love; like the fairy bride of ordinary folklore, she imposed a prohibition on him that in time he violated. Sir Orfeo's wife was carried off by the King of Faerie. Huon of Bordeaux is aided by King Oberon. These fairy characters dwindled in number as the medieval era progressed; the figures became wizards and enchantresses.\nThe oldest fairies on record in England were first described by the historian Gervase of Tilbury in the 13th century.\nIn the 1485 book , Morgan le Fay, whose connection to the realm of Faerie is implied in her name, is a woman whose magic powers stem from study. While somewhat diminished with time, fairies never completely vanished from the tradition. Edmund Spenser featured fairies in his 1590 book \"The Faerie Queene\". In many works of fiction, fairies are freely mixed with the nymphs and satyrs of classical tradition, while in others (e.g., Lamia), they were seen as displacing the Classical beings. 15th-century poet and monk John Lydgate wrote that King Arthur was crowned in \"the land of the fairy\" and taken in his death by four fairy queens, to Avalon, where he lies under a \"fairy hill\" until he is needed again.\nFairies appear as significant characters in William Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\", which is set simultaneously in the woodland and in the realm of Fairyland, under the light of the Moon and in which a disturbance of nature caused by a fairy dispute creates tension underlying the plot and informing the actions of the characters. According to Maurice Hunt, Chair of the English Department at Baylor University, the blurring of the identities of fantasy and reality makes possible \"that pleasing, narcotic dreaminess associated with the fairies of the play\".\nShakespeare's contemporary Michael Drayton features fairies in his \"Nimphidia\", and from these stem Alexander Pope's sylphs of the 1712 poem \"The Rape of the Lock\". In the mid-17th century the French literary style took up the oral tradition of such tales to write fairy tales, and Madame d'Aulnoy invented the term ('fairy tale'). While the tales told by the included many fairies, they were less common in other countries' tales; indeed, the Brothers Grimm included fairies in their first edition but decided this was not authentically German and altered the language in later editions, changing each (\"fairy\") to an enchantress or wise woman. J. R. R. Tolkien described these tales as taking place in the land of Faerie. Additionally, not all folktales that feature fairies are generally categorized as fairy tales.\nThe modern depiction of fairies was shaped in the literature of Romanticism during the Victorian era. Writers such as Walter Scott and James Hogg were inspired by folklore which featured fairies, such as the \"Border ballads\". This era saw an increase in the popularity of collecting fairy folklore and an increase in the creation of original works with fairy characters. In Rudyard Kipling's 1906 book of short stories and poems, \"Puck of Pook's Hill\", Puck holds to scorn the moralizing fairies of other Victorian works. The period also saw a revival of older themes in fantasy literature, such as C.S. Lewis's Narnia books, which, while featuring many such classical beings as fauns and dryads, mingles them freely with hags, giants, and other creatures of the folkloric fairy tradition. Victorian flower fairies were popularized in part by Queen Mary's keen interest in fairy art and by British illustrator and poet Cicely Mary Barker's series of eight books published in 1923 through 1948. Imagery of fairies in literature became prettier and smaller as time progressed. Andrew Lang, complaining of \"the fairies of polyanthuses and gardenias and apple blossoms\" in the introduction to \"The Lilac Fairy Book\" (1910), observed that: \"These fairies try to be funny, and fail; or they try to preach, and succeed.\"\nA story of the origin of fairies appears in a chapter about Peter Pan in J. M. Barrie's 1902 novel \"The Little White Bird\", and was incorporated into his later works about the character. Barrie wrote: \"When the first baby laughed for the first time, his laugh broke into a million pieces, and they all went skipping about. That was the beginning of fairies.\" Fairies are seen in Neverland, in \"Peter and Wendy\", the 1911 novel version of J. M. Barrie's famous Peter Pan stories, and its character Tinker Bell has become a pop culture icon. When Peter Pan is guarding Wendy from pirates, the story says: \"After a time he fell asleep, and some unsteady fairies had to climb over him on their way home from an orgy. Any of the other boys obstructing the fairy path at night they would have mischiefed, but they just tweaked Peter's nose and passed on.\"\nIn visual art.\nImages of fairies have appeared as illustrations, often in books of fairy tales, as well as in photographic media and sculpture. Some artists known for their depictions of fairies include Cicely Mary Barker, Amy Brown, David Delamare, Meredith Dillman, Gustave Dor\u00e9, Brian Froud, Warwick Goble, Jasmine Becket-Griffith, Rebecca Guay, Florence Harrison, Alan Lee, Ida Rentoul Outhwaite, Myrea Pettit, Arthur Rackham, Suza Scalora, and Nene Thomas.\nThe Fairy Doors of Ann Arbor, MI are small doors installed into local buildings. Local children believe these are the front doors of fairy houses, and in some cases, small furniture, dishes, and various other things can be seen beyond the doors.\nThe Victorian era was particularly noted for fairy paintings. The Victorian painter Richard Dadd created paintings of fairy-folk with a sinister and malign tone. Other Victorian artists who depicted fairies include John Anster Fitzgerald, John Atkinson Grimshaw, Daniel Maclise, and Joseph Noel Paton. Interest in fairy-themed art enjoyed a brief renaissance following the publication of the Cottingley Fairies photographs in 1920, and a number of artists turned to painting fairy themes.\nChristian belief in fairies.\nMost Christians have been negative or skeptical regarding creatures such as fairies or nature spirits, but a minority of Christian thinkers have advocated for the reality of fairies in positive terms. One early example is Origen of Alexandria in \"Contra Celsum\" (8.31) from about the year 248:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We indeed also maintain with regard not only to the fruits of the earth, but to every flowing stream and every breath of air that the ground brings forth those things which are said to grow up naturally \u2014 that the water springs in fountains, and refreshes the earth with running streams \u2014 that the air is kept pure, and supports the life of those who breathe it, only in consequence of the agency and control of certain beings whom we may call invisible husbandmen and guardians; but we deny that those invisible agents are demons.\nAbout a century later (c.\u2009335), Athanasius of Alexandria gives an exclusively negative assessment of these same creatures (\"On the Incarnation\" 8.47) as simply \"demons ...taking up their abode in springs or rivers or trees or stones and imposing upon simple people by their frauds.\" While such negative or skeptical ideas remained the majority positions for Christians, some exceptions can be found such as the Scottish minister Robert Kirk who wrote \"The Secret Commonwealth of Elves, Fauns and Fairies\" in the later seventeenth century (1893).\nIn the modern era, C. S. Lewis writes about the possibility of fairies being real in \"The Longaevi\" (the \"Long-livers\" or \"Long Lived Ones\") in his book \"The Discarded Image\". Lewis also shared this account of comments by J. R. R. Tolkien within a letter to Arthur Greeves (22 June 1930):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tolkien once remarked to me that the feeling about home must have been quite different in the days when a family had fed on the produce of the same few miles of country for six generations, and that perhaps this was why they saw nymphs in the fountains and dryads in the woods \u2013 they were not mistaken for there was in a sense a real (not metaphorical) connection between them and the countryside. What had been earth and air and later corn, and later still bread, really was in them. We of course who live on a standardised international diet (you may have had Canadian flour, English meat, Scotch oatmeal, African oranges, &amp; Australian wine to day) are really artificial beings and have no connection (save in sentiment) with any place on earth. We are synthetic men, uprooted. The strength of the hills is not ours.\nTolkien shares more about the possible reality of fairies in a manuscript published posthumously:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If Fairies really exist\u2014independently of Men\u2014then very few of our 'Fairy-stories' have any relation to them... They are a quite separate creation living in another mode. They appear to us in human form (with hands, faces, voices and language similar to our own): this may be their real form and their difference reside in something other than form, or it may be (probably is) only the way in which their presence affects us. Rabbits and eagles may be aware of them quite otherwise. For lack of a better word they may be called spirits, daemons: inherent powers of the created world, deriving more directly and 'earlier' (in terrestrial history) from the creating will of God, but nonetheless created.\nChristian theologians John Milbank and David Bentley Hart have spoken and written about the real existence of fairies as has the Christian philosopher Stephen R. L. Clark. Hart was a 2015 Templeton Fellow at the University of Notre Dame Institute for Advanced Study and has published the most on this topic including references in multiple interviews and books, especially \"Roland in Moonlight\". For example, Hart has written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Of course mermaids exist. Or, to be more precise, of course water spirits and magical marine beings of every kind are real and numerous and, in certain circumstances, somewhat dangerous. ...The modern reports of real encounters with mermaids or other water-spirits, such as two from Zimbabwe, one from South Africa, three from northeastern India, and so on ...are so ingenuous, well-attested, and credible that only a brute would refuse to believe them [and] there is a real moral imperative in not dismissing such tales as lies or delusions.\nFairies in Non-European culture.\nDiwata in Philippine mythology are nature spirits or minor deities, often seen as fairies in modern times. The term comes from the Sanskrit \"devata\" (deity), and they are sometimes linked with fairies called lambana. In modern Tagalog, \"diwata\" means fairy or nymph. The word is thought to originate from the Sanskrit word devata. It refers particularly to nature spirits of extraordinary beauty, like Maria Makiling.\nIn chess.\nFairy chess pieces are a generic term for pieces not found in standard chess, yet which do exist in one or more similar games known as chess variants.\nSee also.\nGeneral.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopular culture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54318", "revid": "40637800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54318", "title": "Luxembourgish euro coins", "text": "Designs of Luxembourgish currency\nLuxembourgish euro coins feature three different designs, though they all contain the portrait or effigy of Grand Duke Henri of Luxembourg. The designs, by Yvette Gastauer-Claire, also contain the 12 stars of the European flag, the year of imprint and the name of the country in the Luxembourgish language: \"L\u00ebtzebuerg\".\nThe Grand Duke Henri of Luxembourg appears on the coins facing to the left.&lt;ref name=\"left/right\"&gt;In heraldry, directions are often described as they would appear to the bearer of a coat of arms, rather than as they would appear to the viewer. Therefore, coin descriptions will use \"facing to the left\" when it would appear to the layperson that the person depicted is facing to the right.&lt;/ref&gt; As he only became Grand Duke in 2000 following the abdication of his father, Jean, Henri was not featured on the Luxembourg franc, with the exception of a 500 francs commemorative coin minted in 7,500 copies to commemorate his accession to the throne. Jean's portrait on the francs showed him facing to the right, and it is common in a number of countries for successive monarchs to alternate the direction they faced on coins.\nHaving abdicated on 3 October 2025, Grand Duke Henri's effigy will be replaced by that of his successor, Guillaume, in 2026. The new design of the coins was revealed on 26 September 2025.\nLuxembourg euro design.\nFor images of the common side and a detailed description of the coins, see euro coins.\nCirculating mintage quantities.\nMints.\n2002-2004: Royal Dutch Mint (Netherlands)\n2005-2006: Mint of Finland\n2007-2008: Paris Mint (France)\n2009-2018: Royal Dutch Mint (Netherlands)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54319", "revid": "49347563", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54319", "title": "Portuguese euro coins", "text": "Designs of Portuguese currency\nPortuguese euro coins show three different designs for each of the three series of coins. However, they are quite similar in that all of them contain old Portuguese royal mints and seals within a circle of seven castles and five escutcheons with silver bezants (all similar to what can be seen in the coat of arms and flag of Portugal) and the word \"Portugal\". Also featured in the designs, all done by V\u00edtor Manuel Fernandes dos Santos, are the 12 stars of the EU and the year of minting.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54320", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54320", "title": "Essex County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nEssex County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 37,381. Its county seat is the hamlet of Elizabethtown. Its name is from the English county of Essex. Essex is one of two counties that are entirely within the Adirondack Park, the other being Hamilton County. The county is part of the North Country region of the state.\nHistory.\nWhen counties were established in the state of New York in 1683, the present Essex County was part of Albany County. This was an enormous area, including the northern part of New York state as well as all of the present state of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. This county was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont. On March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Charlotte County, contained the eastern portion.\nIn 1784, the name \"Charlotte County\" was changed to Washington County to honor George Washington, the American Revolutionary War general and later President of the United States of America.\nIn 1788, Clinton County was split off from Washington County. This was a much larger area than the present Clinton County, including several other counties or county parts of the present New York state (near Clunes).\nEssex County was split from Clinton County in 1799.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (6.4%) is water. It is the second-largest county in New York by land area and third-largest by total area.\nEssex County is in the northeastern part of New York state, just west of Vermont along the eastern boundary of the state. The eastern boundary of Essex County is Lake Champlain, which serves as the New York \u2013 Vermont border at an elevation of just under . The highest natural point in New York, Mount Marcy at , is in the town of Keene.\nThe Ausable River forms a partial northern boundary for the county.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 38,851 people, 15,028 households, and 9,828 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 23,115 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 94.84% White, 2.81% Black or African American, 0.31% Native American, 0.41% Asian, 0.07% Pacific Islander, 0.69% from other races, and 0.86% from two or more races; 2.19% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. Of the population, 22.0% were of French, 16.3% Irish, 13.0% English, 8.6% German, 7.1% American and 6.2% Italian ancestry; 95.2% spoke English, 2.2% Spanish, and 1.3% French as their first language.\nThere were 15,028 households, out of which 29.20% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.20% were married couples living together, 8.90% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.60% were non-families. 28.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.60% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.39 and the average family size was 2.93.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 22.80% under the age of 18, 6.90% from 18 to 24, 29.80% from 25 to 44, 24.50% from 45 to 64, and 16.00% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 107.60 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 108.60 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $34,823, and the median income for a family was $41,927. Males had a median income of $30,952 versus $22,205 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,194. Of the population, 11.60% of individuals, 7.80% of families, 14.50% of those under the age of 18, and 8.60% of those 65 and older, were living below the poverty line.\nEducation.\nK-12.\nSchool districts include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransportation.\nAirports.\nThe following public use airports are located in the county:\nBus.\nEssex County Public Transportation operates several accessible bus routes connecting the county's major communities. Between scheduled stops, riders may flag down buses or request to be let off almost anywhere. Riders may also request minor route deviations for a small fee with advanced notice. Fares generally cost a few dollars or less.\nIn 2020 and 2021, bus service was disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic.\nRoutes.\nThe Champlain North route operates from Elizabethtown north to Wadhams, Whallonsburg, Essex, Willsboro, and to Keeseville, where riders may connect to Clinton County Public Transit bus routes.\nThe Champlain South route operates from Elizabethtown south to Westport, Mineville, Witherbee, Port Henry, Crown Point, and Ticonderoga. The service partially follows New York State Route 9N. Riders can connect to Amtrak's Adirondack train at Westport station for service to New York City and Montreal.\nThe Mountain Valley Shuttle operates from Elizabethtown west to Keene, Jay, Au Sable, Wilmington, and Lake Placid. Riders may connect to Clinton County Public Transit bus routes in Au Sable.\nThe Cascade Express route operates from Elizabethtown west to Keene, North Elba, Lake Placid, and Saranac Lake.\nThe Lake Placid XPRSS route operates within the village of Lake Placid. The bus is fare-free and supports tourism.\nRail.\nAmtrak's Adirondack service travels through Essex County once a day in each direction on its route between New York City and Montreal, stopping in Ticonderoga, Port Henry, Westport and Port Kent (seasonal). Amtrak also offers Thruway Motorcoach service connecting Lake Placid with Westport station.\nThe service was temporarily suspended from March 2020 through early April 2023 due to the closure of the Canadian/American border in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and related logistical challenges.\nCommunities.\nLarger settlements.\n\u2020 - County Seat\n\u2021 - Not Wholly in this County\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nEssex County is a bellwether county, having voted for the nationwide winner in every election beginning in 1980 with the exceptions of 1992 and 2024 (by only 96 votes). It voted for George W. Bush in the 2000 and 2004 elections, switched to Barack Obama in 2008 and 2012 and then flipped to Donald Trump in 2016, then to Joe Biden in 2020 and Kamala Harris in 2024. Before 1996, however, Essex, like most of the North Country, was powerfully Republican. Until Bill Clinton won it in 1996, it had voted for a Democratic presidential candidate only once since the Civil War, in 1964 when Barry Goldwater lost every county in New York State.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54321", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54321", "title": "Karl Donitz", "text": ""}
{"id": "54322", "revid": "47714573", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54322", "title": "Crestones", "text": "Group of mountains in Colorado, United States\nThe Crestones are a group of four peaks (fourteeners) in the Sangre de Cristo Range above Crestone, central southern Colorado, comprising:\nSnow is usually mostly melted by early July. Climbers can expect afternoon rain, hail, and lightning from the seasonal monsoon in late July and August.\nClimbing.\nBroken Hand Peak, , southeast of Crestone Needle, is included within the official name \"Crestone Peaks\". Mount Adams ( ) is a notable peak just to the north of the Crestones, and is quite rugged.\nNote that Crestone Peak and Crestone Needle are somewhat more technical climbs than many Colorado fourteeners; caution is advised. About one person per year is killed on the Crestones; occasionally they are skilled mountaineers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54323", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54323", "title": "Franklin County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nFranklin County is a county on the northern border of the U.S. state of New York. To the north across the Canada\u2013United States border are the Canadian provinces of Quebec and Ontario, from east to west. As of the 2020 census, the county population was 47,555. Its county seat is Malone. The county is named in honor of the United States Founding Father Benjamin Franklin. The county is part of the North Country region of the state.\nFranklin County comprises the Malone, NY Micropolitan Statistical Area. Much of Franklin County is within Adirondack Park. Within the border of the county is the St. Regis Mohawk Reservation, or \"Akwesasne\" in the Mohawk language. Its population was nearly 3,300 in the 2010 census. The people are linked by community and history with the Mohawk of the Akwesasne reserve across the river, spanning the border of Quebec and Ontario. The Mohawk have had authority under the Jay Treaty to freely cross this international border.\nHistory.\nThis area was long occupied by Iroquoian-speaking peoples. In historic times, a group of primarily Mohawks established a village south of colonial Montreal across the St. Lawrence River; they had been trading with French colonists and many had converted to Catholicism. They were the easternmost nation of the Iroquois League of Five Nations, known in their language as the \"Haudenosaunee\".\nAfter the English conquered the Dutch in the New York area, they established counties in 1683, in the eastern part of New York province and what is now Vermont. Both groups had settled primarily in Albany and along the Hudson River, a major waterway linking the upriver fur trade with the market of Manhattan. The first counties were very large in geographic area, taking in low-density populations. Gradually new counties were formed as colonial settlement increased, but most settlers stayed east of the middle of the Mohawk Valley, as the Iroquois nations controlled the lands beyond that. Historically, the French, Dutch and English all traded with the Mohawk, the easternmost of these nations.\nThe area of the present Franklin County was part of Albany County when it was established in 1683. This was an enormous county, including the northern part of what became New York State as well as all of the present state of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. This county was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont. On March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. Charlotte County contained the eastern portion.\nIn 1784, the name \"Charlotte County\" was changed to Washington County to honor George Washington, the American Revolutionary War general and later President of the United States of America.\nIn 1788, Clinton County was split off from Washington County. It comprised a much larger area than the present Clinton County, including several other counties or county parts of the present New York State.\nFollowing the American Revolutionary War, the United States forced the Six Nations of the \"Haudenosaunee\", or Iroquois Confederacy, to cede most of their lands in New York and Pennsylvania, as most had been allies of Great Britain, which had lost to the new United States. After the war, New York State sold off 5 million acres of former Iroquois territory at very low prices, seeking to attract settlers to develop farms and businesses. Land speculators quickly took advantage of the sales. Franklin County was part of the huge speculative Macomb's Purchase of 1791.\nIn 1799, Clinton County was reduced in size by the splitting off of Essex County. In 1802, Clinton County was reduced in size by a part of Clinton and two other counties being taken to form the new St. Lawrence County.\nFranklin County organized.\nIn 1808, Franklin County was split off from Clinton County and organized. It was named after United States Founding Father Benjamin Franklin. In the early decades many landowners basically were subsistence farmers.\nIn the late 1880s and 1890s, both the Delaware and Hudson and New York Central railroads were constructed into the Town of Franklin. The Chateaugay branch of the Delaware and Hudson served the hamlet of Onchiota, which developed for the lumber industry. For more than 12 years, a major tract north of Saranac Lake was harvested and millions of feet of timber were shipped out from here.\nThe railroads carried the timber and products to market, and the industry flourished into the early 20th century until much of the timber was harvested. Several lumber mills operated in this area for decades, including Kinsley Lumber Company, Baker Brothers Lumber Company, and one owned by the Dock and Coal Company. The latter mill was dismantled in 1917 and shipped to Florida to be used in the lumber industry there. The population declined as the lumber industry pulled out of the area.\nThe railroads contributed to the Town of Franklin becoming a destination for summer travelers. In the late 1800s, Franklin County was home to three of the largest resort hotels in the Adirondacks: Paul Smith's Hotel, Loon Lake House, and the Rainbow Inn. Due to the construction of highways and restructuring in the railroad industry, passenger service was ended to this remote area in the mid-20th century.\nThe history of Franklin County is preserved at the Franklin Historical and Museum Society in Malone, New York.\nRay Fadden (Mohawk), with his wife, Christine, and son, John, was the founder and curator of the Six Nations Indian Museum located in Onchiota, a census-designated place in the Town of Franklin. He built the structure from logs he had milled himself. The family-owned museum features more than 3,000 artifacts primarily from the Iroquoian nations, and interprets their culture. They were a prominent confederacy in New York of Six Nations by 1722, and they controlled much of the state west of colonial settlements in Albany and Schenectady.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (4.0%) is water. It is the fourth-largest county in New York by land area. Franklin County is in the northeastern part of New York State. The northern edge borders Quebec and Ontario provinces of Canada.\nThe Upper, Middle and Lower Saranac lakes are located within the county. These are part of the natural resource attractions in the area. Lower Saranac Lake extends into neighboring Essex County to the southeast. Loon Lake is also located in the county, as is its namesake community.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nThe most reported ancestries were:\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 51,134 people, 17,931 households, and 11,798 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 23,936 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 84.03% White, 6.63% Black or African American, 6.20% Native American, 0.38% Asian, 2.07% from other races, and 0.69% from two or more races. 4.01% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 31.0% were of French, 13.6% Irish, 10.6% American, 9.8% French Canadian, 9.2% English and 5.4% German ancestry according to Census 2000. 94.6% spoke English, 2.3% Spanish and 2.0% French as their first language.\nThere were 17,931 households, out of which 32.20% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.50% were married couples living together, 11.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.20% were non-families. 28.20% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 3.00.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 22.80% under the age of 18, 9.50% from 18 to 24, 33.20% from 25 to 44, 21.80% from 45 to 64, and 12.80% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females there were 121.70 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 126.60 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $31,517, and the median income for a family was $38,472. Males had a median income of $29,376 versus $22,292 for females. The per capita income for the county was $15,888. About 10.10% of families and 14.60% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.60% of those under age 18 and 13.90% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nK-12 school districts include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFranklin County is home to North Country Community College and Paul Smith's College. North Country Community College is sponsored by and serves Franklin and Essex counties, with campuses in Saranac Lake (village) - Malone (town) and Ticonderoga.\nTransportation.\nThe area has no public transportation but roads extend through the county. Scheduled train service by the New York Central from Lake Clear to Malone ended in 1956.\nOn April 24, 1965, the New York Central ran its final passenger train on the Adirondack Division from Lake Placid, through Lake Clear to Utica.\nAirports.\nThe following public use airports are located in the county:\nCommunities.\nLarger settlements.\n\u2020 - County Seat\n\u2021 - Not Wholly in this County\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHamlets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nFranklin County typically voted Republican for presidential candidates, until the election of Bill Clinton in 1992. However, there was one notable exception to the county's longtime Republican dominance: in 1928, when New York Governor Al Smith, a Roman Catholic who appealed to the county's predominantly French Canadian population, narrowly carried the county over Republican Herbert Hoover despite Hoover's landslide victory nationwide. Clinton carried the county by a five-point margin in 1992, and increased his lead in 1996 with a more than 20-point victory. The county remained reliably Democratic for twenty years, giving Barack Obama margins of 22.2% in 2008 and 26.1% in 2012. In 2016, Donald Trump became the first Republican since 1988 to carry Franklin County. The county has continued to trend Republican, giving Trump a full majority in 2020, and Trump's improved performance in 2024 was the best for a Republican since 1984.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54324", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54324", "title": "Chester W. Nimitz", "text": "American naval officer (1885\u20131966)\nChester William Nimitz (; 24 February 1885 \u2013 20 February 1966) was a fleet admiral in the United States Navy. He played a major role in the naval history of World War\u00a0II as Commander in Chief, US Pacific Fleet, and Commander in Chief, Pacific Ocean Areas, commanding Allied air, land, and sea forces during World War\u00a0II.\nNimitz was the leading U.S. Navy authority on submarines. Qualified in submarines during his early years, Nimitz later oversaw the conversion of these vessels' propulsion from gasoline to diesel, and then later was key in acquiring approval to build the world's first nuclear-powered submarine, , whose propulsion system later completely superseded diesel-powered submarines in the United States. Beginning in 1917, Nimitz was the Navy's leading developer of underway replenishment techniques, the tool which during the Pacific war would allow the American fleet to operate away from port almost indefinitely. The chief of the Navy's Bureau of Navigation from 1939 to 1942, Nimitz served as the Chief of Naval Operations from 1945 until 1947. He was the United States' last surviving officer who served in the rank of fleet admiral. The supercarrier, the lead ship of her class, is named after Nimitz.\nEarly life and education.\nNimitz, a German Texan, was born the son of Anna Josephine (n\u00e9e Henke) and Chester Bernhard Nimitz on February 24, 1885, in Fredericksburg, Texas, where his grandfather's hotel is now the National Museum of the Pacific War. His frail, rheumatic father had died six months earlier, on August 14, 1884. In 1890, Anna married William Nimitz (1864\u20131943), Chester B. Nimitz's brother. He was significantly influenced by his German-born paternal grandfather, Charles Henry Nimitz, a former seaman in the German Merchant Marine, who taught Nimitz, \"the sea \u2013 like life itself \u2013 is a stern taskmaster. The best way to get along with either is to learn all you can, then do your best and don't worry \u2013 especially about things over which you have no control\". His grandfather had become a Texas Ranger in the Texas Mounted Volunteers in 1851 and later served as captain of the Gillespie Rifles Company in the Confederate States Army during the Civil War.\nOriginally, Nimitz applied to West Point in hopes of becoming an Army officer, but no appointments were available. James L. Slayden, US Representative for Texas's 12th congressional district, told Nimitz that he had one appointment available for the United States Naval Academy and that he would award it to the best-qualified candidate. Nimitz felt that this was his only opportunity for further education and spent extra time studying to earn the appointment. Nimitz was appointed to the Naval Academy by Slayden in 1901, and graduated with distinction on January 30, 1905, seventh in a class of 114.\nMilitary career.\nEarly career.\nNimitz joined the battleship at San Francisco, and cruised on her to the Far East. In September 1906, he was transferred to the cruiser ; on January 31, 1907, after the two years at sea as a warrant officer then required by law, Nimitz was commissioned as an ensign. Remaining on Asiatic Station in 1907, he successively served on the gunboat , destroyer , and cruiser .\nThe destroyer \"Decatur\" ran aground on a mud bank in the Philippines on July 7, 1908, while under the command of Ensign Nimitz. The incident was the result of a navigational error. Nimitz had failed to check the harbor's tide tables and tried Batangas' harbor when the water level was low, leaving \"Decatur\" stuck until the tide rose again the next morning, and she was pulled free by a small steamer. Following the grounding, a naval board of inquiry was convened to investigate the circumstances. The board found that Nimitz had indeed made an error in judgment, and he received a letter of reprimand.\nNimitz returned to the United States on board USS \"Ranger\" when that vessel was converted to a school ship, and in January 1909, began instruction in the First Submarine Flotilla. In May of that year, he was given command of the flotilla, with additional duty in command of , later renamed \"A-1\". Nimitz was promoted directly from ensign to lieutenant in January 1910. He commanded (later renamed \"C-5\") when that submarine was commissioned on 2 February 1910, and on 18 November 1910, assumed command of (later renamed \"D-1\").\nIn the latter command, Nimitz had additional duty on October 10, 1911, as Commander 3rd Submarine Division Atlantic Torpedo Fleet. In November 1911, he was ordered to the Boston Navy Yard, to assist in fitting out and assumed command of that submarine, which had been renamed \"E-1\", at her commissioning on February 14, 1912. On the monitor \"Tonopah\" (then employed as a submarine tender) on 20 March 1912, Nimitz rescued Fireman Second Class W. J. Walsh from drowning, receiving a Silver Lifesaving Medal for his action.\nAfter commanding the Atlantic Submarine Flotilla from May 1912 to March 1913, Nimitz supervised the building of diesel engines for the fleet oil tanker , under construction at the New London Ship and Engine Company, Groton, Connecticut.\nWorld War I.\nIn the summer of 1913, Nimitz (who spoke fluent German) studied engines at the Maschinenfabrik-Augsburg-N\u00fcrnberg (M.A.N.) diesel engine plants in Nuremberg, Germany, and Ghent, Belgium. Returning to the New York Navy Yard, he became executive and engineer officer of \"Maumee\" at her commissioning on October 23, 1916.\nAfter the United States declared war on Germany in April 1917, Nimitz was chief engineer of \"Maumee\" while the vessel served as a refueling ship for the first squadron of US Navy destroyers to cross the Atlantic, to take part in the war. Under his supervision, \"Maumee\" conducted the first-ever underway refuelings. On August 10, 1917, Nimitz became aide to Rear Admiral Samuel S. Robison, Commander, Submarine Force, US Atlantic Fleet ().\nOn February 6, 1918, Nimitz was appointed chief of staff and was awarded a Letter of Commendation for meritorious service as 's chief of staff. On 16 September, he reported to the office of the Chief of Naval Operations, and on October 25 was given additional duty as senior member, Board of Submarine Design.\nInterwar Period.\nFrom May 1919 to June 1920, Nimitz served as executive officer of the battleship . He then commanded the cruiser with additional duty in command of Submarine Division 14, based at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. Nimitz, assisted by four earnest Chief Petty Officers, supervised the construction of Submarine Base Pearl Harbor on a triangle-shaped, overgrown piece of land at the juncture of Southeast Loch and Quarry Loch, and served as the base's first commanding officer. During this tour, he also conducted an investigation into the R-14 sailing incident. Nimitz's handling of the disciplinary action in the aftermath of the investigation was considered a model of even-handed fairness, cementing his reputation as a solid and capable leader. Returning to the mainland in the summer of 1922, Nimitz studied at the Naval War College, Newport, Rhode Island.In June 1923, Nimitz became aide and assistant chief of staff to the Commander, Battle Fleet, and later to the Commander in Chief, United States Fleet. In August 1926, he went to the University of California, Berkeley, where he established one of the first Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps units and successfully advocated for the program's expansion.\nNimitz lost part of a finger in an accident with a diesel engine, saving the rest of it only when the machine briefly jammed against his Annapolis ring.\nIn June 1929, Nimitz took command of Submarine Division 20. In June 1931, he assumed command of the destroyer tender and the destroyers out of commission at San Diego, California. In October 1933, Nimitz took command of the cruiser and deployed to the Far East, where in December, \"Augusta\" became the flagship of the Asiatic Fleet. While in command of the Augusta, his legal aide was Chesty Puller.\nIn April 1935, Nimitz returned home for three years as assistant chief of the Bureau of Navigation, before becoming commander, Cruiser Division 2, Battle Force. In September 1938, Nimitz took command of Battleship Division 1, Battle Force. During this time, he conducted experiments in the underway refueling of large ships which would prove a key element in the Navy's success in the war to come. \"Tests were planned for the spring of 1939 [June 1939] using elements of the fleet left on the West Coast while the rest of the fleet was in the Caribbean participating in Fleet Problem XX. Nimitz was scheduled to remain on the West Coast aboard his flagship the Arizona. The aircraft carrier Saratoga, the heavy cruisers and Vincennes, and the light cruiser Trenton would also be left behind. These ships, with their escorts and at least one oiler, would constitute Task Force 7. Nimitz, as senior officer present, would be in command.\"\nOn June 15, 1939, Nimitz was appointed chief of the Bureau of Navigation. From 1940 to 1941, he served as president of the Army Navy Country Club, in Arlington, Virginia.\nWorld War II.\nTen days after the attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, Rear Admiral Nimitz was selected by President Franklin D. Roosevelt to be the commander-in-chief of the United States Pacific Fleet (CINCPACFLT). Nimitz immediately departed Washington for Hawaii and took command in a ceremony on the top deck of the submarine . He was promoted to the rank of admiral, effective December 31, 1941, upon assuming command. The change of command ceremony would normally have taken place aboard a battleship, but every battleship in Pearl Harbor had been either sunk or damaged during the attack. Assuming command at the most critical period of the war in the Pacific, Admiral Nimitz organized his forces to halt the Japanese advance, despite the shortage of ships, planes, and supplies. Nimitz had a significant advantage in that the United States had cracked the Japanese diplomatic naval code and had made progress on the naval code JN-25. The Japanese had kept radio silence before the attack on Pearl Harbor, although events were then moving so rapidly that they had to rely on coded radio messages they did not realize were being read in Hawaii.\nOn March 24, 1942, the newly formed US-British Combined Chiefs of Staff issued a directive designating the Pacific theater an area of American strategic responsibility. Six days later, the US Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) divided the theater into three areas: the Pacific Ocean Areas, the Southwest Pacific Area (commanded by General Douglas MacArthur), and the Southeast Pacific Area. The JCS designated Nimitz as \"Commander in Chief, Pacific Ocean Areas\", with operational control over all Allied units (air, land, and sea) in that area.\nNimitz, in Hawaii, and his superior Admiral Ernest King, the Chief of Naval Operations, in Washington, rejected the plan of General Douglas MacArthur to advance on Japan through New Guinea and the Philippines and Formosa. Instead, they proposed an island-hopping plan that would allow them to bypass most of the Japanese strength in the Central Pacific until they reached Okinawa. President Roosevelt compromised, giving both MacArthur and Nimitz their own theaters. The two Pacific theaters were favored, to the dismay of generals George Marshall and Dwight Eisenhower, who favored a Germany-first strategy. King and Nimitz provided MacArthur with some naval forces but kept most of the carriers. However, when the time came to plan an invasion of Japan, MacArthur was given overall command.\nNimitz faced superior Japanese forces at the crucial defensive actions of the Battle of the Coral Sea and the Battle of Midway. The Battle of the Coral Sea, while a loss in terms of total damage suffered, has been described as resulting in the strategic success of turning back an apparent Japanese invasion of Port Moresby on the island of New Guinea. Two Japanese carriers were temporarily taken out of action in the battle, which would deprive the Japanese of their use in the Midway operation that shortly followed. The Navy's intelligence team reasoned that the Japanese would be attacking Midway, so Nimitz moved all his available forces to the defense. The severe losses in Japanese carriers at Midway affected the balance of naval air power during the remainder of 1942 and were crucial in neutralizing Japanese offensive threats in the South Pacific. Naval engagements during the Battle of Guadalcanal left both forces severely depleted. However, with the allied advantage in land-based air-power, the results were sufficient to secure Guadalcanal. The US and allied forces then undertook to neutralize remaining Japanese offensive threats with the Solomon Islands campaign and the New Guinea campaign, while building capabilities for major fleet actions. In 1943, Midway became a forward submarine base, greatly enhancing US capabilities against Japanese shipping.\nIn terms of combat, 1943 was a relatively quiet year, but it proved decisive inasmuch as Nimitz gained the materiel and manpower needed to launch major fleet offensives to destroy Japanese power in the central Pacific region. This drive opened with the Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign from November 1943 to February 1944, followed by the destruction of the strategic Japanese base at Truk Lagoon, and the Marianas campaign that brought the Japanese homeland within range of new strategic bombers. Nimitz's forces inflicted a decisive defeat on the Japanese fleet in the Battle of the Philippine Sea (June 19\u201320, 1944), which allowed the capture of Saipan, Guam, and Tinian. His Fleet Forces isolated enemy-held bastions on the central and eastern Caroline Islands and secured in quick succession Peleliu, Angaur, and Ulithi. In the Philippines, his ships destroyed much of the remaining Japanese naval power at the Battle of Leyte Gulf, that lasted from October 24 to 26, 1944. With the loss of the Philippines, Japan's energy supply routes from Indonesia came under direct threat, crippling their war effort.\nBy act of Congress, passed on December 14, 1944, the rank of fleet admiral \u2013 the highest rank in the Navy \u2013 was established. The next day, President Franklin Roosevelt appointed Nimitz to that rank. Nimitz took the oath of that office on December 19. In January 1945, Nimitz moved the headquarters of the Pacific Fleet forward from Pearl Harbor to Guam for the remainder of the war. Nimitz's wife remained in the continental United States for the duration of the war and did not join her husband in Hawaii or Guam. In 1945, Nimitz's forces launched successful amphibious assaults on Iwo Jima and Okinawa and his carriers raided the home waters of Japan. In addition, Nimitz also arranged for the Army Air Force to mine the Japanese ports and waterways by air with B-29 Superfortresses in a successful mission called Operation Starvation, which severely interrupted Japanese logistics.\nOn September 2, 1945, Nimitz signed as representative of the United States when Japan formally surrendered on board in Tokyo Bay. On October 5, 1945, which had been officially designated as \"Nimitz Day\" in Washington, D.C., Nimitz was personally presented a second Gold Star for the third award of the Navy Distinguished Service Medal by President Harry S. Truman \"for exceptionally meritorious service as Commander in Chief, U.S. Pacific Fleet and Pacific Ocean Areas, from June 1944 to August 1945\".\nPost war.\nOn November 26, 1945, Nimitz's nomination as Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) was confirmed by the US Senate, and on December 15, he relieved Fleet Admiral Ernest J. King. Nimitz had assured the President that he was willing to serve as the CNO for one two-year term, but no longer. Nimitz tackled the difficult task of reducing the most powerful navy in the world to a fraction of its war-time strength while establishing and overseeing active and reserve fleets with the strength and readiness required to support national policy.\nFor the postwar trial of German Grand Admiral Karl D\u00f6nitz at the Nuremberg Trials in 1946, Nimitz furnished an affidavit in support of the practice of unrestricted submarine warfare, a practice that he himself had employed throughout the war in the Pacific. This evidence is widely credited as a reason why D\u00f6nitz was sentenced to only 10 years of imprisonment.\nNimitz endorsed an entirely new course for the US Navy's future by way of supporting then-Captain Hyman G. Rickover's chain-of-command-circumventing proposal in 1947 to build , the world's first nuclear-powered vessel. As is noted at a display at the Nimitz Museum in Fredericksburg, Texas: \"Nimitz's greatest legacy as CNO is arguably his support of Admiral Hyman Rickover's effort to convert the submarine fleet from diesel to nuclear propulsion\".\nInactive duty as a fleet admiral.\nNimitz retired from office as CNO on December 15, 1947, and received a third Gold Star in lieu of a fourth Navy Distinguished Service Medal. However, since the rank of fleet admiral is a lifetime appointment, he remained on active duty for the rest of his life, with full pay and benefits. Nimitz and his wife, Catherine, moved to Berkeley, California. After suffering a serious fall in 1964, he and Catherine moved to US Naval quarters on Yerba Buena Island in the San Francisco Bay.\nIn San Francisco, Nimitz served in the mostly ceremonial post as a special assistant to the Secretary of the Navy in the Western Sea Frontier. He worked to help restore goodwill with Japan after World War II by helping to raise funds for the restoration of the Japanese Imperial Navy battleship , Admiral Heihachiro Togo's flagship at the Battle of Tsushima in 1905.\nFrom 1949 to 1953, Nimitz served as UN-appointed plebiscite administrator for Jammu and Kashmir. His proposed role as administrator was accepted by Pakistan but rejected by India.\nNimitz became a member of the Bohemian Club of San Francisco. In 1948, he sponsored a Bohemian dinner in honor of US Army General Mark Clark, known for his campaigns in North Africa and Italy.\nNimitz served as a regent of the University of California from 1948 to 1956, where he had formerly been a faculty member as a professor of naval science for the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps program. Nimitz was honored on October 17, 1964, by the University of California on Nimitz Day.\nPersonal life.\nNimitz married Catherine Vance Freeman (22 March 1892 \u2013 1 February 1979) on 9 April 1913, in Wollaston, Massachusetts. They had four children together: Catherine Vance \"Kate\", Chester William \"Chet\" Jr., Anna Elizabeth \"Nancy\", and Mary Manson.\nCatherine Vance graduated from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1934, became a music librarian with the Washington D.C. Public Library, and married US Navy Commander James Thomas Lay (1909\u20132001), from St. Clair, Missouri, in Chester and Catherine's suite at the Fairfax Hotel in Washington, D.C., on 9 March 1945. She had met Lay in the summer of 1934 while visiting her parents in Southeast Asia.\nChester Nimitz Jr. graduated from the US Naval Academy in 1936 and served as a submariner in the Navy until his retirement in 1957, reaching the (post-retirement) rank of rear admiral; he served as chairman of PerkinElmer from 1969 to 1980.\nAnna Elizabeth (\"Nancy\") Nimitz was an expert on the Soviet economy at the RAND Corporation from 1952 until her retirement in the 1980s.\nSister Mary Aquinas (Nimitz) joined the https://, working at the Dominican University of California. She taught biology for 16 years and was academic dean for 11 years, acting president for a year, and vice president for institutional research for 13 years before becoming the university's emergency preparedness coordinator. Mary held this job until her death, due to cancer, on February 27, 2006.\nNimitz was also a Freemason.\nDeath.\nIn late 1965, Nimitz suffered a stroke, complicated by pneumonia. In January 1966, he left the US Naval Hospital (Oak Knoll) in Oakland to return home to his naval quarters. Nimitz died at home on the evening of 20 February at Quarters One on Yerba Buena Island in San Francisco Bay, four days before his 81st birthday. His funeral on 24 February \u2013 what would have been his 81st birthday \u2013 was at the chapel of adjacent Naval Station Treasure Island, and Nimitz was buried with full military honors at Golden Gate National Cemetery in San Bruno. He lies alongside his wife and his lifelong friends Admiral Raymond A. Spruance, Admiral Richmond K. Turner, and Admiral Charles A. Lockwood and their wives, an arrangement made by all of them while living.\n United States Naval Academy Midshipman \u2013 January 1905\nMemorials and legacy.\nBesides the honor of a United States Great Americans series 50\u00a2 postage stamp, the following institutions and locations have been named in honor of Nimitz:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0\"This article incorporates text from the public domain \"Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships\".\""}
{"id": "54325", "revid": "19545412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54325", "title": "Finnish euro coins", "text": "Designs of Finnish currency\nFinnish euro coins (Finnish: Suomalaiset eurokolikot) (Swedish: Finska euromynt) feature three designs. Heikki H\u00e4iv\u00e4oja provided the design for the 1 cent \u2013 50 cent coins, Pertti M\u00e4kinen provided the design for the 1 euro coin, and Raimo Heino provided the design for the 2 euro coin, which shows cloudberry, the golden berry of northern Finland. All designs feature the 12 stars of the EU and the year of imprint.\nFinnish euro design.\nFor images of the common side and a detailed description of the coins, see euro coins.\nThe first sets of euro coins were minted in 1999 and the euro was put into circulation in the eurozone in 2002. Like Belgium, France, the Netherlands and Spain, the first euro coins of Finland are marked 1999, not 2002.\nFinnish euro coins dated 1999\u20132006 carry the mint mark M which is the initial of the mint master at the Mint of Finland, Raimo Makkonen.\nAmendments.\nIn December 2006, the Bank of Finland announced the following:\n\"The national sides of euro coins will be amended so that each issuing Member State will add its name or abbreviation (FI for Finland) on the coins. On Finnish coins the first letter of the Mint of Finland\u2019s President and CEO (M for Raimo Makkonen) will also be replaced with the Mint\u2019s logo. Amendments to the national sides affect all denominations of euro coins.\n\"Each euro area Member State will decide on the schedule for the introduction of their new coins. In Finland the new coins will be put into circulation in January 2007. The current coins will remain valid, and coins in stock will be put into circulation as necessary. This way coins with the new designs will mix with the current coins in circulation.\"\nFinland was the first state in the EMU (European Monetary Union) to implement these changes.\nCirculating mintage quantities.\nThe following table shows the mintage quantity for all Finnish euro coins, per denomination, per year (the numbers are represented in millions).\n\u20ac2 CC \u20ac2 commemorative coins\nOther commemorative coins (collectors' coins).\nFinland has a collection of euro commemorative coins, mainly in silver and gold, although other materials are used. Their face values range from 5 euro to 100 euro. This is mainly done as a legacy of old national practice of minting gold and silver coins. These coins are not intended to be used as means of payment, so generally they do not circulate.\nInternational coin trading.\nIn June 2009, Finland and the Netherlands coordinated a unique trade at European level. Excess Finnish 5 cent coins were traded for Dutch two-euro coins. In total five truckloads containing 30 million five cent coins were traded for 3 million Dutch two-euro coins. This trade saved both countries a lot of money in production and material costs. An estimated 120,000\u00a0kg of metal has been saved with this trade alone. \nIn 2010 this exact trade has been repeated, helping Finland rid some of its 5-cent excesses, pumping in a new supply of two-euro coins, and saving both countries a lot of money.\nUsage of 1 cent and 2 cent coins.\nFinnish businesses and banks have employed a method known as \"Swedish rounding\" when tallying sums. Due in large part to the inefficiency of producing and accepting the 1 cent and 2 cent coins, Finland has opted to remove these coins from general circulation in order to offset the cost involved in accepting them.\nWhile individual prices are still shown and summed up with \u20ac0.01 precision, the total sum is then rounded to the nearest five cents when paying with cash. Sums ending in 1, 2, 6 and 7 cents are rounded down; sums ending in 3, 4, 8 and 9 cents are rounded up.\nThe 1 cent and 2 cent coins are legal tender and are minted for collector sets as required by the EMU agreement.\nWhen paying in cash in Finland, while by law a shopkeeper should accept the coins, usually they will decline, and ask for higher denominations to match the Swedish rounding, even when presented with exact change.\nDesigners.\nThe 1 euro coin is designed by the sculptor Pertti M\u00e4kinen and the two-euro coin by the designer Raimo Heino.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54326", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54326", "title": "Fulton County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nFulton County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. It forms part of the state's Mohawk Valley region. Its county seat is Johnstown. At the 2020 U.S. census, the county had a population of 53,324. The county is named in honor of Robert Fulton, who is widely credited with developing the first commercially successful steamboat. The county is part of the Mohawk Valley region of the state.\nHistory.\nIn 1838, Fulton County was split off from Montgomery, shortly after the Montgomery county seat was moved to Fonda, New York. The creation of Fulton County was engineered by Johnstown lawyer Daniel Cady, whose wife was a cousin of Robert Fulton. Fulton County was formed on April 18, 1838, by a partition of Montgomery County, resulting in a county with an area of .\nThe old Tryon County courthouse, built in 1772, later the Montgomery County courthouse, became the Fulton County Courthouse, where it is New York's oldest operating courthouse. One adjustment has been made to the area of Fulton County. On April 6, 1860, on the northern border was transferred to Hamilton in the vicinity of Sacandaga Park. That resulted in the Fulton County which exists today.\nIn the mid-18th century, Sir William Johnson, founder of Fort Johnson in Montgomery County and of Johnstown, arrived in what would become Fulton County. Sir William Johnson, 1st Baronet, was an Irish pioneer and army officer in colonial New York, and the British Superintendent of Indian Affairs from 1755 to 1774. His homes, Fort Johnson and Johnson Hall are New York State Historic Sites. Fulton County was also home to Elizabeth Cady Stanton, a central pioneer in America's women's rights movement.\nShortly after the American Revolutionary War, the manufacture of gloves and leather became the area's primary industry. At one point, Johnstown and Gloversville were known as the world's Glove and Leather capital. The largest rise in population and growth came as a result of the fruits of these businesses.\nMany residents of Fulton County can trace their ancestry to the glove and leather trades. Today few glovers, tanners, and leather dressers remain in the area, although some companies have adapted to the changes in the market to remain competitive.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (7.0%) is water. Fulton County is in the central part of the state, northwest of Albany, lying in the southern Adirondack Mountains. Approximately 58% of the county is within the boundaries of Adirondack Park.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2019 American Community Survey.\nThe 2019 American Community Survey estimated there were 53,383 residents in the county, down from 55,531 at the 2010 United States census. There were also an estimated 22,439 households, and 29,173 housing units at the 2019 population estimates. The racial makeup of Fulton County was 92.2% non-Hispanic white, 2.2% Black or African American, 0.3% American Indian or Alaska Native, 0.7% Asian American, 1.6% from two or more races, and 3.5% Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nRoughly 72% of households were owner-occupied and the median gross rent was $759. There were 2.34 persons per household and 3.1% spoke a language other than English at home. Of the population there were 25.1% from ages 18 to 5 and under, and 20.1% aged 65 and older. The median income for a household in the county was $50,248, and the per capita income was $26,875. Roughly 13% of the county population lived at or below the poverty line.\nAt the census of 2000, there were 55,073 people, 21,884 households, and 14,509 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 27,787 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 95.99% White, 1.80% Black or African American, 0.19% Native American, 0.53% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.56% from other races, and 0.91% from two or more races. 1.61% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 17.2% were of Italian, 16.4% German, 13.2% Irish, 10.0% English, 8.3% American, 5.8% French and 5.7% Polish ancestry according to Census 2000. 96.1% spoke English and 1.6% Spanish as their first language.\nThere were 21,884 households, out of which 30.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.00% were married couples living together, 11.30% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.70% were non-families. 27.70% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.90% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.43 and the average family size was 2.94.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 24.90% under the age of 18, 7.20% from 18 to 24, 28.10% from 25 to 44, 23.60% from 45 to 64, and 16.30% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 97.10 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.60 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $33,663, and the median income for a family was $39,801. Males had a median income of $29,538 versus $22,173 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,844. About 9.20% of families and 12.50% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.50% of those under age 18 and 7.50% of those age 65 or over.\nTransportation.\nFulton County has seven private airstrips and two public-use airports:\nGloversville Transit System provides bus service to parts of Fulton County as well as adjacent Montgomery County. The county's Highways and Facilities Department is headquartered in Johnstown and is charged with maintaining roads, including:\nEach town and village within Fulton County maintains its own highway department.\nMajor roadways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe former Fonda, Johnstown and Gloversville Railroad was located in Fulton County. The former New York State Route 920C, New York State Route 920D, and New York State Route 920J were located in Fulton County.\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nFulton County has historically been a stronghold for the Republican Party, with the Republican presidential nominee winning the county in all but two presidential elections since the party's founding in 1854. Fulton County was won by Donald Trump in 2016 with 63.46 percent of the vote, which Trump then improved upon in 2020 with 64.84 percent.\nA Democratic presidential nominee has only won twice in Fulton County since the Republican Party was founded, Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964 and Bill Clinton in 1996.\nEducation.\nIn 2019 the U.S. Census Bureau determined 87.4% of Fulton County's population obtained a high school degree or higher. Nearly 18% had a bachelor's degree or higher. Fulton\u2013Montgomery Community College is in Johnstown, New York. It is a part of the State University of New York system.\nSchool districts include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54327", "revid": "50468542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54327", "title": "History of Denmark", "text": "The history of Denmark as a unified kingdom began in the 8th century, but historic documents describe the geographic area and the people living there\u2014the Danes\u2014as early as 500 AD. These early documents include the writings of Jordanes and Procopius. With the Christianization of the Danes c. 960 AD, it is clear that there existed a kingship. King Frederik X can trace his lineage back to the Viking kings Gorm the Old and Harald Bluetooth from this time, thus making the Monarchy of Denmark the oldest in Europe. The area now known as Denmark has a rich prehistory, having been populated by several prehistoric cultures and people for about 12,000 years, since the end of the last ice age.\nDenmark's history has particularly been influenced by its geographical location between the North and Baltic seas, a strategically and economically important placement between Sweden and Germany, at the center of mutual struggles for control of the Baltic Sea (). Denmark was long in disputes with Sweden over control of Sk\u00e5nelandene and with Germany over control of Schleswig (a Danish fief) and Holstein (a German fief).\nEventually, Denmark lost these conflicts and ended up ceding first Sk\u00e5neland to Sweden and later Schleswig-Holstein to the German Empire. After the eventual cession of Norway in 1814, Denmark retained control of the old Norwegian colonies of the Faroe Islands, Greenland and Iceland. During the 20th century, Iceland gained independence, Greenland and the Faroes became integral parts of the Kingdom of Denmark and North Schleswig reunited with Denmark in 1920 after a referendum. During World War II, Denmark was occupied by Nazi Germany, but was eventually liberated by British forces of the Allies in 1945, after which it joined the United Nations. In the aftermath of World War II, and with the emergence of the subsequent Cold War, Denmark was quick to join the military alliance of NATO as a founding member in 1949.\nPrehistoric Denmark.\nThe Scandinavian region has a rich prehistory, having been populated by several prehistoric cultures and people for about 12,000 years, since the end of the last ice age. During the ice age, all of Scandinavia was covered by glaciers most of the time, except for the southwestern parts of what we now know as Denmark. When the ice began retreating, the barren tundras were soon inhabited by reindeer and elk, and Ahrenburg and Swiderian hunters from the south followed them here to hunt occasionally. The geography then was very different from what we know today. Sea levels were much lower; the island of Great Britain was connected by a land bridge to mainland Europe and the large area between Great Britain and the Jutlandic peninsula \u2013 now beneath the North Sea and known as Doggerland \u2013 was inhabited by tribes of hunter-gatherers. As the climate warmed up, forceful rivers of meltwater started to flow and shape the virgin lands, and more stable flora and fauna gradually began emerging in Scandinavia, and Denmark in particular. The first human settlers to inhabit Denmark and Scandinavia permanently were the Maglemosian people, residing in seasonal camps and exploiting the land, sea, rivers and lakes. It was not until around 6,000 BC that the approximate geography of Denmark as we know it today had been shaped.\nDenmark has some unique natural conditions for preservation of artifacts, providing a rich and diverse archeological record from which to understand the prehistoric cultures of this area.\nStone and Bronze Age.\nHistory of Denmark \nThe Weichsel glaciation covered all of Denmark most of the time, except the western coasts of Jutland. It ended around 13,000 years ago, allowing humans to move back into the previously ice-covered territories and establish permanent habitation. During the first post-glacial millennia, the landscape gradually changed from tundra to light forest, and varied fauna including now-extinct megafauna appeared. Early prehistoric cultures uncovered in modern Denmark include the Maglemosian culture (9,500\u20136,000 BC); the Kongemose culture (6,000\u20135,200 BC), the Erteb\u00f8lle culture (5,300\u20133,950 BC), and the Funnelbeaker culture (4,100\u20132,800 BC).\nThe first inhabitants of this early post-glacial landscape in the so-called Boreal period, were very small and scattered populations living from hunting of reindeer and other land mammals and gathering whatever fruits the climate was able to offer. Around 8,300 BC the temperature rose drastically, now with summer temperatures around 15 degrees Celsius (59 degrees Fahrenheit), and the landscape changed into dense forests of aspen, birch and pine and the reindeer moved north, while aurochs and elk arrived from the south. The Koelbjerg Man is the oldest known bog body in the world and also the oldest set of human bones found in Denmark, dated to the time of the Maglemosian culture around 8,000 BC. With a continuing rise in temperature the oak, elm and hazel arrived in Denmark around 7,000 BC. Now boar, red deer, and roe deer also began to abound.\nA burial from B\u00f8gebakken at Vedb\u00e6k dates to c. 6,000 BC and contains 22 persons \u2013 including four newborns and one toddler. Eight of the 22 had died before reaching 20 years of age \u2013 testifying to the hardness of hunter-gatherer life in the cold north. Based on estimates of the amount of game animals, scholars estimate the population of Denmark to have been between 3,300 and 8,000 persons in the time around 7,000 BC. It is believed that the early hunter-gatherers lived nomadically, exploiting different environments at different times of the year, gradually shifting to the use of semi permanent base camps.\nWith the rising temperatures, sea levels also rose, and during the Atlantic period, Denmark evolved from a contiguous landmass around 11,000 BC to a series of islands by 4,500 BC. The inhabitants then shifted to a seafood based diet, which allowed the population to increase.\nAgricultural settlers made inroads around 4,000 BC. Many dolmens and rock tombs (especially passage graves) date from this period. The Funnelbeaker farmers replaced the Erteb\u00f8lle culture, which had maintained a Mesolithic lifestyle for about 1500 years after farming arrived in Central Europe. The Neolithic Funnelbeaker population persisted for around 1,000 years until people with Steppe-derived ancestry started to arrive from Eastern Europe. The Single Grave culture was a local variant of the Corded Ware culture, and appears to have emerged as a result of a migration of peoples from the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe. The Nordic Bronze Age period in Denmark, from about 1,500 BC, featured a culture that buried its dead, with their worldly goods, beneath burial mounds. The many finds of gold and bronze from this era include beautiful religious artifacts and musical instruments, and provide the earliest evidence of social classes and stratification.\nIron Age.\nDuring the Pre-Roman Iron Age (from the 4th to the 1st century BC), the climate in Denmark and southern Scandinavia became cooler and wetter, limiting agriculture and setting the stage for local groups to migrate southward into Germania. At around this time people began to extract iron from the ore in peat bogs. Evidence of strong Celtic cultural influence dates from this period in Denmark, and in much of northwest Europe, and survives in some of the older place names.\nThe Roman provinces, whose frontiers stopped short of Denmark, nevertheless maintained trade routes and relations with Danish or proto-Danish peoples, as attested by finds of Roman coins. The earliest known runic inscriptions date back to c. 200 AD. Depletion of cultivated land in the last century BC seems to have contributed to increasing migrations in northern Europe and increasing conflict between Teutonic tribes and Roman settlements in Gaul. Roman artifacts are especially common in finds from the 1st century. It seems clear that some part of the Danish warrior aristocracy served in the Roman army.\nOccasionally during this time, both animal and human sacrifice occurred and bodies were immersed in bogs. In recent times[ [update]] some of these bog bodies have emerged very well-preserved, providing valuable information about the religion and people who lived in Denmark during this period. Some of the most well-preserved bog bodies from the Nordic Iron Age are the Tollund Man and the Grauballe Man.\nFrom around the 5th to the 7th century, Northern Europe experienced mass migrations. This period and its material culture are referred to as the Germanic Iron Age.\nMiddle Ages.\nEarliest literary sources.\nIn his description of Scandza (from the 6th-century work, \"Getica\"), the ancient writer Jordanes says that the Dani were of the same stock as the \"Suetidi\" (Swedes, \"Suithiod\"?) and expelled the Heruli and took their lands.\nThe Old English poems \"Widsith\" and \"Beowulf\", as well as works by later Scandinavian writers \u2014 notably by Saxo Grammaticus (c. 1200) \u2014 provide some of the earliest references to Danes.\nViking Age.\nWith the beginning of the Viking Age in the 9th century, the prehistoric period in Denmark ends. The Danish people were among those known as Vikings, during the 8th\u201311th centuries. Viking explorers first discovered and settled in Iceland in the 9th century, on their way from the Faroe Islands. From there, Greenland and Vinland (probably Newfoundland) were also settled. Utilizing their great skills in shipbuilding and navigation they raided and conquered parts of France and the British Isles.\nThey also excelled in trading along the coasts and rivers of Europe, running trade routes from Greenland in the north to Constantinople in the south via Russian and Ukrainian rivers, most notably along the River Dnieper and via Kiev, then being the capital of Kiev Rus, which was founded by Viking conquerors. The Danish Vikings were most active in Britain, Ireland, France, Spain, Portugal and Italy where they raided, conquered and settled (their earliest settlements included sites in the Danelaw, Ireland and Normandy). The Danelaw encompassed the Northeastern half of what now constitutes England, where Danes settled and Danish law and rule prevailed. Prior to this time, England consisted of approximately seven independent Anglo-Saxon kingdoms. The Danes conquered (terminated) all of these except for the kingdom of Wessex. Alfred the Great, king of Wessex, emerged from these trials as the sole remaining English king, and thereby as the first English Monarch.\nIn the early 9th century, Charlemagne's Christian empire had expanded to the southern border of the Danes, and Frankish sources (e.g. Notker of St Gall) provide the earliest historical evidence of the Danes. These report a King Gudfred, who appeared in present-day Holstein with a navy in 804 where diplomacy took place with the Franks; In 808, King Gudfred attacked the Obotrites and conquered the city of Reric whose population was displaced or abducted to Hedeby. In 809, King Godfred and emissaries of Charlemagne failed to negotiate peace, despite the sister of Godfred being a concubine of Charlemagne, and the next year King Godfred attacked the Frisians with 200 ships.\nViking raids along the coast of France and the Netherlands were large-scale. Paris was besieged and the Loire Valley devastated during the 10th century. One group of Danes was granted permission to settle in northwestern France under the condition that they defend the place from future attacks. As a result, the region became known as \"Normandy\" and it was the descendants of these settlers who conquered England in 1066.\nThe oldest parts of the defensive works of Danevirke near Hedeby at least date from the summer of 755 and were expanded with large works in the 10th century. The size and number of troops needed to man it indicates a quite powerful ruler in the area, which might be consistent with the kings of the Frankish sources. In 815 AD, Emperor Louis the Pious attacked Jutland apparently in support of a contender to the throne, perhaps Harald Klak, but was turned back by the sons of Godfred, who most likely were the sons of the above-mentioned Godfred. At the same time St. Ansgar travelled to Hedeby and started the Catholic Christianisation of Scandinavia.\nGorm the Old was the first historically recognized ruler of Denmark, reigning from c.\u2009936 to his death c.\u2009958. He ruled from Jelling, and made the oldest of the Jelling Stones in honour of his wife Thyra. Gorm was born before 900 and died c.\u2009958. His rule marks the start of the Danish monarchy and royal house (see Danish monarchs' family tree).\nThe Danes were united and officially Christianized in 965 AD by Gorm's son Harald Bluetooth (see below), the story of which is recorded on the Jelling stones. The extent of Harald's Danish Kingdom is unknown, although it is reasonable to believe that it stretched from the defensive line of Dannevirke, including the Viking city of Hedeby, across Jutland, the Danish isles and into southern present day Sweden; Scania and perhaps Halland and Blekinge. Furthermore, the Jelling stones attest that Harald had also \"won\" Norway.\nIn retaliation for the St. Brice's Day massacre of Danes in England, the son of Harald, Sweyn Forkbeard mounted a series of wars of conquest against England. By 1014, England had completely submitted to the Danes. However, distance and a lack of common interests prevented a lasting union, and Sweyn's son Cnut the Great barely maintained the link between the two countries, which completely broke up during the reign of his son Hardecanute. A final attempt by the Norwegians under Harald Hardrada to reconquer England failed, but did pave the way for William the Conqueror's takeover in 1066.\nChristianity, expansion and the establishment of the Kingdom of Denmark.\nThe history of Christianity in Denmark overlaps with that of the Viking Age. Various petty kingdoms existed throughout the area now known as Denmark for many years. Between c. 960 and the early 980s, Harald Bluetooth appears to have established a kingdom in the lands of the Danes which stretched from Jutland to Sk\u00e5ne. Around the same time, he received a visit from a German missionary who, according to legend, survived an ordeal by fire, which convinced Harald to convert to Christianity.\nSweyn Estridson (1020\u20131074) re-established strong royal Danish authority and built a good relationship with Archbishop Adalbert of Hamburg-Bremen \u2013 at that time the archbishop of all of Scandinavia.\nThe new religion, which replaced the old Norse religious practices, had many advantages for the king. Christianity brought with it some support from the Holy Roman Empire. It also allowed the king to dismiss many of his opponents who adhered to the old mythology. At this early stage there is no evidence that the Danish Church was able to create a stable administration that Harald could use to exercise more effective control over his kingdom, but it may have contributed to the development of a centralising political and religious ideology among the social elite which sustained and enhanced an increasingly powerful kingship.\nEngland broke away from Danish control in 1035 and Denmark fell into disarray for some time. Sweyn Estridsen's son, Canute IV, raided England for the last time in 1085. He planned another invasion to take the throne of England from an aging William I. He called up a fleet of 1,000 Danish ships, 60 Norwegian long boats, with plans to meet with another 600 ships under Duke Robert of Flanders in the summer of 1086. Canute, however, was beginning to realise that the imposition of the tithe on Danish peasants and nobles to fund the expansion of monasteries and churches and a new head tax () had brought his people to the verge of rebellion. Canute took weeks to arrive where the fleet had assembled at Struer, but he found only the Norwegians still there.\nCanute thanked the Norwegians for their patience and then went from assembly to assembly () outlawing any sailor, captain or soldier who refused to pay a fine, which amounted to more than a year's harvest for most farmers. Canute and his housecarls fled south with a growing army of rebels on his heels. Canute fled to the royal property outside the town of Odense on Funen with his two brothers. After several attempts to break in and then bloody hand-to-hand fighting in the church, Benedict was cut down, and Canute was struck in the head by a large stone and then speared from the front. He died at the base of the main altar on 10 July 1086, where he was buried by the Benedictines. When Queen Edele came to take Canute's body to Flanders, a light allegedly shone around the church and it was taken as a sign that Canute should remain where he was.\nThe death of St. Canute marks the end of the Viking Age. Never again would massive flotillas of Scandinavians meet each year to ravage the rest of Christian Europe.\nIn the early 12th century, Denmark became the seat of an independent church province of Scandinavia. Not long after that, Sweden and Norway established their own archbishoprics, free of Danish control. The mid-12th century proved a difficult time for the kingdom of Denmark. Violent civil wars rocked the land. Eventually, Valdemar the Great (1131\u201382), gained control of the kingdom, stabilizing it and reorganizing the administration. King Valdemar and Absalon (\"ca\" 1128\u20131201), the bishop of Roskilde, rebuilt the country.\nDuring Valdemar's reign construction began of a castle in the village of Havn, leading eventually to the foundation of Copenhagen, the modern capital of Denmark. Valdemar and Absalon built Denmark into a major power in the Baltic Sea, a power which later competed with the Hanseatic League, the counts of Holstein, and the Teutonic Knights for trade, territory, and influence throughout the Baltic. In 1168, Valdemar and Absalon gained a foothold on the southern shore of the Baltic, when they subdued the Principality of R\u00fcgen.\nIn the 1180s, Mecklenburg and the Duchy of Pomerania came under Danish control, too. In the new southern provinces, the Danes promoted Christianity (mission of the Rani, monasteries like Eldena Abbey) and settlement (Danish participation in the \"Ostsiedlung\"). The Danes lost most of their southern gains after the Battle of Bornh\u00f6ved (1227), but the Rugian principality stayed with Denmark until 1325.\nIn 1202, Valdemar II became king and launched various \"crusades\" to claim territories, notably modern Estonia. Once these efforts were successful, a period in history known as the Danish Estonia began. Legend has it that the Danish flag, the Dannebrog fell from the sky during the Battle of Lindanise in Estonia in 1219. A series of Danish defeats culminating in the Battle of Bornh\u00f6ved on 22 July 1227 cemented the loss of Denmark's north German territories. Valdemar himself was saved only by the courageous actions of a German knight who carried Valdemar to safety on his horse.\nFrom that time on, Valdemar focused his efforts on domestic affairs. One of the changes he instituted was the feudal system where he gave properties to men with the understanding that they owed him service. This increased the power of the noble families () and gave rise to the lesser nobles () who controlled most of Denmark. Free peasants lost the traditional rights and privileges they had enjoyed since Viking times.\nThe king of Denmark had difficulty maintaining control of the kingdom in the face of opposition from the nobility and from the Church. An extended period of strained relations between the crown and the Popes of Rome took place, known as the \"archiepiscopal conflicts\".\nBy the late 13th century, royal power had waned, and the nobility forced the king to grant a charter, considered Denmark's first constitution. Following the Battle of Bornh\u00f6ved in 1227, a weakened Denmark provided windows of opportunity to both the Hanseatic League and the Counts of Holstein. The Holstein Counts gained control of large portions of Denmark because the king would grant them fiefs in exchange for money to finance royal operations.\nValdemar spent the remainder of his life putting together a code of laws for Jutland, Zealand and Sk\u00e5ne. These codes were used as Denmark's legal code until 1683. This was a significant change from the local law making at the regional assemblies (), which had been the long-standing tradition. Several methods of determining guilt or innocence were outlawed including trial by ordeal and trial by combat. The Code of Jutland () was approved at meeting of the nobility at Vordingborg in 1241 just prior to Valdemar's death. Because of his position as \"the king of Dannebrog\" and as a legislator, Valdemar enjoys a central position in Danish history. To posterity the civil wars and dissolution that followed his death made him appear to be the last king of a golden age.\nThe Middle Ages saw a period of close cooperation between the Crown and the Roman Catholic Church. Thousands of church buildings sprang up throughout the country during this time. The economy expanded during the 12th century, based mostly on the lucrative herring-trade, but the 13th century turned into a period of difficulty and saw the temporary collapse of royal authority.\nCount rule.\nDuring the disastrous reign of Christopher II (1319\u20131332), most of the country was seized by the provincial counts (except Sk\u00e5ne, which was taken over by Sweden) after numerous peasant revolts and conflicts with the Church. For eight years after Christopher's death, Denmark had no king, and was instead controlled by the counts. After one of them, Gerhard III of Holstein-Rendsburg, was assassinated in 1340, Christopher's son Valdemar was chosen as king, and gradually began to recover the territories, which was finally completed in 1360.\nThe Black Death in Denmark, which came to Denmark during these years, also aided Valdemar's campaign. His continued efforts to expand the kingdom after 1360 brought him into open conflict with the Hanseatic League. He conquered Gotland, much to the displeasure of the League, which lost Visby, an important trading town located there.\nThe Hanseatic alliance with Sweden to attack Denmark initially proved a fiasco since Danish forces captured a large Hanseatic fleet, and ransomed it back for an enormous sum. Luckily for the League, the Jutland nobles revolted against the heavy taxes levied to fight the expansionist war in the Baltic; the two forces worked against the king, forcing him into exile in 1370. For several years, the Hanseatic League controlled the fortresses on the Sound, the strait between Sk\u00e5ne and Zealand.\nMargaret and the Kalmar Union (1397\u20131523).\nMargaret I, the daughter of Valdemar Atterdag, found herself married off to H\u00e5kon VI of Norway in an attempt to join the two kingdoms, along with Sweden, since H\u00e5kon had kinship ties to the Swedish royal family. The dynastic plans called for her son, Olaf II to rule the three kingdoms, but after his early death in 1387 she took on the role herself (1387\u20131412). During her lifetime (1353\u20131412) the three kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden (including the Faroe Islands, as well as Iceland, Greenland, and present-day Finland) became linked under her capable rule, in what became known as the Kalmar Union, made official in 1397.\nHer successor, Eric of Pomerania (King of Denmark from 1412 to 1439), lacked Margaret's skill and thus directly caused the breakup of the Kalmar Union. Eric's foreign policy engulfed Denmark in a succession of wars with the Holstein counts and the city of L\u00fcbeck. When the Hanseatic League imposed a trade embargo on Scandinavia, the Swedes (who saw their mining industry adversely affected) rose up in revolt. The three countries of the Kalmar Union all declared Eric deposed in 1439.\nHowever, support for the idea of regionalism continued, so when Eric's nephew Christopher of Bavaria came to the throne in 1440, he managed to get himself elected in all three kingdoms, briefly reuniting Scandinavia (1442\u20131448). The Swedish nobility grew increasingly unhappy with Danish rule and the union soon became merely a legal concept with little practical application. During the subsequent reigns of Christian I (1450\u20131481) and Hans (1481\u20131513), tensions grew, and several wars between Sweden and Denmark erupted.\nIn the early 16th century, Christian II (reigned 1513\u20131523) came to power. He allegedly declared, \"If the hat on my head knew what I was thinking, I would pull it off and throw it away.\" This quotation apparently refers to his devious and machiavellian political dealings. He conquered Sweden in an attempt to reinforce the union, and had about 100 leaders of the Swedish anti-unionist forces killed in what came to be known as the Stockholm Bloodbath of November 1520. The bloodbath destroyed any lingering hope of Scandinavian union.\nIn the aftermath of Sweden's definitive secession from the Kalmar Union in 1521, civil war and the Protestant Reformation followed in Denmark and Norway. When things settled down, the Privy Council of Denmark had lost some of its influence, and that of Norway no longer existed. The two kingdoms, known as Denmark\u2013Norway, operated in a personal union under a single monarch. Norway kept its separate laws and some institutions, such as a royal chancellor, separate coinage and a separate army. As a hereditary kingdom, Norway's status as separate from Denmark remained important to the royal dynasty in its struggles to win elections as kings of Denmark. The two kingdoms remained tied until 1814.\nEarly Modern Denmark.\nThe Reformation.\nThe Reformation, which originated in the German lands in the early 16th century from the ideas of Martin Luther (1483\u20131546), had a considerable impact on Denmark. The Danish Reformation started in the mid-1520s. Some Danes wanted access to the Bible in their own language. In 1524 Hans Mikkelsen and Christiern Pedersen translated the New Testament into Danish; it became an instant best-seller.\nThose who had traveled to Wittenberg in Saxony and come under the influence of the teachings of Luther and his associates included Hans Tausen, a Danish monk in the Order of St John Hospitallers. On Good Friday in 1525, Tausen used the pulpit at Antvorskov Abbey Church to proclaim Luther's reforms. His scandalized superiors ordered him out of Zealand and held him in the priory at Viborg under close confinement until he should come to his senses.\nTownspeople came to see the troublesome monk, and Tausen preached to them from the window of his cell. Within days Tausen's ideas swept through the town. The then radical ideas of Luther found a receptive audience. Tausen's preaching converted ordinary people, merchants, nobles, and monks and even the Prior grew to appreciate Tausen and ordered his release. Tausen preached openly: much to the consternation of Bishop J\u00f8n Friis, who lost his ability to do anything about the Lutherans and retreated to Hald Castle.\nAfter preaching in the open air, Tausen gained the use of a small chapel, which soon proved too small for the crowds who attended services in Danish. His followers broke open a Franciscan Abbey so they could listen to Tausen, who packed the church daily for services. The town leaders protected Tausen from the Bishop of Viborg.\nViborg became the center for the Danish Reformation for a time. Lutheranism spread quickly to Aarhus and Aalborg.\nWithin months King Frederick appointed Tausen as one of his personal chaplains (October 1526) in order to protect him from Catholics. Tausen's version of Luther's ideas spread throughout Denmark. Copenhagen became a hotbed of reformist activity and Tausen moved there to continue his work. His reputation preceded him and the excitement of hearing the liturgy in Danish brought thousands of people out to hear him. With the kings' permission, churches in Copenhagen opened their doors to the Lutherans and held services for Catholics and for Lutherans at different times of the day.\nAt Our Lady Church, the main church of Copenhagen, Bishop Ronnow refused to admit the \"heretics\". In December 1531, a mob stormed the Church of Our Lady in Copenhagen, encouraged by Copenhagen's fiery mayor, Ambrosius Bogbinder. They tore down statues and side-altars and destroyed artwork and reliquaries. Frederick I's policy of toleration insisted that the two competing groups share churches and pulpits peacefully, but this satisfied neither Lutherans nor Catholics.\nLuther's ideas spread rapidly as a consequence of a powerful combination of popular enthusiasm for church reform and a royal eagerness to secure greater wealth through the seizure of church lands and property. In Denmark the reformation increased the crown's revenues by 300%.\nDissatisfaction with the Catholic Church.\nDissatisfaction with the established Catholic Church had already been widespread in Denmark. Many people viewed the tithes and fees \u2014 a constant source of irritation for farmers and merchants \u2014 as unjust. This became apparent once word got out that King Frederick and his son, Duke Christian had no sympathy with Franciscans who persistently made the rounds of the parishes to collect food, money, and clothing in addition to the tithes. Between 1527 and 1536 many towns petitioned the king to close the Franciscan houses.\nFrederick obliged by sending letters authorizing the closure of the monasteries, often offering a small sum of money to help the brothers on their way. With the royal letter in hand, mobs forcibly closed Franciscan abbeys all over Denmark. They beat up monks, two of whom died. The closure of Franciscan houses occurred systematically in Copenhagen, Viborg, Aalborg, Randers, Malm\u00f6 and ten other cities; in all, 28 monasteries or houses closed. People literally hounded Franciscan monks out of the towns.\nNo other order faced such harsh treatment. Considering how strongly many people felt about removing all traces of Catholic traditions from Danish churches, surprisingly little violence took place. Luther's teaching had become so overwhelmingly popular that Danes systematically cleared churches of statues, paintings, wall-hangings, reliquaries and other Catholic elements without interference. The only exceptions came in individual churches where the local churchmen refused to permit reform.\nFrederick I died in 1533; the Viborg Assembly () proclaimed his son, Duke Christian of Schleswig, King Christian III. The State Council () on Zealand, led by the Catholic bishops, took control of the country and refused to recognize the election of Christian III, a staunch Lutheran. The regents feared Christian's zeal for Luther's ideas would tip the balance and disenfranchise Catholics \u2014 both peasants and nobles.\nThe State Council encouraged Count Christopher of Oldenburg to become Regent of Denmark. Christian III quickly raised an army to enforce his election, including mercenary troops from Germany. Count Christopher raised an army (including troops from Mecklenburg and Oldenburg and the Hanseatic League, especially L\u00fcbeck) to restore his Catholic uncle King Christian II (deposed in 1523). This resulted in a three-year civil war called the Count's Feud ().\nCount's Feud (1534\u20131536).\nArmed rebellion by Catholic peasants led by Skipper Clement started in northern Jutland. Rebellion swept across Funen, Zealand and Sk\u00e5ne. Christian III's army soundly defeated an army of Catholic nobles at Svenstrup on 16 October 1534. Christian forced a truce with the Hanseatic League, which had sent troops to help Count Christopher. Christian III's army, under Johan Rantzau, chased the rebels all the way back to Aalborg and then massacred over 2,000 of them inside the city in December 1534.\nThe Protestants captured Skipper Clement (1534), and later executed him in 1536. Christian III's mercenary troops put an end to Catholic hopes on Zealand and then Funen. Sk\u00e5ne rebels went as far as proclaiming Christian II king again. King Gustav Vasa of Sweden sent two separate armies to ravage Halland and Sk\u00e5ne into submission. Besiegers finally starved the last hold-outs in the rebellion, Copenhagen and Malm\u00f8, into surrender in July 1536. By the spring of 1536, Christian III had taken firm control.\nState Lutheranism.\nDenmark became officially Lutheran on 30 October 1536 by decree of King Christian III, and in 1537 the reconstituted State Council approved the Lutheran Ordinances which was worked out by Danish theologians and Johannes Bugenhagen, based on the Augsburg Confession and Luther's Little Catechism. The government established the Danish National Church () as the state church. All of Denmark's Catholic bishops went to prison until such time as they converted to Luther's reform. The authorities released them when they promised to marry and to support the reforms.\nIf they agreed, they received property and spent the rest of their lives as wealthy landowners. If they refused conversion, they died in prison. The State confiscated Church lands to pay for the armies that had enforced Christian III's election. Priests swore allegiance to Lutheranism or found new employment. The new owners turned monks out of their monasteries and abbeys. Nuns in a few places gained permission to live out their lives in nunneries, though without governmental financial support. The Crown closed churches, abbeys, priories and cathedrals, giving their property to local nobles or selling it.\nThe King appointed Danish superintendents (later bishops) to oversee Lutheran orthodoxy in the church. Denmark became part of a Lutheran heartland extending through Scandinavia and northern Germany. The Catholic Church everywhere in Scandinavia had sealed its fate by supporting hopeless causes: Christian II and the emperor Charles V in Denmark, Norwegian independence in that country, and in Sweden the Kalmar Union. Geographical distance also prevented them from receiving anything more than a sympathetic ear from Rome.\nThe 17th century saw a period of strict Lutheran orthodoxy in Denmark, with harsh punishments visited on suspected followers of either Calvinism or Huldrych Zwingli. Lutheran authorities treated Catholics harshly \u2014 in the fear that they might undermine the king, government, and national church. In a delayed result of the Reformation, Denmark became embroiled in the Thirty Years' War (1618\u20131648) on the Protestant side.\nThe loss of Eastern Denmark.\nThe Dano-Norwegian Kingdom grew wealthy during the 16th century, largely because of the increased traffic through the \u00d8resund, which Danes could tax because Denmark controlled both sides of the Sound. The trade in grain exports from Poland to the Netherlands and to the rest of Europe grew enormously at this time, and the Danish kings did not hesitate to cash in on it. The Sound duty was only repealed in the 1840s.\nThe Danish economy benefited from the Eighty Years' War (1568\u20131648) in the Netherlands because a large number of skilled refugees from that area (the most economically advanced in Europe) came to Denmark. This helped to modernize many aspects of society and to establish trading links between Denmark and the Netherlands.\nDenmark\u2013Norway had a reputation as a relatively powerful kingdom at this time. European politics of the 16th century revolved largely around the struggle between Catholic and Protestant forces, so it seemed almost inevitable that Denmark, a strong, unified Lutheran kingdom, would get drawn into the larger war when it came. The Thirty Years' War went badly for the Protestant states in the early 1620s, and a call went out to Denmark\u2013Norway to \"save the Protestant cause\".\nKing Christian IV, who was also a duke of the Holy Roman Empire on the basis of his possessions in Holstein, decided to intervene in the conflict raging in northern Germany. The campaign ended in defeat, and Jutland was occupied by the imperial army of Albrecht von Wallenstein. In the Treaty of L\u00fcbeck, Christian made peace and agreed to not intervene in Germany again. The war in Germany had been very expensive and Christian IV saw no other recourse than to raise the Sound tolls. Unfortunately, this act pushed the Netherlands away from Denmark and into the arms of Sweden.\nTorstenson War (1643\u20131645).\nIn 1643, Sweden's armies, under the command of Lennart Torstensson, suddenly invaded Denmark without declaring war. The ensuing conflict became known as the Torstenson War. The Netherlands, wishing to end the Danish stranglehold on the Baltic, joined the Swedes in their war against Denmark\u2013Norway. In October 1644, a combined Dutch-Swedish fleet destroyed 80 percent of the Danish fleet in the Battle of Femern. The result of this defeat proved disastrous for Denmark\u2013Norway: in the Second treaty of Br\u00f6msebro (1645) Denmark ceded to Sweden the Norwegian provinces Jemtland, Herjedalen and \u00c4lvdalen as well as the Danish islands of Gotland and \u00d8sel. Halland went to Sweden for a period of 30 years and the Netherlands were exempted from paying the Sound Duty.\nNevertheless, Danes remember Christian IV as one of the great kings of Denmark. He had a very long reign, from 1588 to 1648, and has become known as \"the architect on the Danish throne\" because of the large number of building projects he undertook. Many of the great buildings of Denmark date from his reign. After the death of Christian IV in 1648, his son Frederick succeeded him.\nSecond Northern War (1655\u20131660).\nIn 1657, during the Second Northern War, Denmark\u2013Norway launched a war of revenge against Sweden (then distracted in Poland) which turned into a complete disaster. The war became a disaster for two reasons: Primarily, because Denmark's new powerful ally, the Netherlands, remained neutral as Denmark was the aggressor and Sweden the defender. Secondly, the Belts froze over in a rare occurrence during the winter of 1657\u20131658, allowing Charles X Gustav of Sweden to lead his armies across the ice to invade Zealand.\nIn the following Treaty of Roskilde, Denmark\u2013Norway capitulated and gave up all of Eastern Denmark (), in addition to the counties of Bohusl\u00e4n () and Tr\u00f8ndelag in Norway. Holstein-Gottorp was also tied to Sweden, providing a gateway for future invasions from the south.\nBut the Second Northern War was not yet over. Three months after the peace treaty was signed, Charles X Gustav of Sweden held a council of war where he decided to simply wipe Denmark from the map and unite all of Scandinavia under his rule. Once again the Swedish army arrived outside Copenhagen. However, this time the Danes did not panic or surrender. Instead, they decided to fight and prepared to defend Copenhagen.\nFrederick III of Denmark had stayed in his capital and now encouraged the citizens of Copenhagen to resist the Swedes, by saying he would die in his nest. Furthermore, this unprovoked declaration of war by Sweden finally triggered the alliance that Denmark\u2013Norway had with the Netherlands. A powerful Dutch fleet was sent to Copenhagen with vital supplies and reinforcements, which saved the city from being captured during the Swedish attack. Furthermore, Brandenburg-Prussia, the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth and the Habsburg monarchy had gathered large forces to aid Denmark\u2013Norway and fighting continued into 1659. \nCharles X Gustav of Sweden suddenly died of an illness in early 1660, while planning an invasion of Norway. Following his death, Sweden made peace in the Treaty of Copenhagen. The Swedes returned Tr\u00f8ndelag to Norway and Bornholm to Denmark, but kept both Bohusl\u00e4n and Terra Scania. The Netherlands and other European powers accepted the settlement, not wanting both coasts of the Sound controlled by Denmark. This treaty established the boundaries between Norway, Denmark, and Sweden that still exist today. All in all, Sweden had now surpassed Denmark as the most powerful country in Scandinavia.\nAbsolutism.\nAs a result of the disaster in the war against Sweden, King Frederick III (reigned 1648\u20131670) succeeded in convincing the nobles to give up some of their powers and their exemption from taxes, leading to the era of absolutism in Denmark. The country's main objective in the following decades was the recovery of its lost provinces from Sweden. In the 1670s, Denmark\u2013Norway had regained enough strength to start a war with Sweden to recover its lost provinces. However, in spite of Denmark's outside support, naval dominance and initial support from the population of the former eastern provinces, the war ended in a bitter stalemate.\nGreat Northern War (1700\u20131721).\nA renewed attack during the Third Northern War (1700\u20131721) first resulted in the unfavourable Peace of Travendal, but after Denmark's re-entry into the war and Sweden's ultimate defeat by a large alliance, Sweden was no longer a threat to Denmark. However, the great powers opposed any Danish territorial gains, which meant the Treaty of Frederiksborg did not return the former eastern provinces to Denmark. Furthermore, Denmark was even forced to return Swedish Pomerania, held by Danish forces since 1715, to Sweden. Denmark now had no hope of recovering its lost provinces from Sweden. As noted earlier, the rest of Europe was simply against the Sound being controlled by a single nation ever again.\nFor most of the 18th century, Denmark was at peace. The only time when war threatened was in 1762, when the Duke of Holstein-Gottorp became Tsar Peter III of Russia and declared war on Denmark over his ancestral claims in Schleswig. Before any fighting could begin, however, he was overthrown by his wife, who took control of Russia as Tsarina Catherine II (Catherine the Great). Empress Catherine withdrew her husband's demands and negotiated the transfer of ducal Schleswig-Holstein to the Danish crown in return for Russian control of the County of Oldenburg and adjacent lands within the Holy Roman Empire, an exchange that was formalized with the 1773 Treaty of Tsarskoye Selo. The alliance that accompanied the territorial exchange tied Denmark's foreign policy to Russia's and led directly to Denmark's involvement in a series of wars over the succeeding decades.\nWith the suspension of the Danish diet, that body disappeared for a couple of centuries. During this time power became increasingly centralized in Copenhagen. Frederick's government reorganized itself in a much more hierarchical manner, built around the king as a focal point of administration. Crown officials dominated the administration, as well as a new group of bureaucrats, much to the dismay of the traditional aristocracy, who saw their own influence curtailed even further. The absolutist kings of Denmark were quite weak compared to their Swedish counterparts, and non-noble landlords became the real rulers of the country. They used their influence to pass laws that favored themselves.\nThe administration and laws underwent \"modernization\" during this period. In 1683, the \"Danske lov 1683\" (Danish Code) standardized and collected all the old provincial laws. Other initiatives included the standardization of all weights and measures throughout the kingdom, and an agricultural survey and registry. This survey allowed the government to begin taxing landowners directly, moving it beyond dependence on revenue from crown lands.\nThe population of Denmark rose steadily through this period, from 600,000 in 1660 (after the loss of territory to Sweden) to 700,000 in 1720. By 1807, it had risen to 978,000.\nChanges in the agricultural economy.\nAttempts to diversify the economy away from agriculture failed. During this period, little industry existed, except for a very small amount in Copenhagen (population: 30,000). In the late 17th century a small amount of industry did develop, catering to the military. Denmark suffered in part because of its lack of natural resources. It had nothing much to export except agricultural products. The Netherlands bought the largest share of Denmark's exports. The landlords, only about 300 in number, nevertheless owned 90% of the land in the country.\nRural administration remained primarily the preserve of the large landholders and of a few law-enforcement officials. In 1733, low crop prices caused the introduction of adscription, an effort by the landlords to obtain cheap labor. The effect of this was to turn the previously free Danish peasantry into serfs. The adscription system tied rural laborers to their place of birth and required them to rent farms on the estates.\nAs rent, peasants were required to work the landlords' plots and could not negotiate contracts or demand payment for improvements made to the farm. Peasants who refused to rent a farm were subject to six years of military service. Danish agriculture was very inefficient and unproductive as a result, since the peasants had no motivation to perform anything more than the absolute minimum of work. Attempts to sell Danish grain in Norway failed because of its low quality compared to grain from the Baltic.\nIn the late 18th century, extensive agricultural reforms took place, involving the abolition of the old open-field system and the amalgamation of many smaller farms into larger ones. With the abolition of the adscription system, the military could now only obtain manpower through conscription. These reforms were possible because agricultural prices steadily rose in the second half of the century.\nThroughout the 18th century, the Danish economy did very well, largely on the basis of expanded agricultural output to meet growing demand across Europe. Danish merchant ships also traded around Europe and the North Atlantic, venturing to new Danish colonies in the Caribbean and North Atlantic.\nThe Enlightenment and Danish nationalism.\nNew propriety and Enlightenment ideas became popular among the middle classes of Denmark, arousing increased interest in personal liberty. In the last 15 years of the 18th century, the authorities relaxed the censorship which had existed since the beginning of the 17th century. At the same time, a sense of Danish nationalism began to develop. Hostility increased against Germans and Norwegians present at the royal court. Pride in the Danish language and culture increased, and eventually a law banned \"foreigners\" from holding posts in the government. Antagonism between Germans and Danes increased from the mid-18th century on.\nIn the 1770s, during the reign of the mentally unstable Christian VII (1766\u20131808), the queen Caroline Matilda's lover, a German doctor named Johann Friedrich Struensee, became the de facto ruler of the country. Filled with the ideas of the Enlightenment, he attempted a number of radical reforms including freedom of the press and religion. But it was short-lived and saw open revolt. The landlords feared that the reforms were a threat to their power, while the commoners believed that religious freedom was an invitation to atheism.\nIn 1772, a court faction involving the king's stepmother had Struensee arrested, tried, and convicted of crimes against the majesty, his right hand was cut off following his beheading, his remains were quartered and put on display on top of spikes on the commons west of Copenhagen. The next 12 years were a period of unmitigated reaction until a group of reformers gained power in 1784.\nReforms.\nDenmark became the model of enlightened despotism, partially influenced by the ideas of the French Revolution. Denmark thus adopted liberalizing reforms in line with those of the French Revolution, with no direct contact. Danes were aware of French ideas and agreed with them, as it moved from Danish absolutism to a liberal constitutional system between 1750 and 1850. The change of government in 1784 was caused by a power vacuum created when King Christian VII took ill, and influence shifted to the crown prince (who later became King Frederick VI) and reform-oriented landowners. Between 1784 and 1815, the abolition of serfdom made the majority of the peasants into landowners. The government also introduced free trade and universal education. In contrast to France under the ancien regime, agricultural reform was intensified in Denmark, civil rights were extended to the peasants, the finances of the Danish state were healthy, and there were no external or internal crises. That is, reform was gradual and the regime itself carried out agrarian reforms that had the effect of weakening absolutism by creating a class of independent peasant freeholders. Much of the initiative came from well-organized liberals who directed political change in the first half of the 19th century.\nNewspapers.\nDanish news media first appeared in the 1540s, when handwritten fly sheets reported on the news. In 1666, Anders Bording, the father of Danish journalism, began a state paper. The royal privilege to bring out a newspaper was issued to Joachim Wielandt in 1720. University officials handled the censorship, but in 1770 Denmark became one of the first nations of the world to provide for press freedom; it ended in 1799. In 1795\u20131814, the press, led by intellectuals and civil servants, called out for a more just and modern society, and spoke out for the oppressed tenant farmers against the power of the old aristocracy.\nIn 1834, the first liberal newspaper appeared, one that gave much more emphasis to actual news content rather than opinions. The newspapers championed the Revolution of 1848 in Denmark. The new constitution of 1849 liberated the Danish press. Newspapers flourished in the second half of the 19th century, usually tied to one or another political party or labor union. Modernization, bringing in new features and mechanical techniques, appeared after 1900. The total circulation was 500,000 daily in 1901, more than doubling to 1.2 million in 1925. The German occupation brought informal censorship; some offending newspaper buildings were simply blown up by the Nazis. During the war, the underground produced 550 newspapers\u2014small, surreptitiously printed sheets that encouraged sabotage and resistance.\nColonial ventures.\nDenmark maintained a number of colonies outside Scandinavia, starting in the 17th century and lasting until the 20th century. Denmark also controlled traditional colonies in Greenland and Iceland in the north Atlantic, obtained through the union with Norway. Christian IV (reigned 1588\u20131648) first initiated the policy of expanding Denmark's overseas trade, as part of the mercantilist trend then popular in European governing circles. Denmark established its own first colony at Tranquebar, or Trankebar, on India's south coast, in 1620.\nIn the Caribbean Denmark started a colony on St Thomas in 1671, St John in 1718, and purchased Saint Croix from France in 1733. Denmark maintained its Indian colony, Tranquebar, as well as several other smaller colonies there, for about two hundred years. The Danish East India Company operated out of Tranquebar. The Danes also established themselves in the Gold coast and fought against other European powers like Sweden and the Netherlands there.\nDuring its heyday, the Danish East Indian Company and the Swedish East India Company imported more tea than the British East India Company \u2013 and smuggled 90% of it into Britain, where it sold at a huge profit. Both of the Scandinavia-based East India Companies folded during the course of the Napoleonic Wars. Denmark also maintained other colonies, forts, and bases in West Africa, primarily for the purpose of slave-trading.\n19th century.\nThe Napoleonic Wars.\nThe long decades of peace came to an abrupt end during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. Denmark-Norway initially attempted to stay neutral in the ongoing conflict in order to maintain their trade with both France and Britain. However, British fears that the Dano-Norwegians would ally with France led to a naval battle outside of Copenhagen in 1801, in which a Royal Navy fleet delivered a crushing blow to the Dano-Norwegian navy. Despite this, Denmark-Norway continued to remain neutral until 1807, when a British fleet bombarded Copenhagen and captured most of the Dano-Norwegian navy in order to prevent it from assisting Napoleon against Britain. This led to the Gunboat War, in which Danish gunboats fought against the British navy until 1814, though major engagements ended after the last Danish frigate was captured by the Royal Navy at Lyng\u00f8r in 1812.\nIn 1809 Danish forces fighting on the French side participated in defeating the anti-Bonapartist German rebellion led by Ferdinand von Schill, at the Battle of Stralsund. By 1813, Denmark could no longer bear the war costs, and the state was bankrupt. When in the same year the Sixth Coalition isolated Denmark by clearing Northern Germany of French forces, Frederick VI had to make peace. Accordingly, the Treaty of Kiel was concluded in January 1814 with Sweden and Great Britain, and another peace was signed with Russia in February.\nThe post-Napoleonic Congress of Vienna demanded the dissolution of the Dano-Norwegian union, and this was confirmed by the Treaty of Kiel in 1814. The treaty transferred Heligoland to Great Britain and Norway from the Danish to the Swedish crown, Denmark was to be satisfied with Swedish Pomerania. But the Norwegians revolted, declared their independence, and elected crown-prince Christian Frederick (the future Christian VIII) as their king. However, the Norwegian independence movement failed to attract any support from the European powers. After a brief war with Sweden, Christian had to abdicate in order to preserve Norwegian autonomy, established in a personal union with Sweden. In favour of the Kingdom of Prussia, Denmark renounced her claims to Swedish Pomerania at the Congress of Vienna (1815), and instead was satisfied with the Duchy of Lauenburg and a Prussian payment of 3.5 million talers. Prussia also took over a Danish 600,000-taler debt to Sweden.\nThis period also counts as \"the Golden Age\" of Danish intellectual history. A sign of renewed intellectual vigor was the introduction of compulsory schooling in 1814. Literature, painting, sculpture, and philosophy all experienced an unusually vibrant period. The stories of Hans Christian Andersen (1805\u20131875) became popular not only in Denmark, but all over Europe and in the United States. The ideas of the philosopher S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard (1813\u20131855) spread far beyond Denmark, influencing not only his own era, but proving instrumental in the development of new philosophical systems after him. The sculptures of Thorvaldsen (1770\u20131834) grace public buildings all over Denmark and other artists appreciated and copied his style. Grundtvig (1783\u20131872) tried to reinvigorate the Danish National Church and contributed to the hymns used by the church in Denmark.\nNationalism and liberalism.\nThe Danish liberal and national movements gained momentum in the 1830s, and after the European revolutions of 1848 Denmark became a constitutional monarchy on 5 June 1849. The growing bourgeoisie had demanded a share in government, and in an attempt to avert the sort of bloody revolution occurring elsewhere in Europe, Frederick VII gave in to the demands of the citizens. A new constitution emerged, separating the powers and granting the franchise to all adult males, as well as freedom of the press, religion, and association. The king became head of the executive branch. The legislative branch consisted of two parliamentary chambers; the Folketing, comprising members elected by the general population, and the Landsting, elected by landowners. Denmark also gained an independent judiciary.\nAnother significant result of the revolution was the abolition of slavery in the Danish West Indies, the Danish colony in the Caribbean, which at an earlier part of its history witnessed the biggest slave auctions in the world. In 1845 Denmark's other tropical colony, Tranquebar in India, was sold to Britain.\nThe Danish king's realm still consisted of the islands, the northern half of the Jutland peninsula, and the Duchy of Schleswig in real union with the Duchy of Holstein.\nThe islands and Jutland together constituted the kingdom, whereas the monarch held the duchies in personal union with the kingdom. The duchy of Schleswig constituted a Danish fief, while the Duchy of Holstein remained a part of the German Confederation.\nSince the early 18th century, and even more so from the early 19th century, the Danes had become used to viewing the duchies and the kingdom as increasingly unified in one state. This view, however, clashed with that of the German majority in the duchies, also enthused by liberal and national trends, which led to a movement known as Schleswig-Holsteinism. Schleswig-Holsteinists aimed for independence from Denmark. The First Schleswig War (1848\u20131851) broke out after constitutional change in 1849 and ended with the \"status quo\" because of the intervention of Britain and other Great Powers.\nMuch debate took place in Denmark as to how to deal with the question of Schleswig-Holstein. National-Liberals demanded permanent ties between Schleswig and Denmark, but stated that Holstein could do as it pleased. However, international events overtook domestic Danish politics, and Denmark faced war against both Prussia and Austria in what became known as the Second Schleswig War (1864). The war lasted from February to October 1864. Denmark was easily beaten by Prussia and Austria, and obliged to relinquish both Schleswig and Holstein.\nThe war caused Denmark as a nation severe trauma, forcing it to reconsider its place in the world. The loss of Schleswig-Holstein came as the latest in the long series of defeats and territorial loss that had begun in the 17th century. The Danish state had now lost some of the richest areas of the kingdom: Sk\u00e5ne to Sweden and Schleswig to Germany, so the nation focused on developing the poorer areas of the country. Extensive agricultural improvements took place in Jutland, and a new form of nationalism, which emphasized the \"small\" people, the decency of rural Denmark, and the shunning of wider aspirations, developed.\nIndustrialisation.\nIndustrialisation came to Denmark in the second half of the 19th century. The nation's first railroads were constructed in the 1850s, and improved communications and overseas trade allowed industry to develop in spite of Denmark's lack of natural resources. Trade unions developed starting in the 1870s. There was a considerable migration of people from the countryside to the cities.\nDanish agriculture became centered around the export of dairy and meat products, especially to Great Britain. Instead of relying on German middlemen in Hamburg, the Danes opened new direct trade routes to England after the defeat by the Germans. Lampke and Sharp argue that Denmark's success as in the dairy industry was not based on co-operatives, which came in the late nineteenth century. Instead leadership was in the hands of the landed, intellectual and political elites. They made land reforms, adopted new technologies, and started educational and trading systems. Together these made Denmark a major exporter of butter after 1850. Land reform enabled the growth of a middle ranking class of farmers. They copied the innovations pioneered by wealthy estate owners, and implemented them through newly formed co-operatives.\nInternationalism and nationalism have become very much part of the history of the Danish Labour movement. The Labour movement gathered momentum when social issues became associated with internationalism. Socialist theory and organisational contact with the First International, which linked labour movements in various countries, paved the way. Louis Pio emerged as the driving force. In 1871, following the bloody defeat of the Paris Commune, he started publishing socialist journalism. He campaigned strongly for an independent organisation of the workers under their own management, and organised a Danish branch of the First International. This became the foundation stone for the Social Democratic Party under the name of \"Den Internationale Arbejderforening for Danmark\" (The International Labour Association for Denmark). As a combination of union and political party, it adroitly brought together national and international elements.\nPio saw internationalism as vital for the success of the workers' struggle: without internationalism, no progress. He pointed out that the middle classes cooperated across national frontiers and used nationalistic rhetoric as a weapon against the workers and their liberation.\nThe Danish section started organising strikes and demonstrations for higher wages and social reforms. Demands were moderate, but enough to provoke the employers and the forces of law and order. Things came to a head in the Battle of F\u00e6lleden on 5 May 1872. The authorities arrested the three leaders, Louis Pio, Poul Geleff and Harald Brix, charged them and convicted them of high treason. The three left Denmark for the United States to set up the ill-starred and short-lived socialist colony near Hays City, in Ellis County, Kansas.\nBack in Denmark, the emerging political situation made possible by the new Danish door of independence alarmed many of the existing elites, since it inevitably empowered the peasantry. Simple men with little education replaced professors and professionals in positions of power. The peasants, in coalition with liberal and radical elements from the cities, eventually won a majority of seats in the Folketing. Even though constitutional changes had taken place to boost the power of the Landsting, the Left Party demanded to form the government, but the king, still the head of the executive branch, refused. However, in 1901, king Christian IX gave in and asked Johan Henrik Deuntzer, a member of Venstre, to form a government, the Cabinet of Deuntzer. This began a tradition of parliamentary government, and with the exception of the Easter Crisis of 1920, no government since 1901 has ruled against a parliamentary majority in the Folketing.\nMonetary union.\nThe Scandinavian Monetary Union, a monetary union formed by Sweden and Denmark on 5 May 1873, fixed both their currencies against gold at par to each other. Norway, governed in union with Sweden, entered the monetary union two years later in 1875 by pegging its currency to gold at the same level as Denmark and Sweden (.403\u00a0gram). The monetary union proved one of the few tangible results of the Scandinavist political movement of the 19th century.\nThe union provided fixed exchange-rates and stability in monetary terms, but the member-countries continued to issue their own separate currencies. In an outcome not initially foreseen, the perceived security led to a situation where the formally separate currencies circulated on a basis of \"as good as\" the legal tender virtually throughout the entire area.\nThe outbreak of World War I in 1914 brought an end to the monetary union. Sweden abandoned the tie to gold on 2 August 1914, and without a fixed exchange rate the free circulation came to an end.\n20th century.\n1901\u20131939.\nIn the early decades of the 20th century the new Danish Social Liberal Party and the older Venstre Party shared government. During this time women gained the right to vote (1915), and the United States purchased some of Denmark's colonial holdings: the three islands of Saint John, Saint Croix, and Saint Thomas in the West Indies. The period also saw Denmark inaugurating important social and labour-market reforms, laying the basis for the present[ [update]] welfare state.\nDenmark remained neutral during World War I, but the conflict affected the country to a considerable extent. As its economy was heavily based on exports, the unrestricted German submarine warfare was a serious problem. Denmark had to sell many of its exports to Germany instead of overseas nations. Widespread war profiteering took place, but commerce also suffered significant disruption because of the conflict and because of the ensuing financial instability in Europe. Rationing was instituted, and there were food and fuel shortages. In addition, Berlin forced Denmark to mine the Sound to prevent British ships from entering it. Following the defeat of Germany in the war (1918), the Treaty of Versailles (1919) mandated the Schleswig Plebiscites, which resulted in the return of Northern Schleswig (now[ [update]] South Jutland) to Denmark. The king and parts of the opposition grumbled that Prime Minister Carl Theodor Zahle (in office 1909\u20131910 and 1913\u20131920) did not use Germany's defeat to take back a bigger portion of the province, which Denmark had lost in the Second Schleswig War in 1864. The king and the opposition wanted to take over the city of Flensburg, while the cabinet insisted on only claiming areas where a majority of Danes lived, which led to a plebiscite in the affected areas over whether they wanted to become a part of Denmark or remain within Germany. Believing that he had the support of the people, King Christian X used his reserve power to dismiss Zahle's cabinet, sparking the Easter Crisis of 1920. As a result of the Easter Crisis, the king promised to no longer interfere in politics. Although the Danish Constitution was not amended at that time, Danish monarchs have stayed out of politics since then. The end of the war also prompted the Danish government to finish negotiating with Iceland, resulting in Iceland becoming a sovereign Kingdom on 1 December 1918 while retaining the Danish monarch as head of state.\nIn the 1924 Folketing election the Social Democrats, under the charismatic Thorvald Stauning, became Denmark's largest parliamentary political party, a position they maintained until 2001. Since the opposition still held a majority of the seats in the Landsting, Stauning had to co-operate with some of the right-wing parties, making the Social Democrats a more mainstream party. He succeeded in brokering an important deal in the 1930s which brought an end to the Great Depression in Denmark, and also laid the foundation for a welfare state.\nDenmark joined the League of Nations in 1920 and during the interwar period was active in promoting peaceful solutions to international issues. With the rise of Adolf Hitler in Germany during the 1930s, the country found itself in a very precarious situation. Berlin refused to recognize its post-1920 border with Denmark, but the Nazi regime was preoccupied with more important matters and did not make any issue of it. The Danes tried unsuccessfully to obtain recognition of the border from their neighbor, but otherwise went out of their way to avoid antagonizing Germany.\nSecond World War.\nIn 1939, Hitler offered non-aggression pacts to the Scandinavian nations. While Sweden and Norway refused, Denmark readily accepted. When WWII began that fall, Copenhagen declared its neutrality. Nevertheless, Germany (so as to secure communications for its invasion of Norway) invaded and subsequently occupied Denmark on 9 April 1940, meeting limited resistance. British forces, however, occupied the Faroe Islands (12 April 1940) and invaded Iceland (10 May 1940) in pre-emptive moves to prevent German occupation. Following a plebiscite, Iceland declared its independence on 17 June 1944 and became a republic, dissolving its union with Denmark.\nThe Nazi occupation of Denmark unfolded in a unique manner. The Monarchy remained. The conditions of occupation started off very leniently (although the authorities banned Danmarks Kommunistiske Parti (the Communist party) when the Wehrmacht invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941), and Denmark retained its own government. The new coalition government tried to protect the population from Nazi rule through compromise. The Germans allowed the Folketing to remain in session. Despite deportations of nearly 2,000 of its members, the police remained largely under Danish control, and the German authorities stayed one step removed from the population. However, the Nazi demands eventually became intolerable for the Danish government, so, in 1943, it resigned and Germany assumed full control of Denmark. From that point, an armed resistance movement grew against the occupying forces. Towards the end of the war, Denmark grew increasingly difficult for Germany to control, but the country remained under occupation until near the end of the war. On 4 May 1945, German forces in Denmark, North West Germany, and the Netherlands surrendered to the Allies. On 5 May 1945, British troops liberated Copenhagen. Three days later, the war ended.\nDenmark succeeded in smuggling most of its Jewish population to Sweden, in 1943, when the Nazis threatened deportation; see Rescue of the Danish Jews. Danish doctors refused to treat German citizens fleeing from Germany. More than 13,000 died in 1945 from various causes, among them some 7,000 children under five.\nPost-war.\nIn 1948, Denmark granted home rule to the Faroe Islands. 1953 saw further political reform in Denmark, abolishing the Landsting (the elected upper house), colonial status for Greenland and allowing female rights of succession to the throne with the signing of a new constitution.\nAlthough not one of the war-time United Nations, Denmark succeeded in obtaining a (belated) invitation to the UN Charter conference, and became a founding member of the United Nations organisation in 1945. With the Soviet occupation of Bornholm, the emergence of what evolved to become the Cold War and with the lessons of World War II still fresh in Danish minds, the country abandoned its former policy of neutrality and became one of the original founding members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) in 1949. Denmark had originally tried to form an alliance with Norway and Sweden only, but this attempt had failed. A Nordic Council later emerged however, with the aim of co-ordinating Nordic policies. Later on, in a referendum in 1972, Danes voted in favour of joining the European Community, the predecessor of the European Union, and Denmark became a member on 1 January 1973. Since then, Denmark has proven a hesitant member of the European community, opting out of many proposals, including the Euro, which the country rejected in a referendum in 2000.\n21st century.\nDenmark went through some of its most serious post-war crises in the early 21st century, such as the SARS outbreak in 2003, Indian Ocean tsunami in December 2004, Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy in 2005, Danish embassy bombing in Islamabad in 2008, Copenhagen attacks in 2015, and with the COVID-19 pandemic (including Deltacron hybrid variant) in between January 2020 and March 2022, which has further damaged the economy.\nIn 2001, the Folketing agreed to enter the war in Afghanistan. A total of 43 Danish soldiers were killed in Afghanistan since the first deployment in 2002.\nVenstre leader Anders Fogh Rasmussen won the 2001, 2005, and 2007 Folketing elections and formed a new government and was in his first few months challenged after the Social Democrat prime minister Poul Nyrup Rasmussen admitted defeat. Eight years later, he resigned from his office in April 2009 due to upcoming as the NATO Secretary-General, and then Lars L\u00f8kke Rasmussen was sworn in as prime minister in his first term from 2009 to 2011.\nIn the 2011 Folketing elections, the incumbent centre-right coalition led by Venstre lost power to a centre-left coalition led by the Social Democrats, making Helle Thorning-Schmidt the country's first female prime minister. The Social Liberal Party and the Socialist People's Party became part of the three-party government. The new parliament convened on 4 October 2011.\nIn 2015, Lars L\u00f8kke Rasmussen won the Folketing election and formed a government for the second time. Although the ruling Social Democrats became the largest party in the Folketing and increased their seat count, the opposition Venstre party was able to form a minority government headed by Lars L\u00f8kke Rasmussen with the support of the Danish People's Party, the Liberal Alliance and the Conservative People's Party. Prime Minister Lars L\u00f8kke Rasmussen held the office between 2009 and 2011, and again between 2015 and 2019, with backing from the Danish People's Party (DF).\nIn the 2019 Folketing election, comprising parties that supported the Social Democrats' leader Mette Frederiksen as candidate for Prime Minister. The \"red bloc\", consisting of the Social Democrats, the Social Liberals, Socialist People's Party, the Red\u2013Green Alliance, the Faroese Social Democratic Party and the Greenlandic Siumut, won 93 of the 179 seats, securing a parliamentary majority. Meanwhile, the incumbent governing coalition, consisting of Venstre, the Liberal Alliance and the Conservative People's Party was reduced to 76 seats (including the Venstre-affiliated Union Party in the Faroe Islands) despite receiving external parliamentary support from the Danish People's Party and Nunatta Qitornai. Following the 2019 general election the Social Democrats, led by leader Mette Frederiksen, formed a single-party government with support from the left-wing coalition. Frederiksen became prime minister on 27 June 2019.\nIn the November 2022 snap general election, Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen's Social Democrats remained the biggest party with two more seats, its best result in two decades. The second biggest was the Liberal Party (Venstre), led by Jakob Ellemann-Jensen. The recently formed Moderates party, led by two-time former Prime Minister Lars L\u00f8kke Rasmussen, became the third-biggest party in Denmark. In December 2022, Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen formed a new coalition government with her Social Democrats and the Liberal Party and the Moderates party. Jakob Ellemann-Jensen became deputy prime minister and defence minister while Lars L\u00f8kke Rasmussen was appointed foreign minister.\nIn her 52nd New Year's speech on the last day of 2023, Queen Margrethe II announced her abdication of the Danish throne in favor of her son, Frederick. This was the first willing abdication of a Danish monarch since Eric III in 1146. On 14 January, 52 years to the day after Margrethe ascended the throne, Frederik X was proclaimed king of Denmark.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54329", "revid": "14587130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54329", "title": "Genesee County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nGenesee County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 58,388. Its county seat is Batavia. Its name is from the Seneca word Gen-nis'-hee-yo, meaning \"the Beautiful Valley\". The county was created in 1802 and organized in 1803. The county is part of the Finger Lakes region of the state.\nGenesee County comprises the Batavia, NY micropolitan statistical area, which is also in the Rochester-Batavia-Seneca Falls, NY combined statistical area. It is in Western New York. It is the namesake of Genesee County, Michigan; that is, the Michigan county was named for Genesee County, New York.\nHistory.\nPrecontact era.\nThe archaeological record at the Hiscock Site, in Byron, New York goes back 10,000 to 12,000 years to the Ice Age. Researchers have found a variety of humanmade tools, ceramics, metal, and leather, along with a mastodon jaw, tusks, and teeth and assorted animal bones, indicating long occupation of the site. This site is among North America's most important for archaeological artifacts from the Ice Age.\nDifferent Indigenous peoples lived in the area for thousands of years. Centuries before European arrival, the Iroquoian-speaking Seneca Nation developed in the central part of present-day New York; it became one of the first Five Nations of the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois Confederacy). Beginning in 1639 and lasting for the rest of the century, the Seneca led an invasion of Western New York as part of the Beaver Wars, driving out the existing tribes of Wenro, Erie and Neutrals.\nColonial and revolutionary era.\nWhen counties were established in New York State in 1683, the present Genesee County was part of Albany County. This was an enormous county, including the northern part of New York State as well as all of the present State of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. On March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Tryon County, contained the western portion (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). In 1784 Tryon County was renamed as Montgomery County. Around this time, the Province of Pennsylvania and the Massachusetts Bay Colony also claimed the territory as their own, but New York did not enforce its territorial claim. In 1789 Ontario County was split off from Montgomery as a result of the Phelps and Gorham Purchase. Again, the county theoretically extended west to the Pacific Ocean.\nNew York State.\nIt was not until the Holland Purchase of 1793 that Western New York was enforced as the territory of New York State. Land in the region was sold through the Holland Land Company's office in Batavia, starting in 1801. All the land in Western New York was in the newly created Genesee County, and all of that was in the single town of Batavia.\nGenesee County was created by a partition of of land from Ontario County. The county was not fully organized so it remained under the supervision of Ontario County until it achieved full organization and separation during March 1803.\nOn April 7, 1806, Genesee's area was reduced to due to a partition that created Allegany County. On March 8, 1808, Genesee's area was again reduced, this time to due to a partition that created Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, and Niagara Counties. On February 23, 1821, Genesee's area was again reduced, this time to due a complex partition that produced Livingston and Monroe Counties. On April 15, 1825, another partition reduced Genesee's area to in the creation of Orleans County. On May 1, 1826, the Orleans partition was again surveyed, with of land along the western half of the Orleans/Genesee border returned to Genesee. On March 19, 1841, Genesee's area was again reduced, this time to the it remains to this day due to the partitioning to create Wyoming County.\n19th century politics: Origins of antimasonry.\nGenesee County was included in the 19th century \"burned-over district\" \u2014 the Western region of New York consumed by religious revivals and characterized by \"the evangelical desire to convert the entire American population to Christianity and to create a 'moral, homogeneous commonwealth.'\" This religious moral crusade provided the social atmosphere that allowed antimasonic sentiment to gain momentum as a significant church-oriented movement and, later, a grass-roots political party that became the nation's first third party.\nBy the 1820s, Freemasonry was prevalent in Genesee County. From 1821 to 1827, half of all county officials were Freemasons. In September 1826, William Morgan, a resident of Batavia, New York, disappeared after having been briefly imprisoned for failure to repay a debt. Morgan had been rejected from the Masonic lodge in Batavia, and, as a result, threatened to publish a book which exposed the secret rituals of Freemasonry. His disappearance and presumed murder ignited a campaign against Freemasonry. The investigation into Morgan's disappearance confronted major obstacles from government officials and the judiciary- positions that were largely occupied by Freemasons. The Morgan affair combined with existing suspicions and distrust of the secrecy of Freemasonry initiated mass meetings throughout the county to decide how the issue of Freemasonry should be handled. The Antimasonry crusade's original goal was to oust Masons from political offices. Through the political guidance of party organizers, such as Thurlow Weed and William H. Seward, the crusade developed into a political party that enjoyed a political stronghold in Genesee County and the rest of the \"burned-over district.\"\nThe Antimasonic Party found strong support within Genesee County from 1827 to 1833. The party averaged 69 percent of the vote and won every county office. After continuous domination of Masonic politicians, citizens saw Antimasonry as a solution and an opportunity to restore justice and republicanism. The Baptist and Presbyterian churches favored Antimasonry and encouraged their members to renounce ties with the fraternity. The party was originally associated with populist rhetoric, however, strong Antimasonic sentiment throughout the county correlated with positive economic developments and high population densities. Larger towns, such as Batavia, the county seat and Le Roy, harbored the strongest support for the party. The timing of the creation of the Antimasonic Party coincided with a time in New York politics that encouraged the expansion of political participation. The party leaders made the Antimasonic Party, and later the Whig Party, a great success in Genesee County and other neighboring counties.\nModern day.\nIn 2009, the City and Town of Batavia began exploring ways to merge or consolidate governmental systems.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.5%) is water. Genesee County is east of Buffalo and southwest of Rochester in the western portion of New York State.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGenesee County watersheds.\nSource:\nCounty parks.\n\"Source:\"\nGovernment and politics.\nGenesee County is governed by a 9\u2013member legislature headed by a chairperson. Genesee County is part of the 8th Judicial District of the New York Supreme Court and the 4th Department of the New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division.\nPresidential elections.\nGenesee County is solidly Republican at the Presidential level with Lyndon Johnson in 1964 being the only Democrat to ever carry the county. Since then the closest a Democrat has gotten to winning the county was Bill Clinton in 1996 when he lost to Bob Dole by 3 percent. In 2024 Donald Trump received 66.8 percent of the vote which was the best result for a Republican since 1956 when Dwight D. Eisenhower received 74.6 percent.\nLaw enforcement.\nThe primary law enforcement agency is the Genesee County Sheriff's Office.\nIn most counties in N.Y., the undersheriff is the warden of the county jail. In Genesee County, the sheriff has ultimate authority to operate the 80-bed county jail, built in 1985. In this county, rather than an undersheriff, it is managed by a \"jail superintendent\" with 27 other employees and managers. The current Genesee County Jail was built in 1985.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 60,370 people, 22,770 households, and 15,825 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 24,190 housing units, with an average density of . The county's racial makeup was 94.69% White, 2.13% Black or African American, 0.78% Native American, 0.48% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.71% from other races, and 1.18% from two or more races. 1.50% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 25.0% were of German, 15.2% Italian, 13.5% English, 13.1% Irish, 8.9% Polish and 5.6% American ancestry according to Census\u00a02000. 96.5% spoke English and 1.5% Spanish as their first language.\nThere were 22,770 households, of which 33.30% had children under the age of 18. 55.4% were married couples living together, 9.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.50% were non-families. 24.80% of households were made up of individuals, and 11.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.59 and the average family size was 3.10.\n26.10% of the county's population was under the age of 18, 7.50% were from age 18 to 24, 29.50% were from age 25 to 44, 22.60% were from age 45 to 64, and 14.30% were age 65 or older. The median age was 37\u00a0years. For every 100 females there were 96.90 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.00 males.\nThe U.S.\u00a0Census in 2000 showed the county had a 63.7% employment rate and 2.9% were unemployed. The median household income was $40,542, and the median family income was $47,771. Males had a median income of $34,430 versus $23,788 for females. The county's per capita income was $18,498. About 5.60% of families and 7.60% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.00% of those under age 18 and 6.80% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nThe county has eight public school districts:\nIt has one state-operated school: New York State School for the Blind\nSeveral private schools at the primary and secondary levels are also maintained (Catholic schools are affiliated with the Roman Catholic Diocese of Buffalo):\nGenesee Community College has its main campus in the Town of Batavia.\nCommunities.\nLarger Settlements.\n\u2020 - County Seat\n\u2021 - Not Wholly in this County\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54338", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54338", "title": "Greene County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nGreene County is a county located in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 47,931. Its county seat is Catskill. The county's name is in honor of the American Revolutionary War general Nathanael Greene. The county is part of the Capital District region of the state.\nHistory.\nOn March 25, 1800, Greene County was created by the partitioning of Albany (360 square miles) and Ulster (270 square miles) counties, producing a county of .\nOn April 3, 1801, of land was transferred from Delaware and Ulster counties, raising the total area to . This transferred Prattsville, Vly Mountain, Halcott Center, Bushnellsville, Highmount, Shandaken, Lanesville, and Pine Hill within Greene County.\nOn May 26, 1812, Greene County lost to Ulster County, lowering the total area to , reassigning Pine Hill, Highmount, and Shandaken to Ulster County.\nOn April 15, 1814, the county borders were re-surveyed, and the line adjusted with no change in area.\nOn April 17, 1822, the border was again surveyed, with no change in area, but Palenville was found to be inside Greene County.\nOn April 23, 1823, the border was again resurveyed, and the Hudson River border with Columbia County realigned accordingly.\nOn March 3, 1836, of area was lost to Schoharie County, reducing the total area to , and reassigning Manorkill, producing the Greene County that exists today.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.7%) is water. Greene County is located in southeast central New York State, just west of the Hudson River and south of Albany.\nThe northern and eastern regions are mostly low-lying flatlands. Along the Hudson River the lowest elevation is at sea level. The southern and western areas rise sharply into the Catskill Mountains.\nCatskill Park takes up much of the south central region. The park contains some of the tallest peaks south of the Adirondacks. For example, the highest elevation is Hunter Mountain, at approximately above sea level; In addition, there are many picturesque waterfalls in the park such as the famed, Kaaterskill Falls.\nThe entirety of Greene County is in the 19th Congressional District, and is represented by Democrat Josh Riley.\nThe county is served by Greene County Transit, based in Catskill.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 48,195 people, 18,256 households, and 12,067 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 26,544 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 90.76% White, 5.53% Black or African American, 0.28% Native American, 0.54% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.52% from other races, and 1.36% from two or more races. 4.31% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 18.8% were of Irish, 17.8% Italian, 17.5% German, 8.6% American and 6.9% English ancestry according to Census 2000. 92.3% spoke English, 2.8% Spanish, 1.5% German and 1.3% Italian as their first language.\nThere were 18,256 households, out of which 29.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.2% were married couples living together, 10.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.9% were non-families. 27.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.42 and the average family size was 2.97.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 23.00% under the age of 18, 9.5% from 18 to 24, 27.0% from 25 to 44, 24.8% from 45 to 64, and 15.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 106.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 108.2 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $36,493, and the median income for a family was $43,854. Males had a median income of $35,598 versus $25,346 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,931. About 8.6% of families and 12.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.7% of those under age 18 and 10.4% of those age 65 or over.\nAs of the 2010 census, the racial makeup of the county was 90.3% White, 5.7% African American, 0.3% Native American and 0.8% Asian. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 4.9% of the population.\nPolitics.\nGreene County is considered a Republican stronghold. It was one of only eleven counties in New York that did not vote for Bill Clinton in 1996, a strong year for Democrats. It supported John McCain by a margin just under ten points in 2008 over Barack Obama, another Democratic year. In 2012, 54.1 percent of the county's voters chose Republican challenger Mitt Romney, and 43.7 percent chose Democratic incumbent Obama, despite it being again a Democratic year. In 2016, 59 percent of the county's voters chose Donald Trump while 34 percent chose Hillary Clinton. It has not supported a Democrat for president since 1964, and before that it previously did so in 1912.\nIn some elections, certain towns in Greene County have had a plurality that have voted Democratic, though the county remains very Republican.\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHamlets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54342", "revid": "20466351", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54342", "title": "Cellular automaton", "text": "Discrete model studied in computer science\nA cellular automaton (pl. cellular automata, abbrev. CA) is a discrete model of computation studied in automata theory. Cellular automata are also called cellular spaces, tessellation automata, homogeneous structures, cellular structures, tessellation structures, and iterative arrays. Cellular automata have found application in various areas, including physics, theoretical biology and microstructure modeling.\nA cellular automaton consists of a regular grid of \"cells\", each in one of a finite number of \"states\", such as \"on\" and \"off\" (in contrast to a coupled map lattice). The grid can be in any finite number of dimensions. For each cell, a set of cells called its \"neighborhood\" is defined relative to the specified cell. An initial state (time \"t\"\u00a0=\u00a00) is selected by assigning a state for each cell. A new \"generation\" is created (advancing \"t\" by 1), according to some fixed \"rule\" (generally, a mathematical function) that determines the new state of each cell in terms of the current state of the cell and the states of the cells in its neighborhood. Typically, the rule for updating the state of cells is the same for each cell and does not change over time, and is applied to the whole grid simultaneously, though exceptions are known, such as the stochastic cellular automaton and asynchronous cellular automaton.\nThe concept was originally conceived in the 1940s by Stanislaw Ulam and John von Neumann while they were contemporaries at Los Alamos National Laboratory. While studied by some throughout the 1950s and 1960s, it was not until the 1970s and Conway's Game of Life, a two-dimensional cellular automaton, that interest in the subject expanded beyond academia. In the 1980s, Stephen Wolfram engaged in a systematic study of one-dimensional cellular automata, or what he calls elementary cellular automata; his research assistant Matthew Cook showed that one of these rules is Turing-complete.\nThe primary classifications of cellular automata, as outlined by Wolfram, are numbered one to four. They are, in order, automata in which patterns generally stabilize into homogeneity, automata in which patterns evolve into mostly stable or oscillating structures, automata in which patterns evolve in a seemingly chaotic fashion, and automata in which patterns become extremely complex and may last for a long time, with stable local structures. This last class is thought to be computationally universal, or capable of simulating a Turing machine. Special types of cellular automata are \"reversible\", where only a single configuration leads directly to a subsequent one, and \"totalistic\", in which the future value of individual cells only depends on the total value of a group of neighboring cells. Cellular automata can simulate a variety of real-world systems, including biological and chemical ones.\nOverview.\nOne way to simulate a two-dimensional cellular automaton is with an infinite sheet of graph paper along with a set of rules for the cells to follow. Each square is called a \"cell\" and each cell has two possible states, black or white. The \"neighborhood\" of a cell is the nearby, usually adjacent, cells. The two most common types of neighborhoods are the \"von Neumann neighborhood\" and the \"Moore neighborhood\". The former, named after the founding cellular automaton theorist, consists of the four orthogonally adjacent cells. The latter includes the von Neumann neighborhood as well as the four diagonally adjacent cells. For such a cell and its Moore neighborhood, there are 512 (= 29) possible patterns. For each of the 512 possible patterns, the rule table would state whether the center cell will be black or white on the next time interval. Conway's Game of Life is a popular version of this model. Another common neighborhood type is the \"extended von Neumann neighborhood\", which includes the two closest cells in each orthogonal direction, for a total of eight. The general equation for the total number of automata possible is \"k\"\"k\"\"s\", where \"k\" is the number of possible states for a cell, and \"s\" is the number of neighboring cells (including the cell to be calculated itself) used to determine the cell's next state. Thus, in the two-dimensional system with a Moore neighborhood, the total number of automata possible would be 229, or .\nIt is usually assumed that every cell in the universe starts in the same state, except for a finite number of cells in other states; the assignment of state values is called a \"configuration\". More generally, it is sometimes assumed that the universe starts out covered with a periodic pattern, and only a finite number of cells violate that pattern. The latter assumption is common in one-dimensional cellular automata.\nCellular automata are often simulated on a finite grid rather than an infinite one. In two dimensions, the universe would be a rectangle instead of an infinite plane. The obvious problem with finite grids is how to handle the cells on the edges. How they are handled will affect the values of all the cells in the grid. One possible method is to allow the values in those cells to remain constant. Another method is to define neighborhoods differently for these cells. One could say that they have fewer neighbors, but then one would also have to define new rules for the cells located on the edges. These cells are usually handled with periodic boundary conditions resulting in a \"toroidal\" arrangement: when one goes off the top, one comes in at the corresponding position on the bottom, and when one goes off the left, one comes in on the right. (This essentially simulates an infinite periodic tiling, and in the field of partial differential equations is sometimes referred to as \"periodic\" boundary conditions.) This can be visualized as taping the left and right edges of the rectangle to form a tube, then taping the top and bottom edges of the tube to form a torus (doughnut shape). Universes of other dimensions are handled similarly. This solves boundary problems with neighborhoods, but another advantage is that it is easily programmable using modular arithmetic functions. For example, in a 1-dimensional cellular automaton like the examples below, the neighborhood of a cell \"xit\" is {\"x\"\"i\"\u22121\"t\"\u22121, \"x\"\"i\"\"t\"\u22121, \"x\"\"i\"+1\"t\"\u22121}, where \"t\" is the time step (vertical), and \"i\" is the index (horizontal) in one generation.\nHistory.\nStanislaw Ulam, while working at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in the 1940s, studied the growth of crystals, using a simple lattice network as his model. At the same time, John von Neumann \u2014 Ulam's colleague at Los Alamos \u2014 was working on the problem of self-replicating systems. Von Neumann's initial design was founded upon the notion of one robot building another robot. This design is known as the kinematic model. As he developed this design, von Neumann came to realize the great difficulty of building a self-replicating robot, and of the great cost in providing the robot with a \"sea of parts\" from which to build its replicant. Neumann wrote a paper entitled \"The general and logical theory of automata\" for the Hixon Symposium in 1948. Ulam was the one who suggested using a \"discrete\" system for creating a reductionist model of self-replication. Nils Aall Barricelli performed many of the earliest explorations of these models of artificial life.\nUlam and von Neumann created a method for calculating liquid motion in the late 1950s. The driving concept of the method was to consider a liquid as a group of discrete units and calculate the motion of each based on its neighbors' behaviors. Thus was born the first system of cellular automata. Like Ulam's lattice network, von Neumann's cellular automata are two-dimensional, with his self-replicator implemented algorithmically. The result was a universal copier and constructor working within a cellular automaton with a small neighborhood (only those cells that touch are neighbors; for von Neumann's cellular automata, only orthogonal cells), and with 29 states per cell. Von Neumann gave an existence proof that a particular pattern would make endless copies of itself within the given cellular universe by designing a 200,000 cell configuration that could do so. This design is known as the tessellation model, and is called a von Neumann universal constructor.\nAlso in the 1940s, Norbert Wiener and Arturo Rosenblueth developed a model of excitable media with some of the characteristics of a cellular automaton. Their specific motivation was the mathematical description of impulse conduction in cardiac systems. However their model is not a cellular automaton because the medium in which signals propagate is continuous, and wave fronts are curves. A true cellular automaton model of excitable media was developed and studied by J. M. Greenberg and S. P. Hastings in 1978; see Greenberg-Hastings cellular automaton. The original work of Wiener and Rosenblueth contains many insights and continues to be cited in modern research publications on cardiac arrhythmia and excitable systems.\nIn the 1960s, cellular automata were studied as a particular type of dynamical system and the connection with the mathematical field of symbolic dynamics was established for the first time. In 1969, Gustav A. Hedlund compiled many results following this point of view in what is still considered as a seminal paper for the mathematical study of cellular automata. The most fundamental result is the characterization in the Curtis\u2013Hedlund\u2013Lyndon theorem of the set of global rules of cellular automata as the set of continuous endomorphisms of shift spaces.\nIn 1969, German computer pioneer Konrad Zuse published his book \"Calculating Space\", proposing that the physical laws of the universe are discrete by nature, and that the entire universe is the output of a deterministic computation on a single cellular automaton; \"Zuse's Theory\" became the foundation of the field of study called \"digital physics\".\nAlso in 1969 computer scientist Alvy Ray Smith completed a Stanford PhD dissertation on Cellular Automata Theory, the first mathematical treatment of CA as a general class of computers. Many papers came from this dissertation: He showed the equivalence of neighborhoods of various shapes, how to reduce a Moore to a von Neumann neighborhood or how to reduce any neighborhood to a von Neumann neighborhood. He proved that two-dimensional CA are computation universal, introduced 1-dimensional CA, and showed that they too are computation universal, even with simple neighborhoods. He showed how to subsume the complex von Neumann proof of construction universality (and hence self-reproducing machines) into a consequence of computation universality in a 1-dimensional CA. Intended as the introduction to the German edition of von Neumann's book on CA, he wrote a survey of the field with dozens of references to papers, by many authors in many countries over a decade or so of work, often overlooked by modern CA researchers.\nIn the 1970s a two-state, two-dimensional cellular automaton named Game of Life became widely known, particularly among the early computing community. Invented by John Conway and popularized by Martin Gardner in a \"Scientific American\" article, its rules are as follows:\nDespite its simplicity, the system achieves an impressive diversity of behavior, fluctuating between apparent randomness and order. One of the most apparent features of the Game of Life is the frequent occurrence of \"gliders\", arrangements of cells that essentially move themselves across the grid. It is possible to arrange the automaton so that the gliders interact to perform computations, and after much effort it has been shown that the Game of Life can emulate a universal Turing machine. It was viewed as a largely recreational topic, and little follow-up work was done outside of investigating the particularities of the Game of Life and a few related rules in the early 1970s.\nStephen Wolfram independently began working on cellular automata in mid-1981 after considering how complex patterns seemed formed in nature in violation of the second law of thermodynamics. His investigations were initially spurred by a desire to model systems such as the neural networks found in brains. He published his first paper in \"Reviews of Modern Physics\" investigating \"elementary cellular automata\" (Rule 30 in particular) in June 1983. The unexpected complexity of the behavior of these simple rules led Wolfram to suspect that complexity in nature may be due to similar mechanisms. His investigations, however, led him to realize that cellular automata were poor at modelling neural networks. Additionally, during this period Wolfram formulated the concepts of intrinsic randomness and computational irreducibility, and suggested that Rule 110 may be universal\u2014a fact proved later by Wolfram's research assistant Matthew Cook in the 1990s.\nClassification.\nWolfram, in \"A New Kind of Science\" and several papers dating from the mid-1980s, defined four classes into which cellular automata and several other simple computational models can be divided depending on their behavior. While earlier studies in cellular automata tended to try to identify types of patterns for specific rules, Wolfram's classification was the first attempt to classify the rules themselves. In order of complexity the classes are:\nThese definitions are qualitative in nature and there is some room for interpretation. According to Wolfram, \"...with almost any general classification scheme there are inevitably cases which get assigned to one class by one definition and another class by another definition. And so it is with cellular automata: there are occasionally rules...that show some features of one class and some of another.\"\nThere have been several attempts to classify cellular automata in formally rigorous classes, inspired by Wolfram's classification. For instance, Culik and Yu proposed three well-defined classes (and a fourth one for the automata not matching any of these), which are sometimes called Culik\u2013Yu classes; membership in these proved undecidable.\nWolfram's class 2 can be partitioned into two subgroups of stable (fixed-point) and oscillating (periodic) rules.\nThe idea that there are 4 classes of dynamical system came originally from Nobel-prize winning chemist Ilya Prigogine who identified these 4 classes of thermodynamical systems: (1) systems in thermodynamic equilibrium, (2) spatially/temporally uniform systems, (3) chaotic systems, and (4) complex far-from-equilibrium systems with dissipative structures (see figure 1 in the 1974 paper of Nicolis, Prigogine's student).\nReversible.\nA cellular automaton is \"reversible\" if, for every current configuration of the cellular automaton, there is exactly one past configuration (preimage). If one thinks of a cellular automaton as a function mapping configurations to configurations, reversibility implies that this function is bijective. If a cellular automaton is reversible, its time-reversed behavior can also be described as a cellular automaton; this fact is a consequence of the Curtis\u2013Hedlund\u2013Lyndon theorem, a topological characterization of cellular automata. For cellular automata in which not every configuration has a preimage, the configurations without preimages are called \"Garden of Eden\" patterns.\nFor one-dimensional cellular automata there are known algorithms for deciding whether a rule is reversible or irreversible. However, for cellular automata of two or more dimensions reversibility is undecidable; that is, there is no algorithm that takes as input an automaton rule and is guaranteed to determine correctly whether the automaton is reversible. The proof by Jarkko Kari is related to the tiling problem by Wang tiles.\nReversible cellular automata are often used to simulate such physical phenomena as gas and fluid dynamics, since they obey the laws of thermodynamics. Such cellular automata have rules specially constructed to be reversible. Such systems have been studied by Tommaso Toffoli, Norman Margolus and others. Several techniques can be used to explicitly construct reversible cellular automata with known inverses. Two common ones are the second-order cellular automaton and the block cellular automaton, both of which involve modifying the definition of a cellular automaton in some way. Although such automata do not strictly satisfy the definition given above, it can be shown that they can be emulated by conventional cellular automata with sufficiently large neighborhoods and numbers of states, and can therefore be considered a subset of conventional cellular automata. Conversely, it has been shown that every reversible cellular automaton can be emulated by a block cellular automaton.\nTotalistic.\nA special class of cellular automata are \"totalistic\" cellular automata. The state of each cell in a totalistic cellular automaton is represented by a number (usually an integer value drawn from a finite set), and the value of a cell at time \"t\" depends only on the \"sum\" of the values of the cells in its neighborhood (possibly including the cell itself) at time\u00a0\"t\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01.\nIf the state of the cell at time \"t\" depends on both its own state and the total of its neighbors at time\u00a0\"t\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 then the cellular automaton is properly called \"outer totalistic\". Conway's Game of Life is outer totalistic (but not totalistic), with cell values 0 and 1. Outer totalistic cellular automata with the same Moore neighborhood structure as Life are sometimes called life-like cellular automata.\nMore generally, an \"isotropic\" ruleset is one that is not necessarily outer totalistic, but still has all the reflection symmetries. In the case of a cellular automata on a square grid, the group of symmetries is D8.\nRelated automata.\nThere are many possible generalizations of the cellular automaton concept.\nOne way is by using something other than a rectangular (cubic, \"etc.\") grid. For example, if a plane is tiled with regular hexagons, those hexagons could be used as cells. In many cases the resulting cellular automata are equivalent to those with rectangular grids with specially designed neighborhoods and rules. Another variation would be to make the grid itself irregular, such as with Penrose tiles.\nAlso, rules can be probabilistic rather than deterministic. Such cellular automata are called probabilistic cellular automata. A probabilistic rule gives, for each pattern at time \"t\", the probabilities that the central cell will transition to each possible state at time \"t\"\u00a0+\u00a01. Sometimes a simpler rule is used; for example: \"The rule is the Game of Life, but on each time step there is a 0.001% probability that each cell will transition to the opposite color.\"\nThe neighborhood or rules could change over time or space. For example, initially the new state of a cell could be determined by the horizontally adjacent cells, but for the next generation the vertical cells would be used.\nIn cellular automata, the new state of a cell is not affected by the new state of other cells. This could be changed so that, for instance, a 2 by 2 block of cells can be determined by itself and the cells adjacent to itself.\nThere are \"continuous automata\". These are like totalistic cellular automata, but instead of the rule and states being discrete (\"e.g.\" a table, using states {0,1,2}), continuous functions are used, and the states become continuous (usually values in [0,1]). The state of a location is a finite number of real numbers. Certain cellular automata can yield diffusion in liquid patterns in this way.\nContinuous spatial automata have a continuum of locations. The state of a location is a finite number of real numbers. Time is also continuous, and the state evolves according to differential equations. One important example is reaction\u2013diffusion textures, differential equations proposed by Alan Turing to explain how chemical reactions could create the stripes on zebras and spots on leopards. When these are approximated by cellular automata, they often yield similar patterns. MacLennan http:// considers continuous spatial automata as a model of computation.\nThere are known examples of continuous spatial automata, which exhibit propagating phenomena analogous to gliders in the Game of Life.\n\"Graph rewriting automata\" are extensions of cellular automata based on graph rewriting systems.\nElementary cellular automata.\nThe simplest nontrivial cellular automaton would be one-dimensional, with two possible states per cell, and a cell's neighbors defined as the adjacent cells on either side of it. A cell and its two neighbors form a neighborhood of 3 cells, so there are 23\u00a0=\u00a08 possible patterns for a neighborhood. A rule consists of deciding, for each pattern, whether the cell will be a 1 or a 0 in the next generation. There are then 28\u00a0=\u00a0256 possible rules.\nThese 256 cellular automata are generally referred to by their Wolfram code, a standard naming convention invented by Wolfram that gives each rule a number from 0 to 255. A number of papers have analyzed and compared the distinct cases among the 256 cellular automata (many are trivially isomorphic). The rule 30, rule 90, rule 110, and rule 184 cellular automata are particularly interesting. The images below show the history of rules 30 and 110 when the starting configuration consists of a 1 (at the top of each image) surrounded by 0s. Each row of pixels represents a generation in the history of the automaton, with \"t\"=0 being the top row. Each pixel is colored white for 0 and black for\u00a01.\nRule 30 exhibits \"class 3\" behavior, meaning even simple input patterns such as that shown lead to chaotic, seemingly random histories.\nRule 110, like the Game of Life, exhibits what Wolfram calls \"class 4\" behavior, which is neither completely random nor completely repetitive. Localized structures appear and interact in various complicated-looking ways. In the course of the development of \"A New Kind of Science\", as a research assistant to Wolfram in 1994, Matthew Cook proved that some of these structures were rich enough to support universality. This result is interesting because rule 110 is an extremely simple one-dimensional system, and difficult to engineer to perform specific behavior. This result therefore provides significant support for Wolfram's view that class 4 systems are inherently likely to be universal. Cook presented his proof at a Santa Fe Institute conference on Cellular Automata in 1998, but Wolfram blocked the proof from being included in the conference proceedings, as Wolfram did not want the proof announced before the publication of \"A New Kind of Science\". In 2004, Cook's proof was finally published in Wolfram's journal \"Complex Systems\" (Vol. 15, No. 1), over ten years after Cook came up with it. Rule 110 has been the basis for some of the smallest universal Turing machines.\nRule space.\nAn elementary cellular automaton rule is specified by 8 bits, and all elementary cellular automaton rules can be considered to sit on the vertices of the 8-dimensional unit hypercube. This unit hypercube is the cellular automaton rule space. For next-nearest-neighbor cellular automata, a rule is specified by 25\u00a0=\u00a032 bits, and the cellular automaton rule space is a 32-dimensional unit hypercube. A distance between two rules can be defined by the number of steps required to move from one vertex, which represents the first rule, and another vertex, representing another rule, along the edge of the hypercube. This rule-to-rule distance is also called the Hamming distance.\nCellular automaton rule space allows us to ask the question concerning whether rules with similar dynamical behavior are \"close\" to each other. Graphically drawing a high dimensional hypercube on the 2-dimensional plane remains a difficult task, and one crude locator of a rule in the hypercube is the number of bit-1 in the 8-bit string for elementary rules (or 32-bit string for the next-nearest-neighbor rules). Drawing the rules in different Wolfram classes in these slices of the rule space show that class 1 rules tend to have lower number of bit-1s, thus located in one region of the space, whereas class 3 rules tend to have higher proportion (50%) of bit-1s.\nFor larger cellular automaton rule space, it is shown that class 4 rules are located between the class 1 and class 3 rules. This observation is the foundation for the phrase edge of chaos, and is reminiscent of the phase transition in thermodynamics.\nApplications.\nBiology.\nSeveral biological processes or phenomena can be simulated using cellular automata, which is regarded as a specific type of agent-based model in such application contexts. In these biological simulations, it is common for the cells of the cellular automaton to be identified with biological cells.\nSome examples of biological phenomena modeled by cellular automata with a simple state space are:\nAdditionally, biological phenomena which require explicit modeling of the agents' velocities (for example, those involved in collective cell migration) may be modeled by cellular automata with a more complex state space and rules, such as biological lattice-gas cellular automata. These include phenomena of great medical importance, such as:\nChemistry.\nThe Belousov\u2013Zhabotinsky reaction is a spatio-temporal chemical oscillator that can be simulated by means of a cellular automaton. In the 1950s A. M. Zhabotinsky (extending the work of B. P. Belousov) discovered that when a thin, homogenous layer of a mixture of malonic acid, acidified bromate, and a ceric salt were mixed together and left undisturbed, fascinating geometric patterns such as concentric circles and spirals propagate across the medium. In the \"Computer Recreations\" section of the August 1988 issue of \"Scientific American\", A. K. Dewdney discussed a cellular automaton developed by Martin Gerhardt and Heike Schuster of the University of Bielefeld (Germany). This automaton produces wave patterns that resemble those in the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction. Combining the attachment to one only particle from the growing aggregate, following the seminal model of Witten and Sander to simulate the diffusion-limited growth with the attachment to kink positions as proposed yet by Kossel and Stranski in 1920's, see for the kinetics-limited version of the attachment, Goranova et al. proposed a model for electrochemical co-deposition of two metal cations.\nPhysics.\nProbabilistic cellular automata are used in statistical and condensed matter physics to study phenomena like fluid dynamics and phase transitions. The Ising model is a prototypical example, in which each cell can be in either of two states called \"up\" and \"down\", making an idealized representation of a magnet. By adjusting the parameters of the model, the proportion of cells being in the same state can be varied, in ways that help explicate how ferromagnets become demagnetized when heated. Moreover, results from studying the demagnetization phase transition can be transferred to other phase transitions, like the evaporation of a liquid into a gas; this convenient cross-applicability is known as universality. The phase transition in the two-dimensional Ising model and other systems in its universality class has been of particular interest, as it requires conformal field theory to understand in depth.\nOther cellular automata that have been of significance in physics include lattice gas automata, which simulate fluid flows. In a series of works the so-called \"vicinal Cellular Automaton\" (vicCA) was proposed and further developed to model the possibly unstable growth and sublimation of vicinal crystal surfaces in 1+1D. Besides the attachment/detachment events being encoded in the rules of the CA, the adatoms on top of the vicinal form a thin layer, and their thermal motion is modeled by a Monte Carlo module. A decisive step further was the transition of the model to 2+1D, where a number of different structures were obtained, referred to by the authors as \"vicinal creatures\"\u2014step bunches, step meanders, nano-pillars, nanowires, etc. The vicCA model was extensively used by Alexey Redkov to develop a Machine Learning algorithm on top of it, significantly speeding up calculations by a factor of 105 while enabling systematic classification of the observed phenomena.\nComputer science, coding, and communication.\nCellular automaton processors are physical implementations of CA concepts, which can process information computationally. Processing elements are arranged in a regular grid of identical cells. The grid is usually a square tiling, or tessellation, of two or three dimensions; other tilings are possible, but not yet used. Cell states are determined only by interactions with adjacent neighbor cells. No means exists to communicate directly with cells farther away. One such cellular automaton processor array configuration is the systolic array. Cell interaction can be via electric charge, magnetism, vibration (phonons at quantum scales), or any other physically useful means. This can be done in several ways so that no wires are needed between any elements. This is very unlike processors used in most computers today (von Neumann designs) which are divided into sections with elements that can communicate with distant elements over wires.\nRule 30 was originally suggested as a possible block cipher for use in cryptography. Two-dimensional cellular automata can be used for constructing a pseudorandom number generator. Cellular automata have been proposed for public-key cryptography. The one-way function is the evolution of a finite CA whose inverse is believed to be hard to find. Given the rule, anyone can easily calculate future states, but it appears to be very difficult to calculate previous states. Cellular automata have also been applied to design error correction codes.\nOther problems that can be solved with cellular automata include:\nGenerative art and music.\nCellular automata have been used in generative music and evolutionary music composition and procedural terrain generation in video games.\nSpecific rules.\nSpecific cellular automata rules include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54343", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54343", "title": "Austrian euro coins", "text": "Designs of Austrian currency\nAustrian euro coins have a unique design for each denomination, with a common theme for each of the three series of coins. The minor coins feature Austrian flowers, the middle coins examples of architecture from Austria's capital, Vienna, and the two major coins famous Austrians. All designs are by the hand of Josef Kaiser and also include the 12 stars of the EU, Flag of Austria and the year of imprint.\nAustrian euro design.\nPrior to 2008, the old common side showing national borders was used, but from the 2008 coins use the new common side without borders. For images of the common side and a detailed description of the coins, see euro coins. Austria is the only country which uses the Latin alphabet and yet, repeats the denomination on the national side of the coins, thus not adhering to the rule.\nFrom 2017 (5 cent coins) and 2018 (2 and 1 cent coins) onwards, the design of the national side has been slightly altered, decreasing the thickness and increasing the amount of hatching representing the red fields of the Austrian flag.\nCirculating Mintage quantities.\nThe following table shows the mintage quantity for all Austrian euro coins, per denomination, per year.\nAustrian proof set.\nEach year the Austrian Mint issues a limited edition of its Euro coins in proof quality.\nOther commemorative coins (Collector's coins).\nAustria has a large collection of euro commemorative coins, mainly in silver and gold, but they also use other materials (like niobium for example). Their face value range from 5 euro to 100 euro. This is mainly done as a legacy of old national practice of minting gold and silver coins. These coins are not really intended to be used as means of payment, so generally they do not circulate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54346", "revid": "35575577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54346", "title": "Hamilton County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nHamilton County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 5,107, making it the least populous county in New York and its only county with fewer than 10,000 residents. With a land area nearly the size of Delaware, it is the least densely populated county east of the Mississippi River. Its county seat is Lake Pleasant. The county was created in 1816 and organized in 1847. The county is part of the North Country region of the state.\nHamilton County is one of only two counties that lie entirely within the Adirondack Park (Essex being the other). There are no permanent traffic lights in the county, and much of the county has no cell phone service.\nEtymology.\nThe county is named after Alexander Hamilton, the only member of the New York State delegation who signed the United States Constitution in 1787, and was later the first United States Secretary of the Treasury.\nHistory.\nOn April 12, 1816, Hamilton County was created by partitioning from Montgomery County, but due to low population it remained unorganized and administered by Montgomery County until it was recognized as sufficiently prepared for self-government on January 1, 1838. The organization process was completed by summer 1847.\nOn April 6, 1860, Fulton County, which had been partitioned April 18, 1838, had of land in Sacandaga Park transferred to Hamilton County. On May 24, 1915, land was swapped between Hamilton and Essex counties, with Hamilton ceding Fishing Brook Mountain for Indian Lake. Hamilton gained an additional , whereas Essex County lost . This left Hamilton with its present size of .\nThe former town of Gilman was dissolved in 1860. The original county seat was Sageville, now part of Lake Pleasant.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (5.0%) is water. It is New York's third-largest county by land area and fifth-largest by total area.\nHamilton County is in the state's north central section, northwest of Albany. It lies entirely within Adirondack Park and consists mostly of publicly owned parkland.\nThe county is very mountainous, broken up by rivers and lakes. The county is famous for its lakes. Indian Lake, and Long Lake are both famous for their long length, small width, and erratic shape, similar to the Finger Lakes. Other notable lakes include Piseco Lake, Lewey Lake, Raquette Lake, Sacandaga Lake, and Lake Pleasant. While notable mountains include: Snowy Mountain, Panther Mountain, and Buell Mountain.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, among the 5,107 residents the racial makeup of the county was 93.69% White, 0.61% Black or African American, 0.27% Native American, 0.23% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.43% from other races, and 4.74% from two or more races. 1.96% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. Additional demographics are based on older data. As of the census of 2000, there were 5,379 people, 2,362 households, and 1,558 families residing in the county. The population density was ; both the total population and population density rank lowest in the state of New York. There were 7,965 housing units at an average density of . 16.9% were of Irish, 15.7% German, 15.2% English, 10.9% French, 7.3% American and 5.7% Italian ancestry. 97.5% spoke English and 1.7% French as their first language.\nThere were 2,362 households, out of which 23.60% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.70% were married couples living together, 6.70% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.00% were non-families. 29.60% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.70% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.24 and the average family size was 2.74.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 19.70% under the age of 18, 5.20% from 18 to 24, 24.20% from 25 to 44, 30.90% from 45 to 64, and 20.00% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 45 years. For every 100 females there were 100.00 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.40 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $32,287, and the median income for a family was $39,676. Males had a median income of $29,177 versus $21,849 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,643. About 6.00% of families and 10.40% of the population were below the poverty line, including 10.50% of those under age 18 and 8.70% of those age 65 or over.\nResearch published in 2016 found that Hamilton County had by far the highest suicide rate in the state of New York; at 28 per 100,000 people. This meant that Hamilton County had a suicide rate more than double the national average and more than triple the state average of 13 and 8.4 per 100,000 people respectively. Though the report found instances of suicide to be significantly higher in Upstate generally, the rate in Hamilton County was disproportionate regardless of region; being 22.1, high though still significantly lower, in Lewis County, which was found to have the second highest rate in New York.\nGovernment and politics.\nHamilton County has long been one of the most consistently Republican counties in New York. Since Woodrow Wilson carried the county in 1916, the Republican candidate has lost only once, when Barry Goldwater in 1964 failed to win a single county in the state. The county was Goldwater's third strongest in the state however. In the 2008 U.S. presidential election, John McCain carried Hamilton County by a 26.9% margin over Barack Obama, with Obama winning statewide by a virtually equal margin over McCain; Republican nominee Mitt Romney won the county over President Obama in the 2012 election, too. Hamilton gave McCain the highest margin of victory in the state.\nIt was the only county won by Howard Mills over incumbent Chuck Schumer in the 2004 U.S. Senate election. It also voted for John Faso over Eliot Spitzer for governor in 2006, and for John Spencer 55.5%-42.1% over incumbent Hillary Clinton for the U.S. Senate in 2006, despite Faso and Spencer both losing in landslides statewide. It was one of only a handful of counties outside Western New York to have voted for Carl Paladino over eventual winner Andrew Cuomo for Governor in 2010.\nDemocrat Kirsten Gillibrand, however, won the county in her bid to be elected for a full term to the U.S. Senate in 2012.\nTransportation.\nAirports.\nThe following public use airports are located in the county:\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nSchool districts include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54347", "revid": "48998989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54347", "title": "Complement (set theory)", "text": "Set of the elements not in a given subset\nIn set theory, the complement of a set A, often denoted by formula_1 (or \"A\"\u2032), is the set of elements not in A.\nWhen all elements in the universe, i.e. all elements under consideration, are considered to be members of a given set U, the absolute complement of A is the set of elements in U that are not in A.\nThe relative complement of A with respect to a set B, also termed the set difference of B and A, written formula_2 is the set of elements in B that are not in A.\nAbsolute complement.\nDefinition.\nIf A is a set, then the absolute complement of A (or simply the complement of A) is the set of elements not in A (within a larger set that is implicitly defined). In other words, let U be a set that contains all the elements under study; if there is no need to mention U, either because it has been previously specified, or it is obvious and unique, then the absolute complement of A is the relative complement of A in U:\nformula_3\nThe absolute complement of A is usually denoted by formula_1. Other notations include formula_5 formula_6\nProperties.\nLet A and B be two sets in a universe U. The following identities capture important properties of absolute complements:\nDe Morgan's laws:\nComplement laws:\nInvolution or double complement law:\nRelationships between relative and absolute complements:\nRelationship with a set difference:\nThe first two complement laws above show that if \"A\" is a non-empty, proper subset of \"U\", then {\"A\", \"A\"\u2201} is a partition of \"U\".\nRelative complement.\nDefinition.\nIf \"A\" and \"B\" are sets, then the relative complement of \"A\" in \"B\", also termed the set difference of \"B\" and \"A\", is the set of elements in \"B\" but not in \"A\".\nThe relative complement of \"A\" in \"B\" is denoted formula_18 according to the ISO 31-11 standard. It is sometimes written formula_19 but this notation is ambiguous, as in some contexts (for example, Minkowski set operations in functional analysis) it can be interpreted as the set of all elements formula_20 where \"b\" is taken from \"B\" and \"a\" from \"A\".\nFormally:\nformula_21\nProperties.\nLet \"A\", \"B\", and \"C\" be three sets in a universe U. The following identities capture notable properties of relative complements:\n* formula_27\n* formula_28\n* formula_29\n*:with the important special case formula_30 demonstrating that intersection can be expressed using only the relative complement operation.\n* formula_31\n* formula_32\n* formula_33\n* formula_34\n* formula_35\n* formula_36\n* If formula_37, then formula_38.\n* formula_39 is equivalent to formula_40.\nComplementary relation.\nA binary relation formula_41 is defined as a subset of a product of sets formula_42 The complementary relation formula_43 is the set complement of formula_41 in formula_42 The complement of relation formula_41 can be written\nformula_47\nHere, formula_41 is often viewed as a logical matrix with rows representing the elements of formula_49 and columns elements of formula_50 The truth of formula_51 corresponds to 1 in row formula_52 column formula_53 Producing the complementary relation to formula_41 then corresponds to switching all 1s to 0s, and 0s to 1s for the logical matrix of the complement.\nTogether with composition of relations and converse relations, complementary relations and the algebra of sets are the elementary operations of the calculus of relations.\nLaTeX notation.\nIn the LaTeX typesetting language, the command codice_1 is usually used for rendering a set difference symbol, which is similar to a backslash symbol. When rendered, the codice_1 command looks identical to codice_3, except that it has a little more space in front and behind the slash, akin to the LaTeX sequence codice_4. A variant codice_5 is available in the amssymb package, but this symbol is not included separately in Unicode. The symbol formula_55 (as opposed to formula_56) is produced by codice_6. (It corresponds to the Unicode symbol .)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54349", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54349", "title": "Rhamnales", "text": "Order of plants\nThe Rhamnales are an order of dicotyledon plants in the subclass Rosidae. In the Cronquist system, the following families were placed here:\n\"Leea\" may be included within the Vitaceae. The Rhamnaceae are no longer considered close relatives of these other forms, and newer systems move them to the Rosales. The order then becomes the Vitales.\nUnder the APG III system of classification, Rhamnales is not recognized. Instead, the families previously included here under the Cronquist system are included under the following orders:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "54350", "revid": "1316814025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54350", "title": "Crestone, Colorado", "text": "Town in Colorado, US\nThe Town of Crestone is a statutory town in Saguache County, Colorado. According to the 2020 United States census, the town's population was 141. Crestone is located at the foot of the western slope of the Sangre de Cristo Range, in the northern part of the San Luis Valley. Crestone was platted in 1880 by George Adams, owner of the neighboring Luis Maria Baca Grant No. 4. In the 1970s, the Baca Grande land development was established on the lands of the Baca Grant to the south and west. Several hundred homes have been built there .\nThe Crestone area, which includes the Baca Grande and Moffat, Colorado, is a spiritual center for several religions, including a Hindu temple, a Zen center, several Tibetan Buddhist centers, and various New Age activities. Much of this spiritual development was catalyzed by the couple Hanne and Maurice Strong in the 1970s, who set out to make it an interfaith center.\nCrestone is named for the 14,000-foot peaks that lie just east of the town: Crestone Peak and Crestone Needle. The Crestones, as they are known collectively, in turn, took their name from the Spanish word https://, which, according to Walter Borneman and Lyndon Lampert's book \"A Climbing Guide to Colorado\u2019s Fourteeners\", means: \u201cthe top of a cock\u2019s comb\u201d; \u201cthe crest of a helmet\u201d; or, in miners\u2019 jargon, \u201can outcropping of ore\u201d.\nHistory.\nThe first settlement in the Crestone area occurred after the American Civil War with the granting of the Luis Maria Baca Grant No. 4 in 1860 to the heirs of the original Baca Grant at Las Vegas, New Mexico. Title to the grant at Las Vegas was clouded by a second grant of the same land to the residents of Las Vegas, the Bacas having abandoned their grant after the deaths of the founder to a Mexican soldier in 1827 and of his oldest son at the hands of the Navajo in 1835. The Baca heirs were offered alternative lands from the public lands of the United States. The square tract selected is on a side south of Saguache County Road T south of Crestone. The Bacas deeded the land to their attorney, but it soon passed by tax sale to a third party. The ranch headquarters were on Crestone Creek to the southwest of Crestone. The Baca Grant was one of the first large tracts of land to be fenced in the West and was the home of prize Hereford cattle.\nIn addition to ranching, there was some mining in the area to the east and south of Crestone of small shallow iron oxide copper gold ore deposits. In 1880, the town of Crestone was platted by George Adams, the owner of the Baca Grant. The Crestone, Colorado, post office opened on November 16, 1880. In 1900, with the help of Eastern investors, George Adams ignited a minor boom, reopening one of the more promising gold mines and building a railroad spur to the town and the mines along the Range south of town. The Town of Crestone was incorporated on January 24, 1902 Llacking good ore, the boom was short-lived. A long period of decline followed.\nBy 1948, Crestone had declined to its post-war population of 40, mostly retirees and cowboys who worked on the Grant, a nickname for the Baca Grant. Many of the old cabins were used as vacation homes. By 1971, the Baca Grant came into the ownership of a corporation that subdivided a portion of the Grant, creating the Baca Grande, a subdivision originally platted for about 10,000 lots. At great expense, underground utilities were installed, and roads were built. However, sales lagged and by 1979 the development was considered a liability by the corporation. Maurice Strong, owner of a controlling interest, and his fianc\u00e9e, Hanne Marstrand, visited the development and \"fell in love with it\". They were inspired to create a world spiritual center and began granting parcels of land to traditional spiritual organizations.\nThe population gradually began to increase and by 2006 several hundred homes had been built and small spiritual communities had become established. As the Baca Grande contained no provision for business uses, Crestone became the business center of the community and, having enacted a sales tax, was in a position to finance further improvements.\nGeography.\nCrestone is located near the 38th parallel, in the San Luis Valley in south-central Colorado. It is platted on a quarter section of land, or , on the alluvial fan of North Crestone Creek. Much of the land near the creek where the main part of the city sits, is well watered in normal times, but during a prolonged drought the creek may dry up and underground water levels may fall.\nAt the 2020 United States census, the town had a total area of , all of it land.\nAccess.\nSaguache County Road T is the main road into Crestone. It is a county road. It is \"T\" in a series of alphabetically named east\u2013west roads that begin at State Highway 112, the south boundary of Saguache County, which would be Road A, if it were not a state highway. Road T is a through road across the valley, crossing U.S. Highway 285 at Swede's Corners about 6 miles south of Saguache, Colorado but is paved only from Moffat, Colorado east 12.5 miles to Crestone, Colorado. The eastern portion of Road T forms the north boundary of the Baca National Wildlife Refuge.\nPublic lands.\nMountain terrain east of Crestone is managed by the Rio Grande National Forest including part of the Sangre de Cristo Wilderness. Public lands at the foot of the mountains including the forested public land surrounding Crestone are managed by the United States Bureau of Land Management. The combined office of the United States Forest Service and the BLM is in Saguache, Colorado, the county seat.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe following is derived from the US census and covers only the town itself, thus giving only a partial picture of the area. About half of the homes in Crestone itself are used only on a seasonal basis. The Crestone community is much larger, consisting also of several hundred homes in the Baca Grande subdivision, the surrounding rural area, and the small town of Moffat, Colorado. The Moffat School District No. 2 operates a public school in Moffat and the Crestone Charter School in Crestone.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 73 people, 45 households, and 18 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 79 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 95.9% White, 4.1% from other races. 1.4% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 45 households, out of which 8.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 28.9% were married couples living together, 4.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 60.0% don't fit into the above categories. 48.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 1.62 and the average family size was 2.22.\nIn the town, the population was spread out, with 8.2% under the age of 18, 4.1% from 18 to 24, 23.3% from 25 to 44, 45.2% from 45 to 64, and 19.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 52 years. For every 100 females there were 102.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 103.0 males.\nThe median income for a household in the town was $31,250, and the median income for a family was $40,000. Males had a median income of $22,813 versus $27,917 for females. The per capita income for the town was $22,291. There were 18.8% of families and 19.7% of the population living below the poverty line, including no under eighteens and none of those over 64.\nSpiritual and intellectual centers.\nCrestone has become internationally known as a locus for a diverse range of religious and spiritual traditions. Accommodating of spiritual pilgrims and eco-tourists is the major industry in Crestone. The town's development as a spiritual and intellectual center was initiated by Maurice Strong, a multimillionaire businessman and United Nations Undersecretary, and his wife, Hanne Marstrand Strong. Using land acquired from the corporations Strong controlled, they established the Manitou Foundation and Manitou Institute. According to its website, the institute \"provides grants and some financial support in Crestone/Baca, Colorado to qualified religious and spiritual projects.\" The foundation granted land in the area to several spiritual and intellectual centers.\nCrestone is one of only a handful of places in the United States where open-air funeral pyres are legally permitted. Since 1998, over 75 individuals have been cremated on an open-air pyre in Crestone.\nSpiritual centers in Crestone:\nIntellectual and spiritual centers of historical interest:\nVolunteer and community services.\nEmergency services for the town of Crestone and the Baca Grande are provided by the Crestone Volunteer Fire Dept. and the Baca-Crestone Ambulance Service.\nThe http:// provides open-air cremation and end of life support. CEOLP is a non-denominational community-based group promoting informed end-of-life choices and supporting their fulfillment. Cost is modest but is available only to the 1,000 or so people who live in the local community.\nFairs and markets.\nThe Annual Crestone Energy Fair is held in Crestone's town parks annually each fall. The fair features presentations, panels, building demonstrations and activities that focus on innovative, sustainable and regenerative ideas in construction, lifestyle &amp; community. There are also vendor booths offering food and local products. Crestone hosts an annual Artists Open Studio Tour during the first weekend in October, allowing for visits to the many artist's studios in the area. Food and local products are offered regularly at the Saturday Market which happens in the middle of town in Little Pearl Park every Saturday during the summer. Crestone has a free box which is enthusiastically supported by the community.\nWildlife.\nCrestone has historically been a deer park; Mule deer are commonly seen grazing in yards in town. Black bears are common, but usually only at night when they raid garbage cans, dumpsters and other areas where people leave food accessible to them. Bears in this town have been known to break into cars and even peoples homes when windows are left open. In 2011 a bear with two cubs was frequently seen during the day. This bear, which was generally well-behaved other than raiding trash, was killed by the Colorado Department of Natural Resources following a bear attack on a tethered goat. Local sympathizers complained bitterly the wrong bear had been killed, receiving extensive coverage through Channel 9 in Denver which was distributed nationally by the Associated Press, prompting an investigation of the incident by the Division of Parks and Wildlife and possible re-evaluation of management of bears in mixed rural-urban communities such as Crestone. An internal investigation by the Division of Parks and Wildlife came to the conclusion that the right bear had been shot.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54351", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54351", "title": "Jay Miner", "text": "American electrical engineer\nJay Glenn Miner (May 31, 1932\u00a0\u2013 June 20, 1994) was an American integrated circuit designer, known primarily for developing graphics and audio chips for the Atari 2600 and Atari 8-bit computers and as the \"father of the Amiga\".\nEarly life.\nJay Miner received his first formal electronics education after joining the U.S. Coast Guard out of high school. Following his service he became a radio operator for the North Atlantic Weather Patrol who serviced meteorological duties on distant islands for three years. He returned to school to enroll in the University of California at Berkeley, for which he received a BS in EECS in 1958, focusing on electronics design.\nCareer.\nMiner first became a chip designer when he joined General Microelectronics in 1964, playing a role in the design of the first calculator to use the MOS ICs, the Victor 3900. He then worked at the companies Standard MicroSystems and American Micro Systems, at the latter of which he contributed to the design of the MP944 microprocessor. Subsequently he co-founded Synertek in 1973, where he served as the company's primary chip designer. One of the company's earliest contracts would be creating CMOS chips for the Bulova Watch Company, but they quickly became a second source manufacturer for chips designed by other firms such as Intel, Rockwell, and MOS Technology.\nAtari.\nDue to its manufacturing of the MOS Technology 65xx series of chips, Synertek was recommended as a partner to Atari, Inc. after it had been decided to use the MOS 6507 for their upcoming Atari VCS home video game console. One of Atari's engineers, Harold Lee, had worked with Miner at Standard MicroSystems and suggested him as the designer for a custom chip which would power Atari's new console. Through an arrangement with Synertek, Atari hired Miner in late 1975 to lead the chip design for the Atari VCS, primarily that of the display hardware, the TIA.\nMiner was also the designer on the follow-up technology intended for a successor console to the Atari VCS. The ANTIC and CTIA were created with enhanced capabilities compared to the TIA but the project was altered from a video game console into what would become the Atari 8-bit computers. Due to clashes with management over this and other decisions, Miner left Atari before the release of the computers and found his way into the medical world. He worked for a company called Zymos Corporation and received two patents for a microprocessor-driven pacemaker made into a product by the company Intermedics Inc. called Cosmos.\nAmiga.\nIn 1979, Miner was approached by David Morse, vice president from Tonka Toys, about starting a new company to create video game hardware without the oversight of a large corporation. Jay Miner agreed to take control of engineering on two conditions: that the design be a computer, and that it be a 16/32-bit system built around the Motorola 68000 CPU. They would become two of the co-founders of the company Hi-Toro. In 1979 the soon-to-be-called Amiga was called the Lorraine. In 1980 with the hardware in hand suddenly became the sole focus of Hi-Toro which was eventually renamed Amiga Corporation. Soon, the company suffered financial difficulties which led it first into a temporary deal with Atari, Inc. and then acquisition by Commodore International. \nMiner continued to work for Amiga Corporation as a subsidiary of Commodore. Jay still owned Amiga, because of the patents/IP, but once again grew frustrated with the management style of the company. His frustrations largely revolved around what he said was Commodore marketing executives' failure to penetrate the Amiga into the low-cost computer market. He still owned the majority of Amiga.\nMiner's last electronics job was at the company Ventritex, operating medical instrumentation and designing chips which controlled a cardiac defibrillator.\nPersonal life.\nMiner married his wife Carolina (n\u00e9e Poplowski) in 1951 while attending an electronics school in Groton, Connecticut. His dog Mitchy, a cockapoo, accompanied him everywhere. While he worked at Atari, Mitchy even had her own employee ID badge with number 000, and an embossing of her paw print is inside the Amiga 1000 top cover, alongside staff signatures.\nMiner's personal hobbies included cultivating bonsai trees, square dancing, and camping. He was a particular fan of flight simulators on computers, having been significantly inspired to design Amiga as an excellent flight simulator. He said at one time his favorite Amiga program was the game \"F/A-18 Interceptor\" published by Electronic Arts in 1988.\nHe endured kidney problems for most of his life, according to his wife, and relied on dialysis. His sister, Joyce Beers, donated a kidney to him in 1990. He died due to complications from kidney failure at the age of 62.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54352", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54352", "title": "Dilleniales", "text": "Order of flowering plants\nThe Dilleniales are an order of flowering plants, potentially containing one family, Dilleniaceae. The APG III system of 2009, like the earlier APG II system of 2003, left the Dilleniaceae unplaced as to order, while noting that the name Dilleniales was available. Stevens at the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website has subsequently placed Dilleniaceae in the order Dilleniales.\nThe Cronquist system, of 1981, recognized such an order and placed it in subclass Dilleniidae. It used the following circumscription:\nThe Takhtajan system of 1969 had the families Dilleniaceae and Crossosomataceae in the order.\nThe APG III system assigned the second of these families, the Paeoniaceae, to the order Saxifragales.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54353", "revid": "186336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54353", "title": "Kalamazoo, Michigan", "text": "City in the United States\nKalamazoo () is a city in Kalamazoo County, Michigan, United States, and its county seat. At the 2020 census, Kalamazoo had a population of 73,598. It is the principal city of the Kalamazoo\u2013Portage metropolitan area in southwestern Michigan, which had a population of 261,670 in 2020.\nOne of Kalamazoo's most notable features is the Kalamazoo Mall, an outdoor pedestrian shopping mall. The city created the mall in 1959 by closing part of Burdick Street to automobile traffic, although two of the mall's four blocks have been reopened to auto traffic since 1999. Kalamazoo is home to Western Michigan University, a large public university, Kalamazoo College, a private liberal arts college, and Kalamazoo Valley Community College, a two-year community college.\nName origin.\nOriginally known as Bronson (after founder Titus Bronson) in the township of Arcadia, the names of both the city and the township were changed to \"Kalamazoo\" in 1836 and 1837, respectively. The name \"Kalamazoo\" comes from a Potawatomi word, first found in a British report in 1772. The Kalamazoo River, which passes through the modern city of Kalamazoo, was located on the route between Detroit and Fort Saint Joseph (nowadays Niles, Michigan). French-Canadian traders, missionaries, and military personnel were quite familiar with this area during the French era and thereafter. The Kalamazoo River was then known by Canadians and French as \"La rivi\u00e8re Kikanamaso\". The name \"Kikanamaso\" was also recorded by Father Pierre Potier, a Jesuit missionary for the Huron-Wendats at the Assumption mission (south shore of Detroit), while en route to Fort Saint Joseph during the fall of 1760. Legend has it that \"Ki-ka-ma-sung\", meaning \"boiling water\", referred to a footrace held each fall by local Native Americans, in which participants had to run to the river and back before a pot boiled. The word \"negikanamazo\", purported to mean \"otter tail\" or \"stones like otters\", has also been cited as a possible origin of the name. Another theory is that it means \"the mirage or reflecting river\". Another legend is that the image of \"boiling water\" referred to fog on the river as seen from the hills above the current downtown. The name was also given to the river that flows almost all the way across the state.\nThe name Kalamazoo, which sounds unusual to English speakers, has become a metonym for exotic places, as in the phrase \"from Timbuktu to Kalamazoo\". Today, T-shirts are sold in Kalamazoo with the phrase \"Yes, there really is a Kalamazoo\". For many years, this was even adopted as the city's main slogan.\nHistory.\nThe area on which the modern city of Kalamazoo stands was once home to Native Americans of the Hopewell tradition, who migrated into the area sometime before the first millennium. Evidence of their early residence remains in the form of a small mound in downtown's Bronson Park. The Hopewell civilization began to decline after the eighth century, and was replaced by other groups. The Potawatomi culture lived in the area when the first European explorers arrived.\nRen\u00e9-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, passed just southeast of the present city of Kalamazoo in late March 1680. The first Europeans to reside in the area were itinerant fur traders in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. Records exist of several traders wintering in the area, and by the 1820s, at least one trading post had been established.\nDuring the War of 1812, the British established a smithy and a prison camp in the area.\nThe 1821 Treaty of Chicago ceded the territory south of the Grand River to the United States federal government, but the area around present-day Kalamazoo was reserved as the village of Potawatomi Chief Match-E-Be-Nash-She-Wish. Six years later, as a result of the 1827 Treaty of St. Joseph, the tract that became the city of Kalamazoo was also ceded.\nIn 1829, Titus Bronson, originally from Connecticut, became the first white settler to build a cabin within the present city limits of Kalamazoo. He platted the town in 1831 and named it the village of Bronson\u2014not to be confused with the much smaller Bronson, Michigan, about to the south-southeast of Kalamazoo.\nBronson, frequently described as \"eccentric\" and argumentative, was later run out of town. The village was renamed Kalamazoo in 1836, due in part to Bronson's being fined for stealing a cherry tree. Today, a hospital and a downtown park, among other things, are named for Bronson. Kalamazoo was legally incorporated as a village in 1838 and as a city in 1883.\nThe fertile farmlands attracted prosperous Yankee farmers who settled the surrounding area, and sent their sons to Kalamazoo to become businessmen, professionals, and entrepreneurs who started numerous factories. Most of the original settlers of Kalamazoo were New Englanders or from upstate New York.\nOn August 27, 1856, Abraham Lincoln gave a speech in Kalamazoo during a campaign rally for John C. Fremont, the first Republican presidential candidate. The https:// was found by Lincoln historian Thomas I. Starr in a copy of the \"Detroit Daily Advertiser\" and published in a booklet. This was the only trip Lincoln ever made to Michigan. In July 2022, a local nonprofit, the https://, was given permission by the city to place a statue of Lincoln in Bronson Park to commemorate the event.\nIn the 1940s, the city became the first to install curb cuts.\nIn 1959, the city created the Kalamazoo Mall, the first outdoor pedestrian shopping mall in the United States, by closing part of Burdick Street to auto traffic. The mall was designed by Victor Gruen, who also designed the country's first enclosed shopping mall, which had opened three years earlier. Two of the mall's four blocks were reopened to auto traffic in 1999 after much debate.\nAn F3 tornado struck downtown Kalamazoo on May 13, 1980, killing five and injuring 79.\nOn February 20, 2016, Kalamazoo became the site of a random series of shootings in which six people were killed. A prime suspect was apprehended by police without incident.\nEconomic history.\nIn the past, Kalamazoo was known for its production of windmills, mandolins, buggies, automobiles, cigars, stoves, and paper and paper products. Agriculturally, it once was noted for celery. Although much of it has become suburbanized, the surrounding area still produces farm crops, primarily corn and soybeans. Many landmarks and hiking trails are still based around the past celery industry.\nKalamazoo was the original home of Gibson Guitar Corporation, which spawned the still-local Heritage Guitars. The company was incorporated as \"Gibson Mandolin - Guitar Co., Ltd\" on October 11, 1902, by craftsman Orville Gibson. One budget model was named the Gibson Kalamazoo \"Melody Maker\" Electric Guitar. Operations were moved gradually from Kalamazoo to Memphis, Tennessee (Electric Division) and Bozeman, Montana (Acoustic Division) in the 1980s. Some workers from the original factory stayed in Kalamazoo to create the Heritage Guitars company.\nKalamazoo was once known as the \"Paper City\" because of the paper mills in and near the city. The Allied Paper Corporation operated several mills and employed 1,300 people in Kalamazoo during the late 1960s. As the forests of West Michigan were logged, paper mills closed.\nEarly in the 20th century, Kalamazoo was home to the Brass Era car company Barley.\nKalamazoo was also headquarters of the Checker Motors Company, the former manufacturer of the Checker Cab, which also stamped sheet-metal parts for other auto manufacturers. Checker closed on June 25, 2009, a victim of the Late-2000s recession.\nGeography.\nMost of Kalamazoo is on the southwest bank of a major bend in the Kalamazoo River, with a small portion, about , on the opposite bank. Several small tributaries of the Kalamazoo River, including Arcadia Creek and Portage Creek, wind through the city. The northeastern portion of Kalamazoo sits in the broad, flat Kalamazoo Valley, while the western portions of Kalamazoo climb into low hills to the west and south. Several small lakes are found throughout the area. It is halfway between Detroit and Chicago along I-94. In addition, it is south of Grand Rapids and southwest of Lansing.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, Kalamazoo has a total area of , of which is covered by water.\nKalamazoo's suburban population is located primarily to the south, in the city of Portage, and to the west in Oshtemo and Texas townships.\nAt least part of the municipal water supply for Kalamazoo is provided by the watershed contained within the Al Sabo Preserve in Texas Charter Township, Michigan, immediately southwest of Kalamazoo.\nAnother watershed, Kleinstuck Marsh, is popular with hikers and birdwatchers. Kleinstuck Marsh is south of Maple Street, between Oakland Drive and Westnedge Avenue, Kalamazoo's major north\u2013south artery.\nClimate.\nKalamazoo has a humid continental (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfa\") climate. Summers can be hot, humid, and relatively long, from May to September. Tornadoes are rare but possible in Kalamazoo. In fact, in 1980, a major tornado ripped through downtown Kalamazoo, causing extensive damage. In winter, temperatures occasionally plummet below 0\u00a0\u00b0F (-18\u00b0). Kalamazoo has been known for brutal snowstorms as late as early April, but some winter days have no snow on the ground at all. Lake-effect snowstorms are commonplace in the winter.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2000, the median income for a household in the city was $31,189, and the median income for a family was $42,438. Males had a median income of $32,160 versus $25,532 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,897. About 13.6% of families and 24.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 26.0% of those under age 18 and 11.3% of those age 65 or over.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 74,262 people, 29,141 households, and 13,453 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 32,433 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 68.1% White, 22.2% African American, 0.5% Native American, 1.7% Asian, 2.8% from other races, and 4.6% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino residents of any race were 6.4% of the population.\nThere were 29,141 households, of which 25.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 26.1% were married couples living together, 15.6% had a female householder with no husband present, 4.5% had a male householder with no wife present, and 53.8% were non-families. 36.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.29 and the average family size was 3.04.\nThe median age in the city was 26.2 years. 20.5% of residents were under the age of 18; 27% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 24.9% were from 25 to 44; 18.2% were from 45 to 64; and 9.4% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 49.3% male and 50.7% female.\nNeighborhoods.\nThe city of Kalamazoo is commonly divided into 22 neighborhoods, many of which are served by a neighborhood association. The Neighborhood Development Division of the city's government works with these associations to invest federal, state, and local funds, including those from the Community Development Block Grant program, in community improvements and economic growth.\nEconomy.\nIn 2007, Kalamazoo was named to Fast Company's 'Fast 50: Most Innovative Companies 2007', in recognition of the city's community capitalism approach to revitalize the economy. In 2012 Kiplinger's Personal Finance ranked Kalamazoo fourth of the \"Ten Best Cities for Cheapskates\". The city was named in NerdWallet.com's 2014 'Top 10 Best Cities for Work-Life Balance'.\nBreweries.\nKalamazoo has many local breweries and brewpubs that produce a variety of beer styles.\nPerhaps the best-known is Bell's Brewery, established as the Kalamazoo Brewing Company in 1985 by Larry Bell. The brewery has expanded from its original Kalamazoo location, which houses the Eccentric Cafe, to another brewery in nearby Comstock Charter Township. Bell's beer is distributed to 40 US states, Washington DC and Puerto Rico. Other local breweries include Tibb's Brewing Company, Rupert's Brewhouse (2013-2019), Boatyard Brewing Co. (2014-2019), One Well Brewing, and Latitude 42 Brewing Company, the latter in the southern suburb of Portage. On a smaller scale, Olde Peninsula Brewpub, Bravo! restaurant, and Bilbo's Pizza and Brewing Company serve their own brews. The area is also a hotbed for home brewing and partners with neighboring Grand Rapids to form what is widely considered one of America's more important regions in American craft beer explosion. In recent years, at least two community events have evolved from the growing craft beer industry in the Kalamazoo area (Kalamazoo Beer Week (annual), Kalamazoo Craft Beer Festival). In 2015, the Give a Craft beer trail and passport were introduced. A shuttle bus (\"Kalamazoo Brew Bus\") service and party bike tour service became available in 2016.\nDistilleries.\nIn 2015, Rupert's Brew House entered the Kalamazoo craft spirits market. Two additional distilleries, Green Door Distilling, formerly Revival Distilling and Kalamazoo Distilling Company, are in the licensing stage.\nFlavorings.\nThe A.M. Todd Company, one of the lead producers of peppermint oil and other flavorings, is headquartered in Kalamazoo. Its founder, Albert M. Todd, was elected to the United States House of Representatives for the 55th Congress.\nKalamazoo is also home to Kalsec, another flavorings company, which was founded by Paul H. Todd Jr., Albert Todd's grandson and U.S. Representative in the 89th Congress. Founded as the Kalamazoo Spice Extraction Company, Kalsec is owned and managed by Todd family descendants.\nManufacturing.\nStryker Corporation is Kalamazoo-based and makes medical equipment.\nKalamazoo Outdoor Gourmet designs and manufactures outdoor kitchen equipment.\nFabri-Kal, a supplier of food service and other containers produced from thermoform plastic or plant-based materials (Greenware product line), has operated corporate headquarters in Kalamazoo since the 1960s. The company closed the Kalamazoo-based manufacturing facilities in 1991, but returned and expanded manufacturing capacity in 2008 with the opening of a LEED-certified facility. In recent years, the company's product lines have introduced sustainable and plant-based materials, and innovations to reduce the plastic content of consumer and other packaging.\nParker Hannifin Aerospace's Hydraulic Systems Division (HSD) is located at 2220 Palmer Ave in Kalamazoo, Michigan. The 170,000-square foot facility designs, manufactures, and services hydraulic components for both military and commercial aerospace sectors. It produces hydraulic axial piston pumps and motors, electric motor-driven pumps, hydraulic power transfer/supply units, electrohydraulic power modules, hydraulic thrust-reverser &amp; landing gear actuators, accumulators, reservoirs, filter modules and valve packs.\nLife sciences.\nThe Upjohn Company was a pharmaceutical research and manufacturing firm founded in 1886 in Kalamazoo; through a series of mergers and acquisitions that took place between 1995 and 2003, the Upjohn Company assets became a part of the Pfizer Corporation. Most of Upjohn's original facilities remain, many have been renovated and some new buildings have been constructed. The bulk of the former Upjohn Company facilities in the area exist in Portage, under Pfizer or Zoetis operation; others, located in downtown Kalamazoo, have been re-purposed as the campus of the Western Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine, the research and development headquarters of Zoetis, and office space for Bronson Methodist Hospital.\nWestern Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine (WMed) is a collaboration involving Western Michigan University and Kalamazoo's two teaching hospitals, https:// and Bronson Methodist. The new medical school has been in planning since 2008, and was granted Preliminary Accreditation from the Liaison Committee on Medical Education in October 2012. Welcoming its first class in August 2014, the school is a private 501(c)(3) nonprofit corporation supported by private gifts, clinical revenue, research activity, student tuition, and endowment income. In March 2011, Western Michigan University received a gift of $100 million for the medical school from anonymous donors.\nThe global Research and Development organization of Zoetis, the world's largest producer of medicine and vaccinations for pets and livestock, is headquartered in downtown Kalamazoo.\nThe city is also home to the Stryker Corporation, a surgical and medical devices manufacturer.\nKalamazoo hospitals include: Kalamazoo Regional Psychiatric Hospital, Bronson Methodist Hospital, and Ascension Borgess Hospital.\nIndustrial design.\nIn 2014, Newell Rubbermaid established a global product design center in Kalamazoo, consolidating fifteen global design units at a single location within the Western Michigan University Business Technology and Research Park. The Business Technology and Research Park is also home to design firm TEKNA Solutions. In 2015, Kalamazoo-based landscape design and manufacturing firm Landscape Forms, Inc., received five National Design Awards.\nResearch and economic development.\nThe W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, a nonpartisan, not-for-profit research organization, has operated in Kalamazoo since its establishment in 1945. The institute conducts research into the causes and effects of unemployment, and measures for the alleviation of unemployment. The institute also publishes \"Business Outlook for West Michigan\", a quarterly journal that provides economic analysis and forecasts on the West Michigan economy.\nThe economic development organization Southwest Michigan First was established in Kalamazoo in 1999, with a focus on community capitalism. The organization was recognized as a Best and Brightest Company to Work For in 2013, and has received Fast Company commendations for innovative strategies to improve the economy. In 2015, two members of Southwest Michigan First were selected for Development Counsellors International's \"2015 40 under 40,\" top 40 young economic developers in the United States.\nBusinesses.\nOther notable Kalamazoo businesses include:\nGovernment.\nKalamazoo government is administered under a commission-manager style of government. The city commission is the representative body of the city, and consists of seven members\u2014six city commissioners and a separately elected mayor\u2014elected on a staggered non-partisan basis every four years. Whoever receives the most votes during an election becomes vice mayor of the city for the first two years of their term until a new vice mayor is selected. The current City Commission consists of Mayor David Anderson, Vice Mayor Don Cooney, and commissioners Jeanne Hess, Chris Praedel, Qianna Decker, Stephanie Hoffman, and Esteven Juarez. The current mayor, David F. Anderson, was elected to a second term on November 2, 2021, beating Ben Stanley with 78.7% of the vote.\nThe vice mayor of Kalamazoo is Don Cooney, who won election in 2021 with 69.37% of the vote.\nThe city manager is the city's chief administrative officer. The manager is hired by, and answers to, the city commission.\nCrime.\nKalamazoo has a higher crime rate than the national average. Crime is spread throughout Kalamazoo and is especially high in the inner neighborhoods such as Edison, the Northside and Vine. Crime is lower in the downtown area and most of the southwest area. The aggravated assault rate in 2015 was 793.3 per 100,000\u20143.3 times the national average. The murder rate was 12.5 per 100,000 in 2010 and 7.9 in 2014. The 2016 Kalamazoo shootings by Uber driver Jason Dalton claimed 6 lives and caused 2 serious injuries in Kalamazoo County. Between 2008 and 2013 firearms were involved in 61% of homicides in Kalamazoo county compared to 77% statewide.\nEducation.\nKalamazoo is home to Western Michigan University. The college has four campuses in Kalamazoo, (West Campus, East Campus, Parkview Campus and Oakland Drive Campus) as well as several regional locations throughout Michigan and two in Florida. West Campus, located just west of downtown, has the largest concentration of university students, programs and school services. In 2005, Western Michigan ranked as the no. 2 wireless campus in the United States, per a national survey done by the Intel Corporation. In 2014, the WMU Homer Stryker School of Medicine (WMed) opened, welcoming an inaugural class of 54 students.\nEach May, WMU hosts the International Congress on Medieval Studies. Organized by the Medieval Institute's faculty and graduate students, the Congress brings some 3,000 professors and students from around the globe to present and discuss a variety of topics related to the Middle Ages.\nKalamazoo College, a private liberal arts college founded in 1833, is located on a hill opposite WMU's original campus.\nKalamazoo is home to Kalamazoo Valley Community College, Davenport University, and Kalamazoo Area Mathematics and Science Center (KAMSC). Construction of the new Kalamazoo Valley Community College Culinary and Allied Health campus began in August 2014. It had also been the home of Nazareth College, which closed in 1992.\nK-12 education.\nThe public schools for the vast majority of Kalamazoo are managed by Kalamazoo Public Schools. Every resident graduate of the Kalamazoo Public Schools is provided with a scholarship for up to 100% of tuition and mandatory fee costs for four years at any public university or community college in Michigan, starting with the class of 2006. This program is known as the Kalamazoo Promise.\nSmall sections of Kalamazoo are in other school districts: Parchment School District, Comstock Public Schools and Portage Public Schools.\nCulture.\nThe city has an Arts Council. On the first Friday of each month, the council organizes the 'Art Hop'. Art Hop is a free event, during which downtown businesses and galleries display works by local artists, and patrons 'hop' from venue to venue, enjoying art, live music, and the chance to interact with local artists. A popular site during Art Hop is the Park Trades Center, which houses the Kalamazoo Book Arts Center, Glass Art Kalamazoo, and many other studios.\nOn New Year's Eve, downtown Kalamazoo is the site of an annual New Year's Fest celebration. This celebration is centered at Bronson Park and surrounding venues, allowing patrons to walk from venue to venue to enjoy an all ages showcase of performing arts and other activities (music, magic, comedy, exhibitions, fireworks, food). Initiated in 1985, the event has grown in scope and popularity.\nMusic groups and other performing artists perform at the downtown State Theatre, Western Michigan University's Miller Auditorium, and Wings Event Center.\nThe annual \"Eccentric Day\" at Bell's Eccentric Cafe celebrates the brewery's Eccentric Ale on the December Friday that marks the end of finals at Western Michigan University.\nThe Moped Army was founded in Kalamazoo in 1997.\nThere is no longer a zoo in Kalamazoo. The Milham Park Zoo closed in 1974.\nNext to Milham Park is the Milham Park Golf Course. Completed in 1936, the 18-hole, par-72 course is entirely within the city limits of Kalamazoo. During winter, sledding and cross-country skiing are popular activities at the golf course (free of charge). In recent years, the Kalamazoo Nordic Skiers club has groomed and maintained skate ski and classic ski trails for community use.\nIn 2002, the Kalamazoo Public Library was named \"Library of the Year\" by \"Library Journal\". The library includes a main location and four branch libraries, and until 2010, a bookmobile system. In 2014, the library opened 'The Hub', a digital lab open to the public for digitizing photos and video, producing podcasts, preserving old vinyl records, cassettes and VHS tapes, and other services.\nKalamazoo's theaters and performing groups include the Kalamazoo Civic Theatre, The New Vic Theatre, Farmers Alley Theatre, Crawlspace Theatre Productions, The State Theater, and the Barn Theatre in nearby Augusta. Plays and musicals are also performed at Kalamazoo College and Western Michigan University.\nAnimation festival.\nA project of Kalamazoo Valley Community College, The Kalamazoo Animation Festival International (KAFI) encourages and educates animation artists, promotes Kalamazoo's animation industry, and provides community entertainment. In addition to a biannual festival, KAFI sponsors events such as film screenings and workshops throughout the year.\nKAFI's first festival drew 235 submissions and nearly 1,000 attendees in 2002. A second festival was held in 2003. Since then, an every-other-year schedule has been adopted. The 2007 festival attracted more than 500 entries from 37 countries. In addition to an animated film competition with $15,000 in prizes awarded, the festival features events for students, artists, educators, filmmakers and the general public. Past KAFI award winners include Bill Plympton, Chris Landreth and John Canemaker.\nMuseums.\nThe city's most prominent art museum is the Kalamazoo Institute of Arts, whose collection has more than 3,600 works and a focus on 20th-century American art. The KIA regularly mounts temporary exhibitions.\nThe Kalamazoo Valley Museum, established in 1881, is an American Association of Museums accredited museum operated by Kalamazoo Valley Community College. The museum features \"hands-on\" exhibits aimed largely at children, and has a planetarium and a Challenger Learning Center.\nNortheast of town, in Hickory Corners, is the Gilmore Car Museum, which includes cars used in Walt Disney movies.\nThe Kalamazoo Air Zoo, just south of town, in Portage has several dozen aircraft on display, from biplanes to jets.\nMusic.\nThe Gibson Guitar Corporation, founded in Kalamazoo in 1902, spurred local musicians to play a wide variety of styles, from classical and folk to modern rock (the company relocated to Nashville in 1984). The Kalamazoo Symphony Orchestra, founded in 1921, is directed by Raymond Harvey. The city also hosts the Irving S. Gilmore International Keyboard Festival, a Bach Festival, the Michigan Festival of Sacred Music, and the Stulberg International String Competition.\nThe local and indie music scene has produced pop stars such as RCA recording artists The Verve Pipe and Metal Blade recording artists Thought Industry. Kalamazoo is also host to the Kalamashoegazer music festival, held for the last 13 years and a showcase for both local and national shoegaze and dream pop bands.\nSports.\nKalamazoo plays host to three non-collegiate teams:\nThe Western Michigan University Broncos, who compete in the NCAA Division I Mid-American Conference, play at the following on-campus venues:\nHyames Field played host to the first two College World Series held in 1947 and 1948. Future U. S. President George H. W. Bush was a first baseman for Yale in the 1947 series.\nThe Kalamazoo College Hornets and Kalamazoo Valley Community College Cougars also have several collegiate athletic teams.\nKalamazoo is the hometown of former New York Yankees shortstop Derek Jeter, former NFL wide receiver Greg Jennings, former NFL running back T. J. Duckett, the world's number one prize money winning pro bass fisherman Kevin VanDam, former MLB pitcher Scott Olsen, former NHL player Adam Hall and former Chicago White Sox first baseman Mike Squires. Kalamazoo was also the hometown of longtime Detroit Tigers owner John Fetzer, who owned the American League team from 1961 through 1984, when he sold the franchise to Domino's Pizza founder Tom Monaghan.\nThe United States Tennis Association Boys 18 and 16 National Tennis Championships are hosted every summer by Kalamazoo College. The event has featured such players as Jimmy Connors, John McEnroe, Jim Courier, Andre Agassi, Pete Sampras, Michael Chang, James Blake and Andy Roddick, before they turned professional.\nThe Kalamazoo Rugby Football Club, founded in 1988, competes in the Michigan Rugby Football Union.\nSince 2006, Wings Event Center has been the home of the Kalamazoo Derby Darlins roller derby league teams. Following up on successful events in 2010 and 2015, Wings Event Center and the Kalamazoo Curling Club will host the 2019 U.S. National Curling Championship.\nThe annual Kalamazoo Marathon, a USA Track &amp; Field-certified and Boston Marathon-qualifying event, is part of a weekend of running and walking events.\nIn 1984\u20131986, the Kalamazoo Kangaroos, a Major Indoor Soccer League (MISL) team, played in Kalamazoo.\nIn 2022-2023 The Kalamazoo Galaxy, a basketball team in The Basketball League (TBL) played at Wings Event Center.\nMedia.\nNewspapers.\nKalamazoo is served by one daily newspaper, the \"Kalamazoo Gazette\", which now prints seven and delivers two editions weekly. \"Business Review Western Michigan\", a business-to-business publication headquartered in Kalamazoo, covering Western Michigan news, was rolled into MLive online coverage in late 2012. The ultimate parent company of both the \"Gazette\" and \"Business Review\" are Advance Publications, Inc.\nTelevision.\nWWMT, West Michigan's CBS affiliate, is licensed and operates out of Kalamazoo, but serves the entire West Michigan region. The station was originally owned and operated by famous broadcasting pioneer (and former Detroit Tigers owner) John Fetzer, as \"WKZO-TV\". Along with television, Fetzer introduced Kalamazoo to radio in 1931, when AM 590 WKZO signed on the air. Fetzer also created Kalamazoo's first cable television system, then known as Fetzer Cablevision; it is a predecessor of Kalamazoo's current cable franchise, Charter Communications.\nPublic Media Network, located in downtown Kalamazoo, hosts media outlets, including Charter cable channels 187-191 where daily public access programs are produced and aired to the public.\nKalamazoo is part of the , which also includes Grand Rapids and Battle Creek. Most channels that serve the entire market are receivable in Kalamazoo, including WWMT, WOOD-TV (NBC), WXMI (Fox), WZPX (Ion) and WLLA (religious). Some channels based in the northern part of the market reach Kalamazoo through a satellite or translator, such as WTLJ Muskegon (religious, through W26BX), WGVU-TV Grand Rapids (PBS, through WGVK), and WXSP-CD Grand Rapids (MyNetworkTV, through WOKZ-CA). WOTV in Battle Creek broadcasts ABC and CW programming for the southern part of the market, including Kalamazoo. Charter offers all West Michigan channels on its system to Kalamazoo subscribers, including WZZM, the ABC affiliate for Grand Rapids and the northern part of the market.\nRadio.\nWIDR is the college student-run, commercial-free radio station at Western Michigan University. It is known for playing obscure and underground music of all genres, and some local news and talk. Broadcasting 100 watts on 89.1 FM, WIDR can be heard from about a 20-mile radius from campus.\nWMUK is also on Western Michigan University's campus. It hosts many local music programs, including jazz and classical performances, as well as programming from NPR. WMUK broadcasts at 50,000 watts in high definition on 102.1 FM.\nWKDS is West Michigan's only high-school student-run radio station. The station signed on in 1983 at 89.9 on the FM dial, broadcasting from Loy Norrix High School. The call letters stood for Kalamazoo District Schools (now Kalamazoo Public Schools). For most of its history, WKDS broadcast only during daytime hours and not at all on the weekend. In the fall of 2004, the station began broadcasting 24 hours a day, 7 days a week in an attempt to prevent an outside organization from taking over the time WKDS was off the air. WKDS was part of a county-wide Education for Employment program for years. The radio station is still owned by Kalamazoo Public Schools, although the EFE program has been discontinued. High-school students from around the area continue to operate the station.\nFM radio stations that originate from or can be heard over the air in Kalamazoo include:\nAM radio stations that originate or can be heard over the air in Kalamazoo:\nTransportation.\nHighways.\nKalamazoo is served by highways I-94, US\u00a0131, M-96 and M-343. It was on the original Territorial Road in Michigan of the 19th century, which started in Detroit and ran to Lake Michigan. Much of that, but not all, later became Old US\u00a012\u2014the \"old\" designation came about when I-94 was built parallel to it\u2014and also was called \"Red Arrow Highway\" after a World War I army division. The name \"US\u00a012\" was shifted south to what once was US\u00a0112 between Detroit and New Buffalo. Some parts of Old US\u00a012 outside of town, especially in Van Buren and Berrien counties to the west, are still called Red Arrow Highway. The term \"Old US\u00a012\" has faded from use.\nOther.\nThe Kal-Haven Trail, heavily used by cyclists, runners, walkers, and snowmobilers, extends to downtown Kalamazoo. It runs between South Haven, to a trailhead just west of Kalamazoo. Between that trailhead and South Haven the trail is run by Van Buren County, even the parts within Kalamazoo County. A trail pass is no longer required. The Kal-Haven is a rail trail, built on the former right-of-way of the Kalamazoo and South Haven Railroad.\nThe section east of the trailhead was opened in 2008 and extends to downtown Kalamazoo. It is known as the Kalamazoo River Valley Trail and is run by Kalamazoo County. No pass is required on that section.\nIn popular culture.\nKalamazoo's name is a familiar reference in popular music, since its unique sound makes it a \"great word for a lyric.\" Its use as metonym for a remote place is discussed above\u2014\"although when it comes to both Timbuktu and Kalamazoo, most of that brag-worthy exotic allure is merely in their names.\" Nonetheless, numerous songs use the city's name in their song title or lyrics.\nProbably the first and most famous was \"(I've Got a Gal In) Kalamazoo\" (1942) by the Glenn Miller Orchestra with Tex Beneke. The song was written by Mack Gordon and Harry Warren. It was recreated by the fictional Gene Morrison Orchestra (performing as the Glenn Miller Orchestra) and the Nicholas Brothers (performing the song as part of a dance sequence) in the 1942 movie \"Orchestra Wives.\" It was nominated for Best Original Song at the 15th Academy Awards (music by Harry Warren; lyrics by Mack Gordon).\nAt least a dozen (and many more versions) of \"Kalamazoo\" songs have been recorded. In chronological order, others include: \"I've Been Everywhere\" (1962) by Hank Snow (from the album of the same title) and the 1996 song \"Unchained\" (also from the album of the same name) by Johnny Cash\u2014reworked from the original 1959 Geoff Mack Australian-place-names version made popular by the singer Lucky Starr, \"Down on the Corner\" (1969) by Creedence Clearwater Revival on their fourth studio album, \"Willy and the Poor Boys\"\u2014covered by a dozen other groups\u2014though the reference is not to the city but to the \"Kalamazoo\" line of budget priced guitars manufactured by Gibson, \"Kalamazoo\" (1995) by Luna on \"Penthouse\", \"Cold Rock a Party\" (1996) by MC Lyte on \"Bad as I Wanna B\", \"Kalamazoo\" (1997) by the rock trio Primus on \"Brown Album\", \"Top of the World\" (1999) by Rascalz on \"Global Warning\", \"Isn't It Love\" (2001) by Andrew Peterson on \"Clear to Venus\" (at one point, he sings that he lost his luggage in Kalamazoo), \"Kalamazoo\" (2002) by Mike Craver on \"Shining Down\", \"Kalamazoo\" (2004) by Ben Folds on the EP \"Super D\", and \"Kalamazoo\" (2017) by The Show Ponies on their album \"How It All Goes Down\".\nThe city was also mentioned in the opera \"Einstein on the Beach\" by Philip Glass and in the chorus of the song \"Gotta Get Away\" by The Black Keys, from their album \"Turn Blue\" (\"I went from San Berdoo to Kalamazoo/Just to get away from you...\"). Like Miller, the Creedence and Axton lyrics probably use the word \"Kalamazoo\" as an oblique reference to Gibson, which made various models named \"Kalamazoo\" that were all prominently adorned with the city's name as their origin. In 2011, rap artist Young Jeezy mentioned the city in the song \"Higher Learning\" on his album \"TM:103 Hustlerz Ambition\". In 2014, Kalamazoo was mentioned again by Rittz in the song \"Bounce\" on his album \"Next to Nothing\".\nThe \"Kalamazoo\" was one of several names of a railroad handcar that was produced by the Kalamazoo Manufacturing Company.\nIn Dr. Seuss's classic children's book \"Horton Hatches the Egg\", Horton the Elephant visits Kalamazoo while he is in the circus.\nThe 2010 film \"Cherry\" was filmed in Kalamazoo.\nSister cities.\nThe city of Kalamazoo, Michigan has three sister cities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54355", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54355", "title": "Italian euro coins", "text": "Euro coins issued by Italy\nItalian euro coins have a design unique to each denomination, though there is a common theme of famous Italian works of art throughout history. Each coin is designed by a different designer, from the 1 cent to the 2 euro coin they are: Eugenio Driutti, Luciana De Simoni, Ettore Lorenzo Frapiccini, Claudia Momoni, Maria Angela Cassol, Roberto Mauri, Laura Cretara and Maria Carmela Colaneri. All designs feature the 12 stars of the EU, the year of imprint, the overlapping letters \"RI\" for \"Repubblica Italiana\" (Italian Republic) and the letter R for Rome. There are no Italian euro coins dated earlier than \"2002\", even though they were certainly minted earlier, as they were first distributed to the public in December 2001.\nHistory.\nThe choice of the design of the coins was left to the Italian public by means of a television broadcast where alternative designs were presented, letting the people vote by calling a certain telephone number. However, the 1 euro coin was missing in this election, because Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, the then economy minister, had already decided it would feature the \"Vitruvian Man\" of Leonardo da Vinci. Leonardo's work is highly symbolic as it represents the Renaissance focus on man as the measure of all things, and has simultaneously a round shape that fits the coin perfectly. As Ciampi observed, this represents the \"coin to the service of Man\", instead of Man to the service of money.\nItalian euro design.\nFor images of the common side and a detailed description of the coins, see euro coins.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54356", "revid": "47684007", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54356", "title": "Boolean ring", "text": "Algebraic structure in mathematics\nIn mathematics, a Boolean ring \"R\" is a ring for which \"x\"2 = \"x\" for all \"x\" in \"R\", that is, a ring that consists of only idempotent elements. An example is the ring of integers modulo 2.\nEvery Boolean ring gives rise to a Boolean algebra, with ring multiplication corresponding to conjunction or meet \u2227, and ring addition to exclusive disjunction or symmetric difference (not disjunction \u2228, which would constitute a semiring). Conversely, every Boolean algebra gives rise to a Boolean ring. Boolean rings are named after the founder of Boolean algebra, George Boole.\nNotation.\nThere are at least four different and incompatible systems of notation for Boolean rings and algebras:\nHistorically, the term \"Boolean ring\" has been used to mean a \"Boolean ring possibly without an identity\", and \"Boolean algebra\" has been used to mean a Boolean ring with an identity. The existence of the identity is necessary to consider the ring as an algebra over the field of two elements: otherwise there cannot be a (unital) ring homomorphism of the field of two elements into the Boolean ring. (This is the same as the old use of the terms \"ring\" and \"algebra\" in measure theory.)\nExamples.\nOne example of a Boolean ring is the power set of any set \"X\", where the addition in the ring is symmetric difference, and the multiplication is intersection. As another example, we can also consider the set of all finite or cofinite subsets of \"X\", again with symmetric difference and intersection as operations. More generally with these operations any field of sets is a Boolean ring. By Stone's representation theorem every Boolean ring is isomorphic to a field of sets (treated as a ring with these operations).\nRelation to Boolean algebras.\nSince the join operation \u2228 in a Boolean algebra is often written additively, it makes sense in this context to denote ring addition by \u2295, a symbol that is often used to denote exclusive or.\nGiven a Boolean ring \"R\", for \"x\" and \"y\" in \"R\" we can define\n \"x\" \u2227 \"y\" = \"xy\",\n \"x\" \u2228 \"y\" = \"x\" \u2295 \"y\" \u2295 \"xy\",\n \u00ac\"x\" = 1 \u2295 \"x\".\nThese operations then satisfy all of the axioms for meets, joins, and complements in a Boolean algebra. Thus every Boolean ring becomes a Boolean algebra. Similarly, every Boolean algebra becomes a Boolean ring thus:\n \"xy\" = \"x\" \u2227 \"y\",\n \"x\" \u2295 \"y\" = (\"x\" \u2228 \"y\") \u2227 \u00ac(\"x\" \u2227 \"y\").\nIf a Boolean ring is translated into a Boolean algebra in this way, and then the Boolean algebra is translated into a ring, the result is the original ring. The analogous result holds beginning with a Boolean algebra.\nA map between two Boolean rings is a ring homomorphism if and only if it is a homomorphism of the corresponding Boolean algebras. Furthermore, a subset of a Boolean ring is a ring ideal (prime ring ideal, maximal ring ideal) if and only if it is an order ideal (prime order ideal, maximal order ideal) of the Boolean algebra. The quotient ring of a Boolean ring modulo a ring ideal corresponds to the factor algebra of the corresponding Boolean algebra modulo the corresponding order ideal.\nProperties of Boolean rings.\nEvery Boolean ring \"R\" satisfies \"x\" \u2295 \"x\" = 0 for all \"x\" in \"R\", because we know\n \"x\" \u2295 \"x\" = (\"x\" \u2295 \"x\")2 = \"x\"2 \u2295 \"x\"2 \u2295 \"x\"2 \u2295 \"x\"2 = \"x\" \u2295 \"x\" \u2295 \"x\" \u2295 \"x\"\nand since (\"R\", \u2295) is an abelian group, we can subtract \"x\" \u2295 \"x\" from both sides of this equation, which gives \"x\" \u2295 \"x\" = 0. A similar proof shows that every Boolean ring is commutative:\n \"x\" \u2295 \"y\" = (\"x\" \u2295 \"y\")2 = \"x\"2 \u2295 \"xy\" \u2295 \"yx\" \u2295 \"y\"2 = \"x\" \u2295 \"xy\" \u2295 \"yx\" \u2295 \"y\" and this yields \"xy\" \u2295 \"yx\" = 0, which means \"xy\" = \"yx\" (using the first property above).\nThe property \"x\" \u2295 \"x\" = 0 shows that any Boolean ring is an associative algebra over the field F2 with two elements, in precisely one way. In particular, any finite Boolean ring has as cardinality a power of two. Not every unital associative algebra over F2 is a Boolean ring: consider for instance the polynomial ring F2[\"X\"].\nThe quotient ring \"R\" / \"I\" of any Boolean ring \"R\" modulo any ideal \"I\" is again a Boolean ring. Likewise, any subring of a Boolean ring is a Boolean ring.\nAny localization \"RS\"\u22121 of a Boolean ring \"R\" by a set \"S\" \u2286 \"R\" is a Boolean ring, since every element in the localization is idempotent.\nThe maximal ring of quotients \"Q\"(\"R\") (in the sense of Utumi and Lambek) of a Boolean ring \"R\" is a Boolean ring, since every partial endomorphism is idempotent.\nEvery prime ideal \"P\" in a Boolean ring \"R\" is maximal: the quotient ring \"R\" / \"P\" is an integral domain and also a Boolean ring, so it is isomorphic to the field F2, which shows the maximality of \"P\". Since maximal ideals are always prime, prime ideals and maximal ideals coincide in Boolean rings.\nEvery finitely generated ideal of a Boolean ring is principal (indeed, (\"x\",\"y\") = (\"x\" + \"y\" + \"xy\")). Furthermore, as all elements are idempotents, Boolean rings are commutative von Neumann regular rings and hence absolutely flat, which means that every module over them is flat.\nUnification.\nUnification in Boolean rings is decidable, that is, algorithms exist to solve arbitrary equations over Boolean rings. Both unification and matching in finitely generated free Boolean rings are NP-complete, and both are NP-hard in finitely presented Boolean rings. (In fact, as any unification problem \"f\"(\"X\") = \"g\"(\"X\") in a Boolean ring can be rewritten as the matching problem \"f\"(\"X\") + \"g\"(\"X\") = 0, the problems are equivalent.)\nUnification in Boolean rings is unitary if all the uninterpreted function symbols are nullary and finitary otherwise (i.e. if the function symbols not occurring in the signature of Boolean rings are all constants then there exists a most general unifier, and otherwise the minimal complete set of unifiers is finite).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54357", "revid": "5089509", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54357", "title": "Architecture with non-sequential dynamic execution scheduling", "text": ""}
{"id": "54358", "revid": "981666086", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54358", "title": "Humanistic", "text": ""}
{"id": "54359", "revid": "365454", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54359", "title": "Agnostic", "text": ""}
{"id": "54360", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54360", "title": "Frank Drake", "text": "American astronomer and astrophysicist (1930\u20132022)\nFrank Donald Drake (May 28, 1930 \u2013 September 2, 2022) was an American astrophysicist and astrobiologist.\nHe began his career as a radio astronomer, studying the planets of the Solar System and later pulsars. Drake expanded his interests to the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI), beginning with Project Ozma in 1960, an attempt at extraterrestrial communication. He developed the Drake equation, which attempts to quantify the number of intelligent lifeforms that could potentially be discovered. Working with Carl Sagan, Drake helped to design the Pioneer plaque, the first physical message flown beyond the Solar System, and was part of the team that developed the Voyager Golden Record. Drake designed and implemented the Arecibo message in 1974, an extraterrestrial radio transmission of astronomical and biological information about Earth. He is the father of Advanced SETI.\nDrake worked at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Cornell University, University of California at Santa Cruz, and the SETI Institute.\nEarly life and education.\nBorn on May 28, 1930, in Chicago, Illinois, Drake showed an early interest in electronics and chemistry. His father was a chemical engineer, and his mother a music teacher. He had two younger siblings.\nHe enrolled at Cornell University on a Navy Reserve Officer Training Corps scholarship. Once there he began studying astronomy. His ideas about the possibility of extraterrestrial life were reinforced by a lecture from astrophysicist Otto Struve in 1951. After receiving a B.A. in Engineering Physics, Drake served briefly as an electronics officer on the heavy cruiser USS \"Albany\". He then went on to graduate school at Harvard University from 1952 to 1955 where he received a M.S. and Ph.D. in astronomy. His doctoral advisor was Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin.\nCareer.\nDrake began his research career as a radio astronomer, working at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO) in Green Bank, West Virginia from 1958 to 1963. At NRAO, he conducted research into radio emissions from the planets of the Solar System: using the radio telescope at Green Bank, Drake discovered the ionosphere and magnetosphere of Jupiter, and observed the atmosphere of Venus. He also mapped the radio emission from the Galactic Center. Drake extended the capabilities of the under-construction Arecibo Observatory to allow it to be used for radio astronomy (it was originally designed purely for ionospheric physics).\nIn April 1959, Drake obtained approval from the director Otto Struve of NRAO to begin Project Ozma, a search for extraterrestrial radio communications. Initially, they agreed to keep the project secret, fearing public ridicule. However, Drake decided to publicize his project after Giuseppe Cocconi and Philip Morrison published a paper in \"Nature\" in September 1959, entitled \"Searching for Interstellar Communications\". Drake began his Project Ozma observations in 1960, using the NRAO 26-meter radio telescope, by searching for possible signals from the star systems Tau Ceti and Epsilon Eridani. No extraterrestrial signals were detected and the project was terminated in July 1960. After learning about Project Ozma, Carl Sagan (then a graduate student) contacted Drake, initiating a lifelong collaboration between them.\nIn 1961, Drake devised the Drake equation, which attempted to estimate the number of extraterrestrial civilizations that might be detectable in the Milky Way. The Drake equation has been described as the \"second most-famous equation in science\", after E=mc2.\nIn 1963, Drake served as section chief of Lunar and Planetary Science at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. He returned to Cornell in 1964, this time as a member of the faculty, where he would spend the next two decades. He was promoted to Goldwin Smith Professor of Astronomy in 1976. Drake served as associate director of the Cornell Center for Radiophysics and Space Research, as director of the Arecibo Observatory from 1966 to 1968, and as director of the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center (NAIC, which includes the Arecibo facility), from its establishment in 1971 to 1981.\nIn 1972, Drake co-designed the Pioneer plaque with Carl Sagan and Linda Salzman Sagan. The plaque was the first physical message sent into space and intended to be understandable by any sufficiently technologically advanced extraterrestrial lifeforms that might intercept it. In 1974, Drake wrote the Arecibo message, the first interstellar message transmitted deliberately from Earth. He later served as technical director, with Carl Sagan and Ann Druyan, in the development of the Voyager Golden Record, an improved version of the Pioneer plaque which also incorporated audio recordings.\nIn 1984, Drake moved to the University of California at Santa Cruz (UCSC), becoming their Dean of Natural Science. The non-profit SETI Institute was founded the same year, with Drake as president of its board of trustees. Drake left his role as dean in 1988, but remained a professor at UCSC while also becoming director of the SETI Institute's Carl Sagan Center. Drake was President of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific from 1988 to 1990. From 1989 to 1992, he was chairman of the Board of Physics and Astronomy for the National Research Council. He retired from teaching in 1996 but remained emeritus professor of astronomy and astrophysics at UCSC. In 2010, Drake stepped down as director of The Carl Sagan Center but continued to serve on the SETI Institute's board of trustees.\nOn the subject of the search for the existence of extraterrestrial life, Drake said: \"[A]s far as I know, the most fascinating, interesting thing you could find in the universe is not another kind of star or galaxy \u2026 but another kind of life.\"\nPersonal life.\nDrake's hobbies included lapidary and the cultivation of orchids.\nDrake married musician Elizabeth Bell in 1953; they divorced in 1976. They had three sons. In 1978, Drake married Amahl Shakhashiri, with whom he had two daughters, including science journalist Nadia Drake.\nDrake died on September 2, 2022, at his home in Aptos, California, from natural causes at the age of 92.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54361", "revid": "31604539", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54361", "title": "Neo-Nazism", "text": "Post-WWII Nazi-inspired ideologies\nNeo-Nazism comprises all social, political, and militant ideologies and movements that have professed or idealized Nazism, whether in whole or in part, since the end of World War II in 1945. Neo-Nazi individuals and organizations employ their ideology to promote what they perceive as the racial or ethnic supremacy (often White supremacy) of their own group; to incite or engage in hatred or discrimination against demographic minorities (often antisemitism and Islamophobia); and, in some cases, to establish a fascist state (e.g., \"Fourth Reich\"). Also common in neo-Nazi circles is engagement in historical negationism and propagation of conspiracy theories\u2014not limited to absolving or glorifying the Nazi Party or those who inspired or are thought to have inspired Adolf Hitler and other prominent Nazi figures\u2014such as Holocaust denial and Jewish war; White genocide and Great Replacement; and \"cultural\" Marxism. \nWhile mainly concentrated in the Western world, neo-Nazism is a global phenomenon and has organized representation in several international networks. However, it is not exclusive to people of European origin\u2014many similar supremacist movements among local racial or ethnic groups in non-Western regions have been observed adhering to tenets of or inspired by neo-Nazi ideology. Much of this manifests in adopting original Nazi ideological doctrine and practices, including racism, ultra-nationalism, ableism, homophobia, and conspiratorial anti-communism, among others.\nNeo-Nazis regularly display Nazi symbols and express admiration for the actions of Hitler's Germany before and during World War II. In a number of Western and non-Western countries (and especially in Germany), neo-Nazism is prohibited by laws specifically targeting Nazi ideology, in addition to general laws against hatred and discrimination. Likewise, among these countries, Nazi-related symbols are also banned as part of a long-running effort of de-Nazification that began with the Allies of World War II.\nDefinition.\nThe term neo-Nazism describes any post-World War II militant, social or political movements seeking to revive the ideology of Nazism in whole or in part.\nThe term 'neo-Nazism' can also refer to the ideology of these movements, which may borrow elements from Nazi doctrine, including ultranationalism, anti-communism, racism, ableism, xenophobia, homophobia, antisemitism, up to initiating the Fourth Reich. Holocaust denial is a common feature, as is the incorporation of Nazi symbols and admiration of Adolf Hitler.\nNeo-Nazism is considered a particular form of far-right politics and right-wing extremism.\nEsotericism.\nNeo-Nazi writers have posited a spiritual, esoteric doctrine of race, which moves beyond the primarily Darwinian-inspired materialist scientific racism popular mainly in the Anglosphere during the 20th century. Figures influential in the development of neo-Nazi racism, such as Miguel Serrano and Julius Evola (writers who are described by critics of Nazism such as the Southern Poverty Law Center as influential within what it presents as parts of \"the bizarre fringes of National Socialism, past and present\"), claim that the Hyperborean ancestors of the Aryans were in the distant past, far higher beings than their current state, having suffered from \"involution\" due to mixing with the \"Telluric\" peoples; supposed creations of the Demiurge. Within this theory, if the \"Aryans\" are to return to the Golden Age of the distant past, they need to awaken the memory of the blood. An extraterrestrial origin of the Hyperboreans is often claimed. These theories draw influence from Gnosticism and Tantrism, building on the work of the Ahnenerbe. Within this racist theory, Jews are held up as the antithesis of nobility, purity and beauty.\nEcology and environmentalism.\nNeo-Nazism generally aligns itself with a blood and soil variation of environmentalism, which has themes in common with deep ecology, the organic movement and animal protectionism. This tendency, sometimes called \"ecofascism\", was represented in the original German Nazism by Richard Walther Darr\u00e9 who was the Reichsminister of Food from 1933 until 1942.\nHistory.\nGermany and Austria (1945\u20131950s).\nThe final leader of the National Socialist German Workers' Party (NSDAP) was Martin Bormann, who died on 2 May 1945 during the Battle of Berlin. As his remains were not discovered until 1973, fringe theories claimed that he survived and fled to South America (as did numerous Nazis). Similar theories assert that Hitler faked his death and lived for a number of years in South America.\nThe Allied Control Council officially dissolved the NSDAP on 10 October 1945, marking the end of \"Old\" Nazism. A process of denazification began, and the Nuremberg trials took place, where many major leaders and ideologues were condemned to death by October 1946, others committed suicide.\nIn both the East and West, surviving ex-party members and military veterans assimilated to the new reality and had no interest in constructing a \"neo-Nazism\". However, during the 1949 West German elections a number of Nazi advocates such as Fritz R\u00f6ssler had infiltrated the national conservative \"Deutsche Rechtspartei\", which had five members elected. R\u00f6ssler and others left to found the more radical Socialist Reich Party (SRP) under Otto Ernst Remer. At the onset of the Cold War, the SRP favoured the Soviet Union over the United States.\nIn Austria, national independence had been restored, and the explicitly criminalised the NSDAP and any attempt at restoration. West Germany adopted a similar law to target parties it defined as anti-constitutional; Article\u00a021 Paragraph\u00a02 in the Basic Law, banning the SRP in 1952 for being opposed to liberal democracy.\nAs a consequence, some members of the nascent movement of German neo-Nazism joined the of which Hans-Ulrich Rudel was the most prominent figure. Younger members founded the modelled after the Hitler Youth. The stood for elections from 1953 until 1961 fetching around 1% of the vote each time. Rudel befriended French-born Savitri Devi, who was a proponent of Esoteric Nazism. In the 1950s she wrote a number of books, such as \"Pilgrimage\" (1958), which concerns prominent Third Reich sites, and \"The Lightning and the Sun\" (1958), in which she claims that Hitler was an avatar of the God Vishnu. She was not alone in this reorientation of Nazism towards its Thulean-roots; the , founded by former SS member Wilhelm Kusserow, attempted to promote a new paganism.\nIn the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) a former member of SA, Wilhelm Adam, founded the National Democratic Party of Germany. It reached out to those attracted by the Nazi Party before 1945 and provide them with a political outlet, so that they would not be tempted to support the far-right again or turn to the anti-communist Western Allies. Joseph Stalin wanted to use them to create a new pro-Soviet and anti-Western strain in German politics. According to top Soviet diplomat Vladimir Semyonov, Stalin even suggested that they could be allowed to continue publishing their own newspaper, V\u00f6lkischer Beobachter. While in Austria, former SS member Wilhelm Lang founded an esoteric group known as the Vienna Lodge; he popularised Nazism and occultism such as the Black Sun and ideas of Third Reich survival colonies below the polar ice caps.\nWith the onset of the Cold War, the allied forces had lost interest in prosecuting anyone as part of the denazification. In the mid-1950s this new political environment allowed Otto Strasser, an NS activist on the left of the NSDAP, who had founded the Black Front to return from exile. In 1956, Strasser founded the German Social Union as a Black Front successor, promoting a Strasserite \"nationalist and socialist\" policy, which dissolved in 1962 due to lack of support. Other Third Reich associated groups were the HIAG and Stille Hilfe dedicated to advancing the interests of Waffen-SS veterans and rehabilitating them into the new democratic society. However, they did not claim to be attempting to restore Nazism, instead functioning as lobbying organizations for their members before the government and the two main political parties (the conservative CDU/CSU and the Nazis' one-time archenemies, the Social Democratic Party)\nMany bureaucrats who served under the Third Reich continued to serve in German administration after the war. According to the Simon Wiesenthal Center, many of the more than 90,000 Nazi war criminals recorded in German files were serving in positions of prominence under Chancellor Konrad Adenauer. Not until the 1960s were the former concentration camp personnel prosecuted by West Germany in the Belzec trial, Frankfurt Auschwitz trials, Treblinka trials, Che\u0142mno trials, and the Sobib\u00f3r trial. However, the government had passed laws prohibiting Nazis from publicly expressing their beliefs.\n\"Universal National Socialism\" (1950s\u20131970s).\nNeo-Nazism found expression outside of Germany, including in countries who fought against the Third Reich during the Second World War, and sometimes adopted pan-European or \"universal\" characteristics, beyond the parameters of German nationalism. The two main tendencies, with differing styles and even worldviews, were the followers of the American Francis Parker Yockey, who was fundamentally anti-American and advocated for a pan-European nationalism, and those of George Lincoln Rockwell, an American conservative.\nYockey, a neo-Spenglerian author, had written \"\" (1949) dedicated to \"the hero of the twentieth century\" (namely, Adolf Hitler) and founded the European Liberation Front. He was interested more in the destiny of Europe; to this end, he advocated a National Bolshevik-esque red-brown alliance against American culture and influenced 1960s figures such as SS-veteran Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Thiriart. Yockey was also fond of Arab nationalism, in particular Gamal Abdel Nasser, and saw Fidel Castro's Cuban Revolution as a positive, visiting officials there. Yockey's views impressed Otto Ernst Remer and the radical traditionalist philosopher Julius Evola. He was constantly hounded by the FBI and was eventually arrested in 1960, before committing suicide. Domestically, Yockey's biggest sympathisers were the National Renaissance Party, including James H. Madole, H. Keith Thompson and Eustace Mullins ( of Ezra Pound) and the Liberty Lobby of Willis Carto.\nRockwell, an American conservative, was first politicised in the anti-communism and anti-racial integration movements before becoming anti-Jewish. In response to his opponents calling him a \"Nazi\", he theatrically appropriated the aesthetic elements of the NSDAP, to \"own\" the intended insult. In 1959, Rockwell founded the American Nazi Party and instructed his members to dress in imitation SA-style brown shirts, while flying the flag of the Third Reich. In contrast to Yockey, he was pro-American and cooperated with FBI requests, despite the party being targeted by COINTELPRO due to the mistaken belief that they were agents of Nasser's Egypt during a brief intelligence \"brown scare\". Later leaders of American white nationalism came to politics through the ANP, including a teenage David Duke and William Luther Pierce of the National Alliance, although they soon distanced themselves from explicit self-identification with neo-Nazism.\nIn 1961, the World Union of National Socialists was founded by Rockwell and Colin Jordan of the British National Socialist Movement, adopting the \"Cotswold Declaration.\" French socialite Fran\u00e7oise Dior was involved romantically with Jordan and his deputy John Tyndall and a friend of Savitri Devi, who also attended the meeting. The National Socialist Movement wore quasi-SA uniforms, was involved in streets conflicts with the Jewish 62 Group. In the 1970s, Tyndall's earlier involvement with neo-Nazism would come back to haunt the National Front, which he led, as they attempted to ride a wave of anti-immigration populism and concerns over British national decline. Televised exposes on \"This Week\" in 1974 and \"World in Action\" in 1978, showed their neo-Nazi pedigree and damaged their electoral chances. In 1967, Rockwell was killed by a disgruntled former member. Matt Koehl took control of the ANP, and strongly influenced by Savitri Devi, gradually transformed it into an esoteric group known as the New Order.\nIn Franco's Spain, certain SS refugees most notably Otto Skorzeny, L\u00e9on Degrelle and the son of Klaus Barbie became associated with CEDADE (\"C\u00edrculo Espa\u00f1ol de Amigos de Europa\"), an organisation which disseminated Third Reich apologetics out of Barcelona. They intersected with neo-Nazi advocates from Mark Fredriksen in France to Salvador Borrego in Mexico.\nIn the post-fascist Italian Social Movement splinter groups such as Ordine Nuovo and Avanguardia Nazionale, involved in the \"Years of Lead\" considered Nazism a reference. Franco Freda created a \"Nazi-Maoism\" synthesis.\nIn Germany itself, the various Third Reich nostalgic movements coalesced around the National Democratic Party of Germany in 1964 and in Austria the National Democratic Party in 1967 as the primary sympathisers of the NSDAP past, although more publicly cautious than earlier groups.\nHolocaust denial and subcultures (1970s\u20131990s).\nHolocaust denial, the claim that six million Jews were not deliberately and systematically exterminated as an official policy of the Third Reich and Adolf Hitler, became a more prominent feature of neo-Nazism in the 1970s. Before this time, Holocaust denial had long existed as a sentiment among neo-Nazis, but it had not yet been systematically articulated as a theory with a bibliographical canon. Few of the major theorists of Holocaust denial (who call themselves \"revisionists\") can be uncontroversially classified as outright neo-Nazis (though some works such as those of David Irving forward a clearly sympathetic view of Hitler and the publisher Ernst Z\u00fcndel was deeply tied to international neo-Nazism), however, the main interest of Holocaust denial to neo-Nazis was their hope that it would help them rehabilitate their political ideology in the eyes of the general public. \"Did Six Million Really Die?\" (1974) by Richard Verrall and \"The Hoax of the Twentieth Century\" (1976) by Arthur Butz are popular examples of Holocaust denial material.\nKey developments in international neo-Nazism during this time include the radicalisation of the under former Hitler Youth member Bert Eriksson. They began hosting an annual conference; the \"Iron Pilgrimage\"; at Diksmuide, which drew kindred ideologues from across Europe and beyond. As well as this, the NSDAP/AO under Gary Lauck arose in the United States in 1972 and challenged the international influence of the Rockwellite WUNS. Lauck's organisation drew support from the National Socialist Movement of Denmark of Povl Riis-Knudsen and various German and Austrian figures who felt that the \"National Democratic\" parties were too bourgeois and insufficiently Nazi in orientation. This included Michael K\u00fchnen, Christian Worch, Bela Ewald Althans and Gottfried K\u00fcssel of the 1977-founded ANS/NS which called for the establishment of a Germanic Fourth Reich. Some ANS/NS members were imprisoned for planning paramilitary attacks on NATO bases in Germany and planning to liberate Rudolf Hess from Spandau Prison. The organisation was officially banned in 1983 by the Minister of the Interior.\nDuring the late 1970s, a British subculture came to be associated with neo-Nazism; the skinheads. Portraying an ultra-masculine, crude and aggressive image, with working-class references, some of the skinheads joined the British Movement under Michael McLaughlin (successor of Colin Jordan), while others became associated with the National Front's Rock Against Communism project which was meant to counter the SWP's Rock Against Racism. The most significant music group involved in this project was Skrewdriver, led by Ian Stuart Donaldson. Together with ex-BM member Nicky Crane, Donaldson founded the international Blood &amp; Honour network in 1987. By 1992 this network, with input from Harold Covington, had developed a paramilitary wing; Combat 18, which intersected with football hooligan firms such as the Chelsea Headhunters. The neo-Nazi skinhead movement spread to the United States, with groups such as the Hammerskins. It was popularised from 1986 onwards by Tom Metzger of the White Aryan Resistance. Since then it has spread across the world. Films such as \"Romper Stomper\" (1992) and \"American History X\" (1998) would fix a public perception that neo-Nazism and skinheads were synonymous.\nNew developments also emerged on the esoteric level, as former Chilean diplomat Miguel Serrano built on the works of Carl Jung, Otto Rahn, Wilhelm Landig, Julius Evola and Savitri Devi to bind together and develop already existing theories. Serrano had been a member of the National Socialist Movement of Chile in the 1930s and from the early days of neo-Nazism, he had been in contact with key figures across Europe and beyond. Despite this, he was able to work as an ambassador to numerous countries until the rise of Salvador Allende. In 1984 he published his book \"Adolf Hitler: The Ultimate Avatar\". Serrano claimed that the Aryans were extragalactic beings who founded Hyperborea and lived the heroic life of Bodhisattvas, while the Jews were created by the Demiurge and were concerned only with coarse materialism. Serrano claimed that a new Golden Age can be attained if the Hyperboreans repurify their blood (supposedly the light of the Black Sun) and restore their \"blood-memory\". As with Savitri Devi before him, Serrano's works became a key point of reference in neo-Nazism.\nLifting of the Iron Curtain (1990s\u2013present).\nWith the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of the Soviet Union during the early 1990s, neo-Nazism began to spread its ideas in the East, as hostility to the triumphant liberal order was high and revanchism a widespread feeling. In Russia, during the chaos of the early 1990s, an amorphous mixture of KGB hardliners, Orthodox neo-Tsarist nostalgics (i.e., Pamyat) and explicit neo-Nazis found themselves strewn together in the same camp. They were united by opposition to the influence of the United States, against the liberalising legacy of Mikhail Gorbachev's and on the Jewish question, Soviet Zionology merged with a more explicit anti-Jewish sentiment. The most significant organisation representing this was Russian National Unity under the leadership of Alexander Barkashov, where black-uniform clad Russians marched with a red flag incorporating the Swastika under the banner of \"Russia for Russians.\" These forces came together in a last gasp effort to save the Supreme Soviet of Russia against Boris Yeltsin during the 1993 Russian constitutional crisis. As well as events in Russia, in newly independent ex-Soviet states, annual commemorations for SS volunteers now took place; particularly in Latvia, Estonia and Ukraine.\nThe Russian developments excited German neo-Nazism who dreamed of a Berlin\u2013Moscow alliance against the supposedly \"decadent\" Atlanticist forces; a dream which had been thematic since the days of Remer. Z\u00fcndel visited Russia and met with ex-KGB general Aleksandr Stergilov and other Russian National Unity members. Despite these initial aspirations, international neo-Nazism and its close affiliates in ultra-nationalism would be split over the Bosnian War between 1992 and 1995, as part of the breakup of Yugoslavia. The split would largely be along ethnic and sectarian lines. The Germans and the French would largely back the Western Catholic Croats (Lauck's NSDAP/AO explicitly called for volunteers, which K\u00fchnen's Free German Workers' Party answered and the French formed the \"Groupe Jacques Doriot\"), while the Russians and the Greeks would back the Orthodox Serbs (including Russians from Barkashov's Russian National Unity, Eduard Limonov's National Bolshevik Front and Golden Dawn members joined the Greek Volunteer Guard). Indeed, the revival of National Bolshevism was able to steal some of the thunder from overt Russian neo-Nazism, as ultra-nationalism was wedded with veneration of Joseph Stalin in place of Adolf Hitler, while still also flirting with Nazi aesthetics.\nAnalogous European movements.\nOutside Germany, in other countries which were involved with the Axis powers and had their own native ultra-nationalist movements, which sometimes collaborated with the Third Reich but were not technically German-style National Socialists, revivalist and nostalgic movements have emerged in the post-war period which, as neo-Nazism has done in Germany, seek to rehabilitate their various loosely associated ideologies. These movements include neo-fascists and post-fascists in Italy; Vichyites, P\u00e9tainists and \"national Europeans\" in France; Usta\u0161e sympathisers in Croatia; neo-Chetniks in Serbia; Iron Guard revivalists in Romania; Hungarists and Horthyists in Hungary and others.\nIssues.\nEx-Nazis in mainstream politics.\nThe most significant case on an international level was the election of Kurt Waldheim to the Presidency of Austria in 1986. It came to light that Waldheim had been a member of the National Socialist German Students' League, the SA and served as an intelligence officer during the Second World War. Following this he served as an Austrian diplomat and was the Secretary-General of the United Nations from 1972 until 1981. After revelations of Waldheim's past were made by an Austrian journalist, Waldheim clashed with the World Jewish Congress on the international stage. Waldheim's record was defended by Bruno Kreisky, an Austrian Jew who served as Chancellor of Austria. The legacy of the affair lingers on, as Victor Ostrovsky has claimed the Mossad doctored the file of Waldheim to implicate him in war crimes.\nIn Finland multiple veterans of the Waffen-SS served as ministers and party chairmen. Leader of the National Socialist Union of Finland (SKSL) Yrj\u00f6 Ruutu was a leading member of post-war Socialist Unity Party. Heikki Waris, board member of SKSL served as the Minister of Social Affairs in the Von Fieandt Cabinet in 1957. Many more ex-Nazis were elected as members of parliament, like former SKSL Yrj\u00f6 Kilpel\u00e4inen and Unto Varjonen and Torsten Aminoff of People's Community Society.\nContemporary right-wing populism.\nSome critics have sought to draw a connection between Nazism and modern right-wing populism in Europe, but the two are not widely regarded as interchangeable by most academics. In Austria, the Freedom Party of Austria (FP\u00d6) served as a shelter for ex-Nazis almost from its inception. In 1980, scandals undermined Austria's two main parties and the economy stagnated. J\u00f6rg Haider became leader of the FP\u00d6 and offered partial justification for Nazism, calling its employment policy effective. In the 1994 Austrian election, the FP\u00d6 won 22 percent of the vote, as well as 33 percent of the vote in Carinthia and 22 percent in Vienna; showing that it had become a force capable of reversing the old pattern of Austrian politics.\nHistorian Walter Laqueur writes that even though Haider welcomed former Nazis at his meetings and went out of his way to address Schutzstaffel (SS) veterans, the FP\u00d6 is not a fascist party in the traditional sense, since it has not made anti-communism an important issue, and it does not advocate the overthrow of the democratic order or the use of violence. In his view, the FP\u00d6 is \"not quite fascist\", although it is part of a tradition, similar to that of 19th-century Viennese mayor Karl Lueger, which involves nationalism, xenophobic populism, and authoritarianism. Haider, who in 2005 left the Freedom Party and formed the Alliance for Austria's Future, was killed in a traffic accident in October 2008.\nBarbara Rosenkranz, the Freedom Party's candidate in Austria's 2010 presidential election, was controversial for having made allegedly pro-Nazi statements. Rosenkranz is married to Horst Rosenkranz, a key member of a banned neo-Nazi party, who is known for publishing far-right books. Rosenkranz says she cannot detect anything \"dishonourable\" in her husband's activities.\nAround the world.\nEurope.\nAlbania.\nBrerore and Albanian Third Position (ATP) are neo-Nazi groups based in Albania with ATP also having reach into Kosovo and Northern Macedonia. Albanian football clubs are also sometimes linked to right-wing extremism. For example \"Ultras Tirona\" club uses Nazi symbols in stadiums and they have unfurled banners praising the Albanian SS Division. Some of ATP's members are also members of Tirana Fanatiks football ultra hooligan club.\nArmenia.\nThe Armenian-Aryan Racialist Political Movement is a National Socialist movement in Armenia. It was founded in 2021 and supports Aryanism, Antisemitism, and White supremacy.\nBelarus.\nThere has been a Nazi presence in Belarus since at least 1933 in the form of the Belarusian National Socialist Party. Neo-Nazi White Legion () attempted a bombing of a Soviet Victory Monument in Minsk. In 2020, Dynamo Minsk fans unfurled a banner during a match with a picture of Rudolf Hess and the text \"For us, your life is an iconic example of loyalty\". White Power Skinhead groups include \"White Willpower\" (, ) and Support88. In 2004 a magazine by the name of the Belarusian Resistance (, ) with editor-in-chief Siarhej Iorsh was first published, with the focus of the magazine being rehabilitating the Belarusians who fought the Red Army.\nSince the independence of Belarus, the far-right in Belarus has systematically rehabilitated Belarusian nazi collaborators both in the internet and real life. For example in 2014, the right-wing organization Young Front demonstrated with banners depicting General Micha\u0142 Vitu\u0161ka, nazi collaborator and anti-Soviet partisan. In 2018, the biggest alcohol company in the country Bulbash United posted a picture of General Franci\u0161ak Ku\u0161al, a prominent Nazi collaborator, and a text praising him attached to it on their webpage. It drew both condemnation and praise from the netizens of Belarus. Aliaksei Dzermant is the founder of Kryuskaja Draugija Druvingau, Belarusian branch of the neo-Nazi pagan Allgermanische Heidnische Front. Dzermant is also the founder of the modern successor of the Belarusian Nazi Party.\nBelgium.\nA Belgian neo-Nazi organization, Bloed, Bodem, Eer en Trouw (Blood, Soil, Honour and Loyalty), was created in 2004 after splitting from the international network (Blood and Honour). The group rose to public prominence in September 2006, after 17 members (including 11 soldiers) were arrested under the December 2003 anti-terrorist laws and laws against racism, antisemitism and supporters of censorship. According to Justice Minister Laurette Onkelinx and Interior Minister Patrick Dewael, the suspects (11 of whom were members of the military) were preparing to launch terrorist attacks in order to \"destabilize\" Belgium. According to the journalist Manuel Abramowicz, of the Resistances, the extremists of the radical right have always had as its aim to \"infiltrate the state mechanisms\", including the army in the 1970s and the 1980s, through Westland New Post and the Front de la Jeunesse.\nA police operation, which mobilized 150 agents, searched five military barracks (in Leopoldsburg near the Dutch border, Kleine-Brogel, Peer, Brussels (Royal military school) and Zedelgem) as well as 18 private addresses in Flanders. They found weapons, munitions, explosives and a homemade bomb large enough to make \"a car explode\". The leading suspect, B.T., was organizing the trafficking of weapons and was developing international links, in particular with the Dutch far-right movement De Nationale Alliantie.\nBosnia and Herzegovina.\nThe neo-Nazi white nationalist organization Bosanski Pokret Nacionalnog Ponosa (Bosnian Movement of National Pride) was founded in Bosnia and Herzegovina in July 2009. Its model is the Waffen-SS Handschar Division, which was composed of Bosniak volunteers. It proclaimed its main enemies to be \"Jews, Roma, Serbian Chetniks, the Croatian separatists, Josip Broz Tito, Communists, homosexuals and blacks\". Its ideology is a mixture of Bosnian nationalism, National Socialism and white nationalism. It says \"Ideologies that are not welcome in Bosnia are: Zionism, Islamism, communism, capitalism. The only ideology good for us is Bosnian nationalism because it secures national prosperity and social justice...\" The group is led by a person nicknamed Sauberzwig, after the commander of the 13th SS Handschar. The group's strongest area of operations is in the Tuzla area of Bosnia.\nBulgaria.\nThe primary neo-Nazi political party to receive attention in post-WWII Bulgaria is the Bulgarian National Union \u2013 New Democracy.\nOn 13 February of every year since 2003, Bulgarian neo-Nazis and like-minded far-right nationalists gather at Sofia to honor Hristo Lukov, a late World War II general known for his antisemitic and pro-Nazi stance. From 2003 to 2019, the annual event was hosted by Bulgarian National Union.\nBulgaria is also home to a neo-Nazi group called the White Front that is \"linked to an extremely violent fringe of neo-Nazis\" that have defaced synagogues with antisemitic posters. White Front also countered Sofia Pride by plastering around homophobic posters claiming homosexuality is connected to pedophilia.\nCroatia.\nNeo-Nazis in Croatia base their ideology on the writings of Ante Paveli\u0107 and the Usta\u0161e, a fascist anti-Yugoslav separatist movement. The Usta\u0161e regime committed a genocide against Serbs, Jews and Roma. At the end of World War II, many Usta\u0161e members fled to the West, where they found sanctuary and continued their political and terrorist activities (which were tolerated due to Cold War hostilities).\nIn 1999, Zagreb's Square of the Victims of Fascism was renamed \"Croatian Nobles Square\", provoking widespread criticism of Croatia's attitude towards the Holocaust. In 2000, the Zagreb City Council again renamed the square into \"Square of the Victims of Fascism\". Many streets in Croatia were renamed after the prominent Usta\u0161e figure Mile Budak, which provoked outrage amongst the Serbian minority. Since 2002, there has been a reversal of this development, and streets with the name of Mile Budak or other persons connected with the Usta\u0161e movement are few or non-existent. A plaque in Slunj with the inscription \"Croatian Knight Jure Franceti\u0107\" was erected to commemorate Franceti\u0107, the notorious Usta\u0161e leader of the Black Legion. The plaque remained there for four years, until it was removed by the authorities.\nIn 2003, Croatian penal code was amended with provisions prohibiting the public display of Nazi symbols, the propagation of Nazi ideology, historical revisionism and holocaust denial but the amendments were annulled in 2004 since they were not enacted in accordance with a constitutionally prescribed procedure. Nevertheless, since 2006 Croatian penal code explicitly prohibits any type of hate crime based on race, color, gender, sexual orientation, religion or national origin.\nThere have been instances of hate speech in Croatia, such as the use of the phrase (\"[Hang] Serbs on the willow trees!\"). In 2004, an Orthodox church was spray-painted with pro-Usta\u0161e graffiti. During some protests in Croatia, supporters of Ante Gotovina and other at the time suspected war criminals (all acquitted in 2012) have carried nationalist symbols and pictures of Paveli\u0107. On 17 May 2007, a concert in Zagreb by Thompson, a popular Croatian singer, was attended by 60,000 people, some of them wearing Usta\u0161e uniforms. Some gave Usta\u0161e salutes and shouted the Usta\u0161e slogan \"Za dom spremni\" (\"For the homeland \u2013 ready!\"). This event prompted the Simon Wiesenthal Center to publicly issue a protest to the Croatian president. Cases of displaying Ustashe memorabilia have been recorded at the Bleiburg commemoration held annually in Austria.\nCzech Republic.\nThe government of the Czech Republic strictly punishes neo-Nazism (Czech: \"Neonacismus\"). According to a report by the Ministry of the Interior of the Czech Republic, neo-Nazis committed more than 211 crimes in 2013. The Czech Republic has various neo-Nazi groups. One of them is the group Wotan Jugend, based in Germany.\nDenmark.\nThe National Socialist Movement of Denmark was formed in 1991, and was formally a neo-Nazi party, that would actively promote the Nazi ideology in Denmark. The party did not gain any political influence, and were regarded as a failed political project by neo-Nazi expert Frede Farmand. Long time party leader Johnni Hansen was replaced by Esben Rohde Kristensen in 2010, which resulted in a large amount of party members leaving the party. While the party never has been formally dissolved, there has been very little activity from its core member since 2010. Former neo-Nazi Daniel Carlsen formed the small national party Party of the Danes in 2011, which officially rejected Nazism, but were none the less categorized as such by professor in politics Peter Nedergaard. It was dissolved in 2017 after its founder Daniel Stockholm announced retirement from politics.\nEstonia.\nIn 2006, Roman Ilin, a Jewish theatre director from St. Petersburg, Russia, was attacked by neo-Nazis when returning from a tunnel after a rehearsal. Ilin subsequently accused Estonian police of indifference after filing the incident. When a dark-skinned French student was attacked in Tartu, the head of an association of foreign students claimed that the attack was characteristic of a wave of neo-Nazi violence. An Estonian police official, however, stated that there were only a few cases involving foreign students over the previous two years. In November 2006, the Estonian government passed a law banning the display of Nazi symbols.\nThe 2008 United Nations Human Rights Council Special Rapporteur's Report noted that community representatives and non-governmental organizations devoted to human rights had pointed out that neo-Nazi groups were active in Estonia\u2014particularly in Tartu\u2014and had perpetrated acts of violence against non-European minorities.\nThe neo-Nazi terrorist organization Feuerkrieg Division was found and operates in the country, with some members of the Conservative People's Party of Estonia having been linked to the Feuerkrieg Division.\nFinland.\nIn Finland, neo-Nazism is often connected to the 1930s and 1940s fascist and pro-Nazi Patriotic People's Movement (IKL), its youth movement Blues-and-Blacks and its predecessor Lapua Movement. Post-war fascist groups such as Patriotic People's Movement (1993), Patriotic Popular Front, Patriotic National Movement, Blue-and-Black Movement and many others consciously copy the style of the movement and look up to its leaders as inspiration. A Finns Party councillor and police officer in Sein\u00e4joki caused small scandal wearing the fascist blue-and-black uniform.\nDuring the Cold War, all partied deemed fascist were banned according to the Paris Peace Treaties and all former fascist activists had to find new political homes. Despite Finlandization, many continued in public life. Three former members of the Waffen SS served as ministers; the Finnish SS Battalion officers Sulo Suorttanen (Centre Party) and Pekka Malinen (People's Party) as well as Mikko Laaksonen (Social Democrat), a soldier in the Finnish SS-Company, formed of pro-Nazi defectors. Chairman of the Constitutional Right Party Ilpo J\u00e4rvinen was likewise SS-Company veteran.\nNeo-Nazi activism was limited to small illegal groups like the clandestine Nazi occultist group led by Pekka Siitoin who made headlines after arson and bombing of the printing houses of the Communist Party of Finland. His associates also sent letter bombs to leftists, including to the headquarters of the Finnish Democratic Youth League. Another group called the \"New Patriotic People's Movement\" bombed the left-wing \"Kansan Uutiset\" newspaper and the embassy of communist Bulgaria. Member of the Nordic Realm Party Seppo Seluska was convicted of the torture and murder of a gay Jewish person.\nThe skinhead culture gained momentum during the late 1980s and peaked during the late 1990s. In 1991, Finland received a number of Somali immigrants who became the main target of Finnish skinhead violence in the following years, including four attacks using explosives and a racist murder. Asylum seeker centres were attacked, in Joensuu skinheads would force their way into an asylum seeker centre and start shooting with shotguns. At worst Somalis were assaulted by 50 skinheads at the same time.\nThe most prominent neo-Nazi group is the Nordic Resistance Movement, which is tied to multiple murders, attempted murders and assaults of political enemies was found in 2006 and proscribed in 2019. The second biggest Finnish party, the Finns Party politicians have frequently supported far-right and neo-Nazi movements such as the Finnish Defense League, Soldiers of Odin, Nordic Resistance Movement, Rajat Kiinni (Close the Borders), and Suomi Ensin (Finland First). In the 1990s and 2000s, before the breakthrough of the Finns Party, a few neo-Nazi candidates enjoyed success, like Janne Kujala of Finland - Fatherland (founded as Aryan Germanic Brotherhood) and Jouni Lanam\u00e4ki who was previously associated with the Nordic Reich Party. Pekka Siitoin of the National Democratic Party was the fifth most popular candidate in Naantali city council elections.\nThe NRM, Finns party and other far-right nationalist parties organize an annual torch march demonstration in Helsinki in memory of the Finnish SS-battalion on the Finnish independence day which ends at the Hietaniemi cemetery where members visit the tomb of Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim and the monument to the Finnish SS Battalion. The event is protested by antifascists, leading to counterdemonstrators being violently assaulted by NRM members who act as security. The demonstration attracts close to 3,000 participants according to the estimates of the police and hundreds of officers patrol Helsinki to prevent violent clashes.\nFrance.\nIn France, the most enthusiastic collaborationists during the German occupation of France had been the National Popular Rally of Marcel D\u00e9at (former SFIO members) and the French Popular Party of Jacques Doriot (former French Communist Party members). These two groups, like the Germans, saw themselves as combining ultra-nationalism and socialism. In the south there existed the vassal state of Vichy France under the military \"Hero of the Verdun\", Marshal Philippe P\u00e9tain whose emphasised an authoritarian Catholic conservative politics. Following the liberation of France and the creation of the Fourth French Republic, collaborators were prosecuted during the and nearly 800 put to death for treason under Charles de Gaulle.\nIn the aftermath of the Second World War, the main concern of the French radical right was the collapse of the French Empire, in particular the Algerian War, which led to the creation of the OAS. Outside of this, individual fascistic activists such as Maurice Bard\u00e8che (brother-in-law of Robert Brasillach), as well as SS-veterans Saint-Loup and Ren\u00e9 Binet, were active in France and involved in the European Social Movement and later the New European Order, alongside similar groups from across Europe. Early neo-fascist groups included Jeune Nation, which introduced the Celtic cross into use by radical right groups (an association which would spread internationally). A \"neither East, nor West\" pan-Europeanism was most popular among French fascistic activists until the late 1960s, partly motivated by feelings of national vulnerability following the collapse of their empire; thus the Belgian SS-veteran Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Thiriart's group Jeune Europe also had a considerable French contingent.\nIt was the 1960s, during the Fifth French Republic, that a considerable upturn in French neo-fascism occurred; some of it in response to the Protests of 1968. The most explicitly pro-Nazi of these was the FANE of Mark Fredriksen. Neo-fascist groups included Pierre Sidos' Occident, the Ordre Nouveau (which was banned after violent clashes with the Trotskyist LCR) and the student-based Groupe Union D\u00e9fense. A number of these activists such as Fran\u00e7ois Duprat were instrumental in founding the Front National under Jean-Marie Le Pen; but the FN also included a broader selection from the French hard-right, including not only these neo-fascist elements, but also Catholic integrists, monarchists, Algerian War veterans, Poujadists and national-conservatives. Others from these neo-fascist micro-groups formed the Parti des forces nouvelles working against Le Pen.\nWithin the FN itself, Duprat founded the FANE-backed Groupes nationalistes r\u00e9volutionnaires faction, until his 1978 assassination. The subsequent history of the French hard right has been the conflict between the national-conservative controlled FN and \"national revolutionary\" (fascistic and National Bolshevik) splinter or opposition groups. The latter include groups in the tradition of Thiriart and Duprat, such as the Parti communautaire national-europ\u00e9en, Troisi\u00e8me voie, the Nouvelle R\u00e9sistance of Christian Bouchet, Unit\u00e9 Radicale and most recently Bloc identitaire. Direct splits from the FN include the 1987 founded FANE-revival Parti nationaliste fran\u00e7ais et europ\u00e9en, which was disbanded in 2000. Neo-Nazi organizations are outlawed in the Fifth French Republic, yet a significant number of them still exist.\nGermany.\nFollowing the failure of the National Democratic Party of Germany in the election of 1969, small groups committed to the revival of Nazi ideology began to emerge in Germany. The NPD splintered, giving rise to paramilitary \"Wehrsportgruppe\". These groups attempted to organize under a national umbrella organization, the Action Front of National Socialists/National Activists. Neo-Nazi movements in East Germany began as a rebellion against the Communist regime; the banning of Nazi symbols helped neo-Nazism to develop as an anti-authoritarian youth movement. Mail order networks developed to send illegal Nazi-themed music cassettes and merchandise to Germany.\nTurks in Germany have been victims of neo-Nazi violence on several occasions. In 1992, two young girls were killed in the M\u00f6lln arson attack along with their grandmother; nine others were injured. In 1993, five Turks were killed in the Solingen arson attack. In response to the fire Turkish youth in Solingen rioted chanting \"Nazis out!\" and \"We want Nazi blood\". In other parts of Germany police had to intervene to protect skinheads from assault. The Hoyerswerda riots and Rostock-Lichtenhagen riots targeting migrants and ethnic minorities living in Germany also took place during the 1990s.\nBetween 2000 and 2007, eight Turkish immigrants, one Greek German and a German policewoman were murdered by the neo-Nazi National Socialist Underground. The NSU has its roots in the former East German area of Thuringia, which \"The Guardian\" identified as \"one of the heartlands of Germany's radical right\". The German intelligence services have been criticized for extravagant distributions of cash to informants within the far-right movement. Tino Brandt publicly boasted on television that he had received around \u20ac100,000 in funding from the German state. Though Brandt did not give the state \"useful information\", the funding supported recruitment efforts in Thuringia during the early 1990s. (Brandt was eventually sentenced to five and a half years in prison on for 66 counts of child prostitution and child sexual abuse).\nPolice were only able to locate the killers when they were tipped off following a botched bank robbery in Eisenach. As the police closed in on them, the two men committed suicide. They had evaded capture for 13 years. Beate Zsch\u00e4pe, who had been living with the two men in Zwickau, turned herself in to the German authorities a few days later. Zsch\u00e4pe's trial began in May 2013; she was charged with nine counts of murder. She pleaded \"not guilty\". According to \"The Guardian\", the NSU may have enjoyed protection and support from certain \"elements of the state\". Anders Behring Breivik, a fan of Zsch\u00e4pe's, reportedly sent her a letter from prison in 2012.\nAccording to the annual report of Germany's interior intelligence service (Verfassungsschutz) for 2012, at the time there were 26,000 right-wing extremists living in Germany, including 6,000 neo-Nazis. In January 2020, Combat 18 was banned in Germany, and raids directed against the organization were made across the country. In March 2020, United German Peoples and Tribes, which is part of Reichsb\u00fcrger, a neo-Nazi movement that rejects the German state as a legal entity, was raided by the German police. Holocaust denial is a crime, according to the German Criminal Code (Strafgesetzbuch \u00a7 86a) and \u00a7 130 (public incitement).\nGreece.\nThe far-right political party Golden Dawn (\u03a7\u03c1\u03c5\u03c3\u03ae \u0391\u03c5\u03b3\u03ae \u2013 Chrysi Avyi) is generally labelled neo-Nazi, although the group rejects this label. A few Golden Dawn members participated in the Bosnian War in the Greek Volunteer Guard (GVG) and were present in Srebrenica during the Srebrenica massacre. The party has its roots in Papadopoulos' regime.\nThere is often collaboration between the state and neo-Nazi elements in Greece. In 2018, during the trial of sixty-nine members of the Golden Dawn party, evidence was presented of the close ties between the party and the Hellenic Police.\nGolden Dawn has spoken out in favour of the Assad regime in Syria, and the Strasserist group Black Lily have claimed to have sent mercenaries to Syria to fight alongside the Syrian regime, specifically mentioning their participation in the Battle of al-Qusayr. In the 6 May 2012 legislative election, Golden Dawn received 6.97% of the votes, entering the Greek parliament for the first time with 21 representatives, but when the elected parties were unable to form a coalition government a second election was held in June 2012. Golden Dawn received 6.92% of the votes in the June election and entered the Greek parliament with 18 representatives.\nSince 2008, neo-Nazi violence in Greece has targeted immigrants, leftists and anarchist activists. In 2009, certain far-right groups announced that Agios Panteleimonas in Athens was off limits to immigrants. Neo-Nazi patrols affiliated with the Golden Dawn party began attacking migrants in this neighborhood. The violence continued escalating through 2010. In 2013, after the murder of anti-fascist rapper Pavlos Fyssas, the number of hate crimes in Greece declined for several years until 2017. Many of the crimes in 2017 have been attributed to other groups like the Crypteia Organisation and Combat 18 Hellas.\nGolden Dawn was banned in 2020 for multiple violent crimes and murders. However, multiple successor parties emerged and secured representation in the Hellenic parliament. Given that many of Spartans' members of parliament have previously been associated with either Golden Dawn or Kasidiaris' party Greeks for the Fatherland, which was banned from participating in the 2023 elections, Spartans has been seen as a continuation of Golden Dawn.\nOn June 28, 2025 Thanos Plevris was appointed the new migration minister. Plevris has previously burned Turkish flags together with the neo-Nazi Golden Dawn, advocated shooting migrants and promoted \u201cpurity\u201d of the \"Greek race\". The Central Board of Jewish Communities had earlier voiced concerns about Plevris since he had defended the statement that Auschwitz should be re-opened for Jewish inmates, arguing that advocating for the extermination of the Jewish people should be legal.\nHungary.\nIn Hungary, the historical political party which allied itself ideologically with German National Socialism and drew inspiration from it, was the Arrow Cross Party of Ferenc Sz\u00e1lasi. They referred to themselves explicitly as National Socialists and within Hungarian politics this tendency is known as Hungarism. After the Second World War, exiles such as \u00c1rp\u00e1d Henney kept the Hungarist tradition alive. Following the fall of the Hungarian People's Republic in 1989, which was a Marxist\u2013Leninist state and a member of the Warsaw Pact, many new parties emerged. Amongst these was the Hungarian National Front of Istv\u00e1n Gy\u0151rk\u00f6s, which was a Hungarist party and considered itself the heirs of Arrow Cross-style National Socialism (a self-description they explicitly embraced). In the 2000s, Gy\u0151rk\u00f6s' movement moved closer to a national bolshevist and neo-Eurasian position, aligned with Aleksandr Dugin, cooperating with the Hungarian Workers' Party. Some Hungarists opposed this and founded the Pax Hungarica Movement.\nIn modern Hungary, Jobbik was regarded by some scholars as a neo-Nazi party; for example, it had been termed as such by Randolph L. Braham. The party denied being neo-Nazi, although \"there is extensive proof that the leading members of the party made no effort to hide their racism and anti-Semitism.\" Rudolf Paksa, a scholar of the Hungarian far-right, described Jobbik as \"anti-Semitic, racist, homophobic and chauvinistic\" but not as neo-Nazi because it does not pursue the establishment of a totalitarian regime. Historian Kriszti\u00e1n Ungv\u00e1ry writes that \"It is safe to say that certain messages of Jobbik can be called open neo-Nazi propaganda. However, it is quite certain that the popularity of the party is not due to these statements.\"\nHowever, since 2014 Jobbik has moderated into center-right pro-European conservative party according to multiple sources. The radical right-wing members of Jobbik disappointed with the more moderate direction defected and formed the Our Homeland Movement (MHM). MHM has been described as neo-fascist and they have celebrated the Arrow Cross nazis of the Second World War. In the 2024 European Parliament election MHM successfully secured representation, while the moderate Jobbik party failed to gain a seat.\nItaly.\nDuring the 1950s, the neo-fascist Italian Social Movement moved closer to bourgeois conservative politics on the domestic front, which led to radical youths founding hardline splinter groups, such as Pino Rauti's Ordine Nuovo (later succeeded by Ordine Nero) and Stefano Delle Chiaie's Avanguardia Nazionale. These organisations were influenced by the esotericism of Julius Evola and considered the Waffen-SS and Romanian leader Corneliu Zelea Codreanu a reference, moving beyond Italian fascism. They were implicated in paramiliary attacks during the late 1960s to the early 1980s, such as the Piazza Fontana bombing. Delle Chiaie had even assisted Junio Valerio Borghese in a failed 1970 coup attempt known as the Golpe Borghese, which attempted to reinstate a fascist state in Italy.\nIreland.\nThe National Socialist Irish Workers Party, a small party, was active between 1968 and the late 1980s, producing neo-Nazi propaganda pamphlets and sending threatening messages to Jews and Black people living in Ireland.\nNetherlands.\nNoteworthy neo-Nazi movements and parties in the Netherlands include the National European Social Movement (NESB), the Dutch People's Union (NVU), the National Alliance (NA), and the Nationalist People's Movement (NVB). Individuals of note have included \"Waffen-SS\" volunteer and NESB founder Paul van Tienen, war-time collaborator and NESB co-founder Jan Wolthuis, former NVU member Bernhard Postma, the \"Black Widow\" Florentine Rost van Tonningen, former NVU leader Joop Glimmerveen, CP/CP'86 member and NVB leader Wim Beaux, former CP/CP'86 member and NA leader Jan Teijn, former NVU member and \"Hitler-lookalike\" Stefan Wijkamp, former CP'86 member and current NVU leader Constant Kusters, and former NVU member and NA leader Virginia Kapi\u0107.\nBoth the General Intelligence and Security Service and non-governmental initiatives such as the far-left anti-fascist research group Kafka research neo-Nazism and other forms of political extremism and have attested to the local presence of international movements such as Blood &amp; Honour, Combat 18, the Racial Volunteer Force, and The Base, and expressed concern at the online dissemination of alt-right and far-right accelerationist thought in the Netherlands.\nPoland.\nUnder the Polish Constitution promoting any totalitarian system such as Nazism, fascism, or communism, as well as inciting violence and/or racial hatred is illegal. This was further re-enforced in the Polish Penal Code where discrediting any group or persons on national, religious, or racial grounds carries a sentence of 3 years.\nSeveral far-right and anti-semitic organisations exist, most notably NOP and ONR (both of which exist legally) and while they are classified as fascist, they officially say they are adherents of \"National Democracy\" rather than Nazism. These groups attempt to frame their activities as \"patriotic\" rather than neo-Nazi, even while employing Nazi symbolism or rhetoric, such as the Roman salute, which they distinguish from the Nazi salute. However, Daniel P\u0142adek, a sociologist at the Jagiellonian University and a researcher of the extreme right and Anti-Defamation League describe NOP and ONR as \"Nazi-like\" or outright neo-Nazi, despite their claims to the contrary. NOP was described as \"overtly nazi\" by anti-hate advocacy group Hope not Hate and NOP is connected to the banned neo-Nazi terrorist group National Action.\nAccording to the ADL Self-Defence of the Republic of Poland-party that had at most 10% of the vote tolerates neo-Nazis among its ranks and its founder Andrzej Lepper has praised Adolf Hitler. For example, Self-Defense MP Mateusz Piskorski has translated the texts of the Order of Nine Angles leader David Myatt into Polish.\nIn addition to the fascist groups that tactically officially reject Nazism, there are several openly self-identified Nazi groups in Poland. For example, the Pride and Modernity-group organizes big events to celebrate the birthday of Adolf Hitler where they burn wooden swastikas. The neo-Nazi gang Bad Company threw a welcoming party for Janusz Walu\u015b, a right-wing extremist who assassinated the anti-apartheid black activist Chris Hani. Polish neo-Nazis from Association of Independence Rota held an event at the German border, opposing refugees coming from the West. Szturmowcy (Stormtroopers) Nazi group held demonstrations, holding banners calling for a \"White Europe\". Polish Nazis from Zadru\u017cny Kr\u0105g have also fought as part of the pagan neo-nazi Rusich Group. In addition to these examples, many other neo-Nazi groups exist, like the National Socialist Front, Front for National Cleansing and National-Socialist Congress.\nPoland is also home to neo-Nazi bands such as Graveland and Honor. Reportedly an album by a neo-Nazi band named Legion sold over 30,000 copies even before the fall of the Iron Curtain.\nRobert Winnicki's National Movement sponsored the November 2017 anti-Israel demonstration that was attended by 60,000 people. Algemeiner characterized the demonstration as \"Ultranationalist and neo-Nazi\".\nAccording to several reporter investigations, the Polish government turns a blind eye to these groups, and they are free to spread their ideology, frequently dismissing their existence as conspiracy theories, dismissing acts political provocations, deeming them too insignificant to pose a threat, or attempting to justify or diminish the seriousness of their actions. \nFormer Polish ruling party Law and Justice (PiS) allegedly facilitated co-operation between conservative institutions and far-right extremists. In 2023, the PiS affiliated fundamentalist Catholic group Ordo Iuris started a campaign for the release of a neo-Nazi activist Marika Matuszak convicted of attacking an LGBT event, and she was released by PiS Justice Minister Zbigniew Ziobro. Sejm member and chair of the Together Party Adrian Zandberg criticized PiS Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki for \"commemorat[ing] a unit that openly collaborated with the Gestapo\" for paying tribute to the Holy Cross Mountains Brigade and said Hubert Jura may be a hero to Morawiecki, but not to him.\nRussia.\nSome observers have noted a subjective irony of Russians embracing Nazism, because one of Hitler's ambitions at the start of World War II was the Generalplan Ost (Master Plan East) which envisaged to exterminate, expel, or enslave most or all Slavs from central and eastern Europe (e.g., Russians, Ukrainians, Poles etc.). At the end of the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union, over 25 million Soviet citizens had died.\nThe first reports of neo-Nazi organizations in the USSR appeared in the second half of the 1950s. In some cases, the participants were attracted primarily by the aesthetics of Nazism (rituals, parades, uniforms, the cult of physical fitness, architecture). Other organizations were more interested in the ideology of the Nazis, their program, and the image of Adolf Hitler. The formation of neo-Nazism in the USSR dates back to the turn of the 1960s and 1970s; during this period, these organizations still preferred to operate underground.\nModern Russian neo-paganism took shape in the second half of the 1970s and is associated with the activities of supporters of antisemitism, especially the Moscow Arabist Valery Yemelyanov (also known as \"Velemir\") and the former dissident and neo-Nazi activist Alexey Dobrovolsky (also known as \"Dobroslav\").\nIn Soviet times, the founder of the movement of Peterburgian Vedism (a branch of Slavic neopaganism) Viktor Bezverkhy (Ostromysl) revered Hitler and Heinrich Himmler and propagated racial and antisemitic theories in a narrow circle of his students, calling for the deliverance of mankind from \"inferior offspring\", allegedly arising from interracial marriages. He called such \"inferior people\" \"bastards\", referred to them as \"Zhyds, Indians or gypsies and mulattoes\" and believed that they prevent society from achieving social justice.\nThe first public manifestations of neo-Nazis in Russia took place in 1981 in Kurgan, and then in Yuzhnouralsk, Nizhny Tagil, Sverdlovsk, and Leningrad.\nIn 1982, on Hitler's birthday, a group of Moscow high school students held a Nazi demonstration on Pushkinskaya Square.\nRussian National Unity (RNE) was a neo-Nazi group founded in 1990 and was led by Alexander Barkashov, who claimed to have members in 250 cities. RNE adopted the swastika as its symbol, and sees itself as the avant-garde of a coming national revolution. It is critical of other major far-right organizations, such as the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia (LDPR). As of 1997, the members RNE were called Soratnik (comrades in arms), receive combat training at locations near Moscow, and many of them work as security officers or armed guards. RNE was banned in 1999 by Moscow's court in 1999, after which the group faded away.\nIn 2007, it was claimed that Russian neo-Nazis accounted for \"half of the world's total\".\nOn 15 August 2007, Russian authorities arrested a student for allegedly posting a video on the Internet which appears to show two migrant workers being beheaded in front of a red and black swastika flag. Alexander Verkhovsky, the head of a Moscow-based center that monitors hate crime in Russia, said, \"It looks like this is the real thing. The killing is genuine ... There are similar videos from the Chechen war. But this is the first time the killing appears to have been done intentionally.\"\nAtomwaffen Division Russland is a neo-Nazi terrorist group in Russia found by Russian officials to have been tied to multiple mass murder plots. AWDR was founded by former members of defunct National Socialist Society responsible for 27 murders and AWDR is connected to local chapter of the Order of Nine Angles responsible for rapes, ritual murders and drug trafficking. The Russian authorities raided an Atomwaffen compound in Ulan-Ude and uncovered illegal weapons and explosives.\nNeo-Nazi groups such as \"88th Brigade\" Espanola and Rusich Group are taking part in the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Rusich Group is connected to the Order of Nine Angles and they have are responsible for multiple crimes, including ritual murder.\nSerbia.\nAn example of neo-Nazism in Serbia is the group Nacionalni stroj. In 2006 charges were brought against 18 leading members. Besides political parties, there are a few militant neo-Nazi organizations in Serbia, such as Blood &amp; Honour Serbia and Combat 18. In 2019 Serbian Combat 18 was discovered to be trafficking firearms to Atomwaffen neo-Nazis selling handguns, assault rifles, grenades and RPG-7s from the Balkans to French neo-Nazis in Marseille.\nSerbian Action is a prominent neo-Nazi group in Serbia. The group adheres to the ideology of the fascist ZBOR and the Serbian Nazi collaborators Milan Nedic and Dimitrije Ljoti\u0107 and Bishop Nikolaj Velimirovi\u0107, an early supporter of Adolf Hitler. They also organize annual memorial events and marches for them. Serbian Action is also proponent of the ideology of accelerationism and supports overthrowing the government in favor of Orthodox monarchy. Serbian Action is also affiliated with the neo-Nazi monarchist Russian Imperial Movement, Golden Dawn and the Iron March network that has been described as \"terroristic\".\nSlovakia.\nThe Slovak political party Kotlebists \u2013 People's Party Our Slovakia, which is represented in the National Council and European Parliament, is widely characterized as neo-Nazi. Kotleba has softened its image over time and now disputes that is fascist or neo-Nazi, even suing a media outlet that described it as neo-Nazi. As of 2020, the party spokesperson was Ondrej Durica, a former member of the neo-Nazi band (White Resistance). 2020 candidate Andrej Medvecky was convicted of attacking a black man while shouting racial slurs; another candidate, Anton Gr\u0148o, was fined for making a fascist salute. The party still celebrates 14 March, the anniversary of the founding of the fascist first Slovak Republic. In 2020, party leader Marian Kotleba was facing trial for writing checks for 1,488 euros, alleged to be a reference to Fourteen Words and Heil Hitler.\nSpain.\nSpanish neo-Nazism is often connected to the country's Francoist and Falangist past, and nurtured by the ideology of the National Catholicism.\nAccording to a study by the newspaper \"ABC\", black people are the ones who have suffered the most attacks by neo-Nazi groups, followed by Maghrebis and Latin Americans. They have also caused deaths in the anti-fascist group, such as the murder of the Madrid-born sixteen-year-old Carlos Palomino on 11 November 2007, stabbed with a knife by a soldier in the Legazpi metro station (Madrid).\nThere have been other neo-Nazi cultural organizations such as the Spanish Circle of Friends of Europe (CEDADE) and the Circle of Indo-European Studies (CEI).\nThe extreme right has little electoral support, with the presence of these groups of 0.36% (if the Plataforma per Catalunya (PxC) party is excluded with 66007 votes (0.39%), according to the voting data of the European elections of 2014. The first extreme right party FE de las JONS obtains 0.13% of the votes (21 577 votes), after doubling its results after the crisis; this is followed by the far-right party La Espa\u00f1a en Marcha (LEM) with 0.1% of the votes, National Democracy (DN) of the far-right with 0.08%, Republican Social Movement (MSR) (far-right) with 0.05% of the votes.\nSweden.\nNeo-Nazi activities in Sweden have previously been limited to white supremacist groups, few of which have a membership over a few hundred members. The main neo-Nazi organization is the Nordic Resistance Movement, a political movement which engages in martial arts training and paramilitary exercises and which has been called a terrorist group. They are also active in Norway and Denmark; the branch in Finland\u00a0was banned in 2019.\nSwitzerland.\nThe neo-Nazi and white power skinhead scene in Switzerland has seen significant growth in the 1990s and 2000s. It is reflected in the foundation of the Partei National Orientierter Schweizer in 2000, which resulted in an improved organizational structure of the neo-Nazi and white supremacist scene.\nUkraine.\nIn 1991, the Social-National Party of Ukraine (SNPU) was founded. The party combined radical nationalism and neo-Nazi features. The SNPU was characterized as a radical right-wing populist party that combined elements of ethnic ultranationalism and anti-communism. During the 1990s, it was accused of neo-Nazism due to the party's recruitment of skinheads and usage of neo-Nazi symbols. When Oleh Tyahnybok was elected party leader in 2004, he made efforts to moderate the party's image by changing the party's name to All-Ukrainian Association \"Svoboda\", changing its symbols and expelling neo-Nazi and neofascist groups. According to radicalism researchers Anton Shekhovtsov and Andreas Umland, extreme far-right in Ukraine are extremely weak and marginal force. Right-wing movements researcher Vyacheslav Likhachev notes that the number of Nazi skinheads in 2008 was less than two thousand, which, compared to 20 to 35 thousands skinheads in Russia, makes a substantially lower proportion. According to \"The Nation\" journalist James Carden, in 2016 \"neo-Nazis (or neo-fascists, if you prefer) are a distinctly minority taste in Western Ukraine\". In 2015, Konotop residents elected Artem Semenikhin, a Svoboda party member accused of neo-Nazi sympathies, as a mayor, because, according to Likhachev, he \"created himself an image of a defender of Ukrainian independence\"; however, Eduard Dolinsky of the Ukrainian Jewish Committee stated that Konotop was a \"clear case\" of anti-Semites being elected in local governing bodies.\nThe Azov Battalion, founded in 2014, has been described as a far-right militia, with connections to neo-Nazism and members wearing neo-Nazi and SS symbols and regalia, as well as expressing neo-Nazi views.\nAccording to Vyacheslav Likhachev of the , members of far-right (including neo-Nazi) groups played an important role on the pro-Russian side, arguably more so than on the Ukrainian side, especially during early 2014. Members and former members of the National Bolshevik Party, Russian National Unity (RNU), Eurasian Youth Union, and Cossack groups participated in recruitment of the separatists. A former RNU member, Pavel Gubarev, was founder of the Donbas People's Militia and first \"governor\" of the Donetsk People's Republic. RNU is particularly linked to the Russian Orthodox Army, one of a number of separatist units described as \"pro-Tsarist\" and \"extremist\" Orthodox nationalists. 'Rusich' is part of the Wagner Group, a Russian mercenary group in Ukraine which has been linked to far-right extremism. Afterward, the pro-Russian far-right groups became less important in Donbas and the need for Russian radical nationalists started to disappear.\nThe radical nationalist group \u042114, whose members openly expressed neo-Nazi views, gained notoriety in 2018 for being involved in violent attacks on Romany camps.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn 1962, the British neo-Nazi activist Colin Jordan formed the National Socialist Movement (NSM) which later became the British Movement (BM) in 1968.\nJohn Tyndall, a long-term neo-Nazi activist in the UK, led a break-away from the National Front to form an openly neo-Nazi party named the British National Party. In the 1990s, the party formed a group for protecting its meetings named Combat 18, which later grew too violent for the party to control and began to attack members of the BNP who were not perceived as supportive of neo-Nazism. Under the subsequent leadership of Nick Griffin, the BNP distanced itself from neo-Nazism, although many members (including Griffin himself) have been accused of links to other neo-Nazi groups.\nSonnenkrieg Division is a neo-Nazi terrorist organization in the United Kingdom, linked to international Atomwaffen Division network. Multiple members have been jailed for plotting terror attacks against minorities. Sonnenkrieg Division has been proscribed as a terrorist organization in United Kingdom and Australia. Sonnenkrieg Division is also closely tied with the Order of Nine Angles linked to the Murders of Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman.\nThe UK has also been a source of neo-Nazi music, such as the band Skrewdriver.\nAsia.\nChina.\nThere is a neo-Nazi music subculture in China, with government unofficially tolerating pro-Han bands and cracking down on minority artists. Beijing based Goatowarex has many Nazi bands on its label, including Gestapo 666, Satanic Warmaster and Zyklon SS.\nAccording to Global Network on Extremism and Technology, there exists a neo-Nazi movement in China's Inner Mongolia.\nIran.\nSeveral neo-Nazi groups were active in Iran, although they are now defunct. Advocates of Nazism continue to exist in Iran and are mainly based on the Internet.\nIraq.\nHawpa, also known as the Kurdish National Socialist Organization (PSNK), is a Kurdish neo-Nazi organization based in Iraqi Kurdistan that opposes ethnic and sexual minority rights and Arabization and strives for an ethnically pure, united Kurdistan. Hawpa is based on the ideas of Ramzi Nafi, a Kurdish nationalist and a Nazi collaborator.\nIsrael.\nNeo-Nazi activity is not common or widespread in Israel, and the few reported activities have all been the work of extremists, who were punished severely. One notable case is that of Patrol 36, a cell in Petah Tikva made up of eight teenage immigrants from the former Soviet Union who had been attacking foreign workers and gay people, and vandalizing synagogues with Nazi images. These neo-Nazis were reported to have operated in cities across Israel, and have been described as being influenced by the rise of neo-Nazism in Europe; mostly influenced by similar movements in Russia and Ukraine, as the rise of the phenomenon is widely credited to immigrants from those two states, the largest sources of emigration to Israel. Widely publicized arrests have led to a call to reform the Law of Return to permit the revocation of Israeli citizenship for\u2014and the subsequent deportation of\u2014neo-Nazis.\nJapan.\nSince 1982, the neo-Nazi National Socialist Japanese Workers' Party has operated in Japan, currently under the leadership of Kazunari Yamada, who has praised Hitler and denied the Holocaust.\nMongolia.\nFrom 2008, Mongolian neo-Nazi groups have defaced buildings in Ulaanbaatar, smashed Chinese shopkeepers' windows, and killed Chinese immigrants. The neo-Nazi Mongols' targets for violence are Chinese, Koreans, Mongol women who have sex with Chinese men, and LGBT people. They wear Nazi uniforms and revere the Mongol Empire and Genghis Khan. Though Tsagaan Khas leaders say they do not support violence, they are self-proclaimed Nazis. \"Adolf Hitler was someone we respect. He taught us how to preserve national identity,\" said the 41-year-old co-founder, who calls himself Big Brother. \"We don't agree with his extremism and starting the Second World War. We are against all those killings, but we support his ideology. We support nationalism rather than fascism.\" Some have ascribed it to poor historical education.\nTaiwan.\nThe National Socialism Association (NSA) is a neo-Nazi political organisation founded in Taiwan in September 2006 by Hsu Na-chi (), at that time a 22-year-old female political science graduate of Soochow University. The NSA has an explicit stated goal of obtaining the power to govern the state. The Simon Wiesenthal Centre condemned the National Socialism Association on 13 March 2007 for championing the former Nazi dictator and blaming democracy for social unrest in Taiwan.\nEven though there is no other significant movement than the officially founded NSA in 2005, the organized neo-Nazi activities have been continuing for years, often causing controversy to the public. These occasions include a Nazi parades on city streets, in or around the schools, restaurants serving dishes honoring Nazis, or displaying \"Mein Kampf\" with Nazi dresses while shouting \"Sieg Heil!\" with Nazi salutes. The organized activities were usually condemned by German Institute Taipei, Israel Economic and Cultural Office, and local Jewish communities, and further led to public outcries.\nTurkey.\nA neo-Nazi group existed in 1969 in \u0130zmir, when a group of former Republican Villagers Nation Party members (precursor party of the Nationalist Movement Party) founded the association \"Nasyonal Aktivite ve Zinde \u0130nki\u015faf\" (\"National Activity and Vigorous Development\"). The club maintained two combat units. The members wore SA uniforms and used the Hitler salute. One of the leaders (G\u00fcnd\u00fcz Kapanc\u0131o\u011flu) was re-admitted to the Nationalist Movement Party in 1975.\nApart from neo-fascist Grey Wolves and the Turkish ultranationalist Nationalist Movement Party, there are some neo-Nazi organizations in Turkey such as the Turkish Nazi Party or the National Socialist Party of Turkey, some of which are mainly based on the Internet.\nNational Front Party (Ulusal Cephe Partisi) adheres to neo-Nazism, spreads Nazi material translated into Turkish and targets Jews, Arabs and Africans. National Front Party has about 1000 members and is affiliated with the racist Victory Party (Turkey).\nThe neo-Nazi Ataman Brotherhood (Ataman Karde\u015fli\u011fi) patrols streets in Turkey and attacks Syrian and Afghan refugees.\nThe Newroz clashes were initiated by a Kurdish Neo-Nazi group known as \"Kurd\u00ean Nasyonalist\", who published a statement before Newroz calling for all Kurdish nationalists to attack Kurdish leftists and the LGBT community and its supporters, who are known to rally at Newroz celebrations. Many of the leftists and LGBT supporters were brutally beaten.\nAmericas.\nBrazil.\nSeveral Brazilian neo-Nazi gangs appeared in the 1990s in Southern and Southeastern Brazil, regions with mostly white people, with their acts gaining more media coverage and public notoriety in the 2010s. Some members of Brazilian neo-Nazi groups have been associated with football hooliganism. Their targets have included African, South American and Asian immigrants; Jews, Muslims, Catholics and atheists; Afro-Brazilians and internal migrants with origins in the northern regions of Brazil (who are mostly brown-skinned or Afro-Brazilian); homeless people, prostitutes; recreational drug users; feminists and\u2014more frequently reported in the media\u2014gay people, bisexuals, and transgender and third-gender people. News of their attacks has played a role in debates about anti-discrimination laws in Brazil (including to some extent hate speech laws) and the issues of sexual orientation and gender identity.\nCanada.\nNeo-Nazism in Canada began with the formation of the Canadian Nazi Party in 1965. In the 1970s and 1980s, neo-Nazism continued to spread in the country as organizations including the Western Guard Party and Church of the Creator (later renamed \"Creativity\") promoted white supremacist ideals. Founded in the United States in 1973, Creativity calls for white people to wage racial holy war (Rahowa) against Jews and other perceived enemies.\nDon Andrews founded the Nationalist Party of Canada in 1977. The purported goals of the unregistered party are \"the promotion and maintenance of European Heritage and Culture in Canada,\" but the party is known for anti-Semitism and racism. Many influential neo-Nazi leaders, such as Wolfgang Droege, were affiliated with the party, but many of its members left to join the Heritage Front, which was founded in 1989.\nDroege founded the Heritage Front in Toronto at a time when leaders of the white supremacist movement were \"disgruntled about the state of the radical right\" and wanted to unite unorganized groups of white supremacists into an influential and efficient group with common objectives. Plans for the organization began in September 1989, and the formation of the Heritage Front was formally announced a couple of months later in November. In the 1990s, George Burdi of Resistance Records and the band Rahowa popularized the Creativity movement and the white power music scene.\nOn September 18, 2020, Toronto Police arrested 34-year-old Guilherme \"William\" Von Neutegem and charged him with the murder of Mohamed-Aslim Zafis. Zafis was the caretaker of a local mosque who was found dead with his throat cut. The Toronto Police Service said the killing is possibly connected to the stabbing murder of Rampreet Singh a few days prior a short distance from the spot where Zafis' murder took place. Von Neutegem is a member of the Order of Nine Angles and social media accounts established as belonging to him promote the group and included recordings of Von Neutegem performing satanic chants. In his home there was also an altar with the symbol of the O9A adorning a monolith. According to Evan Balgord of the Canadian Anti-Hate Network, they are aware of more O9A members in Canada and their affiliated organization Northern Order. Northern Order is a proscribed neo-Nazi terrorist organization in Canada. NO members have been arrested for trafficking explosives and firearms, and NO has active members of the Canadian Armed Forces as its members and even a member of the CJIRU was identified as a member.\nControversy and dissention has left many Canadian neo-Nazi organizations dissolved or weakened.\nChile.\nAfter the dissolution of the National Socialist Movement of Chile (MNSCH) in 1938, notable former members of MNSCH migrated into Partido Agrario Laborista (PAL), obtaining high positions. Not all former MNSCH members joined the PAL; some continued to form parties that followed the MNSCH model until 1952. A new old-school Nazi party was formed in 1964 by school teacher Franz Pfeiffer. Among the activities of this group were the organization of a \"Miss Nazi\" beauty contest and the formation of a Chilean branch of the Ku Klux Klan. The party disbanded in 1970. Pfeiffer attempted to restart it in 1983 in the wake of a wave of protests against the Augusto Pinochet regime.\nNicol\u00e1s Palacios considered the \"Chilean race\" to be a mix of two bellicose master races: the Visigoths of Spain and the Mapuche (Araucanians) of Chile. Palacios traces the origins of the Spanish component of the \"Chilean race\" to the coast of the Baltic Sea, specifically to G\u00f6taland in Sweden, one of the supposed homelands of the Goths. Palacios claimed that both the blonde-haired and the bronze-coloured Chilean Mestizo share a \"moral physonomy\" and a masculine psychology. He opposed immigration from Southern Europe, and argued that Mestizos who are derived from south Europeans lack \"cerebral control\" and are a social burden.\nCosta Rica.\nSeveral fringe neo-Nazi groups have existed in Costa Rica, some with online presence since around 2003. The groups normally target Jewish Costa Ricans, Afro-Costa Ricans, Communists, gay people and especially Nicaraguan and Colombian immigrants. In 2012 the media discovered the existence of a neo-Nazi police officer inside the Public Force of Costa Rica, for which he was fired and would later commit suicide in April 2016 due to lack of job opportunities and threats from anti-fascists.\nIn 2015, the Simon Wiesenthal Center asked the Costa Rican government to shut down a store in San Jos\u00e9 that sells Nazi paraphernalia, Holocaust denial books and other products associated with Nazism.\nIn 2018, a series of pages on the social network Facebook of neo-Nazi inclination openly or discreetly carried out a vast campaign instigating xenophobic hatred by recycling old news or posting fake news to take advantage of an anti-immigrant sentiment after three homicides of tourists allegedly committed by migrants (although from one of the homicides the suspect is Costa Rican). A rally against the country's migration policy was held on 19 August 2018, in which neo-Nazi and hooligans took part. Although not all participants were linked these groups and the majority of participants were peaceful, the protest turned violent and the Public Force intervened with 44 arrested (36 Costa Ricans and the rest Nicaraguans). Authorities confiscated sharp weapons, Molotov cocktails and other items from the neo-Nazis, who also carried swastika flags. A subsequent anti-xenophobic march and solidarity with the Nicaraguan refugees was organized a week later with more assistance. A second anti-migration demonstration, with the explicit exclusion of neo-Nazis and hooligans, was carried out in September with similar assistance. In 2019 Facebook pages of extreme right-wing tendencies and anti-immigration position as \"Deputy 58\", \"Costa Rican Resistance\" and \"Salvation Costa Rica\" called an anti-government demonstration on 1 May with small attendance.\nCuba.\nCuban government shut down a rock music cultural center Maxim Rock after a Halloween festival event featuring SS uniforms and nazi salutes. In video footage of the event, the attendants applauded a man referred to as the \"Fuhrer\" who gave a straight arm salute and said \"Germany has won\". \nSome people involved with the CIA sponsored anti-Castro Cuban group Brigade 2506 became involved in neo-Nazism, such as commander Higinio \"Nino\" D\u00edaz who promoted The International Jew, said Hitler saved Germany and made the claim that Castro was Jewish. Another member of the Brigade Felipe Rivero Diaz was a known Holocaust denier, antisemite and an associate of David Duke.\nMexico.\nNeo-Nazi groups have grown in Mexico since the beginning of the 21st century on internet forums. Especially in the case of skinheads, they are often divided into two groups: the Caucasian population of European descent and the mestizos, the latter pejoratively referred to as \"morenazis.\"\nIn the 2010s and 2020s, there have been cases of pro-Nazi rock bands holding clandestine concerts in major Mexican cities, many of which openly displayed associated symbols such as the swastika or Adolf Hitler's cult of personality. According to \"Metal-Archives\", at least 28 neo-Nazi black metal bands have been identified in the country, 21 of which are active.\nPeru.\nPeru has been home to a handful of neo-Nazi groups, most notably the National Socialist Movement \"Peru Awake\", the National Socialist Tercios of New Castile, and the Peruvian National Socialist Union.\nUnited States.\nStatistics.\nIn 2017, following the Charlottesville car attack, an ABC News/Washington Post poll found that 9% of Americans considered having neo-Nazi beliefs was acceptable; at the time, this amounted to 22 million Americans.\nIdeology.\nThe ideology of James H. Madole, leader of the National Renaissance Party, was influenced by Blavatskian Theosophy. Helena Blavatsky developed a racial theory of evolution, holding that the white race was the \"fifth rootrace\" called the Aryan race. According to Blavatsky, Aryans had been preceded by Atlanteans who had perished in the flood that sunk the continent Atlantis. The three races that preceded the Atlanteans, in Blavatsky's view, were proto-humans; these were the Lemurians, Hyperboreans and the first Astral rootrace. It was on this foundation that Madole based his claims that the Aryan race has been worshiped as \"White Gods\" since time immemorial and proposed a governance structure based on the Hindu Laws of Manu and its hierarchical caste system.\nOrganizations and individuals.\nThere are several neo-Nazi groups in the United States. The National Socialist Movement (NSM) was one of largest neo-Nazi organization in the US. NSM had 400 members at its peak but is now a fraction of it. After World War II, new organizations formed with varying degrees of support for Nazi principles. The National States' Rights Party, founded in 1958 by Edward Reed Fields and J. B. Stoner, countered racial integration in the Southern United States with Nazi-inspired publications and iconography. The American Nazi Party, founded by George Lincoln Rockwell in 1959, achieved high-profile coverage in the press through its public demonstrations.\nThe Institute for Historical Review, formed in 1978, is a Holocaust denial body associated with neo-Nazism.\nGroups like the terrorist group Atomwaffen Division grew after the Unite the Right rally, recruiting those radicalized by its failure. Atomwaffen Division has been linked to at least 11 murders.\nIn 2022, famous rapper Kanye West stated that he identifies as a Nazi, denying the Holocaust and praising the policies of Adolf Hitler.\nIn 2025, Elon Musk was widely criticized by governments, media outlets, and watchdog groups after making a gesture during a public speech that many interpreted as a Nazi salute, intensifying concerns about his association with extremist views and antisemitic conspiracy theories.\nAccording to the Terrorism Research and Analysis Consortium, Aryan Freedom Network has as many as 1,500 members as of late 2025, which would make it the biggest neo-Nazi group in the US, rest of the neo-Nazi groups having only some hundreds of members.\nBetween freedom of speech and national security threats.\nThe First Amendment to the United States Constitution guarantees freedom of speech, which the courts have interpreted very broadly to include hate speech, severely limiting the government's authority to suppress it. This allows political organizations great latitude in expressing Nazi, racist, and antisemitic views. A landmark First Amendment case was \"National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie\", in which neo-Nazis threatened to march in a predominantly Jewish suburb of Chicago. The march never took place in Skokie, but the court ruling allowed the neo-Nazis to stage a series of demonstrations in Chicago.\nOrganizations which report upon neo-Nazi activities in the U.S., which may involve attacking and harassing minorities, include the American organizations Anti-Defamation League and the Southern Poverty Law Center.\nIn 2020, the FBI reclassified neo-Nazis to the same threat level as ISIS. Chris Wray, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, stated \"Not only is the terror threat diverse, it's unrelenting.\"\nUruguay.\nIn 1998, a group of people belonging to the \"Joseph Goebbels Movement\" tried to burn down a synagogue, which also served as a Hebrew school, in the Pocitos neighborhood of Montevideo in Uruguay; an antisemitic pamphlet signed by the group was found in the building after the quick action of firefighters saved it. Another group, the racist and antisemitic neo-Nazi group, founded in 1996, said when they were interviewed by the newspaper \"La Rep\u00fablica de Montevideo\" that they had no involvement with the attack on the synagogue, but revealed that they maintain contacts with a group called (\"White Power\"), also Uruguayan, as well as with neo-Nazi groups from Argentina and several European countries. Through the Internet they have received the solidarity of the \"Patria\" pro-fascist group, based in Spain. They also said that in the city of Canelones, Uruguay, fifty kilometers from Montevideo, there is a clandestine \"Aryan church\" which uses rituals taken from the Ku Klux Klan. The declared that they did not tolerate interracial or gay couples. One of the militants said in the interview that \"... if we see a black man with a white woman, we break them up ...\". Other neo-Nazi incidents in Uruguay in 1998 included the bombing of a Jewish-owned small business in February, which injured two people, and the appearance of posters celebrating the anniversary of Hitler's birthday in April.\nAfrica.\nSouth Africa.\nSeveral groups in South Africa, such as and Blanke Bevrydingsbeweging, have often been described as neo-Nazi.\nEug\u00e8ne Terre'Blanche was a prominent South African neo-Nazi leader who was murdered in 2010.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nThere were a number of now-defunct Australian neo-Nazi groups, such as the Australian National Socialist Party (ANSP), which was formed in 1962 and merged into the National Socialist Party of Australia (1968\u20131970s), originally a splinter group, in 1968, and Jack van Tongeren's Australian Nationalist Movement.\nThe National Socialist Network (NSN) is an Australian neo-Nazi political organisation formed from two far-right organisations, the Lads Society and the Antipodean Resistance, in 2020.\nWhite supremacist organisations active in Australia as of 2016 included local chapters of the Aryan Nations. Blair Cottrell, former leader of the United Patriots Front, has tried to distance himself from neo-Nazism, but he has nevertheless been accused of expressing \"pro-Nazi views\". Australian Security Intelligence Organisation director Mike Burgess said in February 2020 that neo-Nazis pose a \"real threat\" to Australia's security. Burgess maintained that there is a growing threat from the extreme right, and that its supporters \"regularly meet to salute Nazi flags, inspect weapons, train in combat and share their hateful ideology\". In June 2022, the Australian state Victoria banned display of the swastika symbol. Under the new law, individuals who intentionally exhibit the symbol may face up to a year in jail or a A$22,000 (\u00a312,300; $15,000) fine. The state of Victoria already has laws against hate speech, but they have been criticized for having weaknesses. The call for reform of these laws grew stronger in 2020 when a couple flew a swastika flag over their home, causing outrage in the community.\"\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, historical neo-Nazi organisations include Unit 88 and the National Socialist Party of New Zealand. White nationalist organisations such as the New Zealand National Front and Action Zealandia have faced accusations of neo-Nazism.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAcademic surveys\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "54363", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54363", "title": "Fashion police", "text": ""}
{"id": "54364", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54364", "title": "Pasigraphy", "text": "Writing system wherein each symbol represents a concept\nA pasigraphy (from Greek \u03c0\u1fb6\u03c3\u03b9 \"pasi\" \"to all\" and \u03b3\u03c1\u03ac\u03c6\u03c9 \"grapho\" \"to write\") is a writing system where each written symbol represents a concept (rather than or not just a word or sound or series of sounds in a spoken language).\nThe aim is to be intelligible to persons of all languages. The term was first applied to a system proposed in 1796, though a number of pasigraphies had been devised prior to that; Leopold Einstein reviews 60 attempts at creating an international auxiliary language, the majority of the 17th\u201318th century projects being pasigraphies of one kind or another, and several pasigraphies and auxiliary languages, including some sample texts, are also reviewed in Arika Okrent's book on constructed languages. Leibniz wrote about the alphabet of human thought and Alexander von Humboldt corresponded with Peter Stephen Du Ponceau who proposed a universal phonetic alphabet.\nExamples of pasigraphies include Blissymbols, Real Character, IConji and Yerkish."}
{"id": "54366", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54366", "title": "Namadgi National Park", "text": "National park in Australian Capital Territory\nNamadgi National Park is a protected area in the southwest of the Australian Capital Territory (ACT), bordering Kosciuszko National Park in New South Wales. It lies approximately southwest of Canberra, and occupies approximately 46 percent of the ACT's land area. \nCreated in 1984, the park is on the Australian National Heritage List. It suffered badly in the 2019\u201320 Australian bushfire season, with around 80% of its vegetation burnt.\nHistory.\nAboriginal history and custodianship.\n\"Namadgi\" is a local Aboriginal name for the mountains situated to the south-west of Canberra. Aboriginal presence in the area has been dated to at least 21,000 years. With radiocarbon dates of cultural deposits dating back to 9000\u20136000 years. There are numerous Aboriginal sites in the national park including rock paintings at Yankee Hat, dating from at least 800 years ago.\nThe area is one of cultural significance to the Aboriginal Australian peoples of the Australian Alps region, who inhabited the ACT region before European settlers arrived, and the national park's management plan is exercised with their consultation. In April 2001, representatives of the Ngambri communities entered into an agreement with the ACT government that recognised their traditional association with the national park lands and their role and duty to their ancestors and descendants as custodians of the area, and established a system of cooperative management. However, as of 2023[ [update]], the Ngunnawal people are recognised as the traditional owners of the land.\nAfter European settlement.\nThe area has a European history dating back to the 1830s, when settlers moved into the area and cleared the valleys for farming. The mountains and ridges remain forested.\nNamadgi National Park was created in 1984.\n2020 bushfire.\nIn January 2020, the Orroral Valley bushfire during the Black Summer season burnt about 80% of the national park (). An army MRH-90 Taipan helicopter, as part of \"Operation Bushfire Assist\" conducting reconnaissance for landing sites for remote area fire-fighting teams, attempted to land for a break when their landing light ignited the fire in dry grass.\nDescription.\nNamadgi National Park lies approximately southwest of Canberra, and makes up approximately 46 percent of the ACT's land area. The Visitor Centre is located south of Tharwa on the Boboyan-Naas Road. \nThe water catchment area of the park supplies approximately 85% of water for the nation's capital city, Canberra.\nThe national park is classified as an IUCN Category II protected area.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe national park protects part of the northern end of the Australian Alps. Its habitat ranges from grassy plains over snow gum forests to alpine meadows and wetlands.\nThe fauna is also varied: eastern grey kangaroos, wallabies, wombats, magpies, rosellas and ravens are commonly seen. The park includes fens with sedges, and sphagnum moss bogs that provide habitat for the northern corroboree frog (\"Pseudophryne pengilleyi\"), an endangered species.\nA single specimen of a new species of spider wasp in the Epipompilus genus was found in the park in 2018 and identified in 2020. The species has been named \"Epipompilus namadji\". As of 2021[ [update]] efforts are ongoing by teams from the Australian National Insect Collection at the CSIRO to find more of the wasps, as the bushfire has destroyed 80% of the park since the sighting.\nAustralian National Heritage List.\nOn 7 November 2008, the national park was one of eleven protected areas added to the Australian National Heritage List under the title of the Australian Alps National Parks and Reserves.\nClimate.\nIn this sub-alpine region, the weather ranges from cold winter nights to warm summer days, and it can change very quickly. Snow normally falls on the Bimberi and Brindabella Ranges during winter, and is not uncommon throughout most of the park. The highest mountain is Bimberi Peak at , the highest peak in the Australian Capital Territory. \nWinter sports.\nThe Namadgi National Park Draft Management Plan (September 2005) downplayed the future development of skiing as a sport in the Park,\nnoting that no facilities existed for alpine or downhill skiing within Namadgi, despite a history of downhill skiing associated with the Canberra Alpine Ski Club and the Mt Franklin Chalet (destroyed in the 2003 bushfires). The report predicted that it would be \"unlikely that Namadgi will be suitable for this activity in the future as climate change is causing conditions to become less favourable\". However, since the report was written, limited downhill ski facilities have returned at nearby Corin Forest, and cross country skiing takes place within the Park at various locations when conditions allow.\nIn the 1930s, with construction of the new capital city of Canberra under way, Canberrans explored the possibilities for developing skiing and snow sports in the Brindabellas. On 30 June 1936, the \"Canberra Times\" newspaper reported:\nThe Mount Franklin chalet was constructed at Mount Franklin in 1938 to service the Canberra Alpine Club. Ski runs were cleared and ski tows were improvised. The club also cleared runs elsewhere, completing a new ski run and jump on nearby Mount Ginini in 1951 - then judged to be the superior slope. Built on leased land, the Mount Franklin Chalet reverted to the Government when Namadgi National Park was created in 1984 and later operated as a museum before being destroyed in the 2003 bushfires. A new shelter designed and built by University of Adelaide students opened in 2008. Today, cross-country skiing is possible in the area when conditions allow.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54368", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54368", "title": "HDL cholesterol", "text": ""}
{"id": "54369", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54369", "title": "Ldl cholesterol", "text": ""}
{"id": "54370", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54370", "title": "LDL cholesterol", "text": ""}
{"id": "54376", "revid": "42355476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54376", "title": "Attorney general", "text": "Chief legal advisor to a government\nIn most common law jurisdictions, the attorney general (pl.: attorneys general) or attorney-general (AG or Atty.-Gen) is the main legal advisor to the government. In some jurisdictions, attorneys general also have executive responsibility for law enforcement and prosecutions, or even responsibility for legal affairs generally. In practice, the extent to which the attorney general personally provides legal advice to the government varies between jurisdictions, and even between individual office-holders within the same jurisdiction, often depending on the level and nature of the office-holder's prior legal experience.\nWhere the attorney general has ministerial responsibility for legal affairs in general (as is the case, for example, with the United States Attorney General or the Attorney-General for Australia, and the respective attorneys general of the states in each country), the ministerial portfolio is largely equivalent to that of a Minister of Justice in some other countries.\nThe term was originally used to refer to any person who holds a general power of attorney to represent a principal in all matters. In the common law tradition, anyone who represents the state, especially in criminal prosecutions, is such an attorney. Although a government may designate some official as the permanent attorney general, anyone who came to represent the state in the same way could, in the past, be referred to as such, even if only for a particular case. Today, however, in most jurisdictions, the term is largely reserved as a title of the permanently appointed attorney general of the state, sovereign or other member of the royal family.\nCivil law jurisdictions have similar offices, which may be variously called \"public prosecutor general\", \"procurators\", \"advocates general\", \"public attorneys\", and other titles. Many of these offices also use \"attorney general\" or \"attorney-general\" as the English translation of the title, although because of different historical provenance, the nature of such offices is usually different from that of attorneys-general in common law jurisdictions.\nEtymology.\nIn regard to the etymology of the phrase \"Attorney General\", Steven Pinker writes that the earliest citation in the Oxford English Dictionary is from 1292: \"Tous attorneyz general purrount lever fins et cirrographer\" (All general attorneys may levy fines and make legal documents). The phrase was borrowed from Anglo-Norman French when England was ruled by Normans after the conquest of England in the 11th-century. As a variety of French, which was spoken in the law courts, schools, universities and in sections of the gentry and the bourgeoisie, the term relating to government was introduced into English.\nThe phrase \"attorney general\" is composed of a noun followed by the postpositive adjective \"general\" and as other French compounds its plural form also appears as \"attorneys generals\". As compared to \"major generals,\" a term that also originates from French (\"\") and also has a postpositive adjective, it also appears incorrectly as \"attorney generals\". While Steven Pinker writes: \"So if you are ever challenged for saying \"attorney-generals,\" \"mother-in-laws\", \"passerbys\" ... you can reply, 'They are the very model of the modern \"major general\"'\" (a reference to the Major-General's Song, from the operetta \"The Pirates of Penzance\").\nThe modern title of major general is a military rank in which the word \"general\" is not used as an adjective but as a noun, which can be pluralized.\nIn modern public discourse, attorneys general are often referred to or addressed as \u201cgeneral\u201d. In this construction, the word \u201cgeneral\u201d is an adjective, and its use as a noun is incorrect. Attorneys general, despite carrying the title of \"general\", are not military officers and carry no rank.\nAttorneys-general in common law and hybrid jurisdictions.\nAttorneys-General in common law jurisdictions, and jurisdictions with a legal system which is partially derived from the common law tradition, share a common provenance.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, the attorney-general is the chief law officer of the Crown and a member of the Cabinet. The Attorney-General is the minister responsible for legal affairs, national and public security, and the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation. Michelle Rowland is the current Attorney-General. The Australian states each have separate attorneys-general, who are state ministers with similar responsibilities to the federal minister with respect to state law.\nFunctions of the state and federal attorneys-general include the administration of the selection of persons for nomination to judicial posts, and authorizing prosecutions. In normal circumstances, the prosecutorial powers of the attorney-general are exercised by the Director of Public Prosecutions and staff; however, the attorney-general maintains formal control, including the power to initiate and terminate public prosecutions and take over private prosecutions. Statutory criminal law provides that prosecutions for certain offences require the individual consent of the attorney-general. This is generally for offences whose illegality is of a somewhat controversial nature or where there is perceived to be a significant risk that prosecutions of a political nature may be embarked upon. The Attorney-General also generally has the power to issue certificates legally conclusive of certain facts (e.g., that the revelation of certain matters in court proceedings might constitute a risk to national security); the facts stated in such certificates must be accepted by the courts and cannot legally be disputed by any parties. The Attorney-General also has the power to issue a \"nolle prosequi\" with respect to a case, which authoritatively determines that the state (in whose name prosecutions are brought) does not wish to prosecute the case, so preventing any person from doing so.\nFor the attorneys-general of the various states and territories of Australia see:\nCanada.\nThe Attorney General of Canada () is a separate title held by the Canadian Minister of Justice (\"\"), a member of the Cabinet. The Minister of Justice is concerned with questions of policy and their relationship to the justice system. In their role as attorney general, they are the chief law officer of the Crown.\nA separate cabinet position, the Minister of Public Safety (), formerly the \"Solicitor General\", administers the law enforcement agencies (police, prisons, and security) of the federal government.\nFor the attorneys-general of the various provinces of Canada see:\nCyprus.\nThe Attorney General of the Republic is an independent official of the Republic of Cyprus, the head of the Legal Service of the state and the legal advisor to the Government of Cyprus. Hierarchically, it is the third highest institution of the state, after the President of the Republic and the President of the Parliament. This institution originates from the time of the British rule, and was preserved even after the independence of Cyprus in 1960 due to the Anglo-Saxon law which continues to exist in Cyprus, as in other Commonwealth states.\nFiji.\nIn Fiji, the role of the attorney general is defined as \"providing essential legal expertise and support to the Government\". More specific functions include \"legislative drafting\", \"legal aid\", \"the prerogative of mercy\" (advising the President), \"liquor licensing\" and \"film censorship\".\nThe current Attorney General is Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum. In January 2008, he sparked controversy by accepting other government positions in addition to his role as attorney general. Sayed-Khaiyum is currently responsible also for \"Public Enterprise, Electoral Reform and Anti-Corruption\". An article in the \"Fiji Times\" pointed out that \"never before in the history of this nation has the Attorney-General held a portfolio dealing with matters other than the law and the judiciary\", and criticised the decision.\nHong Kong.\nThe Secretary for Justice, known as the attorney-general before the handover of Hong Kong in 1997, is the legal adviser to the Hong Kong Government and heads the Department of Justice. They are assisted by five law officers, namely:\nCrimes and offences are prosecuted at the suit of the Secretary of Justice.\nThe Secretary of Justice, appointed by the Chinese government on the advice of the Chief Executive of Hong Kong, is an \"ex officio\" member of the Executive Council of Hong Kong. The position is normally held by a legal professional, and was, before July 2002, a civil service position.\nIndia.\nThe Attorney General for India is the Indian government's chief legal advisor, and is its principal Advocate before the Supreme Court of India. They are appointed by the President of India on the advice of the Union Cabinet under Article 76(1) of the Constitution and hold office during the pleasure of the President. The current Attorney General for India is R. Venkataramani.\nIreland.\nThe Attorney General of Ireland is the legal adviser to the Government and is therefore the chief law officer of the State. The attorney general as of 17 December 2022 is Rossa Fanning, SC.\nThe Office of the Attorney General is made up of a number of different offices:\nSince the enactment of the Prosecution of Offenses Act 1974, the responsibility for the prosecution of indictable criminal offences is mostly in the hands of the Director of Public Prosecutions who is independent of the attorney general and the State.\nIsle of Man.\nIn the Isle of Man, the Attorney General is a Crown appointment (appointed by the UK government) and sits in the Legislative Council of the Isle of Man, .\nIsrael.\nThe Attorney General of Israel is the head of the public prosecution from the state, the person who advises the government in legal matters, the person who represents the state's authorities in the courts, and advises in preparation of law memoranda of the government in general and the Justice Minister in particular (likewise he examines and advises for private proposals for a law of Knesset members).\nJamaica.\nThis is a position which existed in Jamaica for a long time.\nThe Hon. Marlene Malahoo Forte, QC, MP is the new Attorney General of Jamaica as of March 7, 2016.\nKenya.\nIn Kenya the Attorney General is the Principal Legal Adviser to the Government and \"ex officio\" Member of Parliament and Cabinet. His duties include the formulation of legal policy and ensuring proper administration of Kenya's legal system including professional legal education. Assisting the attorney general in the performance of his duties as principal legal adviser to the government are:\nThe Hon. Justice (Rtd) Paul Kihara Kariuki is the Attorney-General of Kenya as of April 2018.\nKiribati.\nIn Kiribati, the attorney general is defined by section 42 of the Constitution as \"the principal legal adviser to the Government\". The Constitution specifies: \"No person shall be qualified to hold or to act in the office of Attorney-General unless he is qualified to practise in Kiribati as an advocate in the High Court.\" The current Attorney General, as of 2016, was the Honourable Tetiro Semilota, until her nomination as Acting Chief Justice in October 2022.\nMalaysia.\nIn Malaysia the attorney-general or \"Peguam Negara\" (as he is referred to in Bahasa Melayu) is the principal legal adviser to the Government. He is also the principal public prosecutor in the country, and is also known as the Public Prosecutor. He has the power, exercisable at his discretion, to institute, conduct or discontinue any proceedings for an offence, other than proceedings before a Syariah court, a native court or a court-martial. The current Attorney-General of Malaysia is Idris Harun since 2020.\nMauritius.\nIn Mauritius, the attorney-general, who should be a barrister, is the principal legal adviser to the government and holds the office of a minister.\nThe Attorney-General's Office is also responsible for the drafting of legislation, and vetting of all contracts or agreements of which the government is a party, including international agreements, treaties or conventions.\nNepal.\nIn Nepal, the attorney general is the chief legal adviser of the Government of Nepal as well as its chief public prosecutor. An Attorney General is appointed by the President on recommendation of the Prime Minister.\nThe Attorney General's Office is a constitutional body under the Constitution of Nepal (2015). For a person to be eligible for the post of Attorney General, they must also be qualified to be appointed as a judge of the Supreme Court.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, the attorney-general is the chief law officer and primary legal advisor of the New Zealand government. The Attorney-General is the Minister responsible for the Crown Law Office, the Parliamentary Counsel Office, and the Serious Fraud Office. Historically, the post could be held either by a politician or by a senior jurist, but today, it is invariably held by a member of Parliament. The Attorney-General attends Cabinet, but the post is not the same as the Minister of Justice. By tradition, persons appointed to the position of Attorney-General have been lawyers. Only two former attorneys-general have not been lawyers, most recently Dr Michael Cullen who held the post in 2005, and again from 2006.\nPakistan.\nThe Attorney-General of Pakistan is the legal adviser to the government of the Pakistan and its public prosecutor.\nPhilippines.\nThe Attorney General of the Philippines was an office that existed from 1901 until 1932, when the office was abolished and its functions taken over by the Secretary of Justice. Since then, the Solicitor General of the Philippines, previously the second law officer, has been the principal law officer and legal defender of the Philippine Government. The Office of the Solicitor General is the law firm of the Republic of the Philippines. It is tasked with representing the Philippines, the Philippine Government, and all its officials in any litigation or matter requiring the services of a lawyer especially before appellate courts. It is an independent and autonomous office attached to the Department of Justice for budgetary purposes.\nSamoa.\nIn Samoa, the attorney general is the legal adviser to the government. Since 2016, the current[ [update]] attorney general is Lemalu Hermann Retzlaff (whose father Misa Telefoni Retzlaff also served as attorney general from 1986 to 1988)\nSingapore.\nThe Attorney-General of Singapore is the legal adviser to the government of the Republic of Singapore and its public prosecutor. The current Attorney-General is Lucien Wong.\nSri Lanka.\nThe attorney-general of Sri Lanka is the chief legal adviser of the Government of Sri Lanka and head of the attorney-general department which is the public prosecutor.\nSudan.\nAs of 2019[ [update]], the Attorney General of Sudan is Tag el-Sir el-Hibir.\nTonga.\nThe office of Attorney General was established in Tonga in 1988, and was held jointly with the portfolio of Justice Minister until the two were separated in 2009. The Attorney General is defined as the \"Chief Legal Advisor to Government\".\nTrinidad &amp; Tobago.\nAccording to the Constitution of Trinidad and Tobago, the supreme law of the nation, The Attorney General shall be responsible for the administration of legal affairs in Trinidad and Tobago and legal proceedings for and against the State shall be taken\u2014\n(a) in the case of civil proceedings, in the name of the attorney general;\n(b) in the case of criminal proceedings, in the name of the State.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEngland and Wales.\nThe Attorney General for England and Wales is similarly the chief law officer of the Crown in England and Wales, and advises and represents the Crown and government departments in court. In practice, the Treasury Solicitor (who also has the title of Procurator General) normally provides the lawyers or briefs Treasury counsel to appear in court, although the attorney general may appear in person. The person appointed to this role provides legal advice to the government, acts as the representative of the public interest and resolves issues between government departments.\nThe Attorney General has supervisory powers over the prosecution of criminal offences, but is not personally involved with prosecutions; however, some prosecutions (e.g. riot) cannot be commenced without their consent, and they have the power to halt prosecutions generally. Criminal prosecutions are the responsibility of the Crown Prosecution Service, headed by the Director of Public Prosecutions. The Attorney General may appeal cases to the higher courts where, although the particular case is settled, there may be a point of law of public importance at issue.\nThe Attorney General's deputy is the Solicitor General for England and Wales.\nUnder the Government of Wales Act 2006, the Counsel General is the chief legal adviser to the Welsh Government.\nNorthern Ireland.\nSince the prorogation of the Parliament of Northern Ireland in 1972, the Attorney General for England and Wales was also Attorney General for Northern Ireland. The separate office of Attorney General for Northern Ireland was re-created alongside the new office of Advocate General for Northern Ireland upon the devolution of policing and justice powers to the Northern Ireland Assembly in 2010.\nScotland.\nHistorically, the Lord Advocate was the equivalent for Scotland of the attorney general for England and Wales, being a legal advisor to the King of Scotland. After the Acts of Union 1707, the Lord Advocate became the chief legal advisor to the British government in respect of Scotland.\nUnder constitutional reforms enacted in 1999, the Lord Advocate has become an officer of the Scottish Government, while the United Kingdom government is advised on Scots law by the Advocate General for Scotland, a position created in 1999.\nThe lord advocate is assisted by the solicitor general for Scotland. The Advocate General is assisted by the solicitor to the Advocate General for Scotland, based in Edinburgh.\nOther attorneys general in the UK.\nThe attorney general of the Duchy of Cornwall is the chief legal adviser to the Prince of Wales, and there is a separate attorney general for the Duchy of Lancaster, an appointment that is held by the Crown.\nUnited States.\nIn the federal government of the United States, the Attorney General is a member of the Cabinet and, as head of the Department of Justice, is the top law enforcement officer and lawyer for the government. The Attorney General may need to be distinguished from the Solicitor General, a high Justice Department official with the responsibility of representing the government before the Supreme Court. In cases of exceptional importance, however, the attorney general may choose personally to represent the government to the Supreme Court.\nThe individual U.S. states and territories, as well as the federal district of Washington, D.C. also have attorneys general with similar responsibilities. The majority of state attorneys general are chosen by popular election, as opposed to the U.S. Attorney General, who is a presidential appointee confirmed by the Senate.\nIn nearly all United States jurisdictions, the attorney general is that jurisdiction's chief law enforcement officer; as such, an attorney general may also be considered a police rank. The proper way to address a person holding the office is Mister or Madam Attorney General, or just as Attorney General. The plural is \"Attorneys General\" or \"Attorneys-General\".\nZimbabwe.\nThe Attorney General is the chief legal advisor of the government of Zimbabwe. The office falls under the Ministry of Justice and Legal Affairs.\nSimilar offices in non-common law jurisdictions.\nNon-common law jurisdictions usually have one or more offices which are similar to attorneys-general in common law jurisdictions, some of which use \"attorney-general\" as the English translation of their titles.\nIceland.\nThe state attorney () represents the state in civil lawsuits. The state attorney is appointed by the Prime Minister for a period of 5 years and must have the same qualifications required to serve as a Supreme Court justice. The state prosecutor () represents the state in criminal trials and is appointed by the Minister of Justice for an indefinite period. The Minister of Justice oversees the judiciary, prosecution, policing, prison system et al.\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, there are two types of attorneys-general, that are only historically related.\nThe first type of attorney-general (\"advocaat-generaal\" in Dutch) is the public prosecutor in criminal cases at appellate courts.\nThe second type of attorney-general (\"procureur-generaal\", while their replacements are called \"advocaat-generaal\") is an independent advisor to the Supreme Court. These people give an opinion on cases (called \"conclusies\") in any field of law (not just criminal law), supported by a scientific staff. The Supreme Court may either follow or reject the opinion of the attorney-general (which is published together with the eventual decision). In a way, an attorney-general acts as yet another judge, but in the Dutch system that does not allow dissenting opinions to be published, it is the only way to reflect different perceptions on a case. The Procureur-Generaal also prosecutes members of parliament in the case of misfeance.\nDutch attorneys-general do \"not\" normally advise the government.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54378", "revid": "50872917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54378", "title": "Sturmabteilung", "text": "Nazi Party's original paramilitary wing\nThe (; SA; lit.\u2009'Storm Division' or loosely 'stormtroopers') was the original paramilitary organisation under Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party of Germany. It played a significant role in Hitler's rise to power in the 1920s and early 1930s. Its primary purposes were providing protection for Nazi rallies and assemblies, disrupting the meetings of opposing parties, fighting against the paramilitary units of the opposing parties, especially the \"Roter Frontk\u00e4mpferbund\" of the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) and the \"Reichsbanner Schwarz-Rot-Gold\" of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), and intimidating Romani, trade unionists, and especially Jews.\nThe SA were colloquially called Brownshirts () because of the colour of their uniform's shirts, similar to Benito Mussolini's Blackshirts. The official SA uniform was a brown shirt with a brown tie. The colour came about because a large shipment of Lettow-shirts, originally intended for the German colonial troops in Germany's former East Africa colony but which never reached its destination because of naval blockades, was purchased in 1921 by Gerhard Ro\u00dfbach for use by his \"Freikorps\" paramilitary unit. They were later used for his Schill Youth organization in Salzburg, and in 1924 were adopted by the Schill Youth in Germany. The \"Schill Sportversand\" then became the main supplier for the SA's brown shirts. The SA developed pseudo-military titles for its members, with ranks that were later adopted by several other Nazi Party groups.\nAfter Hitler rose to Nazi Party leadership in 1921, he formalized the party's militant supporters into the SA as a group that was to protect party gatherings. In 1923, owing to his growing distrust of the SA, Hitler ordered the creation of a bodyguard unit, which was abolished after the failed Beer Hall Putsch later that year. Not long after Hitler's release from prison, he ordered the creation of another bodyguard unit in 1925 that ultimately became the (SS). During the Night of the Long Knives () purge in 1934, the SA's then-leader Ernst R\u00f6hm was arrested and executed. The SA continued to exist but lost almost all its influence and was effectively superseded by the SS, which took part in the purge. The SA remained in existence until after Nazi Germany's final capitulation to the Allies in 1945, after which it was disbanded and outlawed by the Allied Control Council.\nRise.\nThe term predates the founding of the Nazi Party in 1919. Originally it was applied to the specialized assault troops of Imperial Germany in World War I who used infiltration tactics based on being organized into small squads of a few soldiers each. The first official German stormtrooper unit was authorized on March 2, 1915, on the Western Front. The German high command ordered the VIII Corps to form a detachment to test experimental weapons and develop tactics that could break the deadlock on the Western Front. On October 2, 1916, Erich Ludendorff ordered all German armies in the west to form a battalion of stormtroopers. They were first used during the 8th Army's siege of Riga, and again at the Battle of Caporetto. Wider use followed on the Western Front in the German spring offensive in March 1918, when Allied lines were successfully pushed back tens of kilometers.\nThe DAP (, German Workers' Party) was formed in Munich in January 1919, and Adolf Hitler joined it in September of that year. His talents for speaking, publicity and propaganda were quickly recognized. By early 1920 he had gained authority in the party, which changed its name to the NSDAP ( or National Socialist German Workers' Party) in February 1920. The party's executive committee added \"Socialist\" to the name over Hitler's objections, to help the party appeal to left-wing workers.\nThe precursor to the had acted informally and on an \"ad hoc\" basis for some time before this. Hitler, with an eye to helping the party to grow through propaganda, convinced the leadership committee to invest in an advertisement in the \"\" (later renamed the ) for a mass meeting in the , to be held in Munich on October 16, 1919. Some 70 people attended, and a second such meeting was advertised for November 13 in the beer hall, also in Munich. About 130 people attended; there were hecklers, but Hitler's military friends promptly ejected them by force, and the agitators \"flew down the stairs with gashed heads\". The next year on February 24, he announced the party's Twenty-Five Point program at a mass meeting of some 2,000 people at the Hofbr\u00e4uhaus. Protesters tried to shout Hitler down, but his former army companions, armed with rubber truncheons, ejected the dissenters. The basis for the SA had been formed.\nA permanent group of party members, who would serve as the (meeting hall protection detachment) for the DAP, gathered around Emil Maurice after the February 1920 incident at the Hofbr\u00e4uhaus. There was little organization or structure to this group. The group was also called the \"Stewards Troop\" () around this time. More than a year later, on August 3, 1921, Hitler redefined the group as the \"Gymnastic and Sports Division\" of the party (), perhaps to avoid trouble with the government. It was by now well recognized as an appropriate, even necessary, function or organ of the party. The future SA developed by organizing and formalizing the groups of ex-soldiers and beer-hall brawlers who were to protect gatherings of the Nazi Party from disruptions from Social Democrats (SPD) and Communists (KPD), and to disrupt meetings of the other political parties. By September 1921 the name (SA) was being used informally for the group. Hitler was the official head of the Nazi Party by this time.\nThe Nazi Party held a large public meeting in the Munich Hofbr\u00e4uhaus on November 4, 1921, which attracted many Communists and other enemies of the Nazis. After Hitler had spoken for some time, the meeting erupted into a m\u00eal\u00e9e in which a small company of SA thrashed the opposition. The Nazis called this event the (transl.\u2009Meeting hall battle), and it assumed legendary proportions in SA lore with the passage of time. Thereafter, the group was officially known as the .\nThe leadership of the SA passed from Maurice to the young Hans Ulrich Klintzsch in this period. He had been a naval officer and a member of the Brigade, which had taken part in the failed attempted coup. When he took over command of the SA, he was a member of the notorious Organisation Consul (OC). The Nazis under Hitler began to adopt the more professional management techniques of the military.\nIn 1922, the Nazi Party created a youth section, the , for young men between the ages of 14 and 18 years. Its successor, the Hitler Youth ( or HJ), remained under SA command until May 1932. Hermann G\u00f6ring joined the Nazi Party in 1922 after hearing a speech by Hitler. He was given command of the SA as the in 1923. He was later appointed an SA- (general) and held this rank on the SA rolls until 1945.\nFrom April 1924 until late February 1925, the SA was reorganized into a front organization known as the to circumvent Bavaria's ban on the Nazi Party and its organs. (This had been instituted after the abortive Beer Hall Putsch of November 1923). While Hitler was in prison, Ernst R\u00f6hm helped to create the as a legal alternative to the then-outlawed SA. In April 1924, R\u00f6hm had also been given authority by Hitler to rebuild the SA in any way he saw fit. When in April 1925 Hitler and Ludendorff disapproved of the proposals under which R\u00f6hm was prepared to integrate the 30,000-strong into the SA, R\u00f6hm resigned from all political movements and military brigades on May 1, 1925. He felt great contempt for the \"legalistic\" path the party leaders wanted to follow and sought seclusion from public life. Throughout the 1920s and into the 1930s, members of the SA were often involved in street fights, called (collisions), with members of the Communist Party (KPD). In 1929, the SA added a Motor Corps for better mobility and a faster mustering of units. It also acquired an independent source of funds: royalties from its own Sturm Cigarette Company. Previously, the SA had been financially dependent on the party leadership, as it charged no membership fees; the SA recruited particularly among the many unemployed in the economic crisis. The SA used violence against shops and shopkeepers stocking competing cigarette brands; it also punished any SA member caught with non-Sturm cigarettes. Sturm marketing was also used to make military service more appealing. Cigarettes were sold with collectible sets of images of historical German army uniforms.\nIn September 1930, as a consequence of the Stennes revolt in Berlin, Hitler assumed supreme command of the SA as its new . He sent a personal request to R\u00f6hm, asking him to return to serve as the SA's chief of staff. R\u00f6hm accepted this offer and began his new assignment on January 5, 1931. He brought radical new ideas to the SA and appointed several close friends to its senior leadership.\nPreviously, the SA formations were subordinate to the Nazi Party leadership of each . R\u00f6hm established new that had no regional Nazi Party oversight. Each Gruppe extended over several regions and was commanded by a SA- who answered only to R\u00f6hm or Hitler. Under R\u00f6hm as its popular leader and (Staff Chief), the SA grew in importance within the Nazi power structure and expanded to have thousands of members. In the early 1930s, the Nazis expanded from an extremist fringe group to the largest political party in Germany, and the SA expanded with it. By January 1932, the SA numbered approximately 400,000.\nMany of these stormtroopers believed in the strasserist promise of nazism. They expected the Nazi regime to take more radical economic action, such as breaking up the vast landed estates of the aristocracy, once they obtained national power. By the time Hitler assumed power in January 1933, SA membership had increased to approximately 2,000,000\u2014twenty times as large as the number of troops and officers in the (German Army).\nFall.\nAfter Hitler and the Nazis obtained national power, the SA leadership also became increasingly eager for power. By the end of 1933, the SA numbered more than 3 million men, and many believed they were the replacement for the \"antiquated\" . R\u00f6hm's ideal was to absorb the army (then limited by law to no more than 100,000 men) into the SA, which would be a new \"people's army\". This deeply offended and alarmed the professional army leaders and threatened Hitler's goal of co-opting the . The SA's increasing power and ambitions also posed a threat to other Nazi leaders. Originally an adjunct to the SA, the (SS) was placed under the control of Heinrich Himmler, in part to restrict the power of the SA and their leaders. The younger SS had evolved to be more than a bodyguard unit for Hitler and demonstrated that it was better suited to carry out Hitler's policies, including those of a criminal nature.\nAlthough some of the conflicts between the SS and SA were based on personal rivalries of leaders, the mass of members had key socio-economic differences and related conflicts. SS members generally came from the middle class, while the SA had its base among the unemployed and working class. Politically speaking, the SA was more radical than the SS, with its leaders arguing the Nazi revolution had not ended when Hitler achieved power, but rather needed to implement Strasserism in Germany. Hitler believed that the defiant and rebellious culture encouraged before the seizure of power had to give way to using these forces for community organization. But the SA members resented tasks such as canvassing and fundraising, considering them (\"little work\"), which had typically been performed by women before the Nazi seizure of power. , the first Gestapo chief, estimated that in 1933 Berlin, 70 percent of new SA recruits were former Communists.\nIn 1933, General Werner von Blomberg, the Minister of Defence, and General Walter von Reichenau, the chief of the 's Ministerial Department, became increasingly concerned about the growing power of the SA. R\u00f6hm had been given a seat on the National Defence Council and began to demand more say over military matters. On October 2, 1933, R\u00f6hm sent a letter to Reichenau that said: \"I regard the now only as a training school for the German people. The conduct of war, and therefore of mobilization as well, in the future is the task of the SA.\"\nBlomberg and von Reichenau began to conspire with G\u00f6ring and Himmler against R\u00f6hm and the SA. Himmler asked Reinhard Heydrich to assemble a dossier on R\u00f6hm. Heydrich recognized that for the SS to gain full national power, the SA had to be broken. He manufactured evidence to suggest that R\u00f6hm had been paid 12 million marks by French agents to overthrow Hitler. Hitler liked R\u00f6hm and initially refused to believe the dossier provided by Heydrich. R\u00f6hm had been one of his first supporters and, without his ability to obtain army funds in the early days of the movement, it is unlikely that the Nazis would have ever become established. The SA under R\u00f6hm's leadership had also played a vital role in destroying the opposition during the elections of 1932 and 1933.\nNight of the Long Knives.\nHitler had his own reasons for wanting R\u00f6hm removed. Some of his powerful supporters had been complaining about R\u00f6hm for some time. The generals opposed R\u00f6hm's desire to have the SA, a force of by then over three million men, absorb the much smaller German Army into its ranks under his leadership. Since the officers had developed the Reichswehr as a professional force of 100,000, they believed that it would be destroyed if merged with millions of untrained SA thugs. Furthermore, the army commanders were greatly concerned about reports of a huge cache of weapons in the hands of SA members. Industrialists, who had provided the funds for the Nazi victory, were unhappy with R\u00f6hm's socialistic views on the economy and his claims that the real revolution had still to take place. President Hindenburg informed Hitler in June 1934 that if a move to curb the SA was not forthcoming, he would dissolve the government and declare martial law.\nHitler was also concerned that R\u00f6hm and the SA had the power to remove him as leader. G\u00f6ring and Himmler played on this fear by constantly feeding Hitler with new information on R\u00f6hm's proposed coup. A masterstroke was to claim that Gregor Strasser, whom Hitler felt had betrayed him, was part of the planned conspiracy against him. With this news, Hitler ordered all the SA leaders to attend a meeting in the Hanselbauer Hotel in .\nOn June 30, 1934, Hitler, accompanied by SS units, arrived at Bad Wiessee, where he personally placed R\u00f6hm and other high-ranking SA leaders under arrest. Over the next 48 hours, 200 other senior SA officers were arrested on the way to Wiessee. Many were shot and killed as soon as they were captured, but Hitler decided to pardon R\u00f6hm because of his past services to the movement. On July 1, after much pressure from G\u00f6ring and Himmler, Hitler agreed that R\u00f6hm should die. Hitler insisted that R\u00f6hm should first be allowed to commit suicide. When R\u00f6hm refused to do so, he was shot by two SS officers, Theodor Eicke and Michael Lippert. Though the names of 85 victims are known, estimates place the total number killed at between 150 and 200 men, the rest of whom remain unidentified.\nSome Germans were shocked by the executions, but many others perceived Hitler to have restored \"order\" to the country. Goebbels' propaganda highlighted the \"R\u00f6hm-Putsch\" in the days that followed. The homosexuality of R\u00f6hm and other SA leaders was made public to add \"shock value\", although Hitler and other Nazi leaders had known for years about the sexuality of R\u00f6hm and other named SA leaders.\nAfter the purge.\nAfter the Night of the Long Knives, the SA continued to operate, under the leadership of \"Stabschef\" Viktor Lutze, but the group was significantly downsized. Within a year's time, the SA membership was reduced by more than 40%. However, the Nazis increased attacks against Jews in the early 1930s and used the SA to carry these out.\nIn November 1938, after the assassination of German diplomat Ernst vom Rath by Herschel Grynszpan (a Polish Jew), the SA was used for \"demonstrations\" against the act. In violent riots, members of the SA shattered the glass storefronts of about 7,500 Jewish stores and businesses. The events were referred to as ('Night of Broken Glass', more literally 'Crystal Night'). Jewish homes were ransacked throughout Germany. This pogrom damaged, and in many cases destroyed, about 200 synagogues (constituting nearly all Germany had), many Jewish cemeteries, more than 7,000 Jewish shops, and 29 department stores. Some Jews were beaten to death and more than 30,000 Jewish men were arrested and taken to concentration camps.\nThereafter, the SA became overshadowed by the SS; by 1939 it had little remaining significance in the Nazi Party, though it was never formally disbanded and continued to exist until the war ended. In January 1939, the role of the SA was officially established as a training school for the armed forces, with the establishment of the SA (SA Military Units). With the start of World War II in September 1939, the SA lost most of its remaining members to military service in the (armed forces).\nIn January 1941, long-standing rivalries between the \"Ausw\u00e4rtiges Amt\" (Foreign Office) and the SS exploded with the attempted coup d'\u00e9tat in Bucharest that saw SS back the coup by the Iron Guard under its leader Horia Sima against the Prime Minister, General Ion Antonescu, while the \"Ausw\u00e4rtiges Amt\" together with the Wehrmacht backed Antonescu. In the aftermath of the coup, the Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop made an effort to curb the power of the SS to conduct a foreign policy independent of the \"Ausw\u00e4rtiges Amt\". Taking an advantage of the long-standing rivalries between the SS and the SA, in 1941, Ribbentrop appointed an assemblage of SA men to head the German embassies in Eastern Europe, with Manfred Freiherr von Killinger going to Romania, Siegfried Kasche to Croatia, Adolf-Heinz Beckerle to Bulgaria, Dietrich von Jagow to Hungary, and Hanns Ludin to Slovakia in order to ensure that there would be minimal co-operation with the SS. The role of the SA ambassadors was that of \"quasi-\"Reich\" governors\" as they aggressively supervised the internal affairs of the nations they were stationed in, making them very much unlike traditional ambassadors. The SA leaders ambassadors fulfilled Ribbentrop's hopes in that all had distant relations with the SS, but as a group they were notably inept as diplomats with Beckerle being so crude and vulgar in his manners that King Boris III almost refused to allow him to present his credentials at the Vrana Palace. As the ambassador in Bratislava, Ludin arranged the deportation of 50,000 Slovak Jews to Auschwitz in 1942. On 23\u201324 August 1944, Killinger notably bungled the German response to King Michael I's Coup that saw King Michael I of Romania dismiss Antonescu, sign an armistice with the Allies, and declare war on Germany, thereby costing the \"Reich\" its largest source of oil. Of the SA ambassadors, Killinger and Jagow committed suicide in 1944 and 1945 respectively while Kasche and Ludin were executed for war crimes in 1947 in Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia respectively. Beckerle spent 11 years in a Soviet POW camp, was released to West Germany in 1955, was charged with war crimes in 1966 for his role in the deportation of Macedonian Jews, which were dropped on grounds of ill health in 1968 and died in 1976 at a retirement home in West Germany.\nIn 1943, Viktor Lutze was killed in an automobile accident, and Wilhelm Schepmann was appointed as leader. Schepmann did his best to run the SA for the remainder of the war, attempting to restore the group as a predominant force within the Nazi Party and to mend years of distrust and bad feelings between the SA and SS. On the night of 29\u201330 March 1945, Austrian SA members were involved in a death march of Hungarian Jews from a work camp at Engerau (modern Petr\u017ealka, Slovakia) to Bad Deutsch-Altenburg that saw 102 of the Jews being killed, being either shot or beaten to death. In April 1945, \"Kreisstabsf\u00fchrer des Kremser Volkssturms\" (District Chief of Staff of the Krems Militia) and \"SA-Standartenf\u00fchrer\" (Colonel of the SA) Leo Pilz led a contingent of \"Volkssturm\" militiamen during the Stein Prison massacre, during which 400-500 prisoners were summarily executed. Post-war, Pilz and four others were sentenced to death by the People's Court of Vienna.\nThe SA ceased to exist in May 1945 when Nazi Germany collapsed. It was formally disbanded and outlawed by the Allied Control Council enacting Control Council Law No. 2 on October 10, 1945. In 1946, the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg formally ruled that the SA was not a criminal organization.\nLeadership.\nThe leader of the SA was known as the , translated as Supreme SA-Leader. The following men held this position:\nIn September 1930, to quell the Stennes Revolt and to try to ensure the personal loyalty of the SA to himself, Hitler assumed command of the entire organization and remained for the remainder of the group's existence until 1945. The day-to-day running of the SA was conducted by the (SA Chief of Staff), a position Hitler designated for Ernst R\u00f6hm. After Hitler's assumption of the supreme command of the SA, it was the who was generally accepted as the Commander of the SA, acting in Hitler's name. The following personnel held the position of :\nOrganization.\nThe SA was organized into several large regional (\"Groups\"). The group leader answered only to the\n or Hitler. Each was made up of subordinate\n (\"Brigades\"). Subordinate to the were the smaller regiment-sized . operated in every major German city and were split into even smaller units, known as and .\nThe command nexus for the entire SA was the , located in Stuttgart. The SA supreme command had many sub-offices to handle supply, finance and recruiting.\nThe SA also had several military training units. The largest was the , which served as an auxiliary to the (German Navy) and performed search and rescue operations as well as harbor defense. The SA also had an \"army\" wing, similar to the Waffen-SS, known as . This formation expanded from regimental size in 1940 to a fully-fledged armored corps () in 1945. As for units formed outside of Germany, after the success of the invasion of Poland in 1939, an SA unit, \"Great Government\" was formed. The units were renamed SA \"Wehrsch\u00fctzen-Bereitschaften\" in 1942. The title was abbreviated to SA \"Wehrbereitschaften\", thereafter.\n\"Beefsteaks\" within the ranks.\nIn his 1936 \"Hitler: A Biography\", German historian Konrad Heiden remarked that within the SA ranks, there were \"large numbers of former Communists and Social Democrats\" and that \"many of the storm troops were called 'beefsteaks' \u2013 brown outside and red within.\" The influx of non-Nazis into the membership was so prevalent that SA men would joke that \"In our storm troop there are three Nazis, but we shall soon have spewed them out.\"\nThe number of \"beefsteaks\" was estimated to be large in some cities, especially in northern Germany, where the influence of Gregor Strasser and Strasserism was significant. The head of the Gestapo from 1933 to 1934, Rudolf Diels, reported that \"70 percent\" of the new SA recruits in the city of Berlin had been communists. This is evidenced further by historians, \"As for the prior youth group memberships, nearly half of the SS members and nearly one-third of the instant stormtroopers were with the Free Corps, vigilantes, or militant veterans' groups during their first 25 years of life. They also came in disproportionate numbers from left-wing youth groups such as the Socialist or Communist Youth or the Red Front (RFB).\"\nHistorians have argued that since most SA members came from working-class families or were unemployed, they were more amenable to Marxist-leaning socialism, expecting Hitler to fulfill the 25-point National Socialist Program. Historian states that the repeated efforts by the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) to appeal to the working-class backgrounds of the SA were \"doomed to failure\", because most SA men were focused on the nationalistic cult of Hitler and destroying the \"Marxist enemy\", a term that was used to identify both the KPD and the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD).\nThe \"beefsteak\" name also referred to party-switching between Nazi and Communist party members, particularly involving those within the SA ranks.\nSee also.\nSimilar paramilitary organizations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "54379", "revid": "488581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54379", "title": "Houghton, Michigan", "text": "Houghton (; ) is the largest city in and the county seat of Houghton County in the U.S. state of Michigan. Located on the Keweenaw Peninsula, Houghton is the largest city in the Copper Country region. It is the fifth-largest city in the Upper Peninsula, with a population of 8,386 at the 2020 United States census. Houghton is the principal city of the Houghton micropolitan area, which includes all of Houghton and Keweenaw counties. Houghton lies upon the Keweenaw Waterway, a partly natural, partly artificial waterway connecting at both ends to Lake Superior. Across the waterway from Houghton lies the city of Hancock.\nThe city of Houghton was named for Douglass Houghton, an American geologist and physician, primarily known for his exploration of the Keweenaw Peninsula. Houghton is home to Michigan Technological University, a public research university founded in 1885. Michigan Tech hosts a yearly Winter Carnival in February, drawing thousands of visitors from around the world. Michigan Tech's athletic teams are nicknamed the Huskies, and compete primarily in the NCAA Division II Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (GLIAC). The Michigan Tech Huskies men's ice hockey team competes in the NCAA Division I Central Collegiate Hockey Association (CCHA), and has won three national championships, in 1962, 1965, and 1975.\nHistory.\nNative Americans mined copper in and around what would later be Houghton thousands of years before European settlement. \"French explorers had noted... [its] existence [in the area] as early as the seventeenth century, [and in] 1772 Alexander Henry had prospected for copper on the Ontonagon River near Victoria.\"\nMany Cornish and Finnish immigrants arrived in the Houghton area to work in the copper mines in the mining boom that made Copper Country on the Keweenaw Peninsula; both groups have had a great influence on the culture and cuisine of the local area. The Finns and others called much of the area Copper Island. Smaller numbers of French-Canadian immigrants moved to Houghton, while more of them settled elsewhere in Houghton County.\nThe last nearby mines closed in the late 1960s, but a school founded in 1885 by the Michigan State Legislature to teach metallurgy and mining engineering, the Michigan College of Mines, continues today under the name of Michigan Technological University and is the primary employer in the city.\nThe first known European settler of Houghton was named Ransom Shelden, who set up a store named Ransom's near Portage Lake, though it is unclear whether this was in the same building as the 1852 Shelden and Shafer drugs, sometimes described as \"the first commercial building constructed in Houghton,\" which Shelden owned with his son Ransom B. The main street of Houghton, variously called \"Sheldon Avenue,\" (incorrectly) Sheldon Street, and Shelden Avenue, is named for him. In the 1970s the construction of a parking deck and the connection of downtown stores to create Shelden Center significantly changed the downtown.\nWilliam W. Henderson was appointed the first postmaster of Houghton in 1852.\nIn 1854, Ernest F. Pletschke platted Houghton, and was incorporated as a village in 1861. In Houghton's first days it was said that \"only thieves, crooks, murderers and Indians\" lived there. The postwar boom and increasing demand for copper wiring fueled the development of Houghton in the 1860s and 1870s.\nHoughton gained in importance as a port with the opening of the Keweenaw Waterway in 1873, the waterway being the cumulative dredging and extension of the Portage Lake, Portage Shipping Canal and Lily Pond so as to isolate the northern part of the Keweenaw Peninsula into Copper Island. By 1880 Houghton had become \"a burgeoning city\" and in 1883, the railroad was extended from Marquette.\n1909 saw the founding of what would later become Portage Lake District Library.\nDuring the bitter Copper Country Strike of 1913-1914, the Michigan National Guard was called in after the sheriff petitioned the governor.\nHoughton was the birthplace of professional ice hockey in the United States when the Portage Lakers were formed in 1903. Houghton is the home of the Portage Lake Pioneers Senior Hockey Team. The team's home ice is Dee Stadium, named after James R. Dee. Dee Stadium was originally called the Amphidrome, before it was severely damaged in a 1927 fire.\nHoughton was incorporated as a city in 1970.\nIn the winter of 2001, Houghton was the site of one of the first lumitalos (Finnish temporary snow houses) to be constructed in the United States.\nPhilatelic history.\nOn October 28, 2002, the first day of issue ceremony was held in Houghton for the \"snowman stamps\" issued by the United States Postal Service.\nOne of the 2006 United States Postal Service snowflake stamps (\"photographed in Houghton by Caltech physicist Kenneth Libbrecht using a digital camera and special microscope\") were unveiled in Houghton.\nA pictorial postmark commemorating Winter Carnival 2007, \"Ancient Worlds Come to Play in Snowy Drifts of Modern Day\", was applied at the Winter Carnival temporary station in Michigan Technological University's Memorial Union Building, February 10, 2007.\nGeography.\nThe city is located on the south shore of the Keweenaw Waterway, on rolling wooded hills, less than a mile across Portage Lake from Hancock. The city is bounded on the east by Portage Township and Pilgrim, on the west by Dakota Heights and Adams Township, and on the south by Hurontown and Isle Royale Location, unincorporated communities that are part of Portage Township. Houghton is named after Douglass Houghton, discoverer of copper nearby. Houghton is also the home of Michigan Technological University. The city is served by Houghton County Memorial Airport in nearby Oneco.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water.\nIn the West Houghton neighborhood is West Houghton Park, featuring an outdoor ice rink and lawn tennis courts. Along Portage Lake is the Raymond Kestner Waterfront Recreation Area, the principal feature of which is a large \"Chutes and Ladders\" playground; it also includes Houghton Beach. Along the waterfront, in the area that used to be occupied by the railroad tracks, runs the flat, paved Waterfront Trail for cyclists and pedestrians; at one end of this is the Houghton RV Park, at the other end the Nara Nature Park and midway along this corridor is Mattila Square. Prince's Point is also along this trail. Veterans Park is just across the Portage Lake Lift Bridge from Hancock, and contains the memorial to the Houghton Company, which fought in the Civil War. Houghton is the headquarters for Isle Royale National Park.\nThe Portage Lift Bridge spans Portage Lake, which is part of the river and canal system that crosses the entire peninsula, connecting Hancock and Houghton. The bridge, which provides of vertical clearance for ships when open, is the world's heaviest and widest double-decked vertical lift bridge. Since rail traffic was discontinued in the Keweenaw, the lower deck is used to accommodate snowmobile traffic in the winter. The bridge provides the only link between the north and south sections of the Keweenaw peninsula.\nClimate.\nHoughton has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\") but the (typically) long and snowy (due to lake-effect snow, with an average of ) winters make the city feel as though it is in a climate much farther north. It holds the distinction of having the third-most (behind Duluth and International Falls in Minnesota) maxima below of any incorporated city in the contiguous US, with the top temperature failing to rise above freezing an average of 100.9 days per year. It is sometimes said that Houghton has \"two seasons: winter\u2019s here and winter\u2019s coming\".\nWhile Houghton's winters may be the subject of humor, residents take the subject of snow and winter very seriously. Houghton is a Winter City\u2014a community that accommodates winter, celebrates it, and whose residents generally enjoy the season by participating in a variety of outdoor activities. Among those activities are cross country skiing, snow-shoeing, ice fishing, snowmobiling, ice skating and outdoor ice hockey, among other activities. Houghton celebrates winter through the \u201cWinter Carnival\u201d organized by Michigan Tech every year in February.\nHoughton's summer climate tends to be especially pleasant, as hot temperatures are often moderated by the cool waters of nearby Lake Superior. The city's record high temperature of was recorded July 7, 1988; this is the only day in the city's history with a temperature over . Temperatures below are also relatively infrequent due to the moderating effect of the lake, being reached only on 18.3 nights per year as against over fifty at International Falls. The coldest temperature on record is , set on February 9, 1951. The heaviest monthly snow total was in December 1978; the winter of 1978\u20131979 saw of snow fall, making it the snowiest in 109 years of continuous records at the county airport (1891\u20132000). The greatest snow depth recorded was at the end of February 1937; in only two winters between 1891\u20131892 and 1999\u20132000 (1925\u201326 with and 1932\u201333 with ) has the snow depth never reached at least two feet ().\nPeople and culture.\nEvery summer, the city of Houghton hosts a festival known as \"Bridgefest\", to commemorate the building of the Portage Lake Lift Bridge; this is often held in conjunction with \"Seafoodfest\". Every fall, the Parade of Nations takes place in downtown Houghton to commemorate the ethnic diversity of Michigan Technological University. \"Strawberry Fest\" is held in neighboring Chassell every summer, which not only celebrates the fruit, but also includes an art market with paintings, photos, sculptures, and crafts.\nThe city houses two museums. The Carnegie Museum, located in the former Portage Lake District Library building, contains photographs from the Raffaelli Historical Photo Collection, other artifacts on the history of the local area, a mural depicting the history of Houghton, Ontonagon, Baraga and Keweenaw Counties and exhibits of artwork. The AE Seaman Mineral Museum, state mineral museum of Michigan, is located on the campus of Michigan Technological University.\nHoughton is often the host of winter sporting events, due to its long winters and many ski hills. The 2006 cross-country skiing Junior Olympics took place in Houghton. The US National Championships for Nordic skiing took place in Houghton in January 2007. In addition, the International Frisbee Tournament (IFT) takes place every year in Houghton and the roll-out of the distance events of the Keweenaw Chain Drive bike races of Houghton and Hancock takes place in downtown Houghton.\nOther winter events focus around Michigan Technological University. Michigan Tech hosts a yearly Winter Carnival in which thousands of visitors come to see snow sculptures built by members of fraternities, sororities, other student organizations, as well as a few community groups, and participate in the week-long celebration. Students at the university also receive several days of vacation for Carnival. As part of Winter Carnival 2006, the city of Houghton and the university broke three world records: the largest snowball, the largest snowball fight, and the largest number of people making snow angels in one place. They currently still hold two of these records: largest snowball and largest snowball fight.\n\"The Daily Mining Gazette\" (formerly \"The Mining Gazette\") is a daily newspaper published in Houghton.\nThe town is sometimes referred to by locals as \"Hoton\" or \"Ho-town.\" \"Hoton\" is even stenciled on city property. Since Houghton and Hancock are very near each other, their combined area is often referred to as \"Houghton-Hancock,\" though the towns are often fierce rivals, something particularly manifested by the sports rivalry between Houghton High School and Hancock Central High School.\nTourism is a major industry in Houghton. Summer tourism is very popular, especially among those wishing to tour old mines, visit various historical sites, and camp. Winter tourism is also very active from November through April, for snowmobiling, skiing and other winter sports.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the census of 2020, there were 8,386 people residing in the city, living in 2,533 households with an average of 2.30 people per household.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 7,708 people, 2,380 households, and 907 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 2,516 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 85.2% White, 1.0% African American, 0.4% Native American, 11.2% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 0.4% from other races, and 1.8% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino residents of any race were 1.8% of the population.\nThere were 2,380 households, of which 18.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 28.6% were married couples living together, 6.3% had a female householder with no husband present, 3.2% had a male householder with no wife present, and 61.9% were non-families. 32.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.82.\nThe median age in the city was 22.1 years. 10.1% of residents were under the age of 18; 56.2% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 16.1% were from 25 to 44; 10.5% were from 45 to 64; and 7% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 64.3% male and 35.7% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 7,010 people, 2,114 households, and 877 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 2,222 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 89.24% White, 1.87% Black or African American, 0.40% Native American, 6.79% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.24% from other races, and 1.44% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.77% of the population. 16.4% were of German, 12.7% Finnish, 8.2% Irish, 8.0% English, 6.0% Polish and 5.1% Italian ancestry according to Census 2000. 94.8% spoke English, 1.8% Spanish and 1.2% Chinese as their first language.\nThere were 2,114 households, out of which 21.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 31.6% were married couples living together, 7.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 58.5% were non-families. 35.2% of all households were one-person households, and 12.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.34 and the average family size was 2.94.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 12.0% under the age of 18, 55.2% from 18 to 24, 15.3% from 25 to 44, 10.3% from 45 to 64, and 7.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 22 years. For every 100 females, there were 160.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 173.2 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $21,186, and the median income for a family was $41,779. Males had a median income of $36,161 versus $28,639 for females. The per capita income for the city was $11,750. About 20.3% of families and 36.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.9% of those under age 18 and 18.2% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nThe local school district is Houghton-Portage Township Schools. Students K-12 are served by Houghton Elementary (K-5), Middle (6\u20138), and High (9\u201312) Schools. Houghton is also the home of Michigan Technological University.\nTransportation.\nBus.\nIndian Trails bus lines operates daily intercity bus service between Hancock, Michigan, and Milwaukee, Wisconsin.\nHoughton Motor Transit operates both a demand bus and a route bus throughout Houghton and in nearby parts of Portage Township; there are also night trips to Mont Ripley in Ripley.\nFerry.\nHoughton is the port of departure for Isle Royale National Park. Cruise ships on the Great Lakes (in the 1950s) used to frequently stop in Houghton, but this is now an exceedingly rare occurrence.\nAirport.\nHoughton is served by the Houghton County Memorial Airport, which has limited commercial service.\nHoughton was formerly served by airship. A seaplane departs from Houghton to Isle Royale National Park.\nSnowmobiling.\nSnowmobiling is a major winter activity in the area, both locally (snowmobiles are often the best available means of transportation after a blizzard) and as a tourist industry. The Bill Nichols Snowmobile Trail has a terminus in Houghton.\nNeighborhoods.\nHoughton is generally said to be divided into East Houghton, the Central Houghton area (which includes the downtown) and West Houghton.\nMicropolitan area.\nThe Houghton, Michigan micropolitan area is a statistical aggregation of the United States census bureau.\nIn popular culture.\nHoughton features in the novels \"A Superior Death\" and \"Winter Study\" by Nevada Barr and the Robin Hamilton mystery series by Nancy Barr. Much of Ander Monson's \"Other Electricities\" takes place in Houghton.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54381", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54381", "title": "Food and cooking hygiene", "text": ""}
{"id": "54382", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54382", "title": "East Houghton Park", "text": ""}
{"id": "54383", "revid": "28032115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54383", "title": "Pangram", "text": "Sentence using every letter of alphabet\nA pangram or holoalphabetic sentence is a sentence using every letter of a given alphabet at least once. Pangrams have been used to display typefaces, test equipment, and develop skills in handwriting, calligraphy, and typing.\nOrigins.\nThe best-known English pangram is \"The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog\". It has been used since at least the late 19th century and was used by Western Union to test Telex/TWX data communication equipment for accuracy and reliability. Pangrams like this are now used by a number of computer programs to display computer typefaces.\nShort pangrams.\nShort pangrams in English are more difficult to devise and tend to use uncommon words and unnatural sentences. Longer pangrams afford more opportunity for humor, cleverness, or thoughtfulness.\nThe following are examples of pangrams that are shorter than \"The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog\" (which has 35 letters) and use standard written English without abbreviations or proper nouns:\nPerfect pangrams.\nA perfect pangram contains every letter of the alphabet only once and can be considered an anagram of the alphabet. The only known perfect pangrams of the English alphabet use abbreviations or other non-dictionary words, such as \"Blowzy night-frumps vex'd Jack Q.\" or \"Mr. Jock, TV quiz PhD, bags few lynx.\" or they include words so obscure that the phrase is challenging to understand, such as \"Cwm fjord-bank glyphs vext quiz\", in which \"\" is a loan word from Welsh meaning an amphitheatre-like glaciated depression, \"vext\" is an uncommon way to spell \"vexed\", and \"quiz\" is used in an archaic sense to mean a puzzling or eccentric person. Taken together, it means \"Symbols in the bowl-like depression on the edge of a long steep sea inlet confused an eccentric person\".\nOther writing systems may present more options: The Iroha is a well-known perfect pangram of the Japanese syllabary, while the Hanacaraka is a perfect pangram for the Javanese script and is commonly used to order its letters in sequence.\nOther languages.\nUsing the Latin script.\nWhereas the English language uses all 26 letters of the Latin alphabet in native and naturalized words, many other languages using the same alphabet do not. Pangram writers in these languages are forced to choose between only using those letters found in native words or incorporating exotic loanwords into their pangrams. Some words, such as the Gaelic-derived \"whisk(e)y\", which has been borrowed by many languages and uses the letters \"k\", \"w\" and \"y\", are a frequent fixture of many foreign pangrams.\nThere are also languages that use other Latin characters that do not appear in the traditional 26 letters of the Latin alphabet. This differs further from English pangrams, with letters such as \"\u00e7\", \"\u00e4\", and \"\u0161\".\n \"Zafar, take your jacket and cap, it will be very cold tonight\"\n \"At the night kind dragon wrapped in paper the rifle of the envious hunter\"\n \"A horse that was too yellow moaned devilish odes\"\n The most commonly used one, especially to test alphabet support with fonts. This sentence includes all Czech letters with diacritics, but not all basic letters.\n \"May the sinful saxophones of devils echo through the hall with dreadful melodies of waltz, tango and quickstep\"\n Used to include all basic letters, including letters that only occur in loanwords (\"g, q, w, x\").\n \"Tall shy groom won naughty sexquiz on wc\"\n A perfect pangram, using every letter exactly once (Including the more unusual letters as \"q\", \"w\", and \"x\", and including the Danish \"\u00e6\", \"\u00f8\", and \"\u00e5\").\n \"Dad's wise lynx piously looked at the sizable aqueduct\"\n \"Maybe every quasi-fitting bungle-choir makes a human type happy\"\n \"According to Ludwig Zamenhof, fresh Czech food with spices tastes good\"\n \"Echo-changes every Thursday\"\n Doesn't contain every letter but contains all accented letters.\n \"This little miller can jump on a train\"\n An imperfect pangram not using any of the special letters used in Estonian only for foreign words (c, f, q, \u0161, z, \u017e, w, x, y).\n \"The puny cellist-feuilletonist Ciqo from Zagreb was freezing in a dreadful garage\"\n An imperfect pangram not using some of the special letters used in Estonian only for foreign words (w, x, y).\n \"Have a nice birthday tonight, it's been a long time no see, it's been a while since we were in school.&lt;br&gt;Good afternoon, yes, see you again at twelve o'clock in the morning.\"\n A two-part pangram consisting of a statement and response.\n Although difficult to translate because of its non-practical use, it roughly means \"a whinge of a sleazy lover\"\n A perfect pangram not using any of the special letters used in Finnish only for foreign words (\"b\", \"c\", \"f\", \"q\", \"\u0161\", \"w\", \"x\", \"z\", \"\u017e\", \"\u00e5\").\n \"Albert bought a bassoon and blew a puffing tune\"\n An imperfect pangram not using some of the special letters used in Finnish only for foreign words (q, w, x, z, \u00e5) but which makes perfect everyday sense.\n \"It is rather fun that bicycles are a daily phenomenon on the countryroads\"\n An imperfect pangram not containing the previously mentioned special letters.\n \"A/the Viennese rich zombie who can speak Sioux likes \u00c5sa's Roquefort tacos\"\n Contains all the letters of the Finnish alphabet.\n \"Take this old whisky to the blond judge who is smoking\"\n Uses each basic consonant once, though not any letters with diacritics.\n \"The naive, hasty aegithales who lay eggs at Christmas when it's freezing are sure to be disappointed when they see their funny eggs damaged\"\n Contains the letters with diacritics as well as the ligature letters \u0153 (common in French) and \u00e6 (only used in loanwords).\n \"Victor chases twelve boxers across the Great Levee of Sylt\"\n Contains all letters, including the umlauted vowels (\"\u00e4\", \"\u00f6\", \"\u00fc\") and \u00df. The letter \"y\" is limited to loanwords and proper names like \"Sylt\".\n \"An unfaithful son-in-law is being treated by a sniveling, angry Mexican lord in Quito\"\n Contains all 44 letters of the Hungarian alphabet, with a total of 50 letters. \n \"An unfaithful son-in-law paints by a sniveling, angry Mexican lord at Wessel\u00e9nyi's in Quito\"\n Corrected version of the previous sentence, a real pangram.\n \"If a new axe were here, thieves would feel increasing deterrence and punishment\" \n Contains all 32\u00a0letters in the Icelandic alphabet including the vowels with diacritics (\"\u00e1\", \"\u00e9\", \"\u00ed\", \"\u00f3\", \"\u00fa\", \"\u00fd\", and \"\u00f6\") as well as the letters \u00f0, \u00fe, and \u00e6.\n \"Muharjo is a universal xenophobic who fears the peninsula residents, such as Qatar\"\n Contains all 26\u00a0letters in the Indonesian alphabet, including the foreign letters \"f\", \"q\", \"v\", \"x\" and \"z\".\n \"The Quran reciter figure gives the xylophone expert a ride on the tour guide's moped.\"\n Contains all 26\u00a0letters in the Indonesian alphabet. It also contains only words that are in the Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia.\n \"A large black cat ate the rotten fish promptly\"\n Has 31\u00a0letters and includes all 18\u00a0letters found in native Irish words, but does not include the accented \"\u00e1\", \"\u00ed\", or \"\u00fa\", nor the non-accented \"e\".\n \"A lunch of water makes twisted faces\"\n has 26\u00a0letters and includes all 21\u00a0letters found in native Italian words. It does not include the five letters which are not found in any Italian words, except for some loanwords: \"j\", \"k\", \"w\", \"y\", and \"x\".\n \"Sing to me, O Diva, of Achilles, son of Peleus, the raging wrath.\"\n Has 39 characters without considering any apostrophe and space. It is the Italian translation of the first verse of the Iliad and is used in Microsoft Windows operating system if the language is set to Italian (Italiano).\n \"There were more than four beautiful flowers near the filthy Feqo\"\n Has 42\u00a0letters and includes all 31\u00a0letters found in Kurdish words. This pangram was created by \u00cerec M\u00eahrbex\u015f in 2023.\n \"Muzafar often prayed and read the Quran while studying at the University of Oxford.\"\n Contains all 26\u00a0letters in the Malay Latin alphabet.\n \"Strange golfplayer with club won sexquiz in hometown\"\n \"Make the ego yellow with a gusle\"\n Contains all diactrics, but not every letter and is mainly used to test font support.\n \"Push a hedgehog or eight crates of figs in this boat\"\n Most commonly used, perfect pangram, archaic spelling of \"\".\n \"Be brave, protect your regiment and six flags\"\n Another pangram in common use.\n \"The watchman pushed the bone/dice into a quiz of the musics or a fax of the washes\"\n A perfect pangram containing all letters, including those used only in loan words: \"q\", \"v\", \"x\".\n \"I see a sexy hunk forcibly stuff fifteen kiwis into a shallow trunk.\"\n Uses all diacritics and all 23 letters from the Portuguese alphabet (before the Orthographic Agreement of 1990; the letters \"k\", \"w\", and \"y\" are found mainly in loanwords).\n \"I see a hobbler yelling that he performed the show without playback.\"\n Uses all letters from the Portuguese alphabet (including the letters \"k\", \"w\", and \"y\"), but no diacritics. Loans the word show from the english language.\n \"[I'm] still selling jam, beige whisky, and pink tequila, [with a] fixed price.\"\n Contains all letters, including Romanian diacritics: \u0103, \u00e2, \u00ee, \u0219, and \u021b. The letters \"q\", \"w\", and \"y\" were introduced in the Romanian alphabet in 1982 with the first DOOM dictionary. They are used for loan words such as \"quodlibet\", \"watt\", and \"yoga\". The letter \"k\" is also rarely used, mainly for names and international neologisms such as \"kilogram\" and \"folk\".\n \"A kind lamplighter with a sooty face wants to show me a prank.\"\n Can equally be written in gajica.\n \"Benjamin ordered a kiwi and strawberry drink. Noah, without shame, the most exquisite champagne on the menu\"\n Uses all diacritics and the foreign letters \"k\" and \"w\".\n \"The quick Indian bat was happily eating cardillo and kiwi. The stork was playing the saxophone behind the straw palenque.\"\n Contains 2 sentences and 92 letters; it is used in Microsoft Windows operating system if the language is set to Spanish (Espa\u00f1ol).\n \"A flock of happy woodpeckers by the mouth of the river V\u00e1h is teaching a silent horse to nibble on bark and feed on fresh meat\"\n Contains all letters in the Slovak alphabet. It does not include the letters \"f\", \"g\", \"j\", \"l\", \"q\", \"w\", \"x\", \"y\", as well as accented vowels \"\u00e1\" and \"\u00f3\".\n \"Flying snipes seek rest on soft tussocks\"\n Missing q, x and z. Uses archaic spellings.\n \"Axe killer Julia Blomqvist on fencing in Switzerland\"\n Uses the name \"Julia Blomqvist\" and the Swedish name for Switzerland.\n \"Switzerland brings luxury feather on branch behind oven\"\n Feels quite contrived. The duplicated letters spell out \"serif\".\n \"FAQ about Switzerland: Did you cleave a narrow village of ski boots?\"\n Uses the English abbreviation FAQ alongside some made-up compounds.\n \"Axe-handle carrier, give our WC zone-maiden IQ support\"\n Uses the English abbreviation IQ alongside two made up compounds.\n \"God help Zorn's maiden quickly get her pants off\"\n Uses both old-fashioned spelling and the dialectal form \"byx\".\n \"Foal without pants went to the dove show\"\n Missing q and z.\n \"The person gives you food\"\n Contains all the letters found in core words. It is commonly used to test constructed writing systems.\n \"The sick person in pyjamas quickly trusted the swarthy driver\"\n Contains all of the letters in the Turkish alphabet.\n \"I didn't park my least favourite pink fabric car and my magical digger full of bitter water by Mabon's house on Tuesday, but I parked it in a rusty lagoon\"\n Uses all the letters of the Welsh alphabet including the loan letter \"j\".\n \"My countryside school is built thoroughly by my father, so it's very clean and pretty\"\n A more grammatically correct form of , and contains all the letters and diacritics of the Vietnamese alphabet.\nOther alphabetic scripts.\nNon-Latin alphabetic or phonetic scripts such as Greek, Armenian, and others can also have pangrams. In some writing systems, exactly what counts as a distinct symbol can be debated. For example, many languages have accents or other diacritics, but one might count \"\u00e9\" and \"e\" as the same for pangrams. A similar problem arises for older English orthography that includes the long s (\"\u017f\").\n \"Wise text with a decisive secret and great significance, written on a green cloth and wrapped in blue leather\"\n \"The Chinese physicist treats the swollen left arm of the Armenian colonel by spraying it with soapwater\"\n \"In Iwye, a thin, lively devil in a green vest ran to eat minced meat with soup\"\n \"I will brutally kill this flowery profile that walks by my house straight to the heart\"\n \"Under a southern tree, blooming in blue, ran a little fluffy bunny\"\n \"For a moment I was in an unfamiliar squeaky plush armchair\"\n \"Oh, wonderful Bulgarian land, whirl blooming wheats!\"\n \"Hey, Valyo the guard is pretending to watch, but he's secretly eating meatballs behind the crates!\"\n \"A wise wizard from Ceylon took on a commitment and explicitly read the recipe for the elixir of life on the almond tree beside the Zalun Market\"\n \"We were overcome by smoke, the birds were carried away by chirping in the sky, sleep is disturbed by the clatter of glasses on the ground\"\n \"Kazakhstan is a beautiful country, full of tears\"\n \"A bunny ate some lettuce-flavored carrots, and he had enough\"\n \"A man with a beard flew to France and fished with a fishing pole\"\n \"That's how the explosives fell on the little chick that pushed Tzvi into the water\"\n \"A curious fish swimming in the sea is disappointed and suddenly finds a friend\"\n \"Seen across the mountains of salvation, the enchanted hail of darkness.&lt;br&gt;Then, at the cave of Hira's mound, the news was spread in all directions.&lt;br&gt;A wise and powerful one embraced the path of a faqir.&lt;br&gt;With smiles and resounding calls,&lt;br&gt;With responsibility,the fruit of patience was shared, and gains of love,&lt;br&gt;Which is the essence of the entire message.\"\n Punjabi Shahmukhi pangram, written by Akhter Mehmood\n \"Eat some more of these soft French pastries and drink some tea\"\n Most commonly used. Its variation is used by Windows FontView.\n \"Would a citrus live in the jungles of the south? Yes, but a fake specimen!\"\n This pangram is used by GNOME.\n \"Mr. Sangkhaphant Hengpithakfang\u00a0\u2013 an elderly man who earns a living by selling bottles\u00a0\u2013 was arrested for prosecution by police because he stole Lady Chatchada Chansamat's watch\"\n Contains all the letters in the Thai alphabet, both obsolete and non-obsolete.\n \"Echidna, hooded crow, hedgehog and also hissing reptiles are crossing Yangtze in a rush\"\n \"No more hailstorms, no more sunshine, No moonlight flickers in the night.&lt;br&gt;No goblets raised, no rain of fire \u2014 A strange new way of perishing is in sight.&lt;br&gt;Sweetness is lost, wit is annoyed, Every passion weakened, no fear, no fright.&lt;br&gt;The only fruit now is the name of the Beloved \u2014 This, Urfi, is all you have left in this life.\"\n Urdu pangram written by Syed Irfan Urfi\nNon-alphabetic scripts.\nLogographic scripts, or writing systems such as Chinese that do not use an alphabet but are composed principally of logograms, cannot produce pangrams in a literal sense (or at least, not pangrams of reasonable size). The total number of signs is large and imprecisely defined, so producing a text with every possible sign is practically impossible. However, various analogies to pangrams are feasible, including traditional pangrams in a romanization.\nIn Japanese, although typical orthography uses kanji (logograms), pangrams can be made using every kana, or syllabic character. The Iroha is a classic example of a perfect pangram in non-Latin script.\nIn Chinese, the Thousand Character Classic is a 1000-character poem in which each character is used exactly once; however, it does not include all Chinese characters. The single character (permanence) incorporates all the basic strokes used to write Chinese characters, using each stroke exactly once, as described in the Eight Principles of Yong.\nAmong abugida scripts, an example of a perfect pangram is the \"Hanacaraka (hana caraka; data sawala; padha jayanya; maga bathanga)\" of the Javanese script, which is used to write the Javanese language in Indonesia. \n All 50 letters of the Bengali alphabet are present in this pangram created by Sahidul and published in \"Shubach Little Mag\".\n \"Squirrels ride on the old wheel.\"\n Microsoft Windows uses this phrase to test Korean fonts, which uses all of the basic Hangul consonants but not all of the vowels.\n \"The unique conditions of a kiss are to meet the lips and do not require any special skills.\"\n This example pangram uses all 24 basic letters.\nSanskrit.\nSanskrit pangrams focus on consonants alone, since Sandhi rules make it extremely difficult to create a pangram showing vowels distinctly.\n \"Earthen pots and conches hold water.&lt;br&gt;Stupid imposters don\u2019t serve the truth.&lt;br&gt;Herds of pigs play with their tails.&lt;br&gt;Stormy winds blow gustily through the fences.\"\n The above has been composed by Saurabh B, in the \u0909\u092a\u0947\u0928\u094d\u0926\u094d\u0930\u0935\u091c\u094d\u0930\u093e (Up\u0113ndravajr\u0101) meter, and contains all consonants of Classical Sanskrit.\nSelf-enumerating pangrams.\nA self-enumerating pangram is a pangrammatic autogram, or a sentence that inventories its own letters, each of which occurs at least once. The first example was produced by Rudy Kousbroek, a Dutch journalist and essayist, who publicly challenged Lee Sallows, a British recreational mathematician resident in the Netherlands, to produce an English translation of his Dutch pangram. In the sequel, Sallows built an electronic \"pangram machine\", that performed a systematic search among millions of candidate solutions. The machine was successful in identifying the following 'magic' translation:\nThis pangram contains four As, one B, two Cs, one D, thirty Es, six Fs, five Gs, seven Hs, eleven Is, one J, one K, two Ls, two Ms, eighteen Ns, fifteen Os, two Ps, one Q, five Rs, twenty-seven Ss, eighteen Ts, two Us, seven Vs, eight Ws, two Xs, three Ys, &amp; one Z.\nChris Patuzzo was able to reduce the problem of finding a self-enumerating pangram to the boolean satisfiability problem. He did this by using a made-to-order hardware description language as a stepping stone and then applied the Tseytin transformation to the resulting chip.\nPangrams in literature.\nThe pangram \"The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog\", and the search for a shorter pangram, are the cornerstone of the plot of the novel \"Ella Minnow Pea\" by Mark Dunn. The search successfully comes to an end when the phrase \"Pack my box with five dozen liquor jugs\" is discovered (which has only 6 duplicated vowels).\nThe scientific paper \"Cneoridium dumosum\" (Nuttall) Hooker F. Collected March 26, 1960, at an Elevation of about 1450 Meters on Cerro Quemaz\u00f3n, 15 Miles South of Bah\u00eda de Los Angeles, Baja California, M\u00e9xico, Apparently for a Southeastward Range Extension of Some 140 Miles has a pangrammatic title.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54384", "revid": "50986144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54384", "title": "Aw\u00e1 (Brazil)", "text": "Indigenous people of Brazil\nThe Aw\u00e1 are an Indigenous people of Brazil living in the Amazon rainforest. There are approximately 350 members, and 100 of them have no contact with the outside world. They are considered highly endangered because of conflicts with logging interests in their territory.\nThe Aw\u00e1 people speak Guaj\u00e1, a Tupi\u2013Guaran\u00ed language. Originally living in settlements, they adopted a nomadic lifestyle around 1800 to escape incursions by Europeans.\nHistory.\nDuring the 19th century, the Aw\u00e1 came under increasing attack by the European settlers in the region, who cleared most of the forests from their land. Beginning around 1801, the Aw\u00e1 people adjusted an increasingly nomadic lifestyle in order to avoid European invaders.\nFrom the mid-1980s onward, some Aw\u00e1 moved to government-established settlements. However, for the most part, they were able to maintain their traditional way of life. Sustaining themselves entirely from their forests in nomadic groups of a few dozen people, and with little or no contact with the outside world.\nIn 1982, the Brazilian government received a loan of US$900 million from the World Bank and the European Union. One condition of the loan was that the lands of certain Indigenous peoples, including the Aw\u00e1, would be demarcated and protected; this held particular importance for the Aw\u00e1, whose forests were being increasingly invaded by outsiders, with many cases of tribespeople being killed by settlers, and the forest on which they depended being destroyed by logging and land clearance for farming.\nWithout government intervention, it seemed very likely that the Aw\u00e1 and their culture would become extinct. However, the Brazilian government was extraordinarily slow to act on its commitment. It took 20 years of sustained pressure from campaigning organisations such as Survival International and, earlier, the Forest Peoples Programme before, in March 2003, the Aw\u00e1's land was finally demarcated.\nMeanwhile, encroachment on their land and a series of massacres had reduced their numbers to about 300, only about 67 of whom were still living their traditional hunter-gatherer way of life.\nIn late 2011, illegal loggers burned an 8-year-old Aw\u00e1 girl alive after she wandered out of her village. The murder happened inside a protected area in the state of Maranh\u00e3o. Luis Carlos Guajajaras, a leader from another people, said that the girl had been killed as a warning to other native peoples living in the protected area.\nAccording to the Indigenous Missionary Council, about 450 Indigenous people were murdered between 2003 and 2010. An investigation discovered the Aw\u00e1 camp in question had been destroyed by loggers. According to Survival International, a human rights organization which campaigns for the rights of Indigenous tribal peoples and considers them to be the \"earth's most threatened tribe\", Aw\u00e1 forests are now disappearing faster than in any other Indian area in the Brazilian Amazon.\nIn April 2012, Survival International launched a worldwide campaign, backed by the actor Colin Firth, to protect the Aw\u00e1 people.\nIn September 2012, Brazil's Indian Affairs Department claimed that loggers were only away from the Aw\u00e1.\nIn 2019, M\u00eddia \u00cdndia, an indigenous film-making association, released a rough cut video of uncontacted tribe members, as activists warn of growing threats to this tribe from loggers who are nearing their traditional hunting ground. It was shown on Brazil\u2019s Globo TV on July 21, 2019, and features in the documentary, \"Ka'a Zar Ukize W\u00e1 \u2013 Forest Keepers in Danger* by M\u00eddia \u00cdndia. It was made in collaboration with the Instituto Socioambiental and the Instituto Catitu with the support of organizations including Instituto Makarapy, If Not Us Then Who and Survival International. In July 2021, it was confirmed that one of the tribe's members, Karapiru Aw\u00e1 Guaj\u00e1, had died of COVID-19 earlier in the month, at an estimated age of 75. Guaj\u00e1, who campaigned against the destruction of Aw\u00e1 land and for the rights of Indigenous Brazilian peoples, had been vaccinated against the virus.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54385", "revid": "11741717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54385", "title": "Child sacrifice", "text": "Killing of a child to appease a tribe or deity\nChild sacrifice is the ritualistic killing of children in order to please or appease a deity, supernatural beings, or sacred social order, tribal, group or national loyalties in order to achieve a desired result. As such, it is a form of human sacrifice.\nChild sacrifice is thought to be an extreme extension of the idea that the more important the object of sacrifice, the more devout the person rendering it.\nThe practice of child sacrifice in Europe and the Near East appears to have ended as a part of the religious transformations of late antiquity.\nPre-Columbian cultures.\nArchaeologists have found the remains of more than 140 children who were sacrificed in Peru's northern coastal region.\nAztec culture.\nThe Aztecs are well known for their ritualistic human sacrifice as offerings to gods with the goal of restoring cosmological balance. While the demographic of people chosen to sacrifice remains unclear, there is evidence that victims were mostly warriors captured in battle and slaves in the slave trade. Human sacrifice was not limited to adults, however; 16th century Spanish codices chronicled child sacrifice to Aztec rain gods. In 2008, archaeologists found and excavated 43 victims of Aztec sacrifice, 37 of which were children. The sacrificial victims were found by Temple R, a temple in Tlatelolco, the ancient Aztec city which is now Mexico City. Temple R was dedicated to the Aztec rain gods, including Tl\u0101loc, Ehecatl, Quetzalcoatl, and Hu\u012btzil\u014dp\u014dchtli. A majority (66%) of the excavated subadults were under 3 years old, and 32 subadults as well as 6 adults were identified as male, although the sex determination results could be replicated only for 26 of the 38 individuals.\nIt is hypothesized that this specific child sacrifice took place during the great drought and famine of 1454\u20131457, furthering the theory that Aztecs utilized human sacrifice to placate the gods. Osteological and dental pathological evidence shows that many of the child sacrificial victims had varying health issues, and it is suggested that the Tlaloques selected these children who had medical ailments. Because sacrificial victims typically embodied the gods they were being sacrificed to, male child sacrifices were more present at this site due to the masculine nature of the Aztec rain gods.\nInca culture.\nThe Inca culture sacrificed children in a ritual called \"qhapaq hucha\". Their frozen corpses have been discovered in the South American mountaintops. The first of these corpses, a female child who had died from a blow to the skull, was discovered in 1995 by Johan Reinhard. Other methods of sacrifice included strangulation and simply leaving the children, who had been given an intoxicating drink, to lose consciousness in the extreme cold and low-oxygen conditions of the mountaintop, and to die of hypothermia.\nMaya culture.\nIn Maya culture, people believed that supernatural beings had power over their lives and this is one reason that child sacrifice occurred. The sacrifices were essentially to satisfy the supernatural beings. This was done through \"k'ex\", which is an exchange or substitution of something. Through \"k'ex\" infants would substitute more powerful humans. It was thought that supernatural beings would consume the souls of more powerful humans and infants were substituted in order to prevent that. Infants are believed to be good offerings because they have a close connection to the spirit world through liminality. It is also believed that parents in Maya culture would offer their children for sacrifice and depictions of this show that this was a very emotional time for the parents, but they would carry through because they thought the child would continue existing. It is also known that infant sacrifices occurred at certain times. Child sacrifice was preferred when there was a time of crisis and transitional times such as famine and drought.\nThere is archaeological evidence of infant sacrifice in tombs where the infant has been buried in urns or ceramic vessels. There have also been depictions of child sacrifice in art. Some art includes pottery and steles as well as references to infant sacrifice in mythology and art depictions of the mythology.\nMoche culture.\nThe Moche of northern Peru practiced mass sacrifices of men and boys. Archeologists found the remains of 137 children and 3 adults, along with 200 camelids, during excavations in 2011, 2014 and 2016, beneath the sands of a 15th-century site called Huanchaquito-Las Llamas. This sacrifice was possibly made during the heavy rains as there was a layer of mud on top of the clean sand.\nTimoto-Cuica culture.\nThe Timoto-Cuicas offered human sacrifices. Until colonial times children sacrifice persisted secretly in Laguna de Urao (M\u00e9rida). It was described by the chronicler Juan de Castellanos, who cited that feasts and human sacrifices were done in honour of Icaque, an Andean prehispanic goddess.\nAncient Near East.\nTanakh.\nThe Tanakh mentions human sacrifice in the history of ancient Near Eastern practice. The king of Moab gives his firstborn son and heir as a whole burnt offering (\"olah\", as used of the Temple sacrifice). In the book of the prophet Micah, the question is asked, 'Shall I give my firstborn for my sin, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?', and responded to in the phrase, 'He has shown all you people what is good. And what does Yahweh require of you? To act justly and to love mercy and to walk humbly with your God.' The Tanakh also implies that the Ammonites offered child sacrifices to Moloch.\nAccording to scholars such as Otto Eissfeldt, Paul G. Mosca, and Susan Ackerman, Moloch was not a name for a god, but instead is a word for a particular form of child sacrifice practiced in Israel and Judah which was not abandoned until the reforms of Josiah. In the Tanakh mentions are made in books such as Kings, Leviticus, and Jeremiah of children being given \"to the \"m\u014dlek\"\". According to Patrick D. Miller these child sacrifice traditions were not originally part of the Yahwism, but were instead foreign imports. Francesca Stavrakopoulou contradicts this, asserting that sacrifices were native to Israel and part of the royal line's attempts to perpetuate itself.\n states \"The firstborn of your sons you shall give to me\" potentially a demand by Yahweh that the firstborn children of the Israelites must be sacrificed to him. However, Jacob Milgrom argues that Yahweh forbids human sacrifice and that in Exodus 22:28b-29, as in the Day of Atonement, Yahweh instituted substitutionary animal sacrifices for human sin and the redemption of the firstborn in Israelite families (cf. ). Yahweh also states to the prophet Jeremiah, \"They have built the high places of Topheth in the Valley of Ben Hinnom to burn their sons and daughters in the fire\u2014something I did not command, nor did it enter my mind,\" (Jeremiah 7:31) which some scholars interpret as indicating that it was once viewed as a central part to the law and desire of Yahweh.\nBinding of Isaac.\nGenesis 22 relates the binding of Isaac, by Abraham to present his son, Isaac, as a sacrifice on Mount Moriah. It was a test of faith (Genesis 22:12). Abraham agrees to this command without arguing. The story ends with an angel stopping Abraham at the last minute and making Isaac's sacrifice unnecessary by providing a ram, caught in some nearby bushes, to be sacrificed instead. Other interpretations of the text have contradicted this version. For example, Martin S. Bergmann states \"The Aggadah rabbis asserted that \"father Isaac was bound on the altar and reduced to ashes, and his sacrificial dust was cast on Mount Moriah.\" Margaret Barker notes that \"Abraham returned to Bersheeba without Isaac\" according to , a possible sign that he was indeed sacrificed. Barker also stated that wall paintings in the 244 CE Dura-Europos synagogue explicitly show Isaac being sacrificed, followed by his soul traveling to heaven. According to Jon D. Levenson a part of Jewish tradition interpreted Isaac as having been sacrificed. Similarly the German theologians Christan Rose and Hans-Friedrich Wei\u00df maintain that due to the grammatical perfect tense used to describe Abraham's sacrifice of Isaac, he did, in fact, follow through with the action.\nRabbi Abraham Kook, first Chief Rabbi of Israel, stressed that the climax of the story, commanding Abraham not to sacrifice Isaac, is the whole point: to put an end to, and God's total aversion to the ritual of child sacrifice. According to Irving Greenberg the story of the binding of Isaac, symbolizes the prohibition to worship God by human sacrifices, at a time when human sacrifices were the norm worldwide.\nBan in Leviticus.\nIn Leviticus 18:21, 20:3 and Deuteronomy 12:30\u201331, 18:10, the Torah contains a number of imprecations against and laws forbidding child sacrifice and human sacrifice in general. The Tanakh denounces human sacrifice as barbaric customs of Baal worshippers (e.g. Psalms 106:37).\nJames Kugel argues that the Torah's specifically forbidding child sacrifice indicates that it happened in Israel as well. The biblical scholar Mark S. Smith argues that the mention of \"Tophet\" in Isaiah 30:27\u201333 indicates an acceptance of child sacrifice in the early Jerusalem practices, to which the law in Leviticus 20:2\u20135 forbidding child sacrifice is a response. Some scholars have stated that at least some Israelites and Judahites believed child sacrifice was a legitimate religious practice.\nNumbers 31.\nIn the aftermath of the War against the Midianites narrated in Numbers 31, the Israelites appear to be dedicating 32 captive Midianite virgin girls to be sacrificed to Yahweh as his share in the spoils of war.\nGehenna and Tophet.\nThe most extensive accounts of child sacrifice in the Hebrew Bible refer to those carried out in Gehenna by two kings of Judah, Ahaz and Manasseh of Judah.\nJephthah's daughter.\nIn the Book of Judges, chapter 11, the figure of Jephthah makes a vow to God, saying, \"If you give the Ammonites into my hands, whatever comes out of the door of my house to meet me when I return in triumph from the Ammonites will be the Lord's, and I will sacrifice it as a burnt offering\" (as worded in the New International Version). Jephthah succeeds in winning a victory, but when he returns to his home in Mizpah he sees his daughter, dancing to the sound of timbrels, outside. After allowing her two months preparation, Judges 11:39 states that Jephthah kept his vow. According to the commentators of the rabbinic Jewish tradition, Jepthah's daughter was not sacrificed but was forbidden to marry and remained a spinster her entire life, fulfilling the vow that she would be devoted to the Lord. The 1st-century CE Jewish historian Flavius Josephus, however, interpreted this to mean that Jephthah burned his daughter on Yahweh's altar, whilst pseudo-Philo, late first century CE, wrote that Jephthah offered his daughter as a burnt offering because he could find no sage in Israel who would cancel his vow. In other words, this story of human sacrifice is not an order or requirement by God, but the punishment for those who vowed to sacrifice humans.\nPhoenicia and Carthage.\nThe practice of child sacrifice among Canaanite groups is attested by numerous sources spanning over a millennium. One example is in the writings of Diodorus Siculus:\n\"They also alleged that Kronos had turned against them inasmuch as in former times they had been accustomed to sacrifice to this god the noblest of their sons, but more recently, secretly buying and nurturing children, they had sent these to the sacrifice; and when an investigation was made, some of those who had been sacrificed were discovered to have been substituted by stealth... In their zeal to make amends for the omission, they selected two hundred of the noblest children and sacrificed them publicly; and others who were under suspicion sacrificed themselves voluntarily, in number not less than three hundred. There was in the city a bronze image of Kronos, extending its hands, palms up and sloping towards the ground, so that each of the children when placed thereon rolled down and fell into a sort of gaping pit filled with fire. It is probable that it was from this that Euripides has drawn the mythical story found in his works about the sacrifice in Tauris, in which he presents Iphigeneia being asked by Orestes: \"But what tomb shall receive me when I die? A sacred fire within, and earth's broad rift.\" Also the story passed down among the Greeks from ancient myth that Cronus did away with his own children appears to have been kept in mind among the Carthaginians through this observance.\" https://\nPlutarch:\n\"Again, would it not have been far better for the Carthaginians to have taken Critias or Diagoras to draw up their law-code at the very beginning, and so not to believe in any divine power or god, rather than to offer such sacrifices as they used to offer to Cronos? These were not in the manner that Empedocles describes in his attack on those who sacrifice living creatures: \"Changed in form is the son beloved of his father so pious, Who on the altar lays him and slays him. What folly!\" No, but with full knowledge and understanding they themselves offered up their own children, and those who had no children would buy little ones from poor people and cut their throats as if they were so many lambs or young birds; meanwhile the mother stood by without a tear or moan; but should she utter a single moan or let fall a single tear, she had to forfeit the money, and her child was sacrificed nevertheless; and the whole area before the statue was filled with a loud noise of flutes and drums so that the cries of wailing should not reach the ears of the people.\" https://\nPlato:\n\"With us, for instance, human sacrifice is not legal, but unholy, whereas the Carthaginians perform it as a thing they account holy and legal, and that too when some of them sacrifice even their own sons to Cronos, as I daresay you yourself have heard.\" https://\nTheophrastus:\n\"And from then on to the present day they perform human sacrifices with the participation of all, not only in Arcadia during the Lykaia and in Carthage to Kronos, but also periodically, in remembrance of the customary usage, they spill the blood of their own kin on the altars, even though the divine law among them bars from the rites, by means of perirrhanteria and the herald's proclamation, anyone responsible for the shedding of blood in peacetime.\"\nSophocles:\n\". . . was chosen as a . . . sacrifice for the city. For from ancient times the barbarians have had a custom of sacrificing human beings to Kronos.\"\nQuintus Curtius Rufus:\n\"Some even proposed renewing a sacrifice which had been discontinued for many years, and which I for my part should believe to be by no means pleasing to the gods, of offering a freeborn boy to Saturn \u2014this sacrilege rather than sacrifice, handed down from their founders, the Carthaginians are said to have performed until the destruction of their city\u2014and unless the elders, in accordance with whose counsel everything was done, had opposed it, the awful superstition would have prevailed over mercy. But necessity, more inventive than any art, introduced not only the usual means of defence, but also some novel ones.\" History of Alexander IV.III.23\nTertullian:\n\"In Africa infants used to be sacrificed to Saturn, and quite openly, down to the proconsulate of Tiberius, who took the priests themselves and on the very trees of their temple, under whose shadow their crimes had been committed, hung them alive like votive offerings on crosses; and the soldiers of my own country are witnesses to it, who served that proconsul in that very task. Yes, and to this day that holy crime persists in secret.\" Apology 9.2-3\nPhilo of Byblos:\n\"Among ancient peoples in critically dangerous situations it was customary for the rulers of a city or nation, rather than lose everyone, to provide the dearest of their children as a propitiatory sacrifice to the avenging deities. The children thus given up were slaughtered according to a secret ritual. Now Kronos, whom the Phoenicians call El, who was in their land and who was later divinized after his death as the star of Kronos, had an only son by a local bride named Anobret, and therefore they called him Ieoud. Even now among the Phoenicians the only son is given this name. When war's gravest dangers gripped the land, Kronos dressed his son in royal attire, prepared an altar and sacrificed him.\"\nLucian:\n\"There is another form of sacrifice here. After putting a garland on the sacrificial animals they hurl them down alive from the gateway and the animals die from the fall. Some even throw their children off the place, but not in the same manner as the animals. Instead, having laid them in a pallet, they drop them down by hand. At the same time they mock them and say that they are oxen, not children.\"\nCleitarchus:\n\"And Kleitarchos says the Phoenicians, and above all the Carthaginians, venerating Kronos, whenever they were eager for a great thing to succeed, made a vow by one of their children. If they would receive the desired things, they would sacrifice it to the god. A bronze Kronos, having been erected by them, stretched out upturned hands over a bronze oven to burn the child. The flame of the burning child reached its body until, the limbs having shriveled up and the smiling mouth appearing to be almost laughing, it would slip into the oven. Therefore the grin is called \"sardonic laughter,\" since they die laughing.\"\nPorphyry:\n\"The Phoenicians too, in great disasters whether of wars or droughts, or plagues, used to sacrifice one of their dearest, dedicating him to Kronos. And the 'Phoenician History,' which Sanchuniathon wrote in Phoenician and which Philo of Byblos translated into Greek in eight books, is full of such sacrifices.\"\nAt Carthage, a large cemetery exists that combines the bodies of both very young children and small animals, and those who assert child sacrifice have argued that if the animals were sacrificed, then so too were the children. Recent archaeology, however, has produced a detailed breakdown of the ages of the buried children and, based on this and especially on the presence of prenatal individuals \u2013 that is, still births \u2013 it is also argued that this site is consistent with burials of children who had died of natural causes in a society that had a high infant mortality rate, as Carthage is assumed to have had. That is, the data support the view that Tophets were cemeteries for those who died shortly before or after birth. Conversely, Patricia Smith and colleagues from the Hebrew University and Harvard University show from the teeth and skeletal analysis at the Carthage Tophet that infant ages at death (about two months) do not correlate with the expected ages of natural mortality (perinatal), apparently supporting the child sacrifice thesis.\nGreek, Roman and Israelite writers refer to Phoenician child sacrifice. Skeptics suggest that the bodies of children found in Carthaginian and Phoenician cemeteries were merely the cremated remains of children that died naturally. Sergio Ribichini has argued that the Tophet was \"a child necropolis designed to receive the remains of infants who had died prematurely of sickness or other natural causes, and who for this reason were \"offered\" to specific deities and buried in a place different from the one reserved for the ordinary dead\".\nAccording to Stager and Wolff, in 1984, there was a consensus among scholars that Carthaginian children were sacrificed by their parents, who would make a vow to kill the next child if the gods would grant them a favor: for instance that their shipment of goods was to arrive safely in a foreign port.\nEurope.\nArchaeologist Peter Warren was involved in the British School at Athens excavation of Palekastro for one season and the excavation at Lefkandi for two seasons. Then he led the excavation at Fournou Korifi, Myrtos from 1967 to 1968. During the 1980s, in two archaeology magazines, Warren wrote about \"child sacrifice\" despite there being no mention of this subject in the official excavation report, which was completed and published along with his book in 1972.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Startling as it may seem, the available evidence so far points to an argument that the children were slaughtered and their flesh cooked and possibly eaten in a sacrifice ritual made in the service of a nature deity to assure an annual renewal of fertility.\nRodney Castleden uncovered a sanctuary near Knossos where the remains of a 17-year-old were found.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His ankles had evidently been tied and his legs folded up to make him fit on the table... He had been ritually murdered with the long bronze dagger engraved with a boar's head that lay beside him.\nThe Ver Sacrum is a religious practice of ancient Italic peoples, especially the Sabelli (or Sabini) and their offshoot Samnites. The practice is related to that of \"devotio\" in Roman religion. It was customary to resort to it at times of particular danger or strife for the community. Some scholars believe that in earlier times \"devoted\" or vowed children were actually sacrificed, but later expulsion was substituted. Dionysius of Halicarnassus states the practice of child sacrifice was one of the causes that brought about the fall of the Pelasgians in Italy.\nThe human children who had been \"devoted\" were required to leave the community in early adulthood, at 20 or 21 years of age. They were entrusted to a god for protection, and led to the border with a veiled face. Often they were led by an animal under the auspices of the god. As a group, the youth were called \"sacrani\" and were supposed to enjoy the protection of Mars until they had reached their destination, expelled the inhabitants or forced them into submission, and founded their own settlement.\nThe Waldensians, a medieval sect deemed heretical, were accused of participating in child sacrifice.\nAfrica.\nCanary Islands.\nIn the heart of the ancient Guanche culture, in Tenerife it was the custom to throw a living child from the \"Punta de Rasca\" at sunrise at the summer solstice. Sometimes these children came from all parts of the island, even from remote areas of \"Punta de Rasca\". It follows that it was a common custom of the island. On this island sacrificing other human victims associated with the death of the king, where adult men rushed to the sea are also known. Embalmers who produced the Guanche mummies also had a habit of throwing themselves into the sea one year after the king's death.\nBones of children mixed with lambs and kids were found in Gran Canaria, and in Tenerife amphorae have been found with remains of children inside. This suggests a different kind of ritual infanticide than those who were thrown overboard.\nSouth Africa.\nThe continued murder within Black communities of children of all ages, for body parts with which to make muti, for purposes of witchcraft, still occurs in South Africa. Muti murders occur throughout South Africa, especially in rural areas. Traditional healers or witch doctors often grind up body parts and combine them with roots, herbs, seawater, animal parts, and other ingredients to prepare potions and spells for their clients.\nUganda.\nIn the early 21st century Uganda has experienced a revival of child sacrifice. In spite of government attempts to downplay the issue, an investigation by the BBC into human sacrifice in Uganda found that ritual killings of children are more common than Ugandan authorities admit. There are many indicators that politicians and politically connected wealthy businessmen are involved in sacrificing children in practice of traditional religion, which has become a commercial enterprise.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54386", "revid": "50897405", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54386", "title": "Philip II of Spain", "text": "King of Spain (1556\u20131598) and Portugal (1580\u20131598)\nPhilip II (21 May 1527\u00a0\u2013 13 September 1598), sometimes known in Spain as Philip the Prudent (), was King of Spain from 1556, King of Portugal from 1580, and King of Naples and Sicily from 1554 until his death in 1598. He was also \"jure uxoris\" King of England and Ireland from his marriage to Queen Mary I in 1554 until her death in 1558. Further, he was Duke of Milan from 1540. From 1555, he was Lord of the Seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands.\nThe son of Emperor Charles V and Isabella of Portugal, Philip inherited his father's Spanish Empire in 1556, and succeeded to the Portuguese throne in 1580 following a dynastic crisis, forming the Iberian Union. The Spanish conquests of the Inca Empire and of the Philippines, named in his honour by Ruy L\u00f3pez de Villalobos, were completed during his reign. He finished building the royal palace El Escorial in 1584. Under Philip II, Spain reached the height of its influence and power, advancing into the Spanish Golden Age, and ruled territories in every continent then known to Europeans. Deeply devout, Philip saw himself as the defender of Catholic Europe against the Ottoman Empire and the Protestant Reformation, and invested Spain's position as the leading European power in multiple simultaneous warring efforts.\nDuring his reign, Spain participated in victories against the Ottomans in Oran, Malta and Lepanto. In 1584, during the Eighty Years' War, Philip signed the Treaty of Joinville, funding the French Catholic League over the following decade against the French Huguenots. In 1588, he sent an armada to invade Protestant England, with the strategic aim of overthrowing his former sister-in-law Elizabeth I and re-establishing Catholicism there, but his fleet was repulsed in a skirmish and wrecked by storms as it circled the British Isles to return to Spain. Philip's naval power recovered after the failed invasion of the similarly sized English Armada into Spain. An ambitious plan to extend his conquests to China and across Asia was also considered. As a consequence of these conflicts, Philip led a highly debt-leveraged regime, seeing state defaults in 1557, 1560, 1569, 1575, and 1596.\nHistorical reception of Philip II became heavily influenced by enemy propaganda, which he refused to answer or defend against, even prohibiting biographical accounts of his life. His negative foreign reputation eventually developed into the Spanish Black Legend, while reappraisals of his figure would later entangle in turn with the White Legend. As a result, historian Helmut Koenigsberger would write about Philip, \"there has, perhaps, been no personality in modern history, not even Napoleon or Stalin, who has been both as enigmatic and controversial as Philip II of Spain... Neither his own contemporaries nor later historians have been able to agree on his character, his aims or even the degree of success he achieved.\"\nEarly life: 1527\u20131548.\nA member of the House of Habsburg, Philip was the son of Emperor Charles V, who was also king of Castile and Aragon, and Isabella of Portugal. He was born in the Castilian capital of Valladolid on 21 May 1527 at Palacio de Pimentel, which was owned by Don Bernardino Pimentel (the first Marqu\u00e9s de T\u00e1vara). The culture and courtly life of Castile were an important influence in his early life. He was entrusted to the royal governess Leonor de Mascare\u00f1as, and tutored by Juan Mart\u00ednez Siliceo, the future archbishop of Toledo. Philip displayed reasonable aptitude in arts and letters alike. Later he would study with more illustrious tutors, including the humanist Juan Crist\u00f3bal Calvete de Estrella. Though Philip had good command over Latin, Spanish, and Portuguese, he never managed to equal his father as a polyglot. While Philip was also an archduke of Austria, he was seen as a foreigner in the Holy Roman Empire. The feeling was mutual. Philip felt himself to be culturally Spanish; he had been born in Castile and raised in the Castilian court, his native language was Spanish, and he preferred to live in the Spanish kingdoms. This ultimately impeded his succession to the imperial throne.\nIn April 1528, when Philip was eleven months old, he received the oath of allegiance as heir to the crown from the Cortes of Castile. From that time until the death of his mother Isabella in 1539, he was raised in the royal court of Castile under the care of his mother and one of her Portuguese ladies, Do\u00f1a Leonor de Mascarenhas, to whom he was devotedly attached. Philip was also close to his two sisters, Mar\u00eda and Juana, and to his two pages, the Portuguese nobleman Rui Gomes da Silva and Luis de Requesens y Z\u00fa\u00f1iga, the son of his governor. These men would serve Philip throughout their lives, as would Antonio P\u00e9rez, his secretary from 1541. \nPhilip's martial training was undertaken by his governor, Juan de Z\u00fa\u00f1iga y Requesens, a Castilian nobleman who served as the \"commendador mayor\" of Castile. The practical lessons in warfare were overseen by Fernando \u00c1lvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba during the Italian Wars. Philip was present at the Siege of Perpignan in 1542 but did not see action as the Spanish army under Alba decisively defeated the besieging French forces under the Dauphin of France. On his way back to Castile, Philip received the oath of allegiance of the Aragonese Cortes at Monz\u00f3n.\nHis political training had begun a year previously under his father, who had found his son studious, grave, and prudent beyond his years, and having decided to train and initiate him in the government of the Spanish kingdoms. The king-emperor's interactions with his son during his stay in Castile convinced him of Philip's precocity in statesmanship, so he determined to leave in his hands the regency of the Spanish kingdoms in 1543. Philip, who had previously been made the Duke of Milan in 1540, began governing the most extensive empire in the world at the young age of sixteen.\nCharles left Philip with experienced advisors\u2014notably the secretary Francisco de los Cobos and the general, the Duke of Alba. Philip was also left with extensive written instructions that emphasised \"piety, patience, modesty, and distrust\". These principles of Charles were gradually assimilated by his son, who would grow up to become grave, self-possessed and cautious. Personally, Philip spoke softly and had an icy self-mastery; in the words of one of his ministers, \"he had a smile that was cut by a sword\". \nPhilip's journey to Brussels (1548\u20131549).\nOn 1 October 1548, Philip departed Valladolid on his voyage, appointing his sister Maria and her husband Maximilian as regents in his absence. He began a formal journey through Aragon and Catalonia, visiting religious sites such as Zaragoza and Montserrat, and receiving homage in Barcelona and Girona. \nIn November 1548, Philip travelled with Diego L\u00f3pez de Medrano, his first or chief equerry, to Rosas and Genoa aboard the galley belonging to Antonio de Toledo, the senior equerry. Rosas was his point of departure for Italy. At the Bay of Rosas, he was met by Andrea Doria with a fleet of fifty-eight galleys. Florentine obsequies depict his journey in large canvases depicting formative episodes from Philip's youth, including Philip's departure for Brussels from Rosas on the galley, and Philip's reception by the Doge of Genoa in 1548. The admiral, moved by the occasion, knelt before Philip and quoted Simeon: \"Now, Lord, let Thy servant depart in peace, for his eyes have seen Thy salvation.\" \nPhilip landed at Savona and proceeded to Genoa, where he stayed at the Doria palace and received papal emissary Octavio Farnese, who presented him with a ceremonial sword and cap of state from Pope Paul III. The gesture, despite political tensions, reflected hopes that Philip would serve as a future protector of the Church. Celebrated in Milan, Mantua, and other cities, he continued through the Tyrol and Germany before reaching Brussels to meet Emperor Charles V on 1 April 1549.\nDomestic policy.\nAfter living in the Netherlands in the early years of his reign, Philip II decided to return to Castile. Although sometimes described as an absolute monarch, Philip faced many constitutional constraints on his authority, influenced by the growing strength of the bureaucracy. The Spanish Empire was not a single monarchy with one legal system but a personal union of separate realms, each jealously guarding its own rights against those of the House of Habsburg. In practice, Philip often found his authority overruled by local assemblies and his word less effective than that of local lords.\nPhilip carried several titles as heir to the Spanish kingdoms and empire, including Prince of Asturias. The newest constituent kingdom in the empire was Upper Navarre, a realm invaded by Ferdinand II of Aragon mainly with Castilian troops (1512), and annexed to Castile with an ambiguous status (1513). War across Navarre continued until the 1528 (Treaties of Madrid and Cambrai). Charles V proposed to end hostilities with King Henry II of Navarre\u2014the legitimate monarch of Navarre\u2014by marrying his son Philip to the heiress of Navarre, Jeanne III of Navarre. The marriage would provide a dynastic solution to instability in Navarre, making him king of all Navarre (Upper and Lower) and a prince of the independent B\u00e9arn, as well as lord of part of southwestern France. However, the French nobility under Francis I opposed the arrangement and successfully ended the prospects of marriage between the heirs of Habsburg and Albret in 1541.\nIn his will, Charles stated his doubts over Navarre and recommended that his son give the kingdom back. Both King Charles and his son Philip II failed to abide by the elective (contractual) nature of the Crown of Navarre and took the kingdom for granted. This sparked mounting tension not only with King Henry II and Queen Jeanne III of Navarre but also with the Parliament of the Spanish Navarre (\"Cortes\", \"The Three States\") and the \"Diputaci\u00f3n\" for breach of the realm specific laws (fueros)\u2014violation of the \"pactum subjection is\" as ratified by Ferdinand. Tensions in Navarre came to a head in 1592 after several years of disagreements over the agenda of the intended parliamentary session.\nIn November 1592, the Parliament (\"Cortes\") of Arag\u00f3n revolted against another breach of the realm-specific laws, so the Attorney General (\"Justicia\") of the kingdom, Juan de Lanuza, was executed on Philip II's orders, with his secretary Antonio P\u00e9rez taking exile in France. In Navarre, the major strongholds of the kingdom were garrisoned by troops alien to the kingdom (Castilians) in a conspicuous violation of the local laws, and the Parliament had long been refusing to pledge loyalty to Philip II's son and heir apparent without a proper ceremony. On 20 November 1592 a ghostly Parliament session was called, pushed by Philip II, who had arrived in Pamplona at the head of an unspecified military force, and with one only point on his agenda\u2014attendance to the session was kept blank on the minutes: unlawful appointments of trusted Castilian officials and imposition of his son as the future king of Navarre at the Santa Maria Cathedral. A ceremony was held before the bishop of Pamplona (22 November), but its customary procedure and terms were altered. Protests erupted in Pamplona, but they were quelled.\nPhilip II also grappled with the problem of the large Morisco population in the Spanish kingdoms, who had been forcibly converted to Christianity by his predecessors. In 1569, the Morisco Revolt broke out in the southern Kingdom of Granada in defiance of attempts to suppress Moorish customs. Philip ordered the expulsion of the Moriscos from Granada and their dispersal to other provinces.\nDespite its immense dominions, the Spanish kingdoms had a sparse population that yielded a limited income to the crown (in contrast to France, for example, which was much more heavily populated). Philip faced major difficulties in raising taxes, and the collection was largely farmed out to local lords. He was able to finance his military campaigns only by taxing and exploiting the local resources of his empire. The flow of income from the New World proved vital to his militant foreign policy, but his exchequer several times faced bankruptcy.\nSpanish culture flourished during Philip's reign, beginning the \"Spanish Golden Age\", creating a lasting legacy in literature, music, and the visual arts. One of the notable artists from Philip II's court was Sofonisba Anguissola, who gained fame for her talent and unusual role as a woman artist.\nEconomy.\nCharles V had left his son Philip with a debt of about 36\u00a0million ducats and an annual deficit of 1\u00a0million ducats. This debt caused Philip II to default on loans in 1557, 1560, 1575, and 1596 (including debt to Poland, known as Neapolitan sums). Lenders had no power over the King and could not force him to repay his loans. These defaults were just the beginning of Spain's economic troubles as its kings would default six more times in the next 65 years. Aside from reducing state revenues for overseas expeditions, the domestic policies of Philip II further burdened the Spanish kingdoms and would, in the following century, contribute to its decline, as maintained by some historians.\nThe Spanish kingdoms were subject to different assemblies: the Cortes in Castile, the assembly in Navarre, and one each for the four kingdoms of Aragon, which preserved traditional rights and laws from the time when they were separate kingdoms. This made the Spanish kingdoms and its possessions difficult to rule, unlike France, which while divided into regional states, had a single Estates General. The lack of a viable supreme assembly led to power defaulting into Philip II's hands, especially as manager and final arbiter of the constant conflict between different authorities. To deal with the difficulties arising from this situation, authority was administered by local agents appointed by the crown and viceroys carrying out crown instructions. Philip II felt it necessary to be involved in the detail, and he presided over specialised councils for state affairs, finance, war, and the Inquisition.\nPhilip II played groups against each other, leading to a system of checks and balances that managed affairs inefficiently, even to the extent of damaging state business, as in the Perez affair. Following a fire in Valladolid in 1561, he resisted calls to move his Court to Lisbon, an act that could have curbed centralisation and bureaucracy domestically as well as relaxed rule in the Empire as a whole. Instead, with the traditional Royal and Primacy seat of Toledo now essentially obsolete, he moved his Court to the Castilian stronghold of Madrid. Except for a brief period under Philip III of Spain, Madrid has remained the capital of Spain. It was around this time that Philip II converted the Royal Alc\u00e1zar of Madrid into a royal palace; the works, which lasted from 1561 until 1598, were done by tradesmen who came from the Netherlands, Italy, and France.\nKing Philip II ruled at a critical turning point in European history toward modernity whereas his father Charles V had been forced to an itinerant rule as a medieval king. He mainly directed state affairs, even when not at Court. Indeed, when his health began failing, he worked from his quarters at the Palace-Monastery-Pantheon of El Escorial that he had built in 1584, a palace built as a monument to Spain's role as a center of the Christian world. But Philip did not enjoy the supremacy that King Louis XIV of France would in the next century, nor was such a rule necessarily possible at his time. The inefficiencies of the Spanish state and the restrictively regulated industry under his rule were common to many contemporary countries.\nForeign policy.\nPhilip's foreign policies were determined by a combination of Catholic fervour and dynastic objectives. He considered himself the chief defender of Catholic Europe, both against the Ottoman Empire and against the forces of the Protestant Reformation. He never relented from his fight against heresy, defending the Catholic faith and limiting freedom of worship within his territories. These territories included his patrimony in the Netherlands, where Protestantism had taken deep root. Following the Revolt of the Netherlands in 1568, Philip waged a campaign against Dutch heresy and secession. It also dragged in the English and the French at times and expanded into the German Rhineland with the Cologne War. This series of conflicts lasted for the rest of his life. Philip's constant involvement and focus in European wars took a significant toll on the treasury and caused economic difficulties for the Crown and even bankruptcies.\nIn 1588, the English defeated Philip's Spanish Armada, thwarting his planned invasion of the country to reinstate Catholicism. But war with England continued for the next sixteen years, in a complex series of struggles that included France, Ireland and the main battle zone, the Low Countries. It would not end until all the leading protagonists, including himself, had died. Earlier, however, after several setbacks in his reign and especially that of his father, Philip did achieve a decisive victory against the Turks at Lepanto in 1571, with the allied fleet of the Holy League, which he had put under the command of his illegitimate brother, John of Austria. He also successfully secured his succession to the throne of Portugal.\nThe administration of overseas conquests was reformed. Extensive questionnaires were distributed to every major town and region in New Spain called relaciones geogr\u00e1ficas. These surveys helped the Spanish monarchy to govern Philip's overseas possessions more effectively.\nItaly.\nCharles V abdicated the throne of Naples to Philip on 25 July 1554, and the young king was invested with the kingdom (officially a Papal fief) on 2 October by Pope Julius III. The date of Charles' abdication of the throne of Sicily is uncertain, but Philip was invested with this kingdom on 18 November 1554 by Julius. In 1556, Philip decided to invade the Papal States and temporarily held territory there, perhaps in response to Pope Paul IV's anti-Spanish outlook. According to Philip II, he was doing it for the benefit of the Church.\nIn a letter to the Princess Dowager of Portugal, Regent of the Spanish kingdoms, dated 22 September 1556, Francisco de Vargas wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have reported to your Highness what has been happening here, and how far the Pope is going in his fury and vain imaginings. His Majesty could not do otherwise than have a care for his reputation and dominions. I am sure your Highness will have had more recent news from the Duke of Alva, who has taken the field with an excellent army and has penetrated so far into the Pope's territory that his cavalry is raiding up to ten miles from Rome, where there is such panic that the population would have run away had not the gates been closed. The Pope has fallen ill with rage, and was struggling with a fever on the 16th of this month. The two Carafa brothers, the Cardinal and Count Montorio, do not agree, and they and Piero Strozzi are not on as good terms as they were in the past. They would like to discuss peace. The best thing would be for the Pope to die, for he is the poison at the root of all this trouble and more which may occur. His Majesty's intention is only to wrest the knife from this madman's hand and make him return to a sense of his dignity, acting like the protector of the Apostolic See, in whose name, and that of the College of Cardinals, his Majesty has publicly proclaimed that he has seized all he is occupying. The Pope is now sending again to the potentates of Italy for help. I hope he will gain as little thereby as he has done in the past, and that the French will calm down. May God give us peace in the end, as their Majesties desire and deserve!\nIn response to the invasion, Pope Paul IV called for a French military intervention. After minor fights in Lazio and near Rome, Fernando \u00c1lvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba, Viceroy of Naples met Cardinal Carlo Carafa and signed the Treaty of Cave as a compromise: French and Spanish forces left the Papal States and the Pope declared a neutral position between France and the Spanish kingdoms.\nPhilip led the Spanish kingdoms into the final phase of the Italian Wars. A Spanish advance into France from the Low Countries led to their important victory at the Battle of St. Quentin (1557). The French were defeated again at the Battle of Gravelines (1558). The resulting Treaty of Cateau-Cambr\u00e9sis in 1559 secured Piedmont to the Duchy of Savoy, and Corsica to the Republic of Genoa. Both Genoa and Savoy were allies of Spain and, although Savoy subsequently declared its neutrality between France and Spain, Genoa remained a crucial financial ally for Philip during his entire reign. The treaty also confirmed Philip's control over Milan, Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia. Therefore, all of southern Italy was under Spanish rule as part of the Crown of Aragon. In the north, Milan was a duchy of the Holy Roman Empire held by Philip. Attached to the Kingdom of Naples, the State of Presidi in Tuscany gave Philip the possibility to monitor maritime traffic to southern Italy, whilst the grant of the Duchy of Siena to the new Grand Duchy of Tuscany, ensured it would remain a Spanish ally. The Council of Italy was set up by Philip in order to co-ordinate his rule over the states of Milan, Naples and Sicily. Ultimately, the treaty ended the 60-year Franco-Habsburg wars for supremacy in Italy. It marked also the beginning of a period of peace between the Pope and Philip, as their European interests converged, although political differences remained and diplomatic contrasts eventually re-emerged.\nBy the end of the wars in 1559, Habsburg Spain had been established as the premier power of Europe, to the detriment of France. In France, Henry II was fatally wounded in a joust held during the celebrations of the peace. His death led to the accession of his 15-year-old son Francis II, who in turn soon died. The French monarchy was thrown into turmoil, which increased further with the outbreak of the French Wars of Religion that would last for several decades. The states of Italy were reduced to second-rate powers, with Spain dominating the peninsula. Mary Tudor's death in 1558 enabled Philip to seal the treaty by marrying Henry II's daughter, Elisabeth of Valois, later giving him a claim to the throne of France on behalf of his daughter by Elisabeth, Isabella Clara Eugenia.\nFrance.\nThe French Wars of Religion (1562\u20131598) were primarily fought between French Catholics and Protestants (Huguenots). The conflict involved the factional disputes between the aristocratic houses of France, such as the House of Bourbon and House of Guise, and both sides received assistance from foreign sources. Philip claimed descent from Constantine I and Charlemagne, justifying his intervention in French Wars of Religion and his continuing efforts to depose Henry IV of France.\nPhilip signed the Treaty of Vaucelles with Henry II of France in 1556. Based on the terms of the treaty, the territory of Franche-Comt\u00e9 in Burgundy was to be relinquished to Philip. However, the treaty was broken shortly afterwards. France and the Spanish kingdoms waged war in northern France and Italy over the following years. Spanish victories at St. Quentin and Gravelines led to the Treaty of Cateau-Cambr\u00e9sis, in which France recognised Spanish sovereignty over Franche-Comt\u00e9.\nDuring the War of the Portuguese Succession, the pretender Ant\u00f3nio fled to France following his defeats and, as Philip's armies had not yet occupied the Azores, he sailed there with a large Anglo-French fleet under Filippo Strozzi, a Florentine exile in the service of France. The naval Battle of Terceira took place on 26 July 1582, in the sea near the Azores, off S\u00e3o Miguel Island, as part of the War of the Portuguese Succession and the Anglo-Spanish War (1585\u20131604). The Spanish navy defeated the combined Anglo-French fleet that had sailed to preserve control of the Azores under Ant\u00f3nio. The French naval contingent was the largest French force sent overseas before the age of Louis XIV.\nThe Spanish victory at Terceira was followed by the Battle of the Azores between the Portuguese loyal to the claimant Ant\u00f3nio, supported by French and English troops, and the Spanish-Portuguese forces loyal to Philip commanded by the admiral Don \u00c1lvaro de Baz\u00e1n. Victory in Azores completed the incorporation of Portugal into the Spanish Empire.\nPhilip financed the Catholic League during the French Wars of Religion. He directly intervened in the final phases of the wars (1589\u20131598), ordering Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma into France in an effort to unseat Henry IV, and perhaps dreaming of placing his favourite daughter, Isabella Clara Eugenia, on the French throne. Elisabeth of Valois, Philip's third wife and Isabella's mother, had already ceded any claim to the French Crown with her marriage to Philip and in France the Salic law remained in effect. However, the Parlement of Paris, in power of the Catholic party, gave verdict that Isabella Clara Eugenia was \"the legitimate sovereign\" of France. Philip's interventions in the fighting\u2014sending the Duke of Parma to end Henry IV's siege of Paris in 1590 and the siege of Rouen in 1592\u2014contributed in saving the French Catholic Leagues's cause against a Protestant monarchy.\nIn 1593, Henry agreed to convert to Catholicism; weary of war, most French Catholics switched to his side against the hardline core of the Catholic League, who were portrayed by Henry's propagandists as puppets of a foreign monarch, Philip. By the end of 1594 certain League members were still working against Henry across the country, but all relied on the support of the Spanish Crown. In January 1595, therefore, Henry officially declared war on the Spanish Crown, to show Catholics that Philip was using religion as a cover for an attack on the French state, and Protestants that he had not become a puppet of the Spanish Crown through his conversion, while hoping to reconquer large parts of northern France from the Franco-Spanish Catholic forces.\nFrench victory at the Battle of Fontaine-Fran\u00e7aise in Burgundy, 5 June 1595, marked an end to the Catholic League in France. The French also made some progress during an invasion of the Spanish Netherlands. They captured Ham and massacred the small Spanish garrison, provoking anger among the Spanish ranks. The Spanish launched a concerted offensive that year, taking Doullens, Cambrai, and Le Catelet; at Doullens, they massacred 4,000 of its citizens. On 24 April 1596, the Spanish also conquered Calais. Following the Spanish capture of Amiens in March 1597, the French Crown laid siege to it until it managed to reconquer Amiens from the overstretched Spanish forces in September 1597. Henry then negotiated a peace with the Spanish Crown. The war was only drawn to an official close, however, with the Peace of Vervins in May 1598.\nThe 1598 Treaty of Vervins was largely a restatement of the 1559 Peace of C\u00e2teau-Cambr\u00e9sis and Spanish forces and subsidies were withdrawn; meanwhile, Henry issued the Edict of Nantes, which offered a high degree of religious toleration for French Protestants. The military interventions in France thus failed to oust Henry from the throne or suppress Protestantism in France, and yet they had played a decisive part in helping the French Catholic cause gain the conversion of Henry, ensuring that Catholicism would remain France's official and majority faith\u2014matters of paramount importance for the devoutly Catholic Spanish king.\nMediterranean.\nIn the early part of his reign Philip was concerned with the rising power of the Ottoman Empire under Suleiman the Magnificent. Fear of Islamic domination in the Mediterranean caused him to pursue an aggressive foreign policy.\nIn 1558, Turkish admiral Piyale Pasha captured the Balearic Islands, especially inflicting great damage on Menorca and enslaving many, while raiding the coasts of the Spanish mainland. Philip appealed to the Pope and other powers in Europe to bring an end to the rising Ottoman threat. Since his father's losses against the Ottomans and against Hayreddin Barbarossa in 1541, the major European sea powers in the Mediterranean, namely the Spanish Crown and Venice, became hesitant in confronting the Ottomans. The myth of \"Turkish invincibility\" was becoming a popular story, causing fear and panic among the people.\nIn 1560, Philip II organised a \"Holy League\" between the Spanish kingdoms and the Republic of Venice, the Republic of Genoa, the Papal States, the Duchy of Savoy and the Knights of Malta. The joint fleet was assembled at Messina and consisted of 200 ships (60 galleys and 140 other vessels) carrying a total of 30,000 soldiers under the command of Giovanni Andrea Doria, nephew of the famous Genoese admiral Andrea Doria.\nOn 12 March 1560, the Holy League captured the island of Djerba, which had a strategic location and could control the sea routes between Algiers and Tripoli. As a response, Suleiman sent an Ottoman fleet of 120 ships under the command of Piyale Pasha, which arrived at Djerba on 9 May 1560. The battle lasted until 14 May 1560, and the forces of Piyale Pasha and Turgut Reis (who joined Piyale Pasha on the third day of the battle) won an overwhelming victory at the Battle of Djerba. The Holy League lost 60 ships (30 galleys) and 20,000 men, and Giovanni Andrea Doria was barely able to escape with a small vessel. The Ottomans retook the Fortress of Djerba, whose Spanish commander, D. \u00c1lvaro de Sande, attempted to escape with a ship but was followed and eventually captured by Turgut Reis.\nIn 1563, capitalizing on the political climate, the Regency of Algiers launched the sieges of Oran and Mers El K\u00e9bir in a large scale attempt to dislodge the major Spanish positions in Northern Africa, but the attempt met failure. Philip's navy then conquered Pe\u00f1\u00f3n de V\u00e9lez de la Gomera the following year. The Ottomans sent a large expedition to Malta, which laid siege to several forts on the island and took some of them, but the Spanish sent a relief force under D. Garc\u00eda de Toledo and a rescued \u00c1lvaro de Sande, which finally drove the Ottoman army out of the island.\nThe grave threat posed by the increasing Ottoman domination of the Mediterranean was finally reversed in one of history's most decisive battles, with the destruction of nearly the entire Ottoman fleet at the Battle of Lepanto in 1571, by the Holy League under the command of Philip's half brother, Don John of Austria, and Don \u00c1lvaro de Baz\u00e1n. A fleet sent by Philip, again commanded by Don John, reconquered Tunis from the Ottomans in 1573. The Turks soon rebuilt their fleet, and in 1574 Ulu\u00e7 Ali Reis managed to recapture Tunis with a force of 250 galleys and a siege that lasted 40 days. Thousands of Spanish and Italian soldiers became prisoners. Nevertheless, Lepanto marked a permanent reversal in the balance of naval power in the Mediterranean and the end of the threat of Ottoman control. In 1585 a peace treaty was signed with the Ottomans.\nStrait of Magellan.\nDuring Philip's reign Spain considered the Pacific Ocean a \"mare clausum\"\u2014a sea closed to other naval powers\u2014 as the only known entrance from the Atlantic, the Strait of Magellan was at times patrolled by fleets sent to prevent entrance of non-Spanish ships.\nTo end navigation by rival powers in the Strait of Magellan Spanish viceroy Francisco de Toledo ordered Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa to explore the strait and found settlements on its shores.\nIn 1584, Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa founded two colonies in the strait: Nombre de Jes\u00fas, and Ciudad del Rey Don Felipe. The latter was established north of the strait with 300 settlers. The new colonies suffered from high death rates, likely as a consequence of executions, brawls, violent encounters with indigenous peoples and diseases which were rife. A contributing cause for failure of the settlement may have been poor morale, an issue that plagued the venture almost from the beginning. This can in part be explained by a series of difficulties the expedition had to go through between the departure from Spain and the arrival to the strait. Philip II's inaction despite repeated pleas by Sarmiento to aid the ailing colony has been attributed to the strain on Spain's resources that resulted from wars with England and Dutch rebels.\nIn 1587, English corsairs renamed Ciudad del Rey Don Felipe, Puerto del Hambre, or \"Port Famine\". Most of the settlers had died from cold or starvation. When Sir Thomas Cavendish landed at the site of Rey Don Felipe in 1587, he found only ruins of the settlement. The Spanish failure at colonizing the Strait of Magellan caused Chilo\u00e9 Archipelago to assume the role of protecting western Patagonia from foreign intrusions. Valdivia and Chilo\u00e9 acted as sentries, being hubs where the Spanish collected intelligence from all over Patagonia.\nRevolt in the Netherlands.\nPhilip's rule in the Seventeen Provinces known collectively as the Netherlands faced many difficulties, leading to open warfare in 1568. He appointed his half-sister Margaret of Parma as Governor of the Netherlands, when he left the low countries for the Spanish kingdoms in 1559, but forced her to adjust policy to the advice of Cardinal Granvelle, who was greatly disliked in the Netherlands, after he insisted on direct control over events in the Netherlands despite being over two weeks' ride away in Madrid. There was discontent in the Netherlands about Philip's taxation demands and the incessant persecution of Protestants. In 1566, Protestant preachers sparked anti-clerical riots known as the Iconoclast Fury; in response to growing Protestant influence, the army of the Duke of Alba went on the offensive. In 1568, Alba had Lamoral, Count of Egmont and Philip de Montmorency, Count of Horn executed in Brussels' central square, further alienating the local aristocracy. There were massacres of civilians in Mechelen, Naarden, Zutphen and Haarlem. In 1571, Alba erected at Antwerp a bronze statue of himself trampling the rebellious Dutch under his horse's hooves, cast from the melted-down cannon looted by the Spanish troops after the Battle of Jemmingen in 1568; it was modelled on medieval images of the Spanish patron Saint James \"the Moorslayer\" riding down Muslims and caused such outrage that Philip had it removed and destroyed.\nIn 1572, a prominent exiled member of the Dutch aristocracy, William the Silent, Prince of Orange, invaded the Netherlands with a Protestant army, but he only succeeded in holding two provinces, Holland and Zeeland. Because of the Spanish repulse in the Siege of Alkmaar (1573) led by his equally brutal son Fadrique, Alba resigned his command, replaced by Luis de Requesens y Z\u00fa\u00f1iga. Alba boasted that he had burned or executed 18,600 persons in the Netherlands, in addition to the far greater number he massacred during the war, many of them women and children; 8,000 persons were burned or hanged in one year, and the total number of Alba's Flemish victims can not have fallen short of 50,000. Under Requesens, the Army of Flanders reached a peak strength of 86,000 in 1574 and retained its battlefield superiority, destroying Louis of Nassau's German mercenary army at the Battle of Mookerheyde on 14 April 1574, killing both him and his brother Henry of Nassau-Dillenburg.\nRampant inflation and the loss of treasure fleets from the New World prevented Philip from paying his soldiers consistently, leading to the so-called Spanish Fury at Antwerp in 1576, where soldiers ran amok through the streets, burning more than 1,000 homes and killing 6,000 citizens. Philip sent in Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma, as Governor-General of the Spanish Netherlands from 1578 to 1592. Farnese defeated the rebels at the Battle of Gembloux (1578), and he captured many rebel towns in the south: Maastricht (1579), Tournai (1581), Oudenaarde (1582), Dunkirk (1583), Bruges (1584), Ghent (1584), and Antwerp (1585).\nThe States General of the northern provinces, united in the 1579 Union of Utrecht, passed an Act of Abjuration in 1581 declaring that they no longer recognised Philip as their king. The southern Netherlands (what is now Belgium and Luxembourg) remained under Spanish rule. In 1584, William the Silent was assassinated by Balthasar G\u00e9rard, after Philip had offered a reward of 25,000 crowns to anyone who killed him, calling him a \"pest on the whole of Christianity and the enemy of the human race\". The Dutch forces continued to fight on under Orange's son Maurice of Nassau, who received modest help from the Queen of England in 1585. The Dutch gained an advantage over the Spanish because of their growing economic strength, in contrast to Philip's burgeoning economic troubles. The war came to an end in 1648, when the Dutch Republic was recognised by the Spanish Crown as independent. The eight decades of war came at a massive human cost, with an estimated 600,000 to 700,000 victims, of which 350,000 to 400,000 were civilians killed by disease and what would later be considered war crimes.\nKing of Portugal.\nIn 1578 young King Sebastian of Portugal died at the Battle of Alc\u00e1cer Quibir without descendants, triggering a succession crisis. His granduncle, the elderly Cardinal Henry, succeeded him as king, but Henry had no descendants either, having taken holy orders. When Henry died two years after Sebastian's disappearance, three grandchildren of Manuel I claimed the throne: Infanta Catarina, Duchess of Braganza; Ant\u00f3nio, Prior of Crato; and Philip II of Spain. Ant\u00f3nio was acclaimed King of Portugal in many cities and towns throughout the country, but members of the Council of Governors of Portugal who had supported Philip escaped to the Spanish kingdoms and declared him to be the legal successor of Henry.\nIn 1580, Philip II marched into Portugal and defeated Prior Ant\u00f3nio's troops in the Battle of Alc\u00e2ntara. The Portuguese suffered 4,000 killed, wounded, or captured, while the Spanish sustained only 500 casualties. The troops commanded by Fernando \u00c1lvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba imposed subjection to Philip before entering Lisbon, where he seized an immense treasure. Philip II of Spain assumed the Portuguese throne and was crowned \"Philip I\" of Portugal on 17 July 1580 (recognized as king by the Portuguese Cortes of Tomar) and a near sixty-year personal union under the rule of the Philippine Dynasty began. This gave Philip control of the extensive Portuguese Empire. When Philip left for Madrid in 1583, he made his nephew Albert of Austria his viceroy in Lisbon. In Madrid he established a Council of Portugal to advise him on Portuguese affairs, giving prominent positions to Portuguese nobles in the Spanish courts, and allowing Portugal to maintain autonomous law, currency, and government. This followed on the well-established pattern of rule by councils.\nRelations with England and Ireland.\nKing of England and Ireland.\nPhilip's father arranged his marriage to 37-year-old Queen Mary I of England, Charles' maternal first cousin. His father ceded the crown of Naples, as well as his claim to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, to him. Their marriage at Winchester Cathedral on 25 July 1554 took place just two days after their first meeting. Philip's view of the affair was entirely political. Lord Chancellor Stephen Gardiner and the House of Commons petitioned Mary to consider marrying an Englishman, preferring Edward Courtenay.\nUnder the terms of the Act for the Marriage of Queen Mary to Philip of Spain, Philip was to enjoy Mary I's titles and honours for as long as their marriage should last. All official documents, including Acts of Parliament, were to be dated with both their names, and Parliament was to be called under the joint authority of the couple. Coins were also to show the heads of both Mary and Philip. The marriage treaty also provided that England would not be obliged to provide military support to Philip's father in any war. The Privy Council instructed that Philip and Mary should be joint signatories of royal documents, and this was enacted by an Act of Parliament, which gave him the title of king and stated that he \"shall aid her Highness ... in the happy administration of her Grace's realms and dominions\". In other words, Philip was to co-reign with his wife. As the new King of England could not read English, it was ordered that a note of all matters of state should be made in Latin or Spanish.\nActs making it high treason to deny Philip's royal authority were passed by the Parliament of Ireland and England. Philip and Mary appeared on coins together, with a single crown suspended between them as a symbol of joint reign. The Great Seal shows Philip and Mary seated on thrones, holding the crown together. The coat of arms of England was impaled with Philip's to denote their joint reign. During their joint reign, they waged war against France, which resulted in the loss of Calais, England's last remaining possession in France.\nPhilip's wife had succeeded to the Kingdom of Ireland, but the title of King of Ireland had been created in 1542 by Mary's father, Henry VIII, after he was excommunicated, and so it was not recognised by Catholic monarchs. In 1555, Pope Paul IV rectified this by issuing a papal bull recognising Philip and Mary as rightful King and Queen of Ireland. King's County and Philipstown in Ireland were named after Philip as King of Ireland in 1556. The couple's joint royal style after Philip ascended the Spanish throne in 1556 was: \"Philip and Mary, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, Spain, France, Jerusalem, both the Sicilies and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Burgundy, Milan and Brabant, Counts of Habsburg, Flanders and Tirol\".\nHowever, the couple had no children. Mary died in 1558 before the union could revitalise the Roman Catholic Church in England. With her death, Philip lost his rights to the English throne (including the ancient English claims to the French throne) and ceased to be king of England, Ireland and (as claimed by them) France.\nPhilip's great-grandson, Philippe I, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, married Princess Henrietta of England in 1661; in 1807, the Jacobite claim to the British throne passed to the descendants of their child Anne Marie d'Orl\u00e9ans.\nAfter Mary I's death.\nUpon Mary's death, the throne went to Elizabeth I. Philip had no wish to sever his tie with England, and had sent a proposal of marriage to Elizabeth. However, she delayed in answering, and in that time learned Philip was also considering a Valois alliance. Elizabeth I was the Protestant daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn. This union was deemed illegitimate by English Catholics, who disputed the validity of both the annulment of Henry's marriage to Catherine of Aragon and of his subsequent marriage to Boleyn, and hence claimed that Mary, Queen of Scots, the Catholic great-granddaughter of Henry VII, was the rightful monarch.\nFor many years Philip maintained peace with England, and even defended Elizabeth from the Pope's threat of excommunication. This was a measure taken to preserve a European balance of power. Ultimately, Elizabeth allied England with the Protestant rebels in the Netherlands. Further, English ships began a policy of privateering against Spain's merchant shipping and started threatening the Spanish treasure ships coming from the New World. In one instance, English ships attacked a Spanish port. The last straw for Philip was the Treaty of Nonsuch signed by Elizabeth in 1585\u2014promising troops and supplies to the anti-Spanish rebels in the Netherlands. Although it can be argued this English action was the result of Philip's Treaty of Joinville with the Catholic League of France, Philip considered it an act of war by England.\nThe execution of Mary, Queen of Scots, in 1587 ended Philip's hopes of placing a Catholic on the English throne. He turned instead to more direct plans to invade England and return the country to Catholicism. In 1588, he sent a fleet, the Spanish Armada, to rendezvous with the Army of Flanders and convey it across the English Channel. However, the operation had little chance of success from the beginning, because of lengthy delays, lack of communication between Philip II and his two commanders and the lack of a deep bay for the fleet. At the point of attack, a storm struck the English Channel, already known for its harsh currents and choppy waters, which devastated large numbers of the Spanish fleet. There was a tightly fought battle against the English Royal Navy and the Spanish were forced into a retreat, and the overwhelming majority of the Armada was destroyed by the harsh weather. Although the English Royal Navy did not destroy the Armada at the Battle of Gravelines, they prevented it from linking up with the army it was supposed to convey across the channel. Thus, while the English Royal Navy only won a slight tactical victory over the Spanish, it had delivered a major strategic victory\u2014preventing the invasion of England. Through a week of fighting the Spanish had expended 100,000 cannonballs, but no English ship was seriously damaged. However, over 7,000 English sailors died from disease during the time the Armada was in English waters.\nThe defeat of the Spanish Armada gave great heart to the Protestant cause across Europe. The storm that smashed the Armada was seen by many of Philip's enemies as a sign of the will of God. While the invasion had been averted, England was unable to take advantage of this success. An attempt to use her newfound advantage at sea with a counter-armada the following year failed disastrously with 40 ships sunk and 15,000 men lost. Likewise, English buccaneering and attempts to seize territories in the Caribbean were defeated by Spain's rebuilt navy and their improved intelligence networks (although C\u00e1diz was sacked by an Anglo-Dutch force after a failed attempt to seize the treasure fleet). The Habsburgs also struck back with the Dunkirkers, who took an increasing toll on Dutch and English shipping.\nEventually, the Spanish attempted two further Armadas, in October 1596 and October 1597. The 1596 Armada was destroyed in a storm off northern Spain; it had lost as many as 72 of its 126 ships and suffered 3,000 deaths. The 1597 Armada was frustrated by adverse weather as it approached the English coast undetected. This Anglo-Spanish War (1585\u20131604) would be fought to a grinding end, but not until both Philip II (d. 1598) and Elizabeth I (d. 1603) were dead. Some of the fighting was done on land in Ireland, France, and the Netherlands, with the English sending expeditionary forces to France and the Netherlands to fight Spain, and Spain attempting to assist Irish rebellions in Ireland.\nDeath.\nPhilip II died on 13 September 1598 at El Escorial, aged 71, after a prolonged illness, likely cancer. He was surrounded by priests, family, and trusted officials. His personal chamber was divided into a main room, bedroom, study, and oratory, following the layout of his father's monastery. The most notable feature was the monarch's bed, still preserved, which was positioned so he could observe the liturgy at the church's main altar from his bedside. Despite severe pain in his final months, he continued to review state papers and correspondence. The funeral oration honouring the virtues of Philip II is attributed to Tom\u00e1s Fern\u00e1ndez de Medrano, Lord of Valdeosera, author of the \"Rep\u00fablica Mista\" (1602), and a trusted adviser and crown official under both Philip II and Philip III.\nPhilip II governed one of the largest and most diverse empires in history, encompassing the Iberian Peninsula, Spanish America, parts of Africa, the Low Countries, parts of Italy, and territories as far away as Asia, including the Philippines, which was named in his honour. He was succeeded by his 20-year-old son, Philip III, who inherited a vast but financially strained empire.\nLegacy.\nUnder Philip II, Spain reached the peak of its power. However, in spite of the great and increasing quantities of gold and silver flowing into his coffers from the American mines, the riches of the Portuguese spice trade, and the enthusiastic support of the Habsburg dominions for the Counter-Reformation, he would never succeed in suppressing Protestantism or defeating the Dutch rebellion. Early in his reign, the Dutch might have laid down their weapons if he had desisted in trying to suppress Protestantism, but his devotion to Catholicism would not permit him to do so. He was a devout Catholic and exhibited the typical 16th century antipathy for religious heterodoxy; he said, \"Before suffering the slightest damage to religion in the service of God, I would lose all of my estates and a hundred lives, if I had them, because I do not intend nor do I desire to be the ruler of heretics.\"\nAs he strove to enforce Catholic orthodoxy through an intensification of the Inquisition, students were barred from studying elsewhere, and books printed by Spaniards outside the kingdom were banned. In addition to the banning of books, Philip II authorized the burning of at least 70,000 volumes. Even a highly respected churchman like Archbishop Bartolome Carranza of Toledo was jailed by the Inquisition for 17 years, for publishing ideas that seemed sympathetic in some degree with Protestantism. Such strict enforcement of orthodox belief was successful, and Spain avoided the religiously inspired strife tearing apart other European dominions.\nAlthough he was deeply dedicated to rooting out heretical titles, he collected forbidden books for his own royal library at the El Escorial. His library contained 40,000 volumes (1,800 of which were Arabic titles) and several thousand manuscripts. The banned books were protected in a room on an upper floor of the library. He was passionate about rare books he personally collected from far and wide and researched and recorded information about previous owners.\nThe School of Salamanca flourished under his reign. Mart\u00edn de Azpilcueta, highly honoured at Rome by several popes and looked on as an oracle of learning, published his \"Manuale sive Enchiridion Confessariorum et Poenitentium\" (Rome, 1568), long a classical text in the schools and in ecclesiastical practice. Francisco Su\u00e1rez, generally regarded as the greatest scholastic after Thomas Aquinas and regarded during his lifetime as being the greatest living philosopher and theologian, was writing and lecturing, not only in Spain but also in Rome (1580\u20131585), where Pope Gregory XIII attended the first lecture that he gave. Luis de Molina published his \"De liberi arbitrii cum gratiae donis, divina praescientia, praedestinatione et reprobatione concordia\" (1588), wherein he put forth the doctrine attempting to reconcile the omniscience of God with human free will that came to be known as Molinism, thereby contributing to what was one of the most important intellectual debates of the time; Molinism became the \"de facto\" Jesuit doctrine on these matters, and is still advocated today by William Lane Craig and Alvin Plantinga, among others.\nPhilip had a passion for architecture and building, seeking to improve Spain's constructions after those of Italy and the Netherlands. At the same time, he personally favored fields and forests, indulging often in hunting and fishing, and was an obsessive builder of gardens. In 1582 he issued orders to conservate the Spanish forests, worrying that they might get depleted. According to historian Henry Kamen, \"his love of nature turned him into one of the first ecologist rulers in European history\".\nBecause Philip II was the most powerful European monarch in an era of war and religious conflict, evaluating both his reign and the man himself has become a controversial historical subject. Even before his death in 1598, his supporters had started presenting him as an archetypical gentleman, full of piety and Christian virtues, whereas his enemies depicted him as a fanatical and despotic monster, responsible for inhuman cruelties and barbarism. This dichotomy, further developed into the so-called Spanish Black Legend and White Legend, was helped by King Philip himself. Philip prohibited any biographical account of his life to be published while he was alive, and he ordered that all his private correspondence be burned shortly before he died.\nMoreover, Philip did nothing to defend himself after being betrayed by his ambitious secretary Antonio P\u00e9rez, who published incredible calumnies against his former master; this allowed P\u00e9rez's tales to spread all around Europe unchallenged. That way, the popular image of the King that survives to today was created on the eve of his death, at a time when many European princes and religious leaders were turned against Spain as a pillar of the Counter-Reformation. This means that many histories depict Philip from deeply prejudiced points of view, usually negative.\nSome historians classify this anti-Spanish analysis as part of the Black Legend. In a more recent example of popular culture, Philip II's portrayal in \"Fire Over England\" (1937) is not entirely unsympathetic; he is shown as a very hardworking, intelligent, religious, somewhat paranoid ruler whose prime concern is his country, but who had no understanding of the English, despite his former co-monarchy there.\nEven in countries that remained Catholic, primarily France and the Italian states, fear and envy of Spanish success and domination created a wide receptiveness for the worst possible descriptions of Philip II. Although some efforts have been made to separate legend from reality, that task has proved extremely difficult, since many prejudices are rooted in the cultural heritage of European countries. Spanish-speaking historians tend to assess his political and military achievements, sometimes deliberately avoiding issues such as the King's inflexible Catholicism. English-speaking historians tend to show Philip II as a fanatical, despotical, criminal, imperialist ruler, minimising his military victories (Battle of Lepanto, Battle of Saint Quentin, Fall of Antwerp, English Armada, etc...) to mere anecdotes, and magnifying his defeats (Battle of Djerba, Ottoman conquest of Tunis, Dutch Revolt, Armada, etc...) even though at the time those defeats did not result in great political or military changes in the balance of power in Europe.\nHe ended French Valois ambitions in Italy and brought about the Habsburg ascendency in Europe. He secured the Portuguese kingdom and empire. He succeeded in increasing the importation of silver in the face of English, Dutch, and French privateers, overcoming multiple financial crises and consolidating Spain's overseas empire. Although clashes would be ongoing, he ended the major threat posed to Europe by the Ottoman Navy.\nHistorian Geoffrey Parker offers a management-psychological explanation, as summarized by Tonio Andrade and William Reger: One might have expected that Philip\u2014being a dedicated, persistent, and hard-working man, and being the head of Western Europe's wealthiest and largest empire\u2014would have succeeded in his aims. He didn't. His endeavors were doomed by his own character, or at least that's how Parker sees it. Drawing on studies in management science and organizational psychology, Parker argues that a successful manager of a large organization must keep attention on the big picture, must have a good strategy for dealing with copious information, must know how to delegate, and must be flexible. Philip failed on all counts. He was a micromanager who got bogged down in details, refusing to delegate and trying to read every dispatch that came to his desk. He obsessed and dithered, so that by the time his decisions were made and his orders reached the men meant to carry them out, the situation on the ground had changed. Philip was also inflexible, unwilling to abandon ineffective policies. Most pernicious of all was Philip's tendency toward messianic thinking, a belief that he was doing God's work and that heaven would support him with miracles.\nTitles, honours and styles.\nPhilip continued his father's style of \"Majesty\" (Latin: \"Maiestas\"; Spanish: \"Majestad\") in preference to that of \"Highness\" (\"Celsitudo\"; \"Alteza\"). In diplomatic texts, he continued the use of the title \"Most Catholic\" (\"Rex Catholicissimus\"; \"Rey Cat\u00f3lico\") first bestowed by Pope Alexander VI on Ferdinand and Isabella in 1496.\nFollowing the Act of Parliament sanctioning his marriage with Mary, the couple was styled \"Philip and Mary, by the grace of God King and Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Princes of Spain and Sicily, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Milan, Burgundy and Brabant, Counts of Habsburg, Flanders and Tyrol\". Upon his inheritance of Spain in 1556, they became \"Philip and Mary, by the grace of God King and Queen of England, Spain, France, both the Sicilies, Jerusalem and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Burgundy, Milan and Brabant, Counts of Habsburg, Flanders and Tyrol\".\nHis coinage typically bore the obverse inscription \"\" (Latin: \"Philip, by the grace of God King of Spain et cetera\"), followed by the local title of the mint (\"\" for Duke of Brabant, \"\" for Count of Holland, \"\" for Lord of Overissel, etc.). The reverse would then bear a motto such as \"\" (\"For Peace and Justice\") or \"\" (\"The Lord is my helper\"). A medal struck in 1583 bore the inscriptions \"\" (\"Philip II, King of Spain and the New World\") and \"\" (\"The world is not enough\").\nFamily.\nPhilip was married four times and had children with three of his wives. He also had two long-term relationships with Isabel Osorio and Eufrasia de Guzm\u00e1n.\nFirst marriage.\nPhilip's first wife was his double first cousin, Maria Manuela, Princess of Portugal. She was a daughter of Philip's maternal uncle, John III of Portugal, and paternal aunt, Catherine of Austria. They were married at Salamanca on 12 November 1543. The marriage produced one son in 1545, after which Maria died four days later due to haemorrhage:\nSecond marriage.\nPhilip's second wife was his first cousin once removed, Queen Mary I of England. The marriage, which took place on 25 July 1554 at Winchester Cathedral, was political. By this marriage, Philip became \"jure uxoris\" King of England and Ireland, although the couple was apart more than together as they ruled their respective countries. The marriage produced no children, although there was a false pregnancy, and Mary died in 1558, ending Philip's reign in England and Ireland.\nThird marriage.\nPhilip's third wife was Elisabeth of Valois, the eldest daughter of Henry II of France and Catherine de' Medici. The original ceremony was conducted by proxy (the Duke of Alba standing in for Philip) at Notre Dame prior to Elisabeth's departure from France. The actual ceremony was conducted in Guadalajara upon her arrival in Spain. During their marriage (1559\u20131568) they conceived five daughters, though only two of the girls survived. Elisabeth died a few hours after the loss of her last child. Their children were:\nFourth marriage.\nPhilip's fourth and final wife was his niece, Anna of Austria. Pope Pius V initially refused to grant Philip the dispensation needed to marry Anna, citing biblical prohibitions and the danger of birth defects. The pope reluctantly gave his permission when Philip threatened to abandon the Holy League in their fight against the Ottoman Turks. By contemporary accounts, this was a convivial and satisfactory marriage (1570\u20131580) for both Philip and Anna. This marriage produced four sons and one daughter. Anna died of heart failure 8 months after giving birth to Maria in 1580.\nTheir children were:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54390", "revid": "50759215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54390", "title": "Disassembler", "text": "Computer program to translate machine language into assembly language\nA disassembler is a computer program that translates machine language into assembly language\u2014the inverse operation to that of an assembler. The output of disassembly is typically formatted for human-readability rather than for input to an assembler, making disassemblers primarily a reverse-engineering tool. Common uses include analyzing the output of high-level programming language compilers and their optimizations, recovering source code when the original is lost, performing malware analysis, modifying software (such as binary patching), and software cracking.\nA disassembler differs from a decompiler, which targets a high-level language rather than an assembly language. A fundamental method of software analysis is disassembly. Unlike decompilers, which make attempts at recreating high-level human readable structures using binaries, disassemblers are aimed at generating a symbolic assembly, meaning it's attempting to reconstruct the assembly closest to its executions. Disassembled code is hence normally more accurate but also lower level and less abstract than decompiled code and thus it can be much more easily analyzed.\nAssembly language source code generally permits the use of constants and programmer comments. These are usually removed from the assembled machine code by the assembler. If so, a disassembler operating on the machine code would produce disassembly lacking these constants and comments; the disassembled output becomes more difficult for a human to interpret than the original annotated source code. Some disassemblers provide a built-in code commenting feature where the generated output is enriched with comments regarding called API functions or parameters of called functions. Some disassemblers make use of the symbolic debugging information present in object files such as ELF. For example, IDA allows the human user to make up mnemonic symbols for values or regions of code in an interactive session: human insight applied to the disassembly process often parallels human creativity in the code writing process.\nChallenges.\nIt is not always possible to distinguish executable code from data within a binary. While common executable formats, such as ELF and PE, separate code and data into distinct sections, flat binaries do not, making it unclear whether a given location contains executable instructions or non-executable data. This ambiguity might complicate the disassembly process.\nAdditionally, CPUs often allow dynamic jumps computed at runtime, which makes it impossible to identify all possible locations in the binary that might be executed as instructions.\nOn computer architectures with variable-width instructions, such as in many CISC architectures, more than one valid disassembly may exist for the same binary.\nDisassemblers also cannot handle code that changes during execution, as static analysis cannot account for runtime modifications.\nEncryption, packing, or obfuscation are often applied to computer programs, especially as part of digital rights management to deter reverse engineering and cracking. These techniques pose additional challenges for disassembly, as the code must first be unpacked or decrypted before meaningful analysis can begin.\nStatic vs. dynamic disassembly.\nDisassembly can be performed statically or dynamically. Static disassembly analyzes the binary without executing it, which enables offline inspection. However, static disassembly may misinterpret some operations or obfuscation.\nDynamic disassembly observes executed instructions at runtime, typically by monitoring CPU registers and CPU flags. Dynamic analysis can capture executed control paths and runtime-resolved addresses, which while being the major upside to decompilers they may miss code paths not triggered during execution.\nWhile both are respectively powerful, modern disassemblers often combine both approaches to improve accuracy in more complex binaries.\nExamples of disassemblers.\nA disassembler can be either stand-alone or interactive. A stand-alone disassembler generates an assembly language file upon execution, which can then be examined. In contrast, an interactive disassembler immediately reflects any changes made by the user. For example, if the disassembler initially treats a section of the program as data rather than code, the user can specify it as code. The disassembled code will then be updated and displayed instantly, allowing the user to analyze it and make further changes during the same session.\nAny interactive debugger will include some way of viewing the disassembly of the program being debugged. Often, the same disassembly tool will be packaged as a standalone disassembler distributed along with the debugger. For example, objdump, part of GNU Binutils, is related to the interactive debugger gdb.\nDisassemblers and emulators.\nA dynamic disassembler can be integrated into the output of an emulator or hypervisor to trace the real-time execution of machine instructions, displaying them line-by-line. In this setup, along with the disassembled machine code, the disassembler can show changes to registers, data, or other state elements (such as condition codes) caused by each instructions. This provides powerful debugging information for problem resolution. However, the output size can become quite large, particularly if the tracing is active throughout the entire execution of a program. These features were first introduced in the early 1970s by OLIVER as part of its CICS debugging product and are now incorporated into the XPEDITER product from Compuware.\nLength disassembler.\nA length disassembler, also known as length disassembler engine (LDE), is a tool that, given a sequence of bytes (instructions), outputs the number of bytes taken by the parsed instruction. Notable open source projects for the x86 architecture include ldisasm, Tiny x86 Length Disassembler and Extended Length Disassembler Engine for x86-64.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54395", "revid": "1319955139", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54395", "title": "Strike zone", "text": "Target zone for a pitched baseball\nIn baseball, the strike zone is the area of space through which a pitch must pass in order to be called a strike even if the batter does not swing. The strike zone is defined as the volume of space above home plate and between the batter's knees and the midpoint of his torso. Whether a pitch passes through the zone is decided by an umpire, who is generally positioned behind the catcher.\nStrikes are desirable for the pitcher and the fielding team, as three strikes result in a strikeout of that batter. A pitch that misses the strike zone is called a ball if the batter does not swing at it. Balls are desirable for the batter and the batting team, as four balls allow the batter to take a \"walk\" to first base as a base on balls.\nDefinition.\nThe strike zone is a volume of space, a vertical right pentagonal prism. Its sides are vertical planes extending up from the edges of home plate. The official rules of Major League Baseball define the top of the strike zone as the midpoint between the top of the batter's shoulders and the top of his uniform pants, and the bottom of the strike zone is at the hollow beneath the kneecap, both determined from the batter's stance as he is prepared to swing at the pitched ball, although the \"de facto\" enforced strike zone can vary based on the umpire's perspective. The official rules define a pitch as a strike \"if any part of the ball passes through any part of the strike zone\", with the ball required to have not bounced. Thus, a pitch that touches the outer boundary of the zone is as much a strike as a pitch that is thrown right down the center. A pitch passing outside the front of the strike zone but curving so as to enter this volume farther back (without being hit) is sometimes called a \"back-door strike\". Various other rulebooks for baseball and softball define the strike zone slightly differently. \nA pitch is also a strike if the batter swings or offers the bat in an attempt to hit the pitch. A pitch batted into foul territory\u2014a foul ball\u2014is also a strike, unless the batter already has two strikes. Any pitch not called a strike, swung on and missed, or fouled-off, is a \"ball\" (originally \"no ball\"). \nA batter who accumulates three strikes in a single batting appearance has struck out and is ruled out (with the exception of an uncaught third strike); a batter who accumulates four balls in a single appearance has drawn a base on balls (or \"walk\") and is awarded advancement to first base. In very early iterations of the rules during the 19th century, it took up to nine balls for a batter to earn a walk. However, to make up for this, he could request the ball to be pitched high, low, or medium.\nHistory.\nOriginally, the word \"strike\" was used literally: the batter \"striking\" at the ball in an effort to hit it. For example, the 11th rule of the Knickerbocker Rules (1845) read \"Three balls being struck at and missed and the last one caught, is a hand-out.\" There was no adverse consequence if the batter did not swing, i.e. the called strike did not exist, the result being batters prepared to wait all day for \"their\" pitch. It was not until the 1858 NABBP convention that a rule was adopted authorizing the umpire to impose a penalty strike for such conduct: \"Should a striker stand at the bat without striking at good balls repeatedly pitched to him, for the purpose of delaying the game or of giving advantage to a player, the umpire, after warning him, shall call one strike, and if he persists in such action, two and three strikes. When three strikes are called, he shall be subject to the same rules as if he had struck at three balls.\" The called ball first appeared in the rules of 1863, similarly as a discretionary penalty imposed on the pitcher for persistently delivering \"unfair\" balls.\nWhether or not a pitch was \"unfair\" or the batter was being unreasonably picky was left entirely to the umpire's judgment. Well into the 1870s, umpires were reluctant to make such calls, since they were viewed as penalties for unsportsmanlike play. By the 1880s, they had become routine, and the modern view took hold, that every pitch results in either a swing, a ball or a called strike. The first rule leading to the creation of a defined strike \"zone\" was enacted by the American Association before the 1886 season. As explained in \"The Sporting Life\" on March 17, 1886, \"the ball must be delivered at the height called for by the batsman. If at such height it passes over any part of the plate then it is a strike. The idea is to give the pitcher a chance against some cranky umpires who compelled the twirlers to almost cut the plate in two before a strike would be called, even if the height was right.\" The following year, the National League created the full strike zone, eliminating the batter's right to call the height of the pitch, and instead requiring the umpire to call a strike on any pitch that \"passes over home plate not lower than the batsman's knee, nor higher than his shoulders.\"\nMajor League Baseball has occasionally redefined the strike zone to control the balance of power between pitchers and hitters. After the record home run year by Roger Maris in 1961, the major leagues increased the size of the strike zone by raising the top of the zone from the batter's armpit to the top of his shoulder. In 1968, pitchers such as Denny McLain and Bob Gibson dominated hitters, producing 339 shutouts. Carl Yastrzemski was the only American League hitter to finish the season with a batting average higher than .300. In the National League, Gibson posted a 1.12 earned run average, the lowest in 54 years, while Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Don Drysdale threw a record &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;58+2\u20443 consecutive scoreless innings during the 1968 season. As a result of the dropping offensive statistics, Major League Baseball reduced pitchers' advantage by lowering the height of the mound from to , and by reducing the size of the strike zone for the 1969 season to extend only from the batter's armpits to the top of the knees. In 1985, the top of the strike zone was lowered to the midpoint of the batter's torso, as viewed from a vertical angle by the umpire.\nEnforcement.\nWhile baseball rules provide a precise definition for the strike zone, in practice, it is up to the judgment of the umpire to decide whether the pitch passed through the zone.\nThe Official Baseball Rules (Rule 8.02(a), including Comment) state that objections to judgment calls on the field, including balls and strikes, shall not be tolerated, and any manager, coach, or player who leaves his dugout or field position to contest a judgment call will first be warned, and then ejected.\nMany umpires, players and analysts, including the authors of a University of Nebraska study on the subject, believe that due to the QuesTec pitch-tracking system, the enforced strike zone in 2002\u20132006 was larger compared to the zone in 1996\u20132000 and thus closer to the rulebook definition. Some commentators believed the zone had changed so much that some pitchers, such as Tom Glavine, had to radically adjust their approach to pitching for strikes. In 2003, a frustrated Curt Schilling took a baseball bat to a QuesTec camera and destroyed it after a loss, saying the umpires should not be changing the strike zone to match the machines.\nIn 2009, a new system called Zone Evaluation was implemented in all 30 Major League ballparks, replacing the QuesTec system; the new system records the ball's position in flight more than 20 times before it reaches home plate. Much of the early resistance from Major League umpires to QuesTec had diminished and the implementation of the new Zone Evaluation system in all the parks went largely unmentioned to fans. Like the old system, the new system will be used to grade umpires on accuracy and used to determine which umpires receive postseason assignments, but games themselves are still subject to their error.\nAs of 2022, Minor League Baseball has been testing the Automated Ball-Strike System (ABS) on an experimental basis for several seasons. While the umpire continues to call balls and strikes, ABS determines the strike zone and could be used when a team challenged the umpire's call. Major League Baseball commissioner Rob Manfred said in October 2022 that ABS would eventually be used in Major League games. ESPN reported that all AAA games would use ABS in the 2023 season. For 2023, the system was used for half of all games, with the other half using umpires, with ABS used for up to three challenges per team for each game.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54397", "revid": "1127678037", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54397", "title": "Banaw\u00e1", "text": "The Banaw\u00e1 (also Banawa, Banav\u00e1, Jaf\u00ed, Kitiya, Banau\u00e1) are an indigenous group living along the Banaw\u00e1 River in the Amazonas State, Brazil. Their territory is between the Juru\u00e1 and Purus Rivers. Approximately 158 Banaw\u00e1 people live in one major village and two smaller settlements containing a single extended family each. The Banaw\u00e1, who call themselves Kitiya, speak Banaw\u00e1, a dialect of the Madi language.\nHistory.\nTheir territory was invaded at the end of the 19th century, during the rubber boom. In the 1990s, Brazil formally recognized their land rights.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54398", "revid": "15482012", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54398", "title": "Balanjar", "text": "Medieval city in the North Caucasus\nBalanjar (; \"Baranjar\", \"Belenjer\", \"Belendzher\", \"B\u00fcl\u00fcnjar\") was a medieval city located in the North Caucasus region, between the cities of Derbent and Samandar, probably on the lower Sulak River. It flourished between the seventh and tenth centuries. The legendary founder of Balanjar, according to the Persian and Kurdish chroniclers Ibn al-Faqih and Abu al-Fida, was named Balanjar ibn Yafith (\u0628\u0644\u0646\u062c\u0631 \u0628\u0646 \u064a\u0627\u0641\u062b).\nHistory.\nIn the 630s Balanjar was a capital of the Baranjar state. Some scholars speculate that the name derives from the Turkic root \"Bala\" or \"Great\", and the clan-name \"Endzhar\". With the rest of the Baranjar domains the city became part of the Khazar Khaganate around 650; until the early 720s, Balanjar served as the capital of Khazaria. During the First Arab-Khazar War in the 650s, a Muslim army under Abd ar-Rahman ibn Rabiah was defeated outside the town (see Battle of Balanjar).\nAround 722 or 723, Umayyad soldiers under Al-Jarrah ibn Abdallah crossed the Caucasus Mountains and attacked Balanjar. The inhabitants of Balanjar tried to defend their town by fastening 3,000 wagons together and circling them around the key fortress on high terrain, but were defeated in the attack. The Arabs massacred much of the town's population; survivors fled to other towns, including Samandar. The victorious Arab army stole much booty and the soldiers received large sums of money.\nThe city was rebuilt after the war, but the capital of Khazaria was thereafter moved to Samandar and later to Atil. Nevertheless, Balanjar continued to be a city of great importance within the Khaganate. After the fall of Khazaria, Balanjar lost much of its importance and declined steadily until it vanished from the record around 1100.\nThe exact location of Balanjar has not yet been established precisely. Soviet archeologist Mikhail Artamonov initially placed Balanjar on the site of the modern Daghestani city of Buynaksk, but when later the ruins of a town to the south of Makhachkala were found, he identified them as being those of Balanjar."}
{"id": "54399", "revid": "50933490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54399", "title": "TI-89 series", "text": "Series of graphing calculators\nThe TI-89 and the TI-89 Titanium are graphing calculators developed by Texas Instruments (TI). They are differentiated from most other TI graphing calculators by their computer algebra system, which allows symbolic manipulation of algebraic expressions\u2014equations can be solved in terms of variables\u2014 whereas the TI-83/84 series can only give a numeric result.\nTI-89.\nThe TI-89 is a graphing calculator developed by Texas Instruments in 1998. The unit features a 160\u00d7100 pixel resolution LCD and a large amount of flash memory, and includes TI's \"Advanced Mathematics Software\". The TI-89 is one of the highest model lines in TI's calculator products, along with the TI-Nspire. In the summer of 2004, the standard TI-89 was replaced by the TI-89 Titanium.\nThe TI-89 runs on a 32-bit microprocessor, the Motorola 68000, which nominally runs at 10 or 12 MHz, depending on the calculator's hardware version. The calculator has 256 kB of RAM, (190\u00a0kB of which are available to the user) and 2\u00a0MB of flash memory (700\u00a0kB of which is available to the user). The RAM and Flash ROM are used to store expressions, variables, programs, text files, and lists.\nThe TI-89 is essentially a TI-92 Plus with a limited keyboard and smaller screen. It was created partially in response to the fact that while calculators are allowed on many standardized tests, the TI-92 was not due to the QWERTY layout of its keyboard. Additionally, some people found the TI-92 unwieldy and overly large. The TI-89 is significantly smaller\u2014about the same size as most other graphing calculators. It has a flash ROM, a feature present on the TI-92 Plus but not on the original TI-92.\nUser features.\nThe major advantage of the TI-89 over other TI calculators is its built-in computer algebra system, or CAS. The calculator can evaluate and simplify algebraic expressions symbolically. For example, entering codice_1 returns formula_1. The answer is \"prettyprinted\" by default; that is, displayed as it would be written by hand (e.g. the aforementioned formula_1 rather than codice_1). The TI-89's abilities include:\nIn addition to the standard two-dimensional function plots, it can also produce graphs of parametric equations, polar equations, sequence plots, differential equation fields, and three-dimensional (two independent variable) functions.\nProgramming.\nThe TI-89 is directly programmable in a language called TI-BASIC 89, TI's derivative of BASIC for calculators. With the use of a PC, it is also possible to develop more complex programs in Motorola 68000 assembly language or C, translate them to machine language, and copy them to the calculator. Two software development kits for C programming are available; one is TI Flash Studio, the official TI SDK, and the other is TIGCC, a third-party SDK based on GCC.\nIn addition, there is a third party flash application called GTC that allows the writing and compilation of C programs directly on the calculator. It is built on TIGCC, with some modifications. Numerous BASIC extensions are also present, the most notable of which is NewProg.\nSince the TI-89's release in 1998, thousands of programs for math, science, or entertainment have been developed. Many video games have also been developed. Many are generic clones of \"Tetris\", \"Minesweeper\", and other classic games, but some programs are more advanced: for example, a ZX Spectrum emulator, a chess-playing program, a symbolic circuit simulator, and a clone of \"Link's Awakening\". Some of the most popular and well-known games are Phoenix, Drugwars, and Snake. Many calculator games and other useful programs can be found on TI-program sharing sites. Ticalc.org is a major one that offers thousands of calculator programs.\nHardware versions.\nThere are four hardware versions of the TI-89. These versions are normally referred to as HW1, HW2, HW3, and HW4 (released in May 2006). Entering the key sequence [F1] [A] displays the hardware version. Older versions (before HW2) don't display anything about the hardware version in the about menu. The differences in the hardware versions are not well documented by Texas Instruments. HW1 and HW2 correspond to the original TI-89; HW3 and HW4 are only present in the TI-89 Titanium.\nThe most significant difference between HW1 and HW2 is in the way the calculator handles the display. In HW1 calculators there is a video buffer that stores all of the information that should be displayed on the screen, and every time the screen is refreshed the calculator accesses this buffer and flushes it to the display (direct memory access). In HW2 and later calculators, a region of memory is directly aliased to the display controller (memory-mapped I/O). This allows for slightly faster memory access, as the HW1's DMA controller used about 10% of the bus bandwidth. However, it interferes with a trick some programs use to implement grayscale graphics by rapidly switching between two or more displays (page-flipping). On the HW1, the DMA controller's base address can be changed (a single write into a memory-mapped hardware register) and the screen will automatically use a new section of memory at the beginning of the next frame. In HW2, the new page must be written to the screen by software. The effect of this is to cause increased flickering in grayscale mode, enough to make the 7-level grayscale supported on the HW1 unusable (although 4-level grayscale works on both calculators).\nHW2 calculators are slightly faster because TI increased the nominal speed of the processor from 10\u00a0MHz to 12\u00a0MHz. It is believed that TI increased the speed of HW4 calculators to 16\u00a0MHz, though many users disagree about this finding. The measured statistics are closer to 14\u00a0MHz.\nAnother difference between HW1 and HW2 calculators is assembly program size limitations. The size limitation on HW2 calculators has varied with the AMS version of the calculator. As of AMS 2.09 the limit is 24k. Some earlier versions limited assembly programs to 8k, and the earliest AMS versions had no limit. The latest AMS version has a 64kb limit. HW1 calculators have no hardware to enforce the limits, so it is easy to bypass them in software. There are unofficial patches and kernels that can be installed on HW2 calculators to remove the limitations.\nTI-89 Titanium.\nThe TI-89 Titanium was released in on June 1st, 2004, and has largely replaced the popular classic TI-89. The TI-89 Titanium is referred to as HW3 and uses the corresponding AMS 3.x. In 2006, new calculators were upgraded to HW4 which was supposed to offer increases in RAM and speeds up to , but some benchmarks made by users reported speeds between 12.85 and .\nThe touted advantages of the TI-89 Titanium over the original TI-89 include two times the flash memory (with over four times as much available to the user). The TI-89 Titanium is essentially a Voyage 200, without an integrated keyboard. The TI-89 Titanium also has a USB On-The-Go port, for connectivity to other TI-89 Titanium calculators, or to a computer (to store programs or update the operating system). The TI-89 Titanium also features some pre-loaded applications, such as \"CellSheet\", a spreadsheet program also offered with other TI calculators. The Titanium has a slightly updated CAS, which adds a few more mathematical functions, most notably implicit differentiation. The Titanium also has a slightly differing case design from that of the TI-89 (the Titanium's case design is similar to that of the TI-84 Plus).\nThere are some minor compatibility issues with C and assembly programs developed for the original TI-89. Some have to be recompiled to work on the Titanium due to various small hardware changes, though in most cases the problems can be fixed by using a utility such as GhostBuster, by Olivier Armand and Kevin Kofler. This option is generally preferred as it requires no knowledge of the program, works without the need of the program's source code, is automated, and doesn't require additional computer software. In some cases, only one character needs to be changed (the ROM base on TI-89 is at 0x200000, whereas the TI-89 Titanium is at 0x800000) by hand or by patcher. Most, if not all, of these problems are caused by the mirror memory (ghost space) or lack thereof.\nUse in schools.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe Joint Council for Qualifications publish examination instructions on behalf of the main examination boards in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. These instructions state that a calculator used in an examination must not be designed to offer symbolic algebra manipulation, symbolic differentiation or integration. This precludes use of the TI-89 or TI-89 Titanium in examinations, but it may be used as part of classroom study. The SQA give the same instructions for examinations in Scotland.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the TI-89 is allowed by the College Board on all calculator-permitted tests, including the SAT, some SAT Subject Tests, and the AP Calculus, Physics, Chemistry, and Statistics exams. However, the calculator is banned from use on the ACT, the PLAN, and in some classrooms. The TI-92 series, with otherwise comparable features, has a QWERTY keyboard that results in it being classified as a computer device rather than as a calculator.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54402", "revid": "204565", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54402", "title": "Bluegrass band", "text": ""}
{"id": "54403", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54403", "title": "Dizzy Gillespie", "text": "American jazz trumpeter (1917\u20131993)\nJohn Birks \"Dizzy\" Gillespie ( ; October 21, 1917 \u2013 January 6, 1993) was an American jazz trumpeter, bandleader, composer, educator and singer. He was a trumpet virtuoso and improviser, building on the virtuosic style of Roy Eldridge but adding layers of harmonic and rhythmic complexity previously unheard in jazz. His combination of musicianship, showmanship, and wit made him a leading popularizer of the new music called bebop. His beret and horn-rimmed spectacles, scat singing, bent horn, pouched cheeks, and light-hearted personality have made him an enduring icon.\nIn the 1940s, Gillespie, with Charlie Parker, became a major figure in the development of bebop and modern jazz. He taught and influenced many other musicians, including trumpeters Miles Davis, Jon Faddis, Fats Navarro, Clifford Brown, Arturo Sandoval, Lee Morgan, Chuck Mangione, and balladeer Johnny Hartman.\nHe pioneered Afro-Cuban jazz and won several Grammy Awards. Scott Yanow wrote: \"Dizzy Gillespie's contributions to jazz were huge. One of the greatest jazz trumpeters of all time, Gillespie was such a complex player that his contemporaries ended up being similar to those of Miles Davis and Fats Navarro instead, and it was not until Jon Faddis's emergence in the 1970s that Dizzy's style was successfully recreated [...] Gillespie is remembered, by both critics and fans alike, as one of the greatest jazz trumpeters of all time\".\nBiography.\nEarly life and career.\nThe youngest of nine children of Lottie and James Gillespie, Dizzy Gillespie was born in Cheraw, South Carolina. His father was a local bandleader, so instruments were made available to the children. Gillespie started to play the piano at the age of four. Gillespie's father died when he was only ten years old. He taught himself how to play the trombone as well as the trumpet by the age of twelve. From the night he heard his idol, Roy Eldridge, on the radio, he dreamed of becoming a jazz musician.\nHe won a music scholarship to the Laurinburg Institute in North Carolina which he attended for two years before accompanying his family when they moved to Philadelphia in 1935.\nGillespie's first professional job was with the Frank Fairfax Orchestra in 1935, after which he joined the respective orchestras of Edgar Hayes and later Teddy Hill, replacing Frankie Newton as second trumpet in May 1937. Teddy Hill's band was where Gillespie made his first recording, \"King Porter Stomp\". In August 1937 while gigging with Hayes in Washington D.C., Gillespie met a young dancer named Lorraine Willis who worked a Baltimore\u2013Philadelphia\u2013New York City circuit which included the Apollo Theater. Willis was not immediately friendly but Gillespie was attracted anyway. The two married on May 9, 1940.\nGillespie stayed with Teddy Hill's band for a year, then left and freelanced with other bands. In 1939, with the help of Willis, Gillespie joined Cab Calloway's orchestra. He recorded one of his earliest compositions, \"Pickin' the Cabbage\", with Calloway in 1940. After an altercation between the two, Calloway fired Gillespie in late 1941. The incident is recounted by Gillespie and Calloway's band members Milt Hinton and Jonah Jones in Jean Bach's 1997 film, \"The Spitball Story\". Calloway disapproved of Gillespie's mischievous humor and his adventuresome approach to soloing. According to Jones, Calloway referred to it as \"Chinese music\". During rehearsal, someone in the band threw a spitball. Already in a foul mood, Calloway blamed Gillespie, who refused to take the blame. Gillespie stabbed Calloway in the leg with a knife. Calloway had minor cuts on the thigh and wrist. After the two were separated, Calloway fired Gillespie. A few days later, Gillespie tried to apologize to Calloway, but he was dismissed.\nDuring his time in Calloway's band, Gillespie started writing big band arrangements for Woody Herman, Jimmy Dorsey, and others. He then freelanced with a few bands, most notably Ella Fitzgerald's orchestra, composed of members of the Chick Webb's band.\nGillespie did not serve in World War II. At his Selective Service interview, he told the local board, \"in this stage of my life here in the United States whose foot has been in my ass?\" and \"So if you put me out there with a gun in my hand and tell me to shoot at the enemy, I'm liable to create a case of 'mistaken identity' of who I might shoot.\" He was classified 4-F. In 1943, he joined the Earl Hines band. Composer Gunther Schuller said,\n ... In 1943 I heard the great Earl Hines band which had Bird in it and all those other great musicians. They were playing all the flatted fifth chords and all the modern harmonies and substitutions and Gillespie runs in the trumpet section work. Two years later I read that that was 'bop' and the beginning of modern jazz ... but the band never made recordings.\nGillespie said of the Hines band, \"[p]eople talk about the Hines band being 'the incubator of bop' and the leading exponents of that music ended up in the Hines band. But people also have the erroneous impression that the music was new. It was not. The music evolved from what went before. It was the same basic music. The difference was in how you got from here to here to here ... naturally each age has got its own shit.\"\nGillespie joined the big band of Hines's long-time collaborator Billy Eckstine, and it was as a member of Eckstine's band that he was reunited with Charlie Parker, a fellow member. In 1944, Gillespie left Eckstine's band because he wanted to play with a small combo. A \"small combo\" typically comprised no more than five musicians, playing the trumpet, saxophone, piano, bass and drums. Dizzy recommended Fats Navarro for the job with Eckstine, who proved to be an ample replacement.\nRise of Bebop.\nBebop was known as the first modern jazz style, but was unpopular following its onset and was not viewed as positively as swing music was. Bebop was seen as an outgrowth of swing, not a revolution. Swing introduced a diversity of new musicians in the bebop era like Charlie Parker, Thelonious Monk, Bud Powell, Kenny Clarke, Oscar Pettiford, and Gillespie. Through these musicians, a new vocabulary of musical phrases was created. With Parker, Gillespie performed at famous jazz clubs like Minton's Playhouse and Monroe's Uptown House. Parker's system also held methods of adding chords to existing chord progressions and implying additional chords within the improvised lines.\nGillespie compositions like \"Groovin' High\", \"Woody 'n' You\", and \"Salt Peanuts\" sounded radically different, harmonically and rhythmically, from the swing music popular at the time. \"A Night in Tunisia\", written in 1942, while he was playing with Earl Hines's band, is noted for having a feature that is common in today's music: a syncopated bass line. \"Woody 'n' You\" was recorded in a session led by Coleman Hawkins with Gillespie as a featured sideman on February 16, 1944 (Apollo), the first formal recording of bebop. He appeared in recordings by the Billy Eckstine band and started recording prolifically as a leader and sideman in early 1945. He was not content to let Bebop sit in a niche of small groups in small clubs. A concert by one of his small groups in New York's Town Hall on June 22, 1945, presented bebop to a broad audience; recordings of it were released in 2005. He started to organize big bands in late 1945. Dizzy Gillespie and his Bebop Six, which included Parker, started an extended gig at Billy Berg's club in Los Angeles in December 1945. Reception was mixed and the band broke up. In February 1946 he signed a contract with Bluebird, gaining the distribution power of RCA for his music. He and his big band headlined the 1946 film \"Jivin' in Be-Bop\".\nAfter his work with Parker, Gillespie led other small combos (including ones with Milt Jackson, John Coltrane, Lalo Schifrin, Ray Brown, Kenny Clarke, James Moody, J. J. Johnson, and Yusef Lateef) and put together his successful big bands starting in 1947. He and his big bands, with arrangements provided by Tadd Dameron, Gil Fuller, and George Russell, popularized bebop and made him a symbol of the new music.\nHis big bands of the late 1940s also featured Cuban \"rumberos\" Chano Pozo and Sabu Martinez, sparking interest in Afro-Cuban jazz. He appeared frequently as a soloist with Norman Granz's Jazz at the Philharmonic.\nGillespie and his Bebop Orchestra was the featured star of the 4th Cavalcade of Jazz concert held at Wrigley Field in Los Angeles which was produced by Leon Hefflin Sr. On September 12, 1948. The young Gillespie had recently returned from Europe where his music was widely popular. The program description noted \"the musicianship, inventive technique, and daring of this young man has created a new style, which can be defined as off the chord solo gymnastics.\" Also performing that day were Frankie Laine, Little Miss Cornshucks, The Sweethearts of Rhythm, The Honeydrippers, Big Joe Turner, Jimmy Witherspoon, The Blenders, and The Sensations.\nIn 1948, Gillespie was involved in a traffic accident when the bicycle he was riding was bumped by an automobile. He was slightly injured and found that he could no longer hit the B-flat above high C. He won the case, but the jury awarded him only $1000 in view of his high earnings up to that point.\nIn 1951, Gillespie founded his record label, Dee Gee Records; it closed in 1953.\nOn January 6, 1953, he threw a party for his wife Lorraine at Snookie's, a club in Manhattan, where his trumpet's bell got bent upward in an accident, but he liked the sound so much he had a special trumpet made with a 45-degree raised bell, a customization that would become his trademark.\nIn 1956 Gillespie organized a band to go on a State Department tour of the Middle East which was well-received internationally and earned him the nickname \"the Ambassador of Jazz\". During this time, he also continued to lead a big band that performed throughout the United States and featured musicians including Pee Wee Moore and others. This band recorded a live album at the 1957 Newport jazz festival that featured Mary Lou Williams as a guest artist on piano.\nAfro-Cuban jazz.\nIn the late 1940s, Gillespie was involved in the movement called Afro-Cuban music, bringing Afro-Latin American music and elements to greater prominence in jazz and even pop music, particularly salsa. Afro-Cuban jazz is based on traditional Afro-Cuban rhythms. Gillespie was introduced to Chano Pozo in 1947 by Mario Bauza, a Latin jazz trumpet player. Chano Pozo became Gillespie's conga drummer for his band. Gillespie also worked with Mario Bauza in New York jazz clubs on 52nd Street and several famous dance clubs such as the Palladium and the Apollo Theater in Harlem. They played together in the Chick Webb band and Cab Calloway's band, where Gillespie and Bauza became lifelong friends. Gillespie helped develop and mature the Afro-Cuban jazz style. Afro-Cuban jazz was considered bebop-oriented, and some musicians classified it as a modern style. Afro-Cuban jazz was successful because it never decreased in popularity and it always attracted people to dance.\nGillespie's most famous contributions to Afro-Cuban music are \"Manteca\" and \"Tin Tin Deo\" (both co-written with Chano Pozo); he was responsible for commissioning George Russell's \"Cubano Be, Cubano Bop\", which featured Pozo. In 1977, Gillespie met Arturo Sandoval during a jazz cruise to Havana. Sandoval toured with Gillespie and defected in Rome in 1990 while touring with Gillespie and the United Nation Orchestra.\nFinal years.\nIn the 1980s, Gillespie led the United Nations Orchestra. For three years Flora Purim toured with the Orchestra. She credits Gillespie with improving her understanding of jazz.\nIn 1982, he was sought out by Motown musician Stevie Wonder to play his solo in Wonder's 1982 hit single, \"Do I Do\".\nHe starred in the film \"The Winter in Lisbon\" that was released as \"El invierno en Lisboa\" in 1992 and re-released in 2004. The soundtrack album, featuring him, was recorded in 1990 and released in 1991. The film is a crime drama about a jazz pianist who falls for a dangerous woman while in Portugal with an American expatriate's jazz band.\nIn December 1991, during an engagement at Kimball's East in Emeryville, California, he suffered a crisis from what turned out to be pancreatic cancer. He performed one more night but cancelled the rest of the tour for medical reasons, ending his 56-year touring career. He led his last recording session on January 25, 1992.\nOn November 26, 1992, Carnegie Hall, following the Second Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed World Congress, celebrated Gillespie's 75th birthday concert and his offering to the celebration of the centenary of the passing of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h. Gillespie was to appear at Carnegie Hall for the 33rd time. The line-up included Jon Faddis, James Moody, Paquito D'Rivera, and the Mike Longo Trio with Ben Brown on bass and Mickey Roker on drums. Gillespie was too unwell to attend. \"But the musicians played their real hearts out for him, no doubt suspecting that he would not play again. Each musician gave tribute to their friend, this great soul and innovator in the world of jazz.\"\nDeath and postmortem.\nA longtime resident of Englewood, New Jersey, Gillespie died of pancreatic cancer on January 6, 1993, at the age of 75. His funeral was held on January 12 at St. Peter's Lutheran Church, with Roberta Flack singing Amazing Grace. His grave at Flushing Cemetery, Queens, New York City is unmarked.\nPolitics and religion.\nIn 1962, Gillespie and actor George Mathews starred in \"The Hole\", an animated short film by John and Faith Hubley. Released the same year as the Cuban Missile Crisis, it uses audio from an improvised conversation between the two debating the causes of accidents and the possibility of accidentally launching nuclear weapons. The short went on to win the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film the following year.\nDuring the 1964 United States presidential campaign, Gillespie put himself forward as an independent write-in candidate. He promised that if he were elected, the White House would be renamed the Blues House, and he would have a cabinet composed of Duke Ellington (Secretary of State), Miles Davis (Director of the CIA), Max Roach (Secretary of Defense), Charles Mingus (Secretary of Peace), Ray Charles (Librarian of Congress), Louis Armstrong (Secretary of Agriculture), Mary Lou Williams (Ambassador to the Vatican), Thelonious Monk (Travelling Ambassador) and Malcolm X (Attorney General). He said his running mate would be Phyllis Diller. Campaign buttons had been manufactured years before by Gillespie's booking agency as a joke but proceeds went to Congress of Racial Equality, Southern Christian Leadership Conference and Martin Luther King Jr.; in later years they became a collector's item. In 1971, he announced he would run again but withdrew before the election.\nShortly after the death of Charlie Parker, Gillespie encountered an audience member after a show. They had a conversation about the oneness of humanity and the elimination of racism from the perspective of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. Impacted by the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. in 1968, he became a Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed that same year. The universalist emphasis of his religion prodded him to see himself more as a global citizen and humanitarian, expanding on his interest in his African heritage. His spirituality brought out generosity and what author Nat Hentoff called an inner strength, discipline, and \"soul force\".\nGillespie's conversion was most affected by Bill Sears' book \"Thief in the Night\". Gillespie spoke about the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith frequently on his trips abroad. He is honored with weekly jazz sessions at the New York Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Center in the memorial auditorium. A concert in honor of his 75th birthday was held in New York City's Carnegie Hall, November 26, 1992, in conjunction with the second Baha'i world congress, however, he was too ill to personally attend.\nPersonal life.\nGillespie married dancer Lorraine Willis in Boston on May 9, 1940. They remained together until his death in 1993; Lorraine converted to Catholicism with Mary Lou Williams in 1957. Lorraine managed his business and personal affairs. The couple had no children, but Gillespie fathered a daughter, jazz singer Jeanie Bryson, born in 1958 from an affair with songwriter Connie Bryson. Gillespie met Bryson, a Juilliard-trained pianist, at the jazz club Birdland in New York City. In the mid-1960s, Gillespie settled down in Englewood, New Jersey, with his wife. The local Englewood public high school, Dwight Morrow High School, named its auditorium after him: the Dizzy Gillespie Auditorium.\nArtistry.\nStyle.\nGillespie has been described as the \"sound of surprise\". \"The Rough Guide to Jazz\" describes his musical style:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The whole essence of a Gillespie solo was cliff-hanging suspense: the phrases and the angle of the approach were perpetually varied, breakneck runs were followed by pauses, by huge interval leaps, by long, immensely high notes, by slurs and smears and bluesy phrases; he always took listeners by surprise, always shocking them with a new thought. His lightning reflexes and superb ear meant his instrumental execution matched his thoughts in its power and speed. And he was concerned at all times with swing\u2014even taking the most daring liberties with pulse or beat, his phrases never failed to swing. Gillespie's magnificent sense of time and emotional intensity of his playing came from childhood roots. His parents were Methodists, but as a boy he used to sneak off every Sunday to the uninhibited Sanctified Church. He said later, \"The Sanctified Church had deep significance for me musically. I first learned the significance of rhythm there and all about how music can transport people spiritually.\"\nIn Gillespie's obituary, Peter Watrous describes his performance style:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWynton Marsalis summarized Gillespie as a player and teacher:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBent trumpet.\nGillespie's trademark trumpet featured a bell which bent upward at a 45-degree angle rather than pointing straight ahead as in the conventional design. According to Gillespie's autobiography, this was originally the result of accidental damage caused by the dancers Stump and Stumpy falling onto the instrument while it was on a trumpet stand on stage at Snookie's in Manhattan on January 6, 1953, during a birthday party for Gillespie's wife Lorraine. The constriction caused by the bending altered the tone of the instrument, and Gillespie liked the effect. He had the trumpet straightened out the next day, but he could not forget the tone. Gillespie sent a request to Martin to make him a \"bent\" trumpet from a sketch produced by Lorraine, and from that time forward played a trumpet with an upturned bell.\nBy June 1954 he was using a professionally manufactured horn of this design, and it was to become a trademark for the rest of his life. Such trumpets were made for him by Martin (from 1954), King Musical Instruments (from 1972) and Renold Schilke (from 1982, a gift from Jon Faddis). Gillespie favored mouthpieces made by Al Cass. In December 1986 Gillespie gave the National Museum of American History his 1972 King \"Silver Flair\" trumpet with a Cass mouthpiece.\nIn April 1995, Gillespie's Martin trumpet was auctioned at Christie's in New York City with instruments used by Coleman Hawkins, Jimi Hendrix, and Elvis Presley. An image of Gillespie's trumpet was selected for the cover of the auction program. The battered instrument was sold to Manhattan builder Jeffery Brown for $63,000, the proceeds benefiting jazz musicians with cancer.\nAwards and honors.\nIn 1989, Gillespie was given the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. The next year, at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts ceremonies celebrating the centennial of American jazz, Gillespie received the Kennedy Center Honors Award and the American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers \"Duke Ellington Award\" for 50 years of achievement as a composer, performer, and bandleader.\nIn 1989, Gillespie was awarded with an honorary doctorate of music from Berklee College of Music.\nIn 1991, Gillespie received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement presented by Awards Council member Wynton Marsalis.\nIn 1993 he received the Polar Music Prize in Sweden. In 2002, he was posthumously inducted into the International Latin Music Hall of Fame for his contributions to Afro-Cuban music. He was honored on December 31, 2006 in A Jazz New Year's Eve: Freddy Cole &amp; the Dizzy Gillespie All-Star Big Band at The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. In 2014, Gillespie was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame.\nIn popular culture.\nSamuel E. Wright played Dizzy Gillespie in the film \"Bird\" (1988), about Charlie Parker. Kevin Hanchard portrayed Gillespie in the Chet Baker biopic \"Born to Be Blue\" (2015). Charles S. Dutton played him in \"\" (2000).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54404", "revid": "1750837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54404", "title": "Tropaeolum", "text": "Genus of plants in the family Tropaeolaceae\nTropaeolum , commonly known as nasturtium (; literally \"nose-twister\" or \"nose-tweaker\"), is a genus of roughly 80 species of annual and perennial herbaceous flowering plants. It was named by Carl Linnaeus in his book \"Species Plantarum\" and is the only genus in the family Tropaeolaceae. The nasturtiums received their common name because they produce an oil similar to that of watercress (\"Nasturtium officinale\").\nThe genus \"Tropaeolum\", native to South and Central America, includes several very popular garden plants, the most common being \"T.\u00a0majus\", \"T.\u00a0peregrinum\" and \"T.\u00a0speciosum\". One of the hardiest species is \"T.\u00a0polyphyllum\" from Chile, the perennial roots of which can survive the winter underground at elevations of .\nPlants in this genus have showy, often intensely bright flowers and rounded, peltate (shield-shaped) leaves with the petiole in the centre. The flowers are bisexual and zygomorphic, with five petals, a superior three-carpelled ovary, and a funnel-shaped nectar spur at the back, formed by modification of one of the five sepals.\nDescription.\n\"Tropaeolum\" is a genus of dicotyledonous annual or perennial plants, often with somewhat succulent stems and sometimes tuberous roots. The alternate leaves are hairless, peltate, and entirely or palmately lobed. The petioles or leaf stalks are long and, in many species, can twine around other stems to provide support. The flowers are bisexual and showy, set singly on long stalks in the axils of the leaves. They have five sepals, the uppermost of which is elongated into a nectar spur. The five petals are clawed, with the lower three unlike the upper two. The eight stamens are in two whorls of unequal length, and the superior ovary has three segments and three stigmas on a single style. The fruit is naked and nut-like, with three single seed segments.\nTaxonomy.\n\"Tropaeolum\" was named by Carl Linnaeus in his book \"Species Plantarum\". He chose the genus name because \"T.\u00a0majus\" reminded him of an ancient custom: After victory in battle, the Romans erected a trophy pole (or \"tropaeum\", from the Greek tropaion, source of English \"trophy\") on which the vanquished foe's armour and weapons were hung. The plant's round leaves reminded Linnaeus of shields and its flowers of blood-stained helmets.\n\"Tropaeolum\" was previously placed in the family Tropaeolaceae along with two other genera, \"Magallana\" and \"Trophaeastrum\". The monotypic genus \"Magallana\" was characterised by having winged fruit, and the two species of \"Trophaeastrum\" lacked spurs. The genus \"Tropaeolum\" was diagnosed only by the absence of the characteristics of the other two genera. A molecular study undertaken in 2000 found \"Tropaeolum\" to be paraphyletic when the other two genera are segregated, so \"Magallana\" and \"Trophaeastrum\" were reduced to synonyms of \"Tropaeolum\". Tropaeolaceae was thus rendered monogeneric, a family of only one genus.\nThe nasturtiums received their common name because they produce an oil similar to that of watercress (\"Nasturtium officinale\").\nSpecies.\n\"The Plant List\", a collaboration between the Missouri Botanical Garden and the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, includes the following accepted names of \"Tropaeolum\" species names. Some that are under review are here marked \"U\". \nCultivation.\nThe most common flower in cultivation is a hybrid of \"T. majus\", \"T. minus,\" and \"T. peltophorum\". It is commonly known as the nasturtium (and occasionally anglicized as nasturtian). It is mostly grown from seed as a half-hardy annual, and both single and double varieties are available. It comes in various forms and colours, including cream, yellow, orange and red, solid in colour or striped and often with a dark blotch at the base of the petals. It is vigorous and easily grown and does well in sun. It thrives in poor soil and dry conditions, whereas rich soil produces much leafy growth and few flowers. Some varieties adopt a bush form while others scramble over and through other plants and are useful for planting in awkward spots or for covering fences and trellises.\nThe following cultivars have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit:\nThe blue nasturtium (\"Tropaeolum azureum\") is a tender species from Chile which has violet-blue flowers with white eyes that can be as much as across.\n\"Tropaeolum brachyceras\" has yellow flowers with purplish markings on wiry, climbing stems. It is a half-hardy perennial from Chile and may remain dormant for several years before being sparked into growth by some unknown trigger factor.\n\"Tropaeolum hookerianum\" is a tuberous-rooted species from Chile. There are two subspecies, \"T.\u00a0h.\u00a0austropurpureum\" which has violet-purple flowers and \"T.\u00a0h.\u00a0pilosum\" with yellow flowers.\nThe Canary creeper (\"Tropaeolum peregrinum\") is a trailing and climbing half-hardy annual species with wiry stalks and palmately lobed leaves. The pale yellow, fringed flowers are borne on long stalks. It originated from Peru but may first have been cultivated in the Canary Islands before being introduced into Western Europe.\nWreath nasturtium (\"Tropaeolum polyphyllum\") is a prostrate plant originating from Argentina and Chile. It has silvery, deeply lobed leaves and a profusion of small, bright yellow flowers on long trailing stalks. After flowering, the plant dies back. It is a perennial with underground rhizomes which send up new shoots at intervals. It will survive for several years in a suitable sunny location with well-drained soil. It is a very hardy species; the tubers can grow at depths of enabling the plant to survive at altitudes of as much as 3,300\u00a0metres (10,000\u00a0ft) in the Andes.\nThe flame flower (\"Tropaeolum speciosum\") is well adapted to cool, moist climates and famously does well in Scotland. It sends up shoots that thread their way through hedges and shrubs and, when they emerge into the light, bear brilliant red flowers among small, five or six-lobed leaves. It is difficult to establish but is an attractive garden plant when it thrives. This plant has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.\nThree-coloured Indian cress (\"Tropaeolum tricolor\") is another tuberous, climbing species grown for its attractive red, purple and yellow tubular flowers. It comes from Chile and Bolivia and is a reliable winter-growing species.\nMashua (\"Tropaeolum tuberosum\") is a perennial climbing plant from the Andes grown for its tuberous roots. It has been cultivated since ancient times, and depictions of it are found at archaeological sites pre-dating the Incas. It has leaves with five to seven lobes and small, long-spurred, red and yellow flowers. The tubers have an unpleasant smell when raw, which disappears on cooking. It is frost-hardy and produces crops of 30 tonnes per hectare at an elevation of above sea level. The cultivar \"T. tuberosum lineamaculatum\" 'Ken Aslet' has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.\nSpecies originating from the coastal areas and lower foothills make most of their growth in winter, whereas the true alpine species are summer growers. Tuberous \"Tropaeolum\" species are well known for occasionally remaining dormant for one or more years. The species with underground rhizomes and tubers can be propagated from these, while other species are best raised from seed. Many growers favour fresh seed, but dried seed is also often successful. Seed from the winter growing species should be sown in the autumn, while the summer growing species are best sown in the spring in well-drained compost and covered with of grit or sand. The containers should be kept at below until the seedlings appear in about a month, as too high a temperature inhibits germination.\nUses.\nCulinary.\nAll parts of \"T. majus\" are edible. The flower has most often been consumed, making for an especially ornamental salad ingredient; it has a slightly peppery taste reminiscent of watercress and is also used in stir fry. The flowers contain about 130\u00a0mg vitamin C per , about the same amount as is contained in parsley. Moreover, they contain up to 45\u00a0mg of lutein per 100 g, which is the highest amount found in any edible plant. The unripe seed pods can be harvested and dropped into seasoned vinegar to produce a condiment and garnish, sometimes used in place of capers.\nMashua (\"T. tuberosum\") produces an edible underground tuber that is a major food source in parts of the Andes.\nHerbal medicine.\n\"T. majus\" has been used in herbal medicine for respiratory and urinary tract infections.\nIn Germany, licensed physicians can prescribe the herbal antibiotic Angocin Anti-Infekt N, made from only nasturtium and horseradish root.\nOther uses.\nNasturtiums are used as companion plants for biological pest control, repelling some pests, acting as a trap crop for others and attracting predatory insects. While companion planting is a widespread notion and often adopted by home gardeners, there is little but anecdotal evidence to support these claims.\nIn culture.\n\"Tropaeolum\" was introduced into Spain by the Spanish botanist Nicol\u00e1s Monardes, who described it in his \"Historia medicinal de las cosas que se traen de nuestras Indias Occidentales\" of 1569, translated into English as \"Ioyfull newes out of the newe founde worlde\" by John Frampton. The English herbalist John Gerard reports having received seeds of the plant from Europe in his 1597 book \"Herball, or Generall Historie of Plantes\". Nasturtiums were once commonly called \"Indian cresses\" because they were introduced from the Americas, known popularly then as the Indies, and used like cress as salad ingredients. In his herbal, John Gerard compared the flowers of the \"Indian Cress\" to those of the forking larkspur (\"Consolida regalis\") of the buttercup family. He wrote: \"Unto the backe part (of the flower) doth hange a taile or spurre, such as hath the Larkes heele, called in Latine \"Consolida regalis\".\"\nJ. R. R. Tolkien commented that an alternative anglicization of \"nasturtium\" was \"nasturtian\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54405", "revid": "1926", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54405", "title": "Recreational drug", "text": ""}
{"id": "54406", "revid": "11689218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54406", "title": "Monday", "text": "Day of the week\nMonday is the day of the week that takes place between Sunday and Tuesday. According to the International Organization for Standardization's ISO 8601 standard, it is the first day of the week.\nNames.\nThe names of the day of the week were coined in the Roman era, in Greek and Latin, in the case of Monday as\n\u1f21\u03bc\u03ad\u03c1\u1fb1 \u03a3\u03b5\u03bb\u03ae\u03bd\u03b7\u03c2, \"di\u0113s L\u016bnae\" \"day of the Moon\".\nMany languages use either terms directly derived from these names or loan translations based on them.\nThe English noun \"Monday\" derived sometime before 1200 from \"moned\u00e6i\", which itself developed from Old English (around 1000) \"m\u014dnand\u00e6g\" and \"m\u014dnd\u00e6g\" (literally meaning \"moon's day\"), which has cognates in other Germanic languages, including Old Frisian \"m\u014dnadeig\", Middle Low German and Middle Dutch \"m\u0101nendag, m\u0101nendach\" (modern Dutch \"Maandag\"), Old High German \"m\u0101netag\" (modern German \"Montag\"), and Old Norse \"m\u00e1nadagr\" (Swedish and Norwegian nynorsk \"m\u00e5ndag\", Icelandic \"m\u00e1nudagur\". Danish and Norwegian bokm\u00e5l \"mandag\"). The Germanic term is a Germanic interpretation of Latin \"lunae dies\" (\"day of the moon\").\nJapanese and Korean share the same ancient Chinese words '\u6708\u66dc\u65e5' (Hiragana:\u3052\u3064\u3088\u3046\u3073, translit. \"getsuy\u043e\u0304bi\", Hangeul:\uc6d4\uc694\uc77c) for Monday which means \"day of the moon\".\nIn many Indo-Aryan languages, the word for Monday is \"Somav\u0101ra\" or \"Chandrav\u0101ra\", Sanskrit loan-translations of \"Monday\".\nIn some cases, the \"ecclesiastical\" names are used, a tradition of numbering the days of the week to avoid the pagan connotation of the planetary or deities\u2019 names, and to keep with the biblical name, in which Monday is the \"second day\" (Hebrew \u05d9\u05d5\u05dd \u05e9\u05e0\u05d9, Greek \u0394\u03b5\u03c5\u03c4\u03ad\u03c1\u03b1 \u1f21\u03bc\u03ad\u03c1\u03b1 (\"Deut\u00e9ra h\u0113m\u00e9ra\"), Latin \"feria secunda, Arabic \u0627\u0644\u0623\u062b\u0646\u064a\u0646\").\nIn many Slavic languages the name of the day translates to \"after Sunday/holiday\". Russian \"\u043f\u043e\u043d\u0435\u0434\u0435\u043b\u044c\u043d\u0438\u043a\" (\"ponyedyelnik\") literally translated, Monday means \"next to the week\", \u043f\u043e \"next to\" or \"on\" \u043d\u0435\u0434\u0435\u043b\u044c\u043d\u0438\u043a \"(the) week\" Croatian and Bosnian \"ponedjeljak\", Serbian \"\u043f\u043e\u043d\u0435\u0434\u0435\u0459\u0430\u043a\" (\"ponedeljak\"), Ukrainian \"\u043f\u043e\u043d\u0435\u0434\u0456\u043b\u043e\u043a\" (\"ponedilok\"), Bulgarian \"\u043f\u043e\u043d\u0435\u0434\u0435\u043b\u043d\u0438\u043a\" (\"ponedelnik\"), Polish \"poniedzia\u0142ek\", Czech \"pond\u011bl\u00ed\", Slovak \"pondelok\", Slovenian \"ponedeljek\". In Turkish it is called \"pazartesi\", which also means \"after Sunday\".\nArrangement in the week.\nHistorically, the Greco-Roman week began with Sunday (\"dies solis\"), and Monday (\"dies lunae\") was the second day of the week. It is still the custom to refer to Monday as \"feria secunda\" in the liturgical calendar of the Catholic Church. Quakers also traditionally referred to Monday as \"Second Day\".\nThe Portuguese and the Greek (Eastern Orthodox Church) also retain the ecclesiastical tradition (Portuguese \"segunda-feira\", Greek \"\u0394\u03b5\u03c5\u03c4\u03ad\u03c1\u03b1\" \"deut\u00e9ra\" \"second\"). Vietnamese, whose Latin-based alphabet was originally romanized by Portuguese Jesuit missionaries, adopted this convention and thus also refers to Monday as Second Day (\"th\u1ee9 Hai\"). Likewise, the Modern Hebrew name for Monday is \"yom-sheni\" (\u05d9\u05d5\u05dd \u05e9\u05e0\u05d9).\nWhile in North America, Sunday is the first day of the week, the Geneva-based International Organization for Standardization places Monday as the first day of the week in its ISO 8601 standard. Monday is \"x\u012bngq\u012by\u012b (\u661f\u671f\u4e00)\" in Chinese, meaning \"day one of the week\".\nReligious observances.\nChristianity.\nThe early Christian Didache warned believers not to fast on Mondays to avoid Judaizing (see below), and suggested fasting on Wednesdays instead.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church, Mondays are days on which the Angels are commemorated. The Octoechos contains hymns on this theme, arranged in an eight-week cycle, which are chanted on Mondays throughout the year. At the end of Divine Services on Mondays, the dismissal begins with the words: \"May Christ our True God, through the intercessions, of his most-pure Mother, of the honorable, Bodiless Powers (i.e., the angels) of Heaven\u2026\". In many Eastern monasteries Mondays are observed as fast days; because Mondays are dedicated to the angels, and monks strive to live an angelic life. In these monasteries, the monks abstain from meat, fowl, dairy products, fish, wine and oil (if a feast day occurs on a Monday, fish, wine and oil may be allowed, depending upon the particular feast).\nMembers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints spend one evening per week, called Family Home Evening (FHE) or Family Night. This is usually a Monday, when families are encouraged to spend time together in study, prayer and other family activities.\nHinduism.\nIn Hinduism, Mondays are associated with the Hindu god of the moon Chandra or Soma. In several South Asian languages, Monday is knowns as \"Somavara\" or \"Somavaram\". Hindus who fast on Mondays do so in dedication to the deity Shiva. Some observe the \"Solah Somvar Vrat\", which is a fast of sixteen Mondays dedicated to Shiva in hopes of getting married and finding a suitable partner. Fasting on Mondays in the Hindu month of Shravana is also considered auspicious as it is one of the holiest months to Hindus and dedicated to Shiva and his consort Parvati.\nIslam.\nIn Islam, Mondays are one of the days in a week in which Muslims are encouraged to do voluntary fasting, the other being Thursdays.\nThere are a number of Hadith which narrated of Muhammad fasting on these days. According to the same Hadith, Muhammad was born on a Monday. It is also narrated that he received his first revelation (which would later become the Quran) on Monday.\nJudaism.\nIn Judaism, Mondays are considered auspicious days for fasting.\nIn Judaism, a small portion of the weekly Parashah in Torah is read in public on Monday and Thursday mornings, as a supplement for the Saturday reading). Special penitential prayers are recited on Monday unless there is a special occasion for happiness which cancels them. According to the Mishna and Talmud, these traditions are due to Monday and Thursday being \"the market days\" when people gathered from the towns to the city.\nA tradition of Ashkenazi Jews to voluntarily fast on the first consecutive Monday, Thursday and Monday of the Hebrew month is prevalent among the ultra-orthodox.\nIn Hebrew, Monday is called \"Yom Shen\u00ed\", literally meaning \"Second Day\", following the biblical reference to the sabbath day as the \"Seventh-day\" and the tradition of that day being on Saturday. It has been established that the phonetic and cultural link between the planet Saturn, Saturday and the Sabbath day is of ancient Mesopotamian origin.\nCultural references.\nA number of popular songs in Western culture portray Mondays often as days of depression, anxiety, avolition, hysteria, or melancholy (mostly because of its association with the first day of the workweek). Mondays are also portrayed as days of boredom and bad luck, especially for many people in their school years, who have to go back to school every Monday after having no school on Saturday and Sunday, which can make them grow a hatred for Mondays. For example, \"Monday, Monday\" (1966) from the Mamas &amp; the Papas; \"Rainy Days and Mondays\" (1971) from the Carpenters; Monday, Monday, Monday (2002) from Tegan and Sara; and \"Manic Monday\" (1986) from the Bangles (written by Prince).\nThere is a band named the Happy Mondays and an American pop-punk band Hey Monday.\nThe popular comic strip character Garfield by Jim Davis is well known for his hatred for Mondays, mostly accompanied by the catchphrase \u201cI hate Mondays.\u201d\nIn the United Kingdom, more people commit suicide in England and Wales on Mondays than other days of the week; more people in the country in general call in sick; and more people worldwide surf the web.\nIn July 2002, the consulting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers announced that it would rename its consultancy practice \"Monday\", and would spend $110 million over the next year to establish the brand. When IBM acquired the consultancy three months later it chose not to retain the new name.\nOn October 17, 2022, Guinness World Records announced on Twitter that Monday is the '\"Worst Day of the Week\"', to the dismay of some people.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54407", "revid": "11689218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54407", "title": "Sunday", "text": "Day of the week\nSunday (Latin: \"dies solis\" meaning \"day of the sun\") is the day of the week between Saturday and Monday. Sunday is a day of rest in most Western countries and a part of the weekend. In some Middle Eastern countries, Sunday is a weekday.\nFor most Christians, Sunday is observed as a day of worship and rest, holding it as the Lord's Day and the day of Christ's resurrection; in the United States, Canada, Japan, as well as in parts of South America, Sunday is the first day of the week. According to the Islamic calendar, Hebrew calendar and traditional calendars (including Christian calendars) Sunday is the first day of the week; Quaker Christians call Sunday the \"first day\" in accordance with their testimony of simplicity. The International Organization for Standardization ISO 8601, which is based in Switzerland, calls Sunday the seventh day of the week.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Sunday\", the day of the Sun, is derived from the traditional astronomical naming system for days of the week. This system likely originated in the Neo-Babylonian Empire during the Jewish exile in Babylon, though the first direct evidence of it dates to the Roman Empire. The order has been explained in Hellenistic astrology as relating to planetary hours. Each of the hours of the day was assigned to one of the seven classical planets \u2013 Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury and the Moon \u2013 and the planet of the first hour of each day gave its name to that day.\nThe astronomical weekday names spread throughout Europe, including to the Germanic peoples. The names of Sunday and Monday were translated to the corresponding Germanic words (hence \"dies Solis\" became \"Sunday\") while the other days took the names of corresponding Germanic deities.\nThe English noun \"Sunday\" derived sometime before 1250 from \"sunedai\", which itself developed from Old English (before 700) \"Sunnand\u00e6g\" (literally meaning \"sun's day\"), which is cognate to other Germanic languages, including Old Frisian \"sunnandei\", Old Saxon \"sunnundag\", Middle Dutch \"sonnendach\" (modern Dutch \"zondag\"), Old High German \"sunnun tag\" (modern German \"Sonntag\"), and Old Norse \"sunnudagr\" (Danish and Norwegian \"s\u00f8ndag\", Icelandic \"sunnudagur\" and Swedish \"s\u00f6ndag\"). The Germanic term is a Germanic interpretation of Latin \"dies solis\" (\"day of the sun\"), which is a translation of the ancient Greek \u1f2d\u03bb\u03af\u03bf\u03c5 \u03b7\u03bc\u03ad\u03c1\u03b1\" (\"H\u0113l\u00edou h\u0113m\u00e9ra\").\nIn most Indian languages, the word for Sunday is derived from Sanskrit \"Raviv\u0101ra\" or \"Adityav\u0101ra\" \u2014 \"v\u0101ra\" meaning day and \"Aditya\" and \"Ravi\" both being names for Surya, the Sun and the solar deity. Raviv\u0101ra is the first day cited in Jyotisha, which provides logical reason for giving the name of each weekday. In the Thai solar calendar, the name (\"Waan Arthit\") is derived from Aditya, and the associated colour is red.\nIn most Slavic languages other than Russian, the words for Sunday reflect the Christian commandment to abstain from work. Belarusian (), Bulgarian (), Croatian and Serbian \"nedjelja\" / , Czech \"ned\u011ble\", Macedonian (), Polish \"niedziela\", Slovak \"nede\u013ea\", Slovenian \"nedelja\" and Ukrainian () are all cognates literally meaning \"no work\" or \"day with no work\".\nIn Russian, the word for Sunday is () meaning \"resurrection\" (that is, the day of a week which commemorates the resurrection of Jesus Christ). In Old Russian, Sunday was also called (), \"free day\", or \"day with no work\", but in the contemporary language this word means \"week\".\nThe Modern Greek word for Sunday, , is derived from (Kyrios, Lord) also, due to its liturgical significance as the day commemorating the resurrection of Jesus Christ, i.e. The Lord's Day.\nThe name is similar in the Romance languages. In Italian, Sunday is called , which also means \"Lord's Day\" (from Latin ). One finds similar cognates in French, where the name is , as well as Romanian , and in Spanish and Portuguese, .\nIn Chinese, Korean, and Japanese, Sunday is called (), (), and () respectively, which all mean \"sun day of the week\".\nThe Arabic word for Sunday is (), meaning \"the first\". It is usually combined with the word () meaning \"day\".\nThe Latvian word for Sunday is \"sv\u0113tdiena\", literally \"holy day\", while the Lithuanian word is \"sekmadienis\" (&lt; \"sekma\" 'seventh' + \"diena\" 'day'). The fossil word \"sekmas\" (male), \"sekma\" (female) has been displaced by \"septintas\" (\"septinta\") in contemporary Lithuanian.\nPosition in the week.\nISO 8601.\nThe international standard ISO 8601 for representation of dates and times states that Sunday is the seventh and last day of the week. This method of representing dates and times unambiguously was first published in 1988.\nCulture and languages.\nIn the Judaic, Christian, and some Islamic traditions, Sunday has been considered the first day of the week. A number of languages express this position either by the name of the day or by the naming of the other days. In Hebrew it is called \u05d9\u05d5\u05dd \u05e8\u05d0\u05e9\u05d5\u05df \"yom rishon\", in Arabic \u0627\u0644\u0623\u062d\u062f \"al-ahad\", in Persian and related languages \u06cc\u06a9\u0634\u0646\u0628\u0647 \"yek-shanbe\", all meaning \"first\".\nIn Greek, the names of the days Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday (, , , and ) mean \"second\", \"third\", \"fourth\", and \"fifth\", respectively. This leaves Sunday in the first position of the week count. Similarly in Portuguese, where the days from Monday to Friday are counted as \"segunda-feira\", \"ter\u00e7a-feira\", \"quarta-feira\", \"quinta-feira\" and \"sexta-feira\". In Vietnamese, the working days in the week are named as: \"Th\u1ee9 Hai\" (Second), \"Th\u1ee9 Ba\" (Third), \"Th\u1ee9 T\u01b0\" (Fourth), \"Th\u1ee9 N\u0103m\" (Fifth), \"Th\u1ee9 S\u00e1u\" (Sixth), and \"Th\u1ee9 B\u1ea3y\" (Seventh). Sunday is called \"Ch\u1ee7 Nh\u1eadt\"(ch\u1eef H\u00e1n: \u4e3b\u65e5) meaning \"Lord's Day\". Some colloquial text in the south of Vietnam and from the church may use a different reading of \"Ch\u00faa Nh\u1eadt\"(in contemporary Vietnamese, \"Ch\u00faa\" means God or Lord and \"Ch\u1ee7\" means own). In German, Wednesday is called \"Mittwoch\", literally \"mid-week\", implying the week runs from Sunday to Saturday.\nIn the Yoruba culture of West Africa, Sunday is called \"Oj\u0323\u00f3 \u0323Aik\u00fa\". Oj\u00f3 Aiku is the day that begins a new week known as \"Day of Rest\". It is the day Orunmila, the convener of If\u00e1 to earth, buried the mother of Esu Odara and his wife, Imi. Since that occurrence, Yoruba people decided to refer to the day as \"Oj\u00f3 Aiku.\"\nSlavic languages implicitly number Monday as day number one. \nRussian \"\u0432\u043e\u0441\u043a\u0440\u0435\u0441\u0435\u043d\u0438\u0435\" (Sunday) means \"resurrection\".\nHungarian \"szerda\" (Wednesday), \"cs\u00fct\u00f6rt\u00f6k\" (Thursday), and \"p\u00e9ntek\" (Friday) are Slavic loanwords, so the correlation with \"middle\", \"four\", and \"five\" are not evident to Hungarian speakers. Hungarians use \"Vas\u00e1rnap\" for Sunday, which means \"market day\".\nIn the Maltese language, due to its Siculo-Arabic origin, Sunday is called \"Il-\u0126add\", a corruption of \"wie\u0127ed\", meaning \"one\". Monday is \"It-Tnejn\", meaning \"two\". Similarly, Tuesday is \"It-Tlieta\" (three), Wednesday is \"L-Erbg\u0127a\" (four), and Thursday is \"Il-\u0126amis\" (five).\nIn Armenian, Monday is \"Yerkoushabti\", literally meaning \"second day of the week\", Tuesday \"Yerekshabti\" \"third day\", Wednesday \"Chorekshabti\" \"fourth day\", Thursday \"Hingshabti\" \"fifth day\". Saturday is \"Shabat\" coming from the word \"Sabbath\" or \"Shabbath\" in Hebrew, and \"Kiraki\", coming from the word \"Krak\", meaning \"fire\", is Sunday, referring to the sun as a fire. Apostle John, in Revelations 1:10, refers to the \"Lord's Day\", (\"kyriak\u1e17 h\u0113mera\"), that is, \"the day of the Lord\", possibly influencing the Armenian word for Sunday.\nIn many European countries, calendars show Monday as the first day of the week, which follows the ISO 8601 standard.\nIn the Persian calendar, used in Iran and Afghanistan, Sunday is the second day of the week. However, it is called \"number one\" as counting starts from zero; the first day - Saturday - is denoted as day zero.\nSunday in Christianity.\nChristian usage.\nThe ancient Romans traditionally used the eight-day nundinal cycle, a market week, but in the time of Augustus in the 1st century AD, a seven-day week also came into use.\nIn the gospels, the women are described as coming to the empty tomb \"\", which literally means \"toward the first of the sabbath\" and is often translated \"on the first day of the week\".\nJustin Martyr, in the mid-2nd century, mentions \"memoirs of the apostles\" as being read on \"the day called that of the sun\" (Sunday) alongside the \"writings of the prophets.\"\nOn 7 March 321, Constantine I, Rome's first Christian emperor, decreed that Sunday would be observed as the Roman day of rest:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDespite the official adoption of Sunday as a day of rest by Constantine, the seven-day week and the nundinal cycle continued to be used side by side until at least the Calendar of 354 and probably later.\nIn 363, Canon 29 of the Council of Laodicea prohibited observance of the Jewish Sabbath (Saturday), and encouraged Christians to work on Saturday and rest on the Lord's Day (Sunday). The fact that the canon had to be issued at all is an indication that adoption of Constantine's decree of 321 was still not universal, not even among Christians. It also indicates that Jews were observing the Sabbath on Saturday.\nModern practices.\nFirst-day Sabbatarians, including Christians of the Methodist, Baptist and Reformed (Presbyterian and Congregationalist) traditions, observe Sunday as the sabbath, a day devoted to the worship of God at church (the attendance of Sunday School, a service of worship in the morning and evening), as well as a day of rest (meaning that people are free from servile labour and should refrain from trading, buying and selling except when necessary).\nFor most Christians the custom and obligation of Sunday rest is not as strict. A minority of Christians do not regard the day they attend church as important, so long as they attend. There is considerable variation in the observance of Sabbath rituals and restrictions, but some cessation of normal weekday activities is customary. Many Christians today observe Sunday as a day of church attendance.\nIn Roman Catholic practice, on Sundays, church members \"are bound to come together into one place so that, by hearing the word of God and taking part in the eucharist, they may call to mind the passion, the resurrection and the glorification of the Lord Jesus\". Liturgically, Sunday begins on Saturday evening. The evening Mass on Saturday is liturgically a full Sunday Mass and fulfills the obligation of Sunday Mass attendance, and Vespers (evening prayer) on Saturday night is liturgically \"first Vespers\" of the Sunday. The same evening anticipation applies to other major solemnities and feasts, and is an echo of the Jewish practice of starting the new day at sunset. Those who work in the medical field, in law enforcement, and soldiers in a war zone are dispensed from the usual obligation to attend church on Sunday. They are encouraged to combine their work with attending religious services if possible.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church, Sunday begins at the Little Entrance of Vespers (or All-Night Vigil) on Saturday evening and runs until \"Vouchsafe, O Lord\" (after the \"prokeimenon\") of Vespers on Sunday night. During this time, the dismissal at all services begin with the words, \"May Christ our True God, who rose from the dead ...\" Anyone who wishes to receive Holy Communion at Divine Liturgy on Sunday morning is required to attend Vespers the night before (see Eucharistic discipline). Among Orthodox Christians, Sunday is considered to be a \"Little Pascha\" (Easter), and because of the Paschal joy, the making of prostrations is forbidden, except in certain circumstances.\nSome languages lack separate words for \"Saturday\" and \"Sabbath\" (e.g. Italian, Portuguese). Outside the English-speaking world, \"Sabbath\" as a word, if it is used, refers to the Saturday (or the specific Jewish practices on it); Sunday is called the Lord's Day e.g. in Romance languages and Modern Greek. On the other hand, English-speaking Christians often refer to the Sunday as the Sabbath (other than Seventh-day Sabbatarians); a practice which, probably due to the international connections and the Latin tradition of the Roman Catholic Church, is more widespread among (but not limited to) Protestants. Quakers traditionally referred to Sunday as \"First Day\" eschewing the pagan origin of the English name, while referring to Saturday as the \"Seventh day\".\nSome Christian denominations, called \"Seventh-day Sabbatarians\", observe a Saturday Sabbath. Christians in the Seventh-day Adventist, Seventh Day Baptist, and Church of God (Seventh-Day) denominations, as well as many Messianic Jews, have maintained the practice of abstaining from work and gathering for worship on Saturdays (sunset to sunset) as did all of the followers of God in the Old Testament.\nSunday in Mandaeism.\nSunday in Mandaeism is called \"Habshaba\" (\"Hab\u0161aba\"). Mandaeans perform communal masbuta (baptism) every Sunday.\nCommon occurrences on Sunday.\nIn government and business.\nIn the United States and Canada, most government offices are closed on both Saturday and Sunday. The practice of offices closing on Sunday in government and in some rural areas of the United States stem from a system of blue laws. Blue laws were established in the early puritan days, which forbade secular activities on Sunday and were rigidly enforced. Some public activities are still regulated by these blue laws in the 21st century. In 1985, twenty-two states in which religious fundamentalism remained strong maintained general restrictions on Sunday behavior. In Oklahoma, for example, it is stated: \"Oklahoma's statutes state that \"acts deemed useless and serious interruptions of the repose and religious liberty of the community,\" such as trades, manufacturing, mechanical employment, horse racing, and gaming are forbidden. Public selling of commodities other than necessary foods and drinks, medicine, ice, and surgical and burial equipment, and other necessities can legally be prohibited on Sunday. In Oklahoma, a fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars may be imposed on individuals for each offense.\" Because of these blue laws, many private sector retail businesses open later and close earlier on Sunday or do not open at all.\nMany countries, particularly in Europe such as Sweden, France, Germany and Belgium, but also in other countries such as Peru, hold their national and local elections on a Sunday, either by law or by tradition.\nIn media.\nMany American and British daily newspapers publish a larger edition on Sundays, which often includes color comic strips, a magazine, and a coupon section. Others only publish on a Sunday, or have a \"sister paper\" with a different masthead that only publishes on a Sunday.\nNorth American radio stations often play specialty radio shows such as Casey Kasem's countdown or other nationally syndicated radio shows that may differ from their regular weekly music patterns on Sunday morning or Sunday evening. In the United Kingdom, there is a Sunday tradition of chart shows on BBC Radio 1 and commercial radio; this originates in the broadcast of chart shows and other populist material on Sundays by Radio Luxembourg when the Reithian BBC's Sunday output consisted largely of solemn and religious programmes. The first Sunday chart show was broadcast on the Light Programme on 7 January 1962, which was considered a radical step at the time. BBC Radio 1's chart show moved to Fridays in July 2015 but a chart update on Sundays was launched in July 2019.\nPeriod or older-skewing television dramas, such as \"Downton Abbey\", \"Call the Midwife\", \"Lark Rise to Candleford\" and \"Heartbeat\" are commonly shown on Sunday evenings in the UK; the first of these was \"Dr Finlay's Casebook\" in the 1960s. Similarly, \"Antiques Roadshow\" has been shown on Sundays on BBC1 since 1979 and \"Last of the Summer Wine\" was shown on Sundays for many years until it ended in 2010. On Sundays, BBC Radio 2 plays music in styles which it once regularly played but which are now rarely heard on the station, with programmes such as \"Elaine Paige on Sunday\" and \"Sunday Night is Music Night\" although more contemporary styles now make up a higher percentage of the station's Sunday output than previously; for example, Kendrick Lamar received a Sunday-night play on the station in March 2022. Even younger-skewing media outlets sometimes skew older on Sundays within the terms of their own audience; for example, BBC Radio 1Xtra introduced an \"Old Skool Sunday\" schedule in the autumn of 2019.\nMany American, Australian and British television networks and stations also broadcast their political interview shows on Sunday mornings.\nIn sports.\nMajor League Baseball usually schedules all Sunday games in the daytime except for the nationally televised \"Sunday Night Baseball\" matchup. Certain historically religious cities such as Boston and Baltimore among others will schedule games no earlier than 1:35 PM to ensure time for people who go to religious service in the morning can get to the game in time.\nIn the United States, professional American football in the National Football League is usually played on Sunday, although Saturday (via \"Saturday Night Football\"), Monday (via \"Monday Night Football\"), and Thursday (via \"Thursday Night Football\" or Thanksgiving) see some professional games. College football usually occurs on Saturday, and high-school football tends to take place on Friday night or Saturday afternoon.\nIn the UK, some club and Premier League football matches and tournaments usually take place on Sundays. Rugby matches and tournaments usually take place in club grounds or parks on Sunday mornings. It is not uncommon for church attendance to shift on days when a late morning or early afternoon game is anticipated by a local community.\nThe Indian Premier League schedules two games on Saturdays and Sundays instead of one, also called Double-headers.\nOne of the remains of religious segregation in the Netherlands is seen in amateur football: The Saturday-clubs are by and large Protestant Christian clubs, who were not allowed to play on Sunday. The Sunday-clubs were in general Catholic and working class clubs, whose players had to work on Saturday and therefore could only play on Sunday.\nIn Ireland, Gaelic football and hurling matches are predominantly played on Sundays, with the first (previously second) and fourth (previously third) Sundays in September always playing host to the All-Ireland hurling and football championship finals, respectively.\nProfessional golf tournaments traditionally end on Sunday. Traditionally, those in the United Kingdom ended on Saturday, but this changed some time ago; for example, the Open ran from Wednesday to Saturday up to 1979 but has run from Thursday to Sunday since 1980.\nIn the United States and Canada, National Basketball Association and National Hockey League games, which are usually played at night during the week, are frequently played during daytime hours - often broadcast on national television.\nMost NASCAR Cup Series and IndyCar events are held on Sundays. Most Formula One World Championship races are likewise held on Sundays regardless of time zone/country, while MotoGP holds most races on Sundays, with Middle Eastern races being the exception on Saturday. All Formula One events and MotoGP events with Sunday races involve qualifying taking place on Saturday.\nAstrology.\nSunday is associated with the Sun and is symbolized by the symbol \u2609.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54408", "revid": "50283681", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54408", "title": "Charlie Parker", "text": "American jazz saxophonist (1920\u20131955)\nCharles Parker Jr. (August 29, 1920 \u2013 March 12, 1955), nicknamed \"Bird\" or \"Yardbird\", was an American jazz saxophonist, bandleader, and composer. Parker was a highly influential soloist and leading figure in the development of bebop, a form of jazz characterized by fast tempos, virtuosic technique, and advanced harmonies. He was a virtuoso and introduced revolutionary rhythmic and harmonic ideas into jazz, including rapid passing chords, new variants of altered chords, and chord substitutions. Parker primarily played the alto saxophone.\nParker was an icon for the hipster subculture and later the Beat Generation, personifying the jazz musician as an uncompromising artist and intellectual rather than just an entertainer.\nEarly life.\nCharles Parker Jr. was born in Kansas City, Kansas, to Charles Parker Sr. and Adelaide \"Addie\" Bailey, who was of mixed Choctaw and African-American background. He was raised in Kansas City, Missouri, near Westport Road. His father, a Pullman waiter and chef on the railways, was often required to travel for work, but provided some musical influence because he was a pianist, dancer, and singer on the Theatre Owners Booking Association circuit. Parker's mother worked nights at the local Western Union office during the 1920s.\nParker first went to a Catholic school and sang in its choir, but his parents separated in 1930 due to his father's alcoholism and the effects of the Great Depression. By the time he was in high school, Parker, his older half-brother John, and his mother Addie were living near 15th Street and Olive Street and she was working as a cleaner in order to afford housing.\nParker began playing the saxophone at age 11, and at age 14 he joined the Lincoln High School band, where he studied under bandmaster Alonzo Lewis. His mother purchased a new alto saxophone around the same time. Parker's biggest influence in his early teens was a young trombone player named Robert Simpson, who taught him the basics of improvisation.\nParker withdrew from high school in December 1935, joined the local musicians' union, and decided to pursue his musical career full-time.\nCareer.\n1936\u20131938: Jam sessions and woodshedding.\nUpon leaving high school, Parker began to play with local bands in jazz clubs around Kansas City and often ambitiously took part in jam sessions with more experienced musicians. In early 1936, at one such jam session with the Count Basie Orchestra, he lost track of the chord changes while improvising. This prompted Jo Jones to contemptuously remove a cymbal from his drum kit and throw it at his feet as a signal to leave the stage.\nRather than becoming discouraged, Parker vowed to practice harder. He mastered improvisation and, according to his comments in an interview with Paul Desmond, spent the next three to four years practicing up to 15 hours a day. Parker proposed to Rebecca Ruffin, his girlfriend four years his senior, and the two married on July 25, 1936. They had two children before divorcing in 1939, in large part due to his growing drug addiction.\nIn late 1936, Parker and a Kansas City band traveled to the Ozarks for the opening of Musser's Resort south of Eldon, Missouri. Along the way, the caravan of musicians had a car accident and Parker broke three ribs and fractured his spine. Despite this near-death experience, in 1937 Parker returned to the area, where he spent a great deal of time woodshedding and developing his sound. Working with a pianist and guitarist, he practiced improvising over chord changes and began to develop the ability to solo fluently across chords and scales.\nIn 1938, Parker joined pianist Jay McShann's territory band. His first gig with the band was during the summer or early fall at the Continental Club in Kansas City, where Parker worked as a substitute alto saxophonist for Edward \"Popeye\" Hale. In December, he joined Harlan Leonard's Rockets; the band played at dances including a Christmas dance for which Parker was listed in a local newspaper as one of the Rockets' personnel.\n1939\u20131944: Development of bebop.\nIn 1939, Parker moved to New York City to pursue his musical career but worked part-time jobs to make a living. Among the more musically significant of these was as a dishwasher for nine dollars a week at Jimmie's Chicken Shack, where pianist Art Tatum performed. Struggling with poverty, Parker went to the home of fellow alto saxophone player Buster Smith to ask for help. Smith allowed Parker to live in his apartment for six months and gave him gigs in his band. Parker's playing at the gigs impressed several New York musicians, including pianist and bandleader Earl Hines.\nWhile living in New York, Parker achieved his musical breakthrough, developing a new improvisational vocabulary which later came to be known as \"bebop\". Playing \"Cherokee\" in a practice session with guitarist William \"Biddy\" Fleet, he realized that the 12 semitones of the chromatic scale can lead melodically to any key, breaking some of the confines of simpler jazz soloing. Parker recalled: \"I'd been getting bored with the stereotyped changes that were being used all the time at the time, and I kept thinking there's bound to be something else. I could hear it sometimes but I couldn't play it ... Well, that night I was working over 'Cherokee' and, as I did, I found that by using the higher intervals of a chord as a melody line and backing them with appropriately related changes, I could play the thing I'd been hearing. I came alive.\"\nIn 1940, he returned to Kansas City to perform with Jay McShann and to attend the funeral of his father, Charles Sr. The younger Parker then spent the summer in McShann's band playing at Fairyland Park for all-white audiences; trumpet player Bernard Anderson introduced him to Dizzy Gillespie. The band also toured nightclubs and other venues of the southwest, as well as Chicago and New York City, and Parker made his professional recording debut with McShann's band that year. When in New York, to experiment with his new musical ideas that went beyond the bounds of McShann's group, Parker joined a group of young musicians who played in after-hours clubs in Harlem venues including Clark Monroe's Uptown House. Fellow musicians at the venues included developing beboppers Gillespie, pianist Thelonious Monk, guitarist Charlie Christian, and drummer Kenny Clarke. A pianist and one of the pioneers of bebop, Mary Lou Williams, said the after-hours sessions were an opportunity \"to challenge the practice of downtown musicians coming uptown and 'stealing' the music.\"\nParker left McShann's band in 1942 and played for one year with Hines, whose band also included Gillespie. This band's performances and therefore Parker's role in them are virtually undocumented due to the strike of 1942\u20131944 by the American Federation of Musicians, during which time few professional recordings were made. In fact, much of bebop's critical early development was not captured for posterity due to the ban and the new genre gained limited radio exposure as a result. The few recordings in which Parker participated in 1943 took place in Chicago and included a jam session recording with Gillespie and bassist Oscar Pettiford, another session with Billy Eckstine playing trumpet, some informally recorded practice sessions, and a duo with pianist Hazel Scott. Parker's time with Hines's band and his travel between New York and Chicago enabled him to model his style on, according to his own words, a \"combination of the Midwestern beat and the fast New York tempos.\" Parker began writing compositions thanks to his growing friendship with Gillespie, who began notating Parker's solos as melodies. Among these early Parker compositions were \"Koko\", \"Anthropology\", and \"Confirmation\".\nParker left Hines's band and formed a small group with Gillespie, pianist Al Haig, bassist Curley Russell, and drummer Stan Levey. The group stood out from its contemporaries, as it was racially integrated and lacked a guitarist for rhythmic support. This new format freed soloists from harmonic and rhythmic restrictions, and in late 1944 the group secured a gig at the Three Deuces club in New York. The group's name recognition spread along 52nd Street and its style was dubbed \"bebop\" for the first time. Musicians at other clubs came to hear bebop and reacted unfavorably to it because, according to Charles Mingus, they saw it as a threat to their style of jazz.\n1945\u20131953: Solo career.\nOnly in 1945, after the AFM's recording ban was lifted, did Parker's collaborations with Dizzy Gillespie, Max Roach and others have a substantial effect on the jazz world. One of their first small-group performances together, a concert in New York's Town Hall on June 22, 1945, was rediscovered in 2004 and released in 2005. Bebop soon gained wider appeal among musicians and fans.\nOn November 26, 1945, Parker led a record date for Savoy Records, marketed as the \"greatest Jazz session ever\". Recording as Charlie Parker's Reboppers, Parker enlisted sidemen Gillespie and Miles Davis on trumpet, Curley Russell on bass and Max Roach on drums. The tracks recorded during this session include \"Ko-Ko\", \"Billie's Bounce\", and \"Now's the Time\".\nIn December 1945, the Parker band traveled to an unsuccessful engagement at Billy Berg's club in Los Angeles. Most of the group returned to New York, but Parker remained in California, cashing in his return ticket to buy heroin. After he dedicated one of his compositions to local drug dealer \"Moose the Mooche\" at a studio session in the spring, the dealer was arrested, and without access to heroin, Parker turned to alcohol addiction. He suffered a physical and mental breakdown after a studio session in July 1946 for Dial Records, and was briefly jailed after setting the bedsheets of his Los Angeles hotel room on fire and then running naked through the lobby while intoxicated, after which he was committed to the Camarillo State Mental Hospital for six months.\nWhen Parker was discharged from the hospital, he was healthy and free from his drug habit. Before leaving California, he recorded \"Relaxin' at Camarillo,\" in reference to his stay in the mental hospital, at one of two successful recording sessions. The first took place with a septet while the other paired Parker with pianist Erroll Garner's trio and vocalist Earl Coleman. Upon returning to New York in 1947, Parker resumed his heroin usage. He recorded dozens of sides for the Savoy and Dial labels, which remain some of the high points of his recorded output. Many of these were with his new quintet, including Davis and Roach. Parker and Davis disagreed on who should be the quintet's pianist, with Parker originally hiring Bud Powell for a May 1947 recording session but later favoring Gillespie's arranger, John Lewis; Davis preferred Duke Jordan. Ultimately the quintet used both, as Parker wanted to balance leadership of the group with mentoring younger musicians such as Davis.\nFollowing the establishment of a regular quintet, Parker signed for Mercury Records with Jazz at the Philharmonic promoter Norman Granz as his producer. The partnership enabled Parker to work with musicians from other genres, such as Latin jazz percussionist and bandleader Machito, and to appear in concerts at Carnegie Hall as part of the Jazz at the Philharmonic series. Further, Granz was able to fulfil a longstanding desire of Parker's to perform with a string section. He was a keen student of classical music, and contemporaries reported he was most interested in the music and formal innovations of Igor Stravinsky and longed to engage in a project akin to what later became known as Third Stream, a new kind of music, incorporating both jazz and classical elements as opposed to merely incorporating a string section into performance of jazz standards. On November 30, 1949, Norman Granz arranged for Parker to record an album of ballads with a mixed group of jazz and chamber orchestra musicians. Six master takes from this session became the album \"Charlie Parker with Strings\": \"Just Friends\", \"Everything Happens to Me\", \"April in Paris\", \"Summertime\", \"I Didn't Know What Time It Was\", and \"If I Should Lose You\".\nIn 1950, Parker and Gillespie recorded \"Bird and Diz\", an album that proved to be among the few times Parker worked with bebop pianist Thelonious Monk; the music was released in 1952. Meanwhile, Parker's regular group maintained popular success with a European tour in 1950 and live gigs at New York nightclubs continued, leading to live albums \"One Night in Birdland\" (with Fats Navarro and Powell) and \"Summit Meeting at Birdland\" (with Gillespie and Powell). But Parker became frustrated and disillusioned that, due to racial discrimination, he was reaching the limits of what he could achieve in his career.\nIn 1953, Parker performed at Massey Hall in Toronto, joined by Gillespie, Mingus, Powell, and Roach. The concert happened at the same time as a televised heavyweight boxing match between Rocky Marciano and Jersey Joe Walcott, so it was poorly attended. Mingus recorded the concert, which resulted in the album \"Jazz at Massey Hall\". At the concert, Parker played a plastic Grafton saxophone.\nOther live, and often bootleg, recordings of Parker were made in the early 1950s, frequently with groups other than his usual quintet. Among the most notable of these, particularly according to critics, are \"Charlie Parker in Sweden\" (recorded during his 1950 Sweden tour), \"Bird at St. Nick's\" (with Red Rodney), \"Inglewood Jam\" (recorded in 1952 with Chet Baker), \"Live at Rockland Palace\" (recorded live with his quintet and string accompaniment), \"Charlie Parker at Storyville\" (with Herb Pomeroy and Red Garland), and \"The Washington Concerts\" (recorded unrehearsed in 1953 with a big band).\n1954\u20131955: Illness and death.\nSince 1950, Parker had been living in New York City with his common-law wife, Chan Berg, the mother of his son, Baird (1952\u20132014), and his daughter, Pree (who died at age 3). He considered Chan his wife, although he never married her; nor did he divorce his previous wife, Doris, whom he had married in 1948.\nThe death of Parker's daughter Pree from pneumonia in 1954 devastated him and, after being fired from Birdland in September of that year, he attempted to commit suicide. He was hospitalized and made a partial recovery by early 1955 before his health declined again in March. Parker's last gig on March 4 at Birdland ended when Powell refused to play in his group and the performance spiraled into an argument among the musicians. Parker became drunk and a few days later visited the suite of Baroness Pannonica at the Stanhope Hotel in New York City in ill health. He refused to go to the hospital and died on March 12, 1955, while watching the Dorsey Brothers' \"Stage Show\" on television. The official causes of death were lobar pneumonia and a bleeding ulcer, but Parker also had advanced cirrhosis and had suffered a heart attack and a seizure. The coroner who performed his autopsy mistakenly estimated Parker's 34-year-old body to be between 50 and 60 years of age.\nThe details surrounding Parker's death were controversial. Doris Parker claimed that she, Parker's mother, and Art Blakey were aware of Parker's death before March 14, when Pannonica claimed she first revealed the news on a phone call to Chan. Pannonica, however, visited a nightclub on March 13, the day after Parker died at her apartment but before she informed Chan of Parker's death. Further, newspapers incorrectly reported Parker's age as 53 when he died, and Parker's tombstone incorrectly claimed that he died on March 23.\nParker's marital status complicated the settling of Parker's estate and ultimately frustrated his wish to be interred in New York City. Dizzy Gillespie paid for the funeral arrangements, which included a Harlem procession officiated by Congressman and Reverend Adam Clayton Powell Jr. at the Abyssinian Baptist Church and a memorial concert. Parker's body was flown back to Missouri, in accordance with his mother's wishes. Chan criticized Doris and Parker's family for giving him a Christian funeral even though they knew he was an atheist. Parker was buried at Lincoln Cemetery in Missouri, in a hamlet known as Blue Summit, located close to I-435 and East Truman Road.\nSome amount of controversy continued after Parker's burial in the Kansas City area. His tomb was engraved with the image of a tenor saxophone, though Parker is primarily associated with the alto saxophone. Later, some people wanted to move Parker's remains to reinforce redevelopment of the historic 18th and Vine area.\nPersonal life.\nParker acquired the nickname \"Yardbird\" early in his career while on the road with Jay McShann. This, and the shortened form \"Bird\", were used as nicknames for Parker for the rest of his life and inspired the titles of a number of Parker's compositions, such as \"Yardbird Suite\", \"Ornithology\", \"Bird Gets the Worm\", and \"Bird of Paradise\".\nParker's life was riddled with mental health problems and an addiction to heroin. Although it is unclear which came first, his addiction to opiates began at the age of 16, when he was injured in a car crash and a doctor prescribed morphine for the pain. The addiction that stemmed from this incident led him to miss performances, and he was considered to be unreliable. In the jazz scene, heroin use was prevalent and the substance could be acquired with little difficulty.\nAlthough he produced many brilliant recordings during this period, Parker's behavior became increasingly erratic. Heroin was difficult to obtain once he moved to California, where the drug was less abundant, so he used alcohol as a substitute. A recording for the Dial label from July 29, 1946 provides evidence of his condition. Before this session, Parker drank a quart of whiskey. According to the liner notes of \"Charlie Parker on Dial Volume 1\", Parker missed most of the first two bars of his first chorus on the track \"Max Making Wax\". When he finally did come in, he swayed wildly and once spun all the way around, away from his microphone. On the next tune, \"Lover Man\", producer Ross Russell physically supported Parker. On \"Bebop\" (the final track Parker recorded that evening), he begins a solo with a solid first eight bars; on his second eight bars, however, he begins to struggle, and a desperate Howard McGhee, the trumpeter on this session, shouts, \"Blow!\" at him. Charles Mingus, however, considered this version of \"Lover Man\" to be among Parker's greatest recordings, despite its flaws. Nevertheless, Parker hated the recording and never forgave Ross Russell for releasing it. He re-recorded the tune in 1951 for Verve. Parker's life took a turn for the worse in March 1954 when his three-year-old daughter Pree died of cystic fibrosis and pneumonia. He attempted suicide twice in 1954, which once again landed him in a mental hospital.\nArtistry.\nParker's style of composition involved interpolation of original melodies over existing jazz forms and standards, a practice known as contrafact and still common in jazz today. Examples include \"Ornithology\" (which borrows the chord progression of jazz standard \"How High the Moon\" and is said to be co-written with trumpet player Little Benny Harris), and \"Moose The Mooche\" (one of many Parker compositions based on the chord progression of \"I Got Rhythm\"). The practice was not uncommon prior to bebop, but it became a signature of the movement as artists began to move away from arranging popular standards and toward composing their own material. Perhaps Parker's most well-known contrafact is \"Koko\", which is based on the chord changes of the popular bebop tune \"Cherokee\", written by Ray Noble.\nWhile tunes such as \"Now's The Time\", \"Billie's Bounce\", \"Au Privave\", \"Barbados\", \"Relaxin' at Camarillo\", \"Bloomdido\", and \"Cool Blues\" were based on conventional 12-bar blues changes, Parker also created a unique version of the 12-bar blues for tunes such as \"Blues for Alice\", \"Laird Baird\", and \"Si Si.\" These unique chords are known popularly as \"Bird Changes\". Like his solos, some of his compositions are characterized by long, complex melodic lines and a minimum of repetition, although he did employ the use of repetition in some tunes, most notably \"Now's The Time\".\nParker contributed greatly to the modern jazz solo, one in which triplets and pick-up notes were used in unorthodox ways to lead into chord tones, affording the soloist more freedom to use passing tones, which soloists previously avoided. His recordings were used for a book of solo transcriptions, the posthumously published \"Charlie Parker Omnibook\".\nOther well-known Parker compositions include \"Ah-Leu-Cha\", \"Anthropology\" (co-written with Gillespie), \"Confirmation\", \"Constellation\", \"Moose the Mooche\", \"Scrapple from the Apple\" and \"Yardbird Suite\", the vocal version of which is called \"What Price Love\", with lyrics by Parker.\nMiles Davis once said, \"You can tell the history of jazz in four words: Louis Armstrong. Charlie Parker\".\nRecognition.\nAwards.\nGrammy Award\nGrammy Hall of Fame\nRecordings of Charlie Parker were inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, which is a special Grammy award established in 1973 to honor recordings that are at least twenty-five years old, and that have \"qualitative or historical significance\".\nInductions\nGovernment honors.\nIn 1995, the U.S. Postal Service issued a 32-cent commemorative postage stamp in Parker's honor.\nIn 2002, the Library of Congress honored his recording \"Ko-Ko\" (1945) by adding it to the National Recording Registry.\nCharlie Parker residence.\nFrom 1950 to 1954, Parker lived with Chan Berg on the ground floor of the townhouse at 151 Avenue B, across from Tompkins Square Park in Manhattan's East Village. The Gothic Revival building, which was built about 1849, was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1994 and was designated a New York City landmark in 1999. Avenue B between East 9th and East 10th Streets was given the honorary designation \"Charlie Parker Place\" in 1992.\nCitations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54409", "revid": "46600217", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54409", "title": "Jazz band", "text": "Musical ensemble that plays jazz music\nA jazz band (jazz ensemble or jazz combo) is a musical ensemble that plays jazz music. Jazz bands vary in the quantity of its members and the style of jazz that they play but it is common to find a jazz band made up of a rhythm section and a horn section.\nThe size of a jazz band is closely related to the style of jazz they play as well as the type of venues in which they play. Smaller jazz bands, also known as \"combos\", are common in night clubs and other small venues and will be made up of three to seven musicians; whereas big bands are found in dance halls and other larger venues.\nJazz bands can vary in size from a big band, to a smaller trio or quartet. Some bands use vocalists, while others are purely instrumental groups.\nJazz bands and their composition have changed many times throughout the years, just as the music itself changes with personal interpretation and improvisation of its performers.\nEnsemble types.\nCombos.\nIt is common for musicians in a combo to perform their music from memory. The improvisational nature of these performances make every show unique.\nInstrumentation.\nThe rhythm section consists of the percussion, double bass or bass guitar, and usually at least one instrument capable of playing chords, such as a piano, guitar, Hammond organ or vibraphone; most will usually have more than one of these. The standard rhythm section is piano, bass, and drums.\nThe horn section consists of a woodwind section and a brass section, which play the melody.\nRhythm section.\nBanjo.\nThe banjo has been used in jazz since the earliest jazz bands. The earliest use of the banjo in a jazz band was by Frank Duson in 1917, however Laurence Marrero claims it became popular in 1915.\nThere are three common types of banjo, the plectrum banjo, tenor banjo, and cello banjo. Over time, the four-stringed tenor banjo became the most common banjo used in jazz. The drum-like sound box on the banjo made it louder than the acoustic guitars that were common with early jazz bands, and banjos were popular for recording.\nBass.\nBeginning in the early 1950s, some jazz bass players began to use the electric bass guitar in place of the double bass.\nDrums.\nJazz drumming is the art of playing percussion, usually the drum set, in jazz styles ranging from 1910s-style Dixieland jazz to 1970s-era jazz-rock fusion and 1980s-era Latin jazz. Stylistically, this aspect of performance was shaped by its starting place, New Orleans, as well as numerous other regions of the world, including other parts of the United States, the Caribbean, and Africa.\nJazz required a method of playing percussion different from traditional European styles, one that was easily adaptable to the different rhythms of the new genre, fostering the creation of jazz drumming's hybrid technique.\nWoodwind section.\nClarinet.\nThe clarinet is a woodwind instrument with a single-reed mouthpiece. A clarinet player is known as a clarinetist. Originally, the clarinet was a central instrument in jazz, beginning with the New Orleans players in the 1910s. It remained a signature instrument of jazz through much of the big band era into the 1940s. Larry Shields was the clarinetist for the Original Dixieland Jazz Band, the first jazz band to record commercially in 1917. The American players Ted Lewis and Jimmie Noone were pioneers of the instrument in jazz bands. The B\u266d soprano clarinet was the most common instrument, but a few early jazz musicians such as Alcide Nunez preferred the C soprano clarinet, and many New Orleans jazz brass bands have used an E\u266d soprano clarinet. \nSwing clarinetists such as Benny Goodman, Artie Shaw, and Woody Herman led successful big bands and smaller groups from the 1930s onward.\nWith the decline of the big bands' popularity in the late 1940s, the clarinet faded from its prominent position in jazz and the saxophone rose in importance in many jazz bands, probably because it uses a less complicated fingering system. But the clarinet did not entirely disappear. In the late 50s, traditional jazz experienced a revival, with the notable example of clarinetist Acker Bilk's Bristol Paramount Jazz Band. Some of the works of Bilk's jazz band reached the pop charts.\nSaxophone section.\nIn the saxophone section, all of the saxophones will play a similar melodic line, but the baritone sax doubles by occasionally joining in with the bass trombone and bass to play the bass line. A big band saxophone section typically consists of two alto saxophones, two tenor saxophones, and one baritone saxophone.\nString section.\nViolin.\nJazz violin is the use of the violin or electric violin to improvise solo lines. Although the violin has been used in jazz recordings since the first decades of the 20th century, it is more commonly associated with folk music than jazz. Jazz musician Milt Hinton claimed that the decline in violin players coincided with the introduction of sound movies, as many violin players were used as accompaniment for silent films.\nVocalists.\nThe definition of a jazz vocalist can be unclear because jazz has shared a great deal with blues and pop music since the 1920s. In their book \"Essential Jazz\", Henry Martin and Keith Waters identify five main characteristics that identify jazz singing, three of which are: \"Loose phrasing [...], use of blue notes [...], [and] free melodic embellishment.\" Often the human voice can act in place of a brass section in playing melodies, both written and improvised.\nScat singing is vocal improvisation with wordless vocables, nonsense syllables or without words at all. Though scat singing is improvised, the melodic lines are often variations on scale and arpeggio fragments, stock patterns and riffs, as is the case with instrumental improvisers. The deliberate choice of scat syllables is also a key element in vocal jazz improvisation. Syllable choice influences the pitch articulation, coloration, and resonance of the performance.\nRepertoire.\nAnother important aspect of jazz is improvisation (\"jams\"). Bands playing in this fashion fall under the category of jam bands. A common way to incorporate improvisation is to feature solo performances from band members made up on the spot, allowing them to showcase their skill.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
