{"id": "52491", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52491", "title": "Non-repudiation", "text": "Legal term\nIn law, non-repudiation is a situation where a statement's author cannot successfully dispute its authorship or the validity of an associated contract. The term is often seen in a legal setting when the authenticity of a signature is being challenged. In such an instance, the authenticity is being \"repudiated\".\nFor example, Mallory buys a cell phone for $100, writes a paper cheque as payment, and signs the cheque with a pen. Later, she finds that she can't afford it, and claims that the cheque is a forgery. The signature guarantees that only Mallory could have signed the cheque, and so Mallory's bank must pay the cheque. This is non-repudiation; Mallory cannot repudiate the cheque. In practice, pen-and-paper signatures are not hard to forge, but digital signatures can be very hard to break.\nIn security.\nIn general, \"non-repudiation\" involves associating actions or changes with a unique individual. For example, a secure area may use a key card access system where non-repudiation would be violated if key cards were shared or if lost and stolen cards were not immediately reported. Similarly, the owner of a computer account must not allow others to use it, such as by giving away their password, and a policy should be implemented to enforce this.\nIn digital security.\nIn digital security, non-repudiation means:\nProof of data integrity is typically the easiest of these requirements to accomplish. A data hash such as SHA2 usually ensures that the data will not be changed undetectably. Even with this safeguard, it is possible to tamper with data in transit, either through a man-in-the-middle attack or phishing. Because of this, data integrity is best assessed when the recipient already possesses the necessary verification information, such as after being mutually authenticated.\nThe common method to provide non-repudiation in the context of digital communications or storage is Digital Signatures, a more powerful tool that provides non-repudiation in a \"publicly verifiable\" manner. Message Authentication Codes (MAC), useful when the communicating parties have arranged to use a shared secret that they both possess, does not give non-repudiation. A misconception is that encrypting, per se, provides authentication \"If the message decrypts properly then it is authentic\", which is not the case. MAC can be subject to several types of attacks, like: message reordering, block substitution, block repetition, ... Thus just providing message integrity and authentication, but not non-repudiation. To achieve non-repudiation one must trust a service (a certificate generated by a trusted third party (TTP) called certificate authority (CA)) which prevents an entity from denying previous commitments or actions (e.g. sending message A to B). The difference between MAC and Digital Signatures, one uses symmetric keys and the other asymmetric keys (provided by the CA). Note that the goal is not to achieve confidentiality: in both cases (MAC or digital signature), one simply appends a tag to the otherwise plaintext, visible message. If confidentiality is also required, then an encryption scheme can be combined with the digital signature, or some form of authenticated encryption could be used. Verifying the digital origin means that the certified/signed data likely came from someone who possesses the private key corresponding to the signing certificate. If the key used to digitally sign a message is not properly safeguarded by the original owner, digital forgery can occur.\nTrusted third parties (TTPs).\nTo mitigate the risk of people repudiating their own signatures, the standard approach is to involve a trusted third party.\nThe two most common TTPs are forensic analysts and notaries. A forensic analyst specializing in handwriting can compare some signature to a known valid signature and assess its legitimacy. A notary is a witness who verifies an individual's identity by checking other credentials and affixing their certification that the person signing is who they claim to be. A notary provides the extra benefit of maintaining independent logs of their transactions, complete with the types of credentials checked, and another signature that can be verified by the forensic analyst. \nFor digital information, the most commonly employed TTP is a certificate authority, which issues public key certificates. A public key certificate can be used by anyone to verify digital signatures without a shared secret between the signer and the verifier. The role of the certificate authority is to authoritatively state to whom the certificate belongs, meaning that this person or entity possesses the corresponding private key. However, a digital signature is forensically identical in both legitimate and forged uses. Someone who possesses the private key can create a valid digital signature. Protecting the private key is the idea behind some smart cards such as the United States Department of Defense's Common Access Card (CAC), which never lets the key leave the card. That means that to use the card for encryption and digital signatures, a person needs the personal identification number (PIN) code necessary to unlock it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52493", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52493", "title": "Video card", "text": ""}
{"id": "52495", "revid": "44321697", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52495", "title": "Gor", "text": "Setting of John Norman's novels\nGor () is the fictional setting for a series of sword and planet novels written by philosophy professor John Lange, writing as John Norman. The setting was first described in the 1966 novel \"Tarnsman of Gor\". The series is inspired by science fantasy pulp fiction works by Edgar Rice Burroughs, such as the \"Barsoom\" series. It also includes erotica and philosophical content. The Gor series repeatedly depicts men abducting and physically and sexually brutalizing women, who grow to enjoy their submissive state. According to \"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\", Norman's \"sexual philosophy\" is \"widely detested\", but the books have inspired a Gorean subculture.\nThe series has been variously referred to by publishers with several names, including \"The Chronicles of Counter-Earth\" (Ballantine Books), \"The Saga of Tarl Cabot\" (DAW Books), \"Gorean Cycle\" (Tandem Books), \"Gorean Chronicles\" (Masquerade Books), \"Gorean Saga\" (Open Road Media) and \"The Counter-Earth Saga\" (DAW Books, for novels with a protagonist other than Tarl Cabot).\nBackground.\nIn an interview with the speculative fiction anthology \"Polygraff\", John Norman spoke at length about the creation of the Gor universe and his influences.\n&lt;poem&gt;The Counter-Earth, or \"Antichthon\", is from Greek cosmology. Speculation on such a world, you see, is ancient. One of the premises of the Gorean series is that a race of aliens, whom we might speak of as the Priest-Kings, have a technology at their disposal compared to which ours would be something like that in the Bronze Age.\nI think, pretty clearly, the three major influences on my work are Homer, Freud, and Nietzsche. Interestingly, however obvious this influence might be, few, if any, critics, commentators, or such, have called attention to it.&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn the same interview, he said \"one of the pleasures of writing science fiction is the development of, and characterization of, alien life forms\".\nSetting.\nGor is described as a habitable planet in the Solar System that shares the same orbit as Earth, but it is linearly opposed to Earth and consequently always hidden by the Sun, making direct observation of it from Earth impossible. The flora, fauna and customs of Gor are intricately detailed. Norman populates his planet with the equivalents of Roman, Greek, Native American, Viking, Inuit and other cultures. In the novels, these various population groups are transplants from Earth brought there by spacecraft through the behind-the-scenes rulers of Gor, the Priest-Kings, an extraterrestrial species of insectoid appearance. The Gorean humans are permitted advanced architectural, agricultural and medical skills (including life extension), but are forced to remain primitive in the fields of transportation, communication and weaponry (at approximately the level of Classical Mediterranean civilization) due to restrictions on technology imposed by the Priest-Kings. The most advanced form of transportation is the riding of large predatory birds called \"tarns\" by masterful men known as \"tarnsmen\". The limitation of technology is imposed to ensure the safety of both the Priest-Kings and the other indigenous and transplanted beings on Gor, who would otherwise possibly come to harm due to the humans' belligerent tendencies.\nThe planet Gor has lower gravity than the Earth (which allows for the existence of large flying creatures and tall towers connected by aerial bridges in the cities) and would have an even lower gravity if not for the technology of the Priest-Kings. The known geography of Gor consists mainly of the western seaboard of a continent that runs from the Arctic in the north to south of the equator, with the Thassa ocean to the west, and the Voltai mountain range forming an eastern boundary at many latitudes. There are also offshore islands in the ocean and some relatively sparsely settled plains to the east of the Voltai. The word \"Gor\" itself means \"home stone\" in the Gorean language, the native language of the \"northern civilized cities of known Gor\" (which resemble ancient Greco-Roman city-states in many respects), and a widely spoken \"lingua franca\" in many other areas.\nPlotlines.\nMost of the novels in the series are action and sexual adventures, with many of the military engagements borrowing liberally from historic ones, such as the trireme battles of ancient Greece and the castle sieges of medieval Europe. Ar, the largest city in known Gor, has resemblances to the ancient city of Rome, and its land empire is opposed by the sea-power of the island of Cos.\nThe series is an overlapping of planetary romance and sword and planet. The first book, \"Tarnsman of Gor\", opens with scenes reminiscent of scenes in the first book of the Barsoom series by Edgar Rice Burroughs; both feature the protagonist narrating his adventures after being transported to another world. These parallels end after the first few books, when the stories of the books begin to be structured along a loose story arc involving the struggles of the city-state of Ar and the island of Cos to control the Vosk river area, as well as the struggles at a higher level between the non-human Priest-Kings and the Kurii (another alien race) to control Gor and Earth.\nMost of the books are narrated by transplanted British professor Tarl Cabot, master swordsman, as he engages in adventures involving Priest-Kings, Kurii, and humans. Books 7, 11, 19, 22, 26, 27, 31, 34 and parts of 32 are narrated by abducted Earth women who are made into slaves. Books 14, 15, and 16 are narrated by male abductee Jason Marshall. Book 28 is narrated by an unknown Kur, but features Tarl Cabot. Book 30 and parts of 32 are narrated by three Gorean men: a mariner, a scribe and a merchant/slaver.\nThe series features several sentient alien races. The most important to the books are the insectoid Priest-Kings and the huge, sharp-clawed, predatory Kurii, both spacefarers from foreign star systems. The Priest-Kings rule Gor as disinterested custodians, leaving humans to their own affairs as long as they abide by certain restrictions on technology. The Kurii are an aggressive, invasive race with advanced technology (but less so than that of the Priest-Kings) who wish to colonize both Gor and Earth. The power of the Priest-Kings is diminished after the \"Nest War\" described in the third book and the Priest-Kings and Kurii struggle against each other via their respective human agents and spies.\nEarly entries in the series were plot-driven space opera adventures, but later entries grew more philosophical and sexual. Many subplots run the course of several books and tie back to the main plot in later books. Some of these plots begin in the first book, but most are underway in the first 10 books.\nPublication.\nDAW Books, which published the Gor series from the 8th volume (\"Hunters of Gor\") through the 25th volume (\"Magicians of Gor\"), subsequently decided to cease publication of the books, citing low sales; Norman attributes the decision to feminist influences, saying in 1996:\n\"Tarnsman of Gor\" was published in late 1966. It has been reprinted 22 times... I have recently signed contracts for fresh French and German sales, and have recently been published for the first time in Czechoslovakia. There have been recent Spanish and Italian sales. There's no evidence that my books no longer sell... After DAW refused to buy any more Gor books, I sold a three-part Telnarian series to Brian Thomsen of Warner Books. The first book, \"The Chieftain\", had a 67 percent sell-through. The second, \"The Captain\", had a 91 percent sell-through, which is the sort of thing that would make Stephen King rush over to shake your hand... Brian Thomsen, my Warner editor for the Telnarian series... was replaced by an editor from one of the blacklisting presses, one that \"explicitly\" informed my agent they would not consider anything by John Norman. That new editor canceled the series despite its success and without waiting to see how the third book, \"The King\", would do. That way things are made nicely clear...\nUnfortunately for me, only about seven or eight publishing houses maintain a mass-market paperback line in science fiction and fantasy; this small, closely-knit group effectively controls the market. With such a group, a blacklist need not be an explicit, formal written or oral agreement subscribed to by a gathered cabal pledged to secrecy. It is an understanding that a certain individual is to be ostracized, excluded, methodologically overlooked or such.\nStarting in 2001, John Norman's books were published by E-Reads as ebooks and print copies. According to their website, \"they are among E-Reads' biggest sellers\". Open Road Integrated Media acquired E-Reads in 2014.\nAdaptations.\nTwo films have been made, \"Gor\" in 1987 and \"Outlaw of Gor\" in 1989 (also known as \"Outlaw\").\nWhile not officially connected to John Norman's work, \"Fencer of Minerva\" is a Japanese animated series containing many of the elements and ideas discussed in Gorean philosophy.\nDuring the mid-1990s, an attempt was made to publish an authorized graphic novel adaptation of the Gor series under Vision Entertainment. The project collapsed under a combination of financial issues and the nature of the imagery, which violated Canadian law, where the printer was located.\nA Gor region was established in the virtual world of \"Second Life\" in 2005, where users roleplay as characters based on the novels. In it, characters interact in standard Middle Age scenarios, combat, and sexual situations. By mid-2024, many more regions had been added, and there is a body of fans who continue to roleplay in the Gorean settings.\nThe Gor novels have inspired short fan fiction parodies freely available online, including \"Houseplants of Gor\" and \"Gay, Bejeweled, Nazi Bikers of Gor\".\nReception.\nThe \"Gor\" novels have been criticized for their focus on relationships between dominant men and submissive women, the latter often in positions of slavery. \"The Encyclopedia of Fantasy\" has stated that the first several books are \"passable exercises\" of Edgar Rice Burroughs-style fiction while \"later volumes degenerate into extremely sexist, sadomasochistic pornography involving the ritual humiliation of women, and as a result have caused widespread offence\". Science fiction/fantasy author Michael Moorcock has suggested that the \"Gor\" novels should be placed on the top shelves of bookstores, saying, \"I'm not for censorship but I am for strategies which marginalize stuff that works to objectify women and suggests women enjoy being beaten.\"\nSubculture.\nA fandom has developed based on the series. Gorean subculture developed independently of Norman's involvement, particularly starting as a fan network after the publishing houses ceased printing new paperback editions of the novels. Fans allege that due to the controversy and pressure from feminist circles, the Gor books went out of print in the late 1980s (trade paperback and e-book sequel novels were subsequently published from 2001 to 2016). It does not have a uniform following but encompasses different groups of varying views and practices.\nThe Gorean subculture particularly focuses on the master-and-slave dynamic in sexual relationships and associated forms of female submission as portrayed in the novels. Therefore, although they are estimated to comprise less than 5% of the total female population on Gor, training and keeping a female slave (often known as a \"kajira\") is central to Gorean subculture. Formal slave training, slave positions, and commands, as well as slave attire and beautification, are practices central to the Gorean subculture.\nLiteralists, otherwise known as lifestylers, incorporate elements from the Gorean culture and gender roles in their daily lives and some followers of an unofficial splinter group known as Kaotians who adhered to this approach were prosecuted for leading coercive sex cults. As opposed to literalists, the role players, divided into real-life sexual roleplayers (engaged or not engaged in BDSM practices) and online role-playing gamers (present particularly in \"Second Life\") are not necessarily committed to Gorean philosophy and ideals. \nStarting from the 1990s, the Gorean subculture has become attractive to a number of male teenagers through role-playing in chat rooms. The teenage role-playing Goreans who concealed many of their personal aspects such as age or lack of experience, thanks to anonymity, managed to appeal to a considerable number of married and middle-aged women as kajirae in role-playing contexts. Such notoriety caused by this profile and related practices in the virtual Gorean community succeeded in creating disdain among both feminists and the BDSM community. Nevertheless, scholars have discussed the way that Gorean subculture groups on media such as Second Life and Internet Relay Chat have influenced the development of online role-playing and even the MMORPG genre.\nNorman's non-fictional sex manual \"Imaginative Sex\" presents a series of elaborate fantasy scenarios to be acted out in isolated scenes. He also recommends the use of symbolic substitutes, such as the sound of claps as a substitute for whippings and other physical punishments. Patrick Califia asserts that Norman was critical of the psychological and physical harm that non-stop BDSM slavery and corporal punishment might inflict. However, such views of Norman are not part of the Gorean canon and debate on Gorean practices' relationship to BDSM, focusing on aspects such as Total Power Exchange and further complicated by the community's diverse nature, continue. BDSM writer Michael Makai nevertheless asserts that Gorean fiction may be found responsible for shaping or otherwise popularizing many of today's established BDSM protocols and tenets.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52496", "revid": "1235683997", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52496", "title": "Sadomasochistic", "text": ""}
{"id": "52497", "revid": "5320876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52497", "title": "Nobel Prize in Physics", "text": "One of five prizes established in 1895 by Alfred Nobel\nThe Nobel Prize in Physics is an annual award given by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences for those who have made the most outstanding contributions to mankind in the field of physics. It is one of the five Nobel Prizes established by the will of Alfred Nobel in 1895 and awarded since 1901, the others being the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, Nobel Prize in Literature, Nobel Peace Prize, and Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.\nThe prize consists of a medal along with a diploma and a certificate for the monetary award. The front side of the medal displays the same profile of Alfred Nobel depicted on the medals for Physics, Chemistry, and Literature.\nThe first Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to German physicist Wilhelm R\u00f6ntgen in recognition of the extraordinary services he rendered by the discovery of X-rays. This award is administered by the Nobel Foundation and is widely regarded as the most prestigious award that a scientist can receive in physics. It is presented in Stockholm at an annual ceremony on 10 December, the anniversary of Nobel's death. As of 2025[ [update]], a total of 229 people have been awarded the prize.\nBackground.\nAlfred Nobel, in his last will and testament, stated that his wealth should be used to create a series of prizes for those who confer the \"greatest benefit on mankind\" in the fields of physics, chemistry, peace, physiology or medicine, and literature. Though Nobel wrote several wills during his lifetime, the last one was written a year before he died and was signed at the Swedish-Norwegian Club in Paris on 27 November 1895. Nobel bequeathed 94% of his total assets, 31 million Swedish \"kronor\", to establish and endow the five Nobel Prizes. Owing to the level of skepticism surrounding the will, it was not until 26 April 1897 that it was approved by the Storting (Norwegian Parliament). The executors of his will were Ragnar Sohlman and Rudolf Lilljequist, who formed the Nobel Foundation to take care of Nobel's fortune and organise the prizes.\nThe members of the Norwegian Nobel Committee who were to award the Peace Prize were appointed soon after the will was approved. The other prize-awarding organisations followed: Karolinska Institutet on 7 June, the Swedish Academy on 9 June, and the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences on 11 June. The Nobel Foundation then established guidelines for awarding the prizes. In 1900, the Nobel Foundation's newly created statutes were promulgated by King Oscar II. According to Nobel's will, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences would award the Prize in Physics.\nNomination and selection.\nA maximum of three Nobel laureates and two different works may be selected for the Nobel Prize in Physics. Compared with other Nobel Prizes, the nomination and selection process for the prize in physics is long and rigorous. This is a key reason why it has grown in importance over the years to become the most important prize in Physics.\nThe Nobel laureates are selected by the Nobel Committee for Physics, a Nobel Committee that consists of five members elected by The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. During the first stage which begins in September, a group of about 3,000 selected university professors, Nobel Laureates in Physics and Chemistry, and others are sent confidential nomination forms. The completed forms must arrive at the Nobel Committee by 31 January of the following year. The nominees are scrutinized and discussed by experts and are narrowed to approximately fifteen names. The committee submits a report with recommendations on the final candidates to the Academy, where, in the Physics Class, it is further discussed. The Academy then makes the final selection of the Laureates in Physics by a majority vote.\nThe names of the nominees are never publicly announced, and neither are they told that they have been considered for the Prize. Nomination records are sealed for fifty years. While posthumous nominations are not permitted, awards can be made if the individual died in the months between the decision of the committee (typically in October) and the ceremony in December. Prior to 1974, posthumous awards were permitted if the candidate had died after being nominated.\nThe rules for the Nobel Prize in Physics require that the significance of achievements being recognized has been \"tested by time\". In practice, that means that the lag between the discovery and the award is typically on the order of 20 years and can be much longer. For example, half of the 1983 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar for his work on stellar structure and evolution that was done during the 1930s. As a downside of this tested-by-time rule, not all scientists live long enough for their work to be recognized. Some important scientific discoveries are never considered for a prize, as the discoverers have died by the time the impact of their work is appreciated.\nPrizes.\nA Physics Nobel Prize laureate is awarded a gold medal, a diploma bearing a citation, and a sum of money.\nMedals.\nThe medal for the Nobel Prize in Physics is identical in design to the Nobel Prize in Chemistry medal. The reverse of the physics and chemistry medals depicts the Goddess of Nature in the form of Isis as she emerges from clouds holding a cornucopia. The Genius of Science holds the veil which covers Nature's \"cold and austere face\". It was designed by Erik Lindberg and is manufactured by Svenska Medalj in Eskilstuna. It is inscribed \"Inventas vitam iuvat excoluisse per artes\" (\"It is beneficial to have improved (human) life through discovered arts\"), an adaptation of \"\"inventas aut qui vitam excoluere per artes\" from line 663 of book 6 of the \"Aeneid\" by the Roman poet Virgil. A plate below the figures is inscribed with the name of the recipient. The text \"REG. ACAD. SCIENT. SUEC.\"\" denoting the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences is inscribed on the reverse.\nDiplomas.\nNobel laureates receive a diploma directly from the hands of the King of Sweden. Each diploma is uniquely designed by the prize-awarding institutions for the laureate who receives it. The diploma contains a picture with the name of the laureate and a citation explaining their accomplishments.\nAward money.\nAt the awards ceremony, the laureate is given a document indicating the award sum. The amount of the cash award may differ from year to year, based on the funding available from the Nobel Foundation. For example, in 2009 the total cash awarded was 10\u00a0million Swedish Kronor (SEK) (US$1.4\u00a0million), but in 2012 following the Great Recession, the amount was 8\u00a0million SEK, or US$1.1\u00a0million. If there are two laureates in a particular category, the award grant is divided equally between the recipients, but if there are three, the awarding committee may opt to divide the grant equally, or award half to one recipient and a quarter to each of the two others.\nCeremony.\nThe committee and institution serving as the selection board for the prize typically announce the names of the laureates during the first week of October. The prize is then awarded at formal ceremonies held annually in Stockholm Concert Hall on 10 December, the anniversary of Nobel's death. The laureates receive a diploma, a medal, and a document confirming the prize amount.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52498", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52498", "title": "I. P. Pavlov", "text": ""}
{"id": "52500", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52500", "title": "Sado-masochism", "text": ""}
{"id": "52501", "revid": "49645270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52501", "title": "Fork", "text": "Eating utensil\nIn cutlery or kitchenware, a fork (from 'pitchfork') is a utensil, now usually made of metal, whose long handle terminates in a head that branches into several narrow and often slightly curved tines with which one can spear foods either to hold them to cut with a knife or to lift them to the mouth.\nHistory.\nBone forks have been found in archaeological sites of the Bronze Age Qijia culture (2400\u20131900 BC), the Shang dynasty (c. 1600\u2013c. 1050 BC), as well as later Chinese dynasties. A stone carving from an Eastern Han tomb (in Ta-kua-liang, Suide County, Shaanxi) depicts three hanging two-pronged forks in a dining scene. Similar forks have also been depicted on top of a stove in a scene at another Eastern Han tomb (in Suide County, Shaanxi).\nIn Ancient Egypt, large forks were used as cooking utensils.\nIn the Roman Empire, bronze and silver forks were used, many surviving examples of which are displayed in museums around Europe. Use varied according to local customs, social class, and the type of food, but in earlier periods forks were mostly used as cooking and serving utensils.\nAlthough its origin may go back to Ancient Greece, the personal table fork was most likely invented in the Eastern Roman (\"Byzantine\") Empire, where they were in common use by the 4th century. \nRecords show that by the 9th century in some elite circles of Persia a similar utensil known as a \"barjyn\" was in limited use. By the 10th century, the table fork was in common use throughout the Middle East. \nChronographers mention the astonishment that the Byzantine princess Theophanu caused to the court of the Holy Roman Empire, where she married Emperor Otto II), because she was using a fork instead of her hands when she was eating.\nIn addition, according to Peter Damian, the Byzantine princess Maria Argyropoulina brought some golden forks to Venice, when she married Giovanni Orseolo, the son of the Doge Pietro II Orseolo in 1004. Damian condemned the fork as \"vanity\". The same story (with Maria Argyropoulina) was mistakenly said about the Byzantine princess Theodora Doukaina who came to Venice to marry the Doge Domenico Selvo and was confused with Maria Argyropoulina by later authors.\nBy the 11th century, the table fork had become increasingly prevalent in the Italian peninsula because of historical ties with the Eastern Roman Empire and, as pasta became a greater part of the Italian diet, continued to gain popularity, displacing the long wooden spike formerly used since the fork's three spikes proved better suited to gathering the noodles. By the 14th century the table fork had become commonplace in Italy, and by 1600 was almost universal among the merchant and upper classes. It was proper for a guest to arrive with his own fork and spoon enclosed in a box called a \"cadena\"; this usage was introduced to the French court with Catherine de' Medici's entourage.\nAlthough in Portugal forks were first used around 1450 by Infanta Beatrice, Duchess of Viseu, King Manuel I of Portugal's mother, only by the 16th century, when they had become part of Italian etiquette, did forks enter into common use in southwestern Europe, gaining some currency in Spain, and gradually spreading to France. The rest of Europe did not adopt the fork until the 18th century.\nThe fork's adoption in northern Europe was slower. Its use was first described in English by Thomas Coryat in a volume of writings on his Italian travels (1611), but for many years it was viewed as an unmanly Italian affectation. Some writers of the Roman Catholic Church expressly disapproved of its use; St. Peter Damian seeing it as \"excessive delicacy\". It was not until the 18th century that the fork became commonly used in Great Britain, although some sources say that forks were common in France, England and Sweden already by the early 17th century.\nThe fork did not become popular in North America until near the time of the American Revolution. The four-tine design became current in the early 19th century.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52502", "revid": "50244296", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52502", "title": "Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine", "text": "One of five Nobel Prizes established in 1895 by Alfred Nobel\nThe Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine is awarded yearly by the Nobel Assembly at the Karolinska Institute for outstanding discoveries in physiology or medicine. It is one of the five Nobel Prizes prizes that, in accordance with Alfred Nobel's 1895 will, are awarded \"to those who, during the preceding year, have conferred the greatest benefit to humankind\". Nobel Prizes are awarded in the fields of Physics, Medicine or Physiology, Chemistry, Literature, and Peace.\nThe Nobel Prize is presented annually on the anniversary of Alfred Nobel's death, 10 December. As of 2024, 116 Nobel Prizes in Physiology or Medicine have been awarded to 232 laureates, 218 men and 14 women. The first one was awarded in 1901 to the German physiologist, Emil von Behring, for his work on serum therapy and the development of a vaccine against diphtheria. The first woman to receive the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, Gerty Cori, received it in 1947 for her role in elucidating the metabolism of glucose, important in many aspects of medicine, including treatment of diabetes. The most recent Nobel prize was announced by the Nobel Assembly at Karolinska Institutet on 6 October 2025, and has been awarded to Americans Mary E. Brunkow and Fred Ramsdell, and Japanese scientist Shimon Sakaguchi, for their discoveries concerning peripheral immune tolerance and regulatory T cells.\nThe prize consists of a medal along with a diploma and a certificate for the monetary award. The front side of the medal displays the same profile of Alfred Nobel depicted on the medals for Physics, Chemistry, and Literature; the reverse side is unique to this medal.\nSome awards have been controversial. This includes one to Ant\u00f3nio Egas Moniz in 1949 for the prefrontal lobotomy, bestowed despite protests from the medical establishment. Other controversies resulted from disagreements over who was included in the award. The 1952 prize to Selman Waksman was litigated in court, and half the patent rights were awarded to his co-discoverer Albert Schatz who was not recognised by the prize. Nobel prizes cannot be awarded posthumously. Also, no more than three recipients can receive a Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, a limitation that is sometimes discussed because of an increasing trend for larger teams to conduct important scientific projects.\nBackground.\nAlfred Nobel was born on 21 October 1833 in Stockholm, Sweden, into a family of engineers. He was a chemist, engineer and inventor who amassed a fortune during his lifetime, most of it from his 355\u00a0inventions, of which dynamite is the most famous. He was interested in experimental physiology and set up his own labs in France and Italy to conduct experiments in blood transfusions. Keeping abreast of scientific findings, he was generous in his donations to Ivan Pavlov's laboratory in Russia and was optimistic about the progress resulting from scientific discoveries made in laboratories.\nIn 1888, Nobel was surprised to read his own obituary, titled \"The Merchant of death Is Dead\", in a French newspaper. As it happened, it was Nobel's brother Ludvig who had died, but Nobel, unhappy with the content of the obituary and concerned that his legacy would reflect poorly on him, was inspired to change his will. In his last will, Nobel requested that his money be used to create a series of prizes for those who confer the \"greatest benefit on mankind\" in physics, chemistry, peace, physiology or medicine, and literature. Though Nobel wrote several wills during his lifetime, the last was written a little over a year before he died in 1896 at the age of 63. Because his will was contested, it was not approved by the Storting (Norwegian Parliament) until 26 April 1897.\nAfter Nobel's death, the Nobel Foundation was set up to manage the assets of the bequest. In 1900, the Nobel Foundation's newly created statutes were promulgated by Swedish King Oscar II. According to Nobel's will, the Karolinska Institute in Sweden, a medical school and research centre, is responsible for the Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Today, the prize is commonly referred to as the Nobel Prize in Medicine.\nNomination and selection.\nIt was important to Nobel that the prize be awarded for a \"discovery\" and that it be of \"greatest benefit on mankind\". Per the provisions of the will, only select persons are eligible to nominate individuals for the award. These include members of academies around the world, professors of medicine in Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Iceland, and Finland, as well as professors of selected universities and research institutions in other countries. Past Nobel laureates may also nominate. Until 1977, all professors of Karolinska Institute together decided on the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. That year, changes in Swedish law forced the institute to make public any documents pertaining to the Nobel Prize, and it was considered necessary to establish a legally independent body for the Prize work. Therefore, the Nobel Assembly was constituted, consisting of 50 professors at Karolinska Institute. It elects the Nobel Committee with five members who evaluate the nominees, the Secretary who is in charge of the organisation, and each year ten adjunct members to assist in the evaluation of candidates. In 1968, a provision was added that no more than three persons may share a Nobel prize.\nTrue to its mandate, the committee has chosen researchers working in the basic sciences over those who have made applied science contributions. Harvey Cushing, a pioneering American neurosurgeon who identified Cushing's syndrome, was not awarded the prize, nor was Sigmund Freud, as his psychoanalysis lacks hypotheses that can be experimentally confirmed. The public expected Jonas Salk or Albert Sabin to receive the prize for their development of the polio vaccines, but instead the award went to John Enders, Thomas Weller, and Frederick Robbins whose basic discovery that the polio virus could reproduce in monkey cells in laboratory preparations made the vaccines possible.\nThrough the 1930s, there were frequent prize laureates in classical physiology, but after that, the field began fragmenting into specialities. The last classical physiology laureates were John Eccles, Alan Hodgkin, and Andrew Huxley in 1963 for their findings regarding \"unitary electrical events in the central and peripheral nervous system.\"\nPrizes.\nA Medicine or Physiology Nobel Prize laureate earns a gold medal, a diploma bearing a citation, and a sum of money. These are awarded during the prize ceremony at the Stockholm Concert Hall.\nMedals.\nThe Physiology or Medicine medal has a portrait of Alfred Nobel in left profile on the obverse. The medal was designed by Erik Lindberg. The reverse of the medal depicts the 'Genius of Medicine holding an open book in her lap, collecting the water pouring out from a rock in order to quench a sick girl's thirst'. It is inscribed \"\" (\"It is beneficial to have improved (human) life through discovered arts\") an adaptation of \"\" from line 663 from book 6 of the \"Aeneid\" by the Roman poet Virgil. A plate below the figures is inscribed with the name of the recipient. The text \"REG. UNIVERSITAS MED. CHIR. CAROL.\" denoting the Karolinska Institute is also inscribed on the reverse.\nBetween 1902 and 2010 the Nobel Prize medals were struck by the Myntverket, the Swedish royal mint, located in Eskilstuna. In 2011 the medals were made by the Det Norske Myntverket in Kongsberg. The medals have been made by Svenska Medalj in Eskilstuna since 2012.\nDiplomas.\nNobel laureates receive a diploma directly from the King of Sweden. Each diploma is uniquely designed by the prize-awarding institutions for the laureate who receives it. In the case of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, that is the Nobel Assembly at Karolinska Institute. Well-known artists and calligraphers from Sweden are commissioned to create it. The diploma contains a picture and text which states the name of the laureate and a citation as to why they received the prize.\nAward money.\nAt the awards ceremony, the laureate is given a document indicating the award sum. The amount of the cash award may differ from year to year, based on the funding available from the Nobel Foundation. For example, in 2009 the total cash awarded was 10\u00a0million SEK (US$1.4\u00a0million), but in 2012, the amount was 8\u00a0million Swedish Krona, or US$1.1\u00a0million. If there are two laureates in a particular category, the award grant is divided equally between the recipients, but if there are three, the awarding committee may opt to divide the grant equally, or award half to one recipient and a quarter to each of the two others.\nCeremony and banquet.\nThe awards are bestowed at a gala ceremony followed by a banquet. The Nobel Banquet is an extravagant affair with the menu, planned months ahead of time, kept secret until the day of the event. The Nobel Foundation chooses the menu after tasting and testing selections submitted by selected chefs of international repute. Currently, it is a three-course dinner, although it was originally six courses in 1901. Each Nobel Prize laureate may bring up to 16 guests. Sweden's royal family attends, and typically the Prime Minister and other members of the government attend as well as representatives of the Nobel family.\nLaureates.\nThe first Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded in 1901 to the German physiologist Emil Adolf von Behring. Behring's discovery of serum therapy in the development of the diphtheria and tetanus vaccines put \"in the hands of the physician a victorious weapon against illness and deaths\". In 1902, the award went to Ronald Ross for his work on malaria, \"by which he has shown how it enters the organism and thereby has laid the foundation for successful research on this disease and methods of combating it\". He identified the mosquito as the transmitter of malaria, and worked tirelessly on measures to prevent malaria worldwide. The 1903 prize was awarded to Niels Ryberg Finsen, the first Faroese laureate, \"in recognition of his contribution to the treatment of diseases, especially lupus vulgaris, with concentrated light radiation, whereby he has opened a new avenue for medical science\". He died within a year after receiving the prize at the age of 43. Ivan Pavlov, whose work Nobel admired and supported, received the prize in 1904 for his work on the physiology of digestion.\nSubsequently, those selecting the recipients have exercised wide latitude in determining what falls under the umbrella of Physiology or Medicine. The awarding of the prize in 1973 to Nikolaas Tinbergen, Konrad Lorenz, and Karl von Frisch for their observations of animal behavioural patterns could be considered a prize in the behavioural sciences rather than medicine or physiology. Tinbergen expressed surprise in his Nobel Prize acceptance speech at \"the unconventional decision of the Nobel Foundation to award this year's prize 'for Physiology or Medicine' to three men who had until recently been regarded as 'mere animal watchers'\".\nLaureates have been awarded the Nobel Prize in a wide range of fields that relate to physiology or medicine. Prizes have recognized significant discoveries in areas as diverse as signal transduction through G proteins, neurobiology, and intermediary metabolism. As of 2025, a total of 116 Nobel Prizes in Physiology or Medicine have been awarded to 232 individuals since 1901.\nThirteen women have received the prize: Gerty Cori (1947), Rosalyn Yalow (1977), Barbara McClintock (1983), Rita Levi-Montalcini (1986), Gertrude B. Elion (1988), Christiane N\u00fcsslein-Volhard (1995), Linda B. Buck (2004), Fran\u00e7oise Barr\u00e9-Sinoussi (2008), Elizabeth H. Blackburn (2009), Carol W. Greider (2009), May-Britt Moser (2014), Tu Youyou (2015), Katalin Karik\u00f3 (2023) and Mary E. Brunkow (2025). Only one woman, Barbara McClintock, has received an unshared prize in this category, for the discovery of genetic transposition.\nMario Capecchi, Martin Evans, and Oliver Smithies were awarded the prize in 2007 for the discovery of a gene targeting procedure (a type of genetic recombination) for introducing homologous recombination in mice, employing embryonic stem cells through the development of the knockout mouse. In 2009, the Nobel Prize was awarded to Elizabeth Blackburn, Carol W. Greider and Jack W. Szostak of the United States for discovering the process by which chromosomes are protected by telomeres (regions of repetitive DNA at the ends of chromosomes) and the enzyme telomerase.\nRita Levi-Montalcini, an Italian neurologist, who together with colleague Stanley Cohen and Lucas Pu, received the 1986 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their discovery of nerve growth factor (NGF), was the first Nobel laureate to reach the 100th birthday.\nThrough 2025, the prize has been awarded to a single individual 40 times, shared by two laureates 35 times, and shared by three laureates 41 times (the maximum allowed).\nTime factor and death.\nBecause of the length of time that may pass before the significance of a discovery becomes apparent, some prizes are awarded many years after the initial discovery. Barbara McClintock made her discoveries in 1944, before the structure of the DNA molecule was known; she was not awarded the prize until 1983. Similarly, in 1916 Peyton Rous discovered the role of tumor viruses in chickens, but was not awarded the prize until 50 years later, in 1966.\nNobel laureate Carol Greider's research leading to the prize was conducted over 20 years before. She noted that the passage of time is an advantage in the medical sciences, as it may take many years for the significance of a discovery to become apparent. \nIn 2011, Canadian immunologist Ralph M. Steinman was awarded the prize; however, unbeknownst to the committee, he had died three days before the announcement. The committee decided that since the prize was awarded \"in good faith,\" it would be allowed to stand.\nControversial inclusions and exclusions.\nSome of the awards have been controversial. The person who was deserving of the 1923 prize for the discovery of insulin as a central hormone for controlling diabetes (awarded only a year after its discovery) has been heatedly debated. It was shared between Frederick Banting and John Macleod; this infuriated Banting who regarded Macleod's involvement as minimal. Macleod was the department head at the University of Toronto but otherwise was not directly involved in the findings. Banting thought his laboratory partner Charles Best, who had shared in the laboratory work of discovery, should have shared the prize with him as well. In fairness, he decided to give half of his prize money to Best. Macleod on his part felt the biochemist James Collip, who joined the laboratory team later, deserved to be included in the award and shared his prize money with him. Some maintain that Nicolae Paulescu, a Romanian professor of physiology at the University of Medicine and Pharmacy in Bucharest, was the first to isolate insulin, in 1916, although his pancrein was an impure aqueous extract unfit for human treatment similar to the one used previously by Israel Kleiner. When Banting published the paper that brought him the Nobel, Paulescu already held a patent for his discovery (10 April 1922, patent no. 6254 (8322) \"Pancreina \u015fi procedeul fabrica\u0163iei ei\"/\"Pancrein and the process of making it\", from the Romanian Ministry of Industry and Trade).\nThe Spanish neurophysiologist Fernando de Castro (1896\u20131967) was the first to describe arterial chemoreceptors and circumscribe them to the carotid body for the respiratory reflexes in 1926\u20131928. For many experts, this direct disciple of Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal deserved to share the Nobel Prize 1938 with the awarded Corneille Heymans, but at that time Spain was immersed in the Spanish Civil War and it seems that the Nobel Board even doubted if he was alive or not, being at the front since almost the beginning of the conflict. Heymans himself recognised the merits of De Castro for the Nobel Prize in different occasions, including a famous talk in Montevideo (Uruguay).\nIn 1949, despite protests from the medical establishment, the Portuguese neurologist Ant\u00f3nio Egas Moniz received the Physiology or Medicine Prize for his development of the prefrontal leucotomy, which he promoted by declaring the procedure's success just 10 days postoperative. Due largely to the publicity surrounding the award, it was prescribed without regard for modern medical ethics. Favourable results were reported by such publications as \"The New York Times\". It is estimated that around 40,000 lobotomies were performed in the United States before the procedure's popularity faded. Rosemary Kennedy, the sister of John F. Kennedy, was subjected to the procedure by their father; it incapacitated her to the extent that she needed to be institutionalised for the rest of her life.\nThe 1952 prize, awarded solely to Selman Waksman for his discovery of streptomycin, omitted the recognition some felt due to his co-discoverer Albert Schatz. There was litigation brought by Schatz against Waksman over the details and credit of the streptomycin discovery; Schatz was awarded a substantial settlement, and, together with Waksman, Schatz was to be officially recognised as a co-discoverer of streptomycin as concerned patent rights. He is not a Nobel Prize laureate.\nThe 1962 Prize awarded to James D. Watson, Francis Crick, and Maurice Wilkins\u2014for their work on DNA structure and properties\u2014did not recognise contributing work from others, such as Alec Stokes and Herbert Wilson. In addition, Erwin Chargaff, Oswald Avery, and Rosalind Franklin (whose key DNA x-ray crystallography work was the most detailed yet least acknowledged among the three) contributed directly to the ability of Watson and Crick to solve the structure of the DNA molecule. Avery died in 1955, Franklin died in 1958 and posthumous nominations for the Nobel Prize are not permitted. Files of Nobel Prize nominations show Franklin was not nominated when she was alive. As a result of Watson's misrepresentations of Franklin and her role in the discovery of the double helix in his book \"The Double Helix\", Franklin has come to be portrayed as a classic victim of sexism in science. Chargaff, for his part, was not quiet about his exclusion from the prize, bitterly writing to other scientists about his disillusionment regarding the field of molecular biology.\nThe 2008 award went to Harald zur Hausen in recognition of his discovery that human papillomavirus (HPV) can cause cervical cancer, and to Fran\u00e7oise Barr\u00e9-Sinoussi and Luc Montagnier for discovering the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Whether Robert Gallo or Luc Montagnier deserved more credit for the discovery of the virus that causes AIDS has been a matter of considerable controversy. As it was, Gallo was left out and not awarded a prize. Additionally, there was a scandal when it was learned that Harald zur Hausen was being investigated for having a financial interest in vaccines for the cervical cancer that HPV can cause. AstraZeneca, which had a stake in two lucrative HPV vaccines could benefit financially from the prize, had agreed to sponsor Nobel Media and Nobel Web. According to Times Online, two senior figures in the selection process that chose zur Hausen also had strong links with AstraZeneca.\nLimits on number of awardees.\nThe provision that restricts the maximum number of nominees to three for any one prize, introduced in 1968, has caused considerable controversy. From the 1950s onward, there has been an increasing trend to award the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine to more than one person. There were 59 people who received the prize in the first 50 years of the last century, while 113 individuals received it between 1951 and 2000. This increase could be attributed to the rise of the international scientific community after World War II, resulting in more persons being responsible for the discovery, and nominated for, a particular prize. Also, current biomedical research is more often carried out by teams rather than by scientists working alone, making it unlikely that any one scientist, or even a few, is primarily responsible for a discovery; this has meant that a prize nomination that would have to include more than three contributors is automatically excluded from consideration. Also, deserving contributors may not be nominated at all because the restriction results in a cut-off point of three nominees per prize, leading to controversial exclusions.\nYears without awards.\nThere have been nine years in which the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was not awarded (1915\u20131918, 1921, 1925, 1940\u20131942). Most of these occurred during either World War I (1914\u20131918) or World War II (1939\u20131945). In 1939, Nazi Germany forbade Gerhard Domagk from accepting his prize. He was later able to receive the diploma and medal but not the money.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52503", "revid": "198194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52503", "title": "Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine", "text": ""}
{"id": "52504", "revid": "157842", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52504", "title": "Gwent", "text": "Gwent may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52507", "revid": "20612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52507", "title": "British colonization of the Americas", "text": "The British colonization of the Americas is the history of establishment of control, settlement, and colonization of the continents of the Americas by England, Scotland, and, after 1707, Great Britain. Colonization efforts began in the late 16th century with failed attempts by England to establish permanent colonies in the North. The first permanent English colony in the Americas was established in Jamestown, Virginia, in 1607. Colonies were established in North America, Central America, South America, and the Caribbean. Though most British colonies in the Americas eventually gained independence, some colonies have remained under Britain's jurisdiction as British Overseas Territories.\nThe first documented settlement of Europeans in the Americas was established by Norse people around 1000\u00a0AD in what is now Newfoundland, called Vinland by the Norse. Later European exploration of North America resumed with Christopher Columbus's 1492 expedition sponsored by Spain. English settlement began almost a century later. Sir Walter Raleigh established the short-lived Roanoke Colony in 1585. The 1607 settlement of the Jamestown colony grew into the Colony of Virginia. \"Virgineola\"\u2014settled unintentionally by the shipwreck of the Virginia Company's Sea Venture in 1609, and renamed \"The Somers Isles\"\u2014is still known by its older Spanish name, Bermuda. In 1620, a group of mostly Pilgrim religious separatists established a second permanent colony on the mainland, on the coast of Massachusetts. Several other English colonies were established in North America during the 17th and 18th centuries. With the authorization of a royal charter, the Hudson's Bay Company established the territory of Rupert's Land in the Hudson Bay drainage basin. The English also established or conquered several colonies in the Caribbean, including Barbados and Jamaica.\nEngland captured the Dutch colony of New Netherland in the Anglo-Dutch Wars of the mid-17th century, leaving North America divided among the English, Spanish, and French empires. After decades of warring with France, Britain took control of the French colony of Canada and France's territory east of the Mississippi River, as well as several Caribbean territories, in 1763. Many of the North American colonies gained independence from Britain through victory in the American Revolutionary War, which ended in 1783. Historians refer to the British Empire after 1783 as the \"Second British Empire\"; this period saw Britain increasingly focus on Asia and Africa instead of the Americas, and increasingly focus on the expansion of trade rather than territorial possessions. Nonetheless, Britain continued to colonize parts of the Americas in the 19th century, taking control of British Columbia and establishing the colonies of the Falkland Islands and British Honduras. Britain also gained control of several colonies, including Trinidad and British Guiana, following the 1815 defeat of France in the Napoleonic Wars.\nIn the mid-19th century, Britain began the process of granting self-government to its remaining colonies in North America. Most of these colonies joined the Confederation of Canada in the 1860s or 1870s, though Newfoundland would not join Canada until 1949. Canada gained full autonomy following the passage of the Statute of Westminster 1931, though it retained various ties to Britain and still recognizes the British monarch as head of state. Following the onset of the Cold War, most of the remaining British colonies in the Americas gained independence between 1962 and 1983. Many of the former British colonies are part of the Commonwealth of Nations, a political association chiefly consisting of former colonies of the British Empire.\nBackground: early exploration and colonization of the Americas.\nFollowing the first voyage of Christopher Columbus in 1492, Spain and Portugal established colonies in the New World, beginning the European colonization of the Americas. France and England, the two other major powers of 15th-century Western Europe, employed explorers soon after the return of Columbus's first voyage. In 1497, King Henry VII of England dispatched an expedition led by John Cabot to explore the coast of North America, but the lack of precious metals or other riches discouraged both the Spanish and English from permanently settling in North America during the early 17th century.\nLater explorers such as Martin Frobisher and Henry Hudson sailed to the New World in search of a Northwest Passage between the Atlantic Ocean and Asia, but were unable to find a viable route. Europeans established fisheries in the Grand Banks of Newfoundland, and traded metal, glass, and cloth for food and fur, beginning the North American fur trade. During mid-1585 Bernard Drake launched an expedition to Newfoundland which crippled the Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleets there from which they never recovered. This would have consequences in terms of English colonial expansion and settlement.\nIn the Caribbean Sea, English sailors defied Spanish trade restrictions and preyed on Spanish treasure ships. The English colonization of America had been based on the English colonization of Ireland, specifically the Munster Plantation, England's first colony, using the same tactics as the Plantations of Ireland. Many of the early colonists of North America had their start in colonizing Ireland, including a group known as the West Country Men. When Sir Walter Raleigh landed in Virginia, he compared the Native Americans to the wild Irish. Both Roanoke and Jamestown had been based on the Irish plantation model.\nIn the late sixteenth century, Protestant England became embroiled in a religious war with Catholic Spain. Seeking to weaken Spain's economic and military power, English privateers such as Francis Drake and Humphrey Gilbert harassed Spanish shipping. Gilbert proposed the colonization of North America on the Spanish model, with the goal of creating a profitable English empire that could also serve as a base for the privateers. After Gilbert's death, Walter Raleigh took up the cause of North American colonization, sponsoring an expedition of 500 men to Roanoke Island. In 1584, the colonists established the first permanent English colony in North America, but the colonists were poorly prepared for life in the New World, and by 1590, the colonists had disappeared.\nThere are a variety of theories as to what happened to the colonists there. The most popular theory is that the colonists left in search of a new area to settle in the Chesapeake, leaving stragglers to integrate with local Native American tribes. A separate colonization attempt in Newfoundland also failed. Despite the failure of these early colonies, the English remained interested in the colonization of North America for economic and military reasons.\nEarly colonization, 1607\u20131630.\nIn 1606, King James I of England granted charters to both the Plymouth Company and the London Company for the purpose of establishing permanent settlements in North America. In 1607, the London Company established a permanent colony at Jamestown on the Chesapeake Bay, but the Plymouth Company's Popham Colony proved short-lived. Approximately 30,000 Algonquian peoples lived in the region at the time. The colonists at Jamestown faced extreme adversity, and by 1617 there were only 351 survivors out of the 1700 colonists who had been transported to Jamestown. After the Virginians discovered the profitability of growing tobacco, the settlement's population boomed from 400 settlers in 1617 to 1240 settlers in 1622. The London Company was bankrupted in part due to frequent warring with nearby American Indians, leading the English crown to take direct control of the Colony of Virginia, as Jamestown and its surrounding environs became known.\nIn 1609, the Sea Venture, flagship of the English London Company, a division of the Virginia Company, bearing Admiral Sir George Somers and the new Lieutenant-Governor for Jamestown, Sir Thomas Gates, was deliberately driven onto the reef off the archipelago of Bermuda to prevent its foundering during a hurricane on the 25th of July. The 150 passengers and crew built two new ships, the \"Deliverance\" and \"Patience\" and most departed Bermuda again for Jamestown on 11 May 1610. Two men remained behind, and were joined by a third after the Patience returned again, then departed for England (it had been meant to return to Jamestown after gathering more food in Bermuda), ensuring that Bermuda remained settled, and in the possession of England and the London Company from 1609 to 1612, when more settlers and the first Lieutenant-Governor arrived from England following the extension of the Royal Charter of the London Company to officially add Bermuda to the territory of Virginia.\nThe archipelago was officially named \"Virgineola\", though this was soon changed to \"The Somers Isles\", which remains an official name though the archipelago had already long been infamous as \"Bermuda\", and the older Spanish name has resisted replacement. The Lieutenant-Governor and settlers who arrived in 1612 briefly settled on Smith's Island, where the three left behind by the Sea Venture were thriving, before moving to St. George's Island where they established the town of \"New London\", which was soon renamed to St. George's Town (the first actual town successfully established by the English in the New World as Jamestown was really \"James Fort\", a rudimentary defensive structure, in 1612).\nBermuda was soon more populous, self-sufficient and prosperous than Jamestown and a second company, the \"Company of the City of London for the Plantacion of The Somers Isles\" (better known as The Somers Isles Company) was spun-off from the London Company in 1615, and continued to administer Bermuda after the London Company's Royal Charter was revoked in 1624 (The Somers Isles Company's Royal Charter was similarly revoked in 1684). Bermuda pioneered tobacco cultivation as the engine for its economic growth, but as Virginia's tobacco agriculture outstripped it in the 1620s, and new colonies in the West Indies also emulated its tobacco industry, the price of Bermudian tobacco fell and the colony became unprofitable for many of the company's shareholders, who mostly had remained in England while managers or tenants farmed their land in Bermuda with the labour of indentured servants. Bermuda's House of Assembly held its first session in 1620 (Virginia's House of Burgesses having held its first session in 1619), but with no landowners resident in Bermuda there was consequently no property qualification, unlike the case with the House of Commons.\nAs the bottom fell out of tobacco, many absentee shareholders (or \"Adventurers\") sold their shares to the occupying managers or tenants, with the agricultural industry quickly shifting towards family farms that grew subsistence crops instead of tobacco. Bermudians soon found they could sell their excess foodstuffs in the West Indies where colonies like Barbados grew tobacco to the exclusion of subsistence crops. As the company's magazine ship would not carry their food exports to the West Indies, Bermudians began to build their own ships from Bermuda cedar, developing the speedy and nimble Bermuda sloop and the Bermuda rig.\nBetween the late 1610s and the American Revolution, the British shipped an estimated 50,000 to 120,000 convicts to their American colonies.\nMeanwhile, the Council for New England sponsored several colonization projects, including a colony established by a group of English Puritans, known today as the Pilgrims. The Puritans embraced an intensely emotional form of Calvinist Protestantism and sought independence from the Church of England. In 1620, the \"Mayflower\" transported the Pilgrims across the Atlantic, and the Pilgrims established Plymouth Colony on Cape Cod. The Pilgrims endured an extremely hard first winter, with roughly fifty of the one hundred colonists dying. In 1621, Plymouth Colony was able to establish an alliance with the nearby Wampanoag tribe, which helped the Plymouth Colony adopt effective agricultural practices and engaged in the trade of fur and other materials. Farther north, the English also established Newfoundland Colony in 1610, which primarily focused on cod fishing.\nThe Caribbean would provide some of England's most important and lucrative colonies, but not before several attempts at colonization failed. An attempt to establish a colony in Guiana in 1604 lasted only two years and failed in its main objective to find gold deposits. Colonies in St Lucia\u00a0(1605) and Grenada\u00a0(1609) also rapidly folded. Encouraged by the success of Virginia, in 1627 King Charles I granted a charter to the Barbados Company for the settlement of the uninhabited Caribbean island of Barbados. Early settlers failed in their attempts to cultivate tobacco, but found great success in growing sugar.\nGrowth, 1630\u20131689.\nWest Indies colonies.\nThe success of colonization efforts in Barbados encouraged the establishment of more Caribbean colonies, and by 1660 England had established Caribbean sugar colonies in St. Kitts, Antigua, Nevis, and Montserrat, English colonization of the Bahamas began in 1648 after a Puritan group known as the Eleutheran Adventurers established a colony on the island of Eleuthera. England established another sugar colony in 1655 following the successful invasion of Jamaica during the Anglo-Spanish War. Spain acknowledged English possession of Jamaica and the Caiman Islands in the 1670 Treaty of Madrid. England captured Tortola from the Dutch in 1670, and subsequently took possession of the nearby islands of Anegada and Virgin Gorda; these islands would later form the British Virgin Islands.\nDuring the 17th century, the sugar colonies adopted the system of sugar plantations successfully used by the Portuguese in Brazil, which depended on slave labour. The English government valued the economic importance of these islands over that of New England. Until the abolition of its slave trade in 1807, Britain was responsible for the transportation of 3.5\u00a0million African slaves to the Americas, a third of all slaves transported across the Atlantic. Many of the slaves were captured by the Royal African Company in West Africa, though others came from Madagascar. These slaves soon came to form the majority of the population in Caribbean colonies like Barbados and Jamaica, where strict slave codes were established partly to deter slave rebellions.\nEstablishment of the Thirteen Colonies.\nNew England Colonies.\nFollowing the success of the Jamestown and Plymouth Colonies, several more English groups established colonies in the region that became known as New England. In 1629, another group of Puritans led by John Winthrop established the Massachusetts Bay Colony, and by 1635 roughly ten thousand English settlers lived in the region between the Connecticut River and the Kennebec River. After defeating the Pequot in the Pequot War, Puritan settlers established the Connecticut Colony in the region the Pequots had formerly controlled. The Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations was founded by Roger Williams, a Puritan leader who was expelled from the Massachusetts Bay Colony after he advocated for a formal split with the Church of England. As New England was a relatively cold and infertile region, the New England Colonies relied on fishing and long-distance trade to sustain the economy.\nSouthern Colonies.\nIn 1632, Cecil Calvert, 2nd Baron Baltimore founded the Province of Maryland to the north of Virginia. Maryland and Virginia became known as the Chesapeake Colonies, and experienced similar immigration and economic activities. Though Baltimore and his descendants intended for the colony to be a refuge for Catholics, it attracted mostly Protestant immigrants, many of whom scorned the Calvert family's policy of religious toleration. In the mid-17th century, the Chesapeake Colonies, inspired by the success of slavery in Barbados, began the mass importation of African slaves. Though many early slaves eventually gained their freedom, after 1662 Virginia adopted policies that passed enslaved status from mother to child and granted slave owners near-total domination of their human property.\n640 miles (1,030\u00a0km) East-South-East of Cape Hatteras, in the Virginia Company's other former settlement, the Somers Isles, alias the Islands of Bermuda, where the spin-off Somers Isles Company still administered, the company and its shareholders in England only earned profits from the export of tobacco, placing them increasingly at odds with Bermudians for whom tobacco had become unprofitable to cultivate. As only those landowners who could attend the company's annual meetings in England were permitted to vote on company policy, the company worked to suppress the developing maritime economy of the colonists and to force the production of tobacco, which required unsustainable farming practices as more was required to be produced to make up for the diminished value.\nAs many of the class of moneyed businessmen who were adventurers in the company were aligned to the Parliamentary cause during the English Civil War, Bermuda was one of the colonies that sided with the Crown during the war, being the first to recognise Charles II after the execution of his father. With control of their Assembly and the militia and volunteer coastal artillery, the Royalist majority deposed the company-appointed Governor (by the 1630s, the company had ceased sending Governors to Bermuda and had instead appointed a succession of prominent Bermudians to the role, including religious Independent and Parliamentarian William Sayle) by force of arms and elected John Trimingham to replace him. Many of Bermuda's religious Independents, who had sided with Parliament, were forced into exile. Although some of the newer continental colonies settled largely by anti-Episcopalian Protestants sided with Parliament during the war, Virginia and other colonies like Bermuda supported the Crown and were subjected to the measures laid out in An Act for prohibiting Trade with the Barbadoes, Virginia, Bermuda and Antego until Parliament was able to force them to acknowledge its sovereignty.\nBermudian anger at the policies of the Somers Isles Company ultimately saw them take their complaints to the Crown after The Restoration, leading to the Crown revoking the Royal Charter of the Somers Isles Company and taking over direct administration of Bermuda in 1684. From that date, Bermudians abandoned agriculture, diversifying their maritime industry to occupy many niches of inter-colonial trade between North America and the West Indies. Bermudians limited landmass and high birth rate meant that a steady outflow from the colony contributed about 10,000 settlers to other colonies, notably the southern continental colonies (including Carolina Province, which was settled from Bermuda in 1670), as well as West Indian settlements, including the Providence Island colony in 1631, the Bahamas (settled by Eleutheran Adventurers, Parliament-allied Civil War exiles from Bermuda, under William Sayle in the 1640s), and the seasonal occupation of the Turks Islands from 1681.\nEncouraged by the apparent weakness of Spanish rule in Florida, Barbadian planter John Colleton and seven other supporters of Charles II of England established the Province of Carolina in 1663. Settlers in the Carolina Colony established two main population centers, with many Virginians settling in the north of the province and many English Barbadians settling in the southern port city of Charles Town. In 1712, Carolina was divided into the crown colonies of North Carolina and South Carolina. The colonies of Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina (as well as the Province of Georgia, which was established in 1732) became known as the Southern Colonies.\nMiddle Colonies.\nBeginning in 1609, Dutch traders had established fur trading posts on the Hudson River, Delaware River, and Connecticut River, ultimately creating the Dutch colony of New Netherland, with a capital at New Amsterdam. In 1657, New Netherland expanded through conquest of New Sweden, a Swedish colony centered in the Delaware Valley. Despite commercial success, New Netherland failed to attract the same level of settlement as the English colonies. In 1664, during a series of wars between the English and Dutch, English soldier Richard Nicolls captured New Netherland. The Dutch briefly regained control of parts of New Netherland in the Third Anglo-Dutch War, but surrendered its claim to the territory in the 1674 Treaty of Westminster, ending the Dutch colonial presence in North America. In 1664, the Duke of York, later known as James II of England, was granted control of the English colonies north of the Delaware River. He created the Province of New York out of the former Dutch territory and renamed New Amsterdam as New York City. He also created the provinces of West Jersey and East Jersey out of former Dutch land situated to the west of New York City, giving the territories to John Berkeley and George Carteret. East Jersey and West Jersey would later be unified as the Province of New Jersey in 1702.\nCharles II rewarded William Penn, the son of distinguished Admiral William Penn, with the land situated between Maryland and the Jerseys. Penn named this land the Province of Pennsylvania. Penn was also granted a lease to the Delaware Colony, which gained its own legislature in 1701. A devout Quaker, Penn sought to create a haven of religious toleration in the New World. Pennsylvania attracted Quakers and other settlers from across Europe, and the city of Philadelphia quickly emerged as a thriving port city. With its fertile and cheap land, Pennsylvania became one of the most attractive destinations for immigrants in the late 17th century. New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware became known as the Middle Colonies.\nHudson's Bay Company.\nIn 1670, Charles II incorporated by royal charter the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC), granting it a monopoly on the fur trade in the area known as Rupert's Land. Forts and trading posts established by the HBC were frequently the subject of attacks by the French.\nDarien scheme.\nIn 1695, the Parliament of Scotland granted a charter to the Company of Scotland, which established a settlement in 1698 on the Isthmus of Panama. Besieged by neighbouring Spanish colonists of New Granada, and afflicted by malaria, the colony was abandoned two years later. The Darien scheme was a financial disaster for Scotland\u2014a quarter of Scottish capital was lost in the enterprise\u2014and ended Scottish hopes of establishing its own overseas empire. The episode also had major political consequences, persuading the governments of both England and Scotland of the merits of a union of countries, rather than just crowns. This occurred in 1707 with the Treaty of Union, establishing the Kingdom of Great Britain.\nExpansion and conflict, 1689\u20131763.\nSettlement and expansion in North America.\nAfter succeeding his brother in 1685, King James II and his lieutenant, Edmund Andros, sought to assert the crown's authority over colonial affairs. James was deposed by the new joint monarchy of William and Mary in the Glorious Revolution, but William and Mary quickly reinstated many of the James's colonial policies, including the mercantilist Navigation Acts and the Board of Trade. The Massachusetts Bay Colony, Plymouth Colony and the Province of Maine were incorporated into the Province of Massachusetts Bay, and New York and the Massachusetts Bay Colony were reorganized as royal colonies, with a governor appointed by the king. Maryland, which had experienced a revolution against the Calvert family, also became a royal colony, though the Calverts retained much of their land and revenue in the colony. Even those colonies that retained their charters or proprietors were forced to assent to much greater royal control than had existed before the 1690s.\nBetween immigration, the importation of slaves, and natural population growth, the colonial population in British North America grew immensely in the 18th century. According to historian Alan Taylor, the population of the Thirteen Colonies (the British North American colonies which would eventually form the United States) stood at 1.5\u00a0million in 1750. More than ninety percent of the colonists lived as farmers, though cities like Philadelphia, New York, and Boston flourished. With the defeat of the Dutch and the imposition of the Navigation Acts, the British colonies in North America became part of the global British trading network. The colonists traded foodstuffs, wood, tobacco, and various other resources for Asian tea, West Indian coffee, and West Indian sugar, among other items. Native Americans far from the Atlantic coast supplied the Atlantic market with beaver fur and deerskins, and sought to preserve their independence by maintaining a balance of power between the French and English. By 1770, the economic output of the Thirteen Colonies made up forty percent of the gross domestic product of the British Empire.\nPrior to 1660, almost all immigrants to the English colonies of North America had migrated freely, though most paid for their passage by becoming indentured servants. Improved economic conditions and an easing of religious persecution in Europe made it increasingly difficult to recruit labor to the colonies in the 17th and 18th centuries. Partly due to this shortage of free labor, the population of slaves in British North America grew dramatically between 1680 and 1750; the growth was driven by a mixture of forced immigration and the reproduction of slaves. In the Southern Colonies, which relied most heavily on slave labor, the slaves supported vast plantation economies lorded over by increasingly wealthy elites. By 1775, slaves made up one-fifth of the population of the Thirteen Colonies but less than ten percent of the population of the Middle Colonies and New England Colonies. Though a smaller proportion of the English population migrated to British North America after 1700, the colonies attracted new immigrants from other European countries, including Catholic settlers from Ireland and Protestant Germans. As the 18th century progressed, colonists began to settle far from the Atlantic coast. Pennsylvania, Virginia, Connecticut, and Maryland all lay claim to the land in the Ohio River valley, and the colonies engaged in a scramble to expand west.\nFollowing the 1684 revocation of the Somers Isles Company's Royal Charter, seafaring Bermudians established an inter-colonial trade network, with Charleston, South Carolina (settled from Bermuda in 1670 under William Sayle, and on the same latitude as Bermuda, although Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, is the nearest landfall to Bermuda) forming a continental hub for their trade (Bermuda itself produced only ships and seamen). The widespread activities and settlement of Bermudians has resulted in many localities named after Bermuda dotting the map of North America.\nConflicts with the French and Spanish.\nThe Glorious Revolution and the succession of William III, who had long resisted French hegemony as the Stadtholder of the Dutch Republic, ensured that England and its colonies would come into conflict with the French empire of Louis XIV after 1689. Under the leadership of Samuel de Champlain, the French had established Quebec City on the St Lawrence River in 1608, and it became the center of French colony of Canada. France and England engaged in a proxy war via Native American allies during and after the Nine Years' War, while the powerful Iroquois declared their neutrality. War between France and England continued in Queen Anne's War, the North American component of the larger War of the Spanish Succession. In the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht, which ended the War of Spanish Succession, the British won possession of the French territories of Newfoundland and Acadia, the latter of which was renamed Nova Scotia. In the 1730s, James Oglethorpe proposed that the area south of the Carolinas be colonized to provide a buffer against Spanish Florida, and he was part of a group of trustees that were granted temporary proprietorship over the Province of Georgia. Oglethorpe and his compatriots hoped to establish a utopian colony that banned slavery, but by 1750 the colony remained sparsely populated, and Georgia became a crown colony in 1752.\nIn 1754, the Ohio Company started to build a fort at the confluence of the Allegheny River and the Monongahela River. A larger French force initially chased the Virginians away, but was forced to retreat after the Battle of Jumonville Glen. After reports of the battle reached the French and British capitals, the Seven Years' War broke out in 1756; the North American component of this war is known as the French and Indian War. After the Duke of Newcastle returned to power as Prime Minister in 1757, he and his foreign minister, William Pitt, devoted unprecedented financial resources to the transoceanic conflict. The British won a series of victories after 1758, conquering much of New France by the end of 1760. Spain entered the war on France's side in 1762 and promptly lost several American territories to Britain. The 1763 Treaty of Paris ended the war, and France surrendered almost all of the portion of New France to the east of the Mississippi River to the British. France separately ceded its lands west of the Mississippi River to Spain, and Spain ceded Florida to Britain. With the newly acquired territories, the British created the provinces of East Florida, West Florida, and Quebec, all of which were placed under military governments. In the Caribbean, Britain retained Grenada, St. Vincent, Dominica, and Tobago, but returned control of Martinique, Havana, and other colonial possessions to France or Spain.\nThe Americans break away, 1763\u20131783.\nThe British subjects of North America believed the unwritten British constitution protected their rights and that the governmental system\u2014with the House of Commons, the House of Lords, and the monarch sharing power\u2014found an ideal balance among democracy, oligarchy, and tyranny. However, the British were saddled with huge debts following the French and Indian War. As much of the British debt had been generated by the defense of the colonies, British leaders felt that the colonies should contribute more funds, and they began imposing taxes such as the Sugar Act 1764. Increased British control of the Thirteen Colonies upset the colonists and upended the notion many colonists held: that they were equal partners in the British Empire. Meanwhile, seeking to avoid another expensive war with Native Americans, Britain issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763, which restricted settlement west of the Appalachian Mountains. However, it was effectively replaced five years later thanks to the Treaty of Fort Stanwix. The Thirteen Colonies became increasingly divided between Patriots, opposed to parliamentary taxation without representation, and Loyalists, who supported the king. In the British colonies nearest to the Thirteen Colonies, however, protests were muted, as most colonists accepted the new taxes. These provinces had smaller populations, were largely dependent on the British military, and had less of a tradition of self-rule.\nAt the Battles of Lexington and Concord in April 1775, the Patriots repulsed a British force charged with seizing militia arsenals. The Second Continental Congress assembled in May 1775 and sought to coordinate armed resistance to Britain. It established an impromptu government that recruited soldiers and printed its own money. Announcing a permanent break with Britain, the delegates adopted a Declaration of Independence on 4\u00a0July 1776 for the United States of America. The French formed a military alliance with the United States in 1778 following the British defeat at the Battle of Saratoga. Spain joined France to regain Gibraltar from Britain. A combined Franco-American operation trapped a British invasion army at Yorktown, Virginia, forcing them to surrender in October 1781. The surrender shocked Britain. The king wanted to keep fighting, but he lost control of Parliament and peace negotiations began. In the 1783 Treaty of Paris, Britain ceded all of its North American territory south of the Great Lakes, except for the two Florida colonies, which were ceded to Spain.\nWith their close ties of blood and trade with the continental colonies, especially Virginia and South Carolina, Bermudians leaned towards the rebels during the American War of Independence, supplying them with privateering ships and gunpowder, but the power of the Royal Navy on the surrounding Atlantic left no possibility of their joining the rebellion, and they eventually availed themselves of the opportunities of privateering against their former kinsmen. Although often mistaken for being in the West Indies, Bermuda is nearer to Canada (and was initially grouped within British North America, retaining close links especially with the Nova Scotia and Newfoundland until the continental colonies were confederated into Canada) than to the West Indies, and the nearest landfall is North Carolina. Following the independence of the United States, this would make Bermuda of supreme importance to Britain's strategic control of the region, including its ability to protect its shipping in the area and its ability to project its power against the Atlantic seaboard of the United States, as was to be shown during the American War of 1812.\nHaving defeated a combined Franco-Spanish naval force at the decisive 1782 Battle of the Saintes, Britain retained control of Gibraltar and all its pre-war Caribbean possessions except for Tobago. Economically, the new nation became a major trading partner of Britain.\nSecond British Empire, 1783\u20131945.\nThe loss of a large portion of British America defined the transition between the \"first\" and \"second\" empires, in which Britain shifted its attention away from the Americas to Asia, the Pacific, and later Africa. Influenced by the ideas of Adam Smith, Britain also shifted away from mercantile ideals and began to prioritize the expansion of trade rather than territorial possessions. During the nineteenth century, some observers described Britain as having an \"unofficial\" empire based on the export of goods and financial investments around the world, including the newly independent republics of Latin America. Though this unofficial empire did not require direct British political control, it often involved the use of gunboat diplomacy and military intervention to protect British investments and ensure the free flow of trade.\nFrom 1793 to 1815, Britain was almost constantly at war, first in the French Revolutionary Wars and then in the Napoleonic Wars. During the wars, Britain took control of many French, Spanish, and Dutch Caribbean colonies. Tensions between Britain and the United States escalated during the Napoleonic Wars, as the United States took advantage of its neutrality to undercut the British embargo on French-controlled ports, and Britain tried to cut off that American trade with France. The Royal Navy, which was desperately short of trained seamen and constantly losing deserters who sought better-paid work under less draconian discipline aboard American merchant vessels, boarded American ships to search for deserters, sometimes resulting in the Impressment of American sailors into the Royal Navy. The United States, at the same time, coveted the acquisition of Canada, which Britain could ill afford to lose as its naval and merchant fleets had been constructed largely from American timber before United States independence, and from Canadian timber thereafter. Taking advantage of Britain's absorption in its war with France, the United States began the American War of 1812 with the invasion of the Canadas, but the British Army mounted a successful defence with minimal regular forces, supported by militia and native allies, while the Royal Navy blockaded the United States of America's Atlantic coastline from Bermuda, strangling its merchant trade, and carried out amphibious raids including the Chesapeake Campaign with its Burning of Washington. As the United States failed to make any gains before British victory against France in 1814 freed British forces from Europe to be wielded against it, and as Britain had no aim in its war with its former colonies other than to defend its remaining continental territory, the war ended with the pre-war boundaries reaffirmed by the 1814 Treaty of Ghent, ensuring Canada's future would be separate from that of the United States.\nFollowing the final defeat of French Emperor Napoleon in 1815, Britain gained ownership of Trinidad, Tobago, British Guiana, and Saint Lucia, as well as other territories outside of the Western Hemisphere. The Treaty of 1818 with the United States set a large portion of the Canada\u2013United States border at the 49th parallel and also established a joint U.S.\u2013British occupation of Oregon Country. In the 1846 Oregon Treaty, the United States and Britain agreed to split Oregon Country along the 49th parallel north with the exception of Vancouver Island, which was assigned in its entirety to Britain.\nAfter warring throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries in both Europe and the Americas, the British and French reached a lasting peace after 1815. Britain would fight only one war (the Crimean War) against a European power during the remainder of the nineteenth century, and that war did not lead to territorial changes in the Americas. However, the British Empire continued to engage in wars such as the First Opium War against China; it also put down rebellions such as the Indian Rebellion of 1857, the Canadian Rebellions of 1837\u20131838, and the Jamaican Morant Bay rebellion of 1865. A strong abolition movement had emerged in the United Kingdom in the late-eighteenth century, and Britain abolished the slave trade in 1807. In the mid-nineteenth century, the economies of the British Caribbean colonies would suffer as a result of the Slavery Abolition Act 1833, which abolished slavery throughout the British Empire, and the 1846 Sugar Duties Act, which ended preferential tariffs for sugar imports from the Caribbean. To replace the labor of former slaves, British plantations on Trinidad and other parts of the Caribbean began to hire indentured servants from India and China.\nEstablishing the Dominion of Canada.\nDespite its defeat in the American Revolutionary War and shift towards a new form of imperialism during the nineteenth century, the British Empire retained numerous colonies in the Americas after 1783. During and after the American Revolutionary War, between 40,000 and 100,000 defeated Loyalists migrated from the United States to Canada. The 14,000 Loyalists who went to the Saint John and Saint Croix river valleys, then part of Nova Scotia, felt too far removed from the provincial government in Halifax, so London split off New Brunswick as a separate colony in 1784. The Constitutional Act 1791 created the provinces of Upper Canada (mainly English-speaking) and Lower Canada (mainly French-speaking) to defuse tensions between the French and British communities, and implemented governmental systems similar to those employed in Britain, with the intention of asserting imperial authority and not allowing the sort of popular control of government that was perceived to have led to the American Revolution.\nThe British also expanded their mercantile interests in the North Pacific. Spain and Britain had become rivals in the area which came to a head with the Nootka Crisis in 1789. Both sides mobilised for war, and Spain counted on France for support but when France refused, Spain had to back down and capitulated to British terms leading to the Nootka Convention. The outcome of the crisis was a humiliation for Spain and a triumph for Britain, for the former had practically renounced all sovereignty on the North Pacific coast. This opened the way to British expansion in that area, and a number of expeditions took place; firstly a naval expedition led by George Vancouver which explored the inlets around the Pacific NorthWest, particularly around Vancouver Island. On land, expeditions took place hoping for a discovery of a practicable river route to the Pacific for the extension of the North American fur trade (the North West Company). Sir Alexander Mackenzie led the first starting out in 1792, and a year a later he became the first European to reach the Pacific overland north of the Rio Grande reaching the ocean near present-day Bella Coola. This preceded the Lewis and Clark Expedition by twelve years. Shortly thereafter, Mackenzie's companion, John Finlay, founded the first permanent European settlement in British Columbia, Fort St. John. The North West Company sought further explorations firstly by David Thompson, starting in 1797, and later by Simon Fraser. More expedition took place in the early 1800s and pushed into the wilderness territories of the Rocky Mountains and Interior Plateau and all the way to the Strait of Georgia on the Pacific Coast expanding British North America Westward.\nIn 1815, Lieutenant-General Sir George Prevost was \"Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief in and over the Provinces of Upper-Canada, Lower-Canada, Nova-Scotia, and New~Brunswick, and their several Dependencies, Vice-Admiral of the same, Lieutenant-General and Commander of all His Majesty's Forces in the said Provinces of Lower Canada and Upper-Canada, Nova-Scotia and New-Brunswick, and their several Dependencies, and in the islands of Newfoundland, Prince Edward, Cape Breton and the Bermudas, &amp;c. &amp;c. &amp;c.\" Beneath Prevost, the staff of the British Army in \"the Provinces of Nova-Scotia, New-Brunswick, and their Dependencies, including the Islands of Newfoundland, Cape Breton, Prince Edward and Bermuda\" were under the Command of Lieutenant-General Sir John Coape Sherbrooke. Below Sherbrooke, the Bermuda Garrison was under the immediate control of the Lieutenant-Governor of Bermuda, Major-General George Horsford (although the Lieutenant-Governor of Bermuda was eventually restored to a full civil Governorship, in his military role as Commander-in-Chief of Bermuda he remained subordinate to the Commander-in-Chief in Halifax, and naval and ecclesiastic links between Bermuda the Maritimes also remained; The military links were severed by Canadian confederation at the end of the 1860s, which resulted in the removal of the British Army from Canada and its Commander-in-Chief from Halifax when the Canadian Government took responsibility for the defence of Canada; The naval links remained until the Royal Navy withdrew from Halifax in 1905, handing its dockyard there over to the Royal Canadian Navy; The established Church of England in Bermuda, within which the Governor held office as Ordinary, remained linked to the colony of Newfoundland under the same Bishop until 1919).\nIn response to the Rebellions of 1837\u20131838, Britain passed the Act of Union in 1840, which united Upper Canada and Lower Canada into the Province of Canada. Responsible government was first granted to Nova Scotia in 1848, and was soon extended to the other British North American colonies. With the passage of the British North America Act, 1867 by the British Parliament, Upper and Lower Canada, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia were formed into the confederation of Canada. Rupert's Land (which was divided into Manitoba and the Northwest Territories), British Columbia, and Prince Edward Island joined Canada by the end of 1873, but Newfoundland would not join Canada until 1949. Like other British dominions such as Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa, Canada enjoyed autonomy over its domestic affairs but recognized the British monarch as head of state and cooperated closely with Britain on defense issues. After the passage of the 1931 Statute of Westminster, Canada and other dominions were fully independent of British legislative control; they could nullify British laws and Britain could no longer pass laws for them without their consent.\nUnited States independence, and the closure of its ports to British trade, combined with growing peace in the region which reduced the risk to shipping (resulting in smaller evasive merchantmen, such as those that Bermudian shipbuilders turned out, losing favour to larger clippers), and the advent of metal hulls and steam engines, were to slowly strangle Bermuda's maritime economy, while its newfound importance as a Royal Navy and British Army base from which the North America and West Indies Station could be controlled meant increasing interest from the British Government in its governance.\nBermuda was grouped with British North America, especially Nova Scotia and Newfoundland (its closest British neighbours), following United States Independence. When war with France followed the French Revolution, a Royal Naval Dockyard was established at Bermuda in 1795, which was to alternate with Royal Naval Dockyard, Halifax (Bermuda during the summers and Halifax during the winters) as the Royal Navy headquarters and main base for the \"River St. Lawrence and Coast of America Station\" (which was to become the \"North America Station\" in 1813, the \"North America and Lakes of Canada Station\" in 1816, the \"North America and Newfoundland Station\" in 1821, the North America and West Indies Station about 1820, and finally the \"America and West Indies Station\" from 1915 to 1956) before becoming the year-round headquarters and main base from about 1818.\nThe regular army garrison (established in 1701 but withdrawn in 1784) was re-established in 1794 and grew during the Nineteenth Century to be one of the British Army's largest, relative to Bermuda's size. The blockade of the Atlantic seaboard ports of the United States and the Chesapeake Campaign (including the Burning of Washington) were orchestrated from Bermuda during the American War of 1812. Preparations for similar operations were carried out in Bermuda when the Trent Affair nearly brought Britain to war with the United States during the American Civil War (Bermuda had already been serving as the primary tran-shipment point for British and European manufactured arms which were smuggled into Confederate ports, especially Charleston, South Carolina, by blockade runners; cotton was brought out from the same ports by the blockade runners to be traded at Bermuda for the war materiel), and Bermuda played important roles (as a naval base, trans-Atlantic convoy forming-up point, as a connecting point in the Cable and Wireless Nova Scotia-to-British West Indies submarine telegraph cable, as a wireless station, and from the 1930s as a site for airbases used as a staging point for trans-Atlantic flights and for operating anti-submarine air patrols over the North Atlantic) in the Atlantic theatre of the First World War and in the Battle of the Atlantic during the Second World War, when the already existing Royal Navy, British Army, and Royal Air Force bases were joined by a Royal Canadian Navy base and naval and air bases of the allied United States. It remained a vital air and naval base during the Cold War, with American and Canadian bases existing alongside the British ones from the Second World War until 1995.\nBritish Honduras and Falkland Islands.\nIn the early 17th century, English sailors had begun cutting logwood in parts of coastal Central America over which the Spanish exercised little control. By the early 18th century, a small British settlement had been established on the Belize River, though the Spanish refused to recognize British control over the region and frequently evicted British settlers. In the 1783 Treaty of Paris and the 1786 Convention of London, Spain gave Britain the right to cut logwood and mahogany in the area between the Hondo River and the Belize River, but Spain retained sovereignty over this area. Following the 1850 Clayton\u2013Bulwer Treaty with the United States, Britain agreed to evacuate its settlers from the Bay Islands and the Mosquito Coast, but it retained control of the settlement on the Belize River. In 1862, Britain established the crown colony of the British Honduras at this location.\nThe British first established a presence on the Falkland Islands in 1765 but were compelled to withdraw for economic reasons related to the American War of Independence in 1774. The islands continued to be used by British sealers and whalers, although the settlement of Port Egmont was destroyed by the Spanish in 1780. Argentina attempted to establish a colony in the ruins of the former Spanish settlement of Puerto Soledad, which ended with the British return in 1833. The British governed the uninhabited South Georgia Island, which had been claimed by Captain James Cook in 1775, as a dependency of the Falkland Islands.\nDecolonization and overseas territories, 1945\u2013present.\nSuccessful independence movements.\nWith the onset of the Cold War in the late 1940s, the British government began to assemble plans for the independence of the empire's colonies in Africa, Asia, and the Americas. British authorities initially planned for a three-decades-long process in which each colony would develop a self-governing and democratic parliament, but unrest and fears of Communist infiltration in the colonies encouraged the British to speed up the move towards self-governance. Compared to other European empires, which experienced wars of independence such as the Algerian War and the Portuguese Colonial War, the British post-war process of decolonization in the Caribbean was relatively peaceful.\nIn an attempt to unite its Caribbean colonies, Britain established the West Indies Federation in 1958. The federation collapsed following the loss of its two largest members, Jamaica and Trinidad, each of which attained independence in 1962; Trinidad formed a union with Tobago to become the country of Trinidad and Tobago. The eastern Caribbean islands, as well as the Bahamas, gained independence in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s. Guyana achieved independence in 1966. Britain's last colony on the American mainland, British Honduras, became a self-governing colony in 1964 and was renamed Belize in 1973, achieving full independence in 1981. A dispute with Guatemala over claims to Belize was left unresolved.\nRemaining territories.\nThough many of the Caribbean territories of the British Empire gained independence, Anguilla and the Turks and Caicos Islands opted to revert to British rule after they had already started on the path to independence. The British Virgin Islands, Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat, and the Falkland Islands also remain under the jurisdiction of Britain. In 1982, Britain defeated Argentina in the Falklands War, an undeclared war in which Argentina attempted to seize control of the Falkland Islands. In 1983, the British Nationality Act 1981 renamed the existing British colonies as \"British dependent territories\".\nHistorically, colonials shared the same citizenship (although Magna Carta had effectively created English citizenship, citizens were still termed \"subjects of the King of England\" or \"English subjects\". With the union of the kingdoms of England and Scotland, this was replaced with \"British subject\", which encompassed citizens throughout the sovereign territory of the British government, including the colonies) as Britons. Although historically all British subjects had the right to vote for candidates, or to themselves stand for election, to the House of Commons (providing that they were male, prior to women's suffrage, and met the property qualification, when it applied). The British government (as with the Government of the Kingdom of England before it) has never assigned seats in the House of Commons to any colony, effectively disenfranchising colonials at the sovereign level of their government. There has also never been a peer in the House of Lords representing any colony. Colonials were therefore not consulted, or required to give their consent, to a series of acts that passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom between 1968 and 1982, which were to limit their rights and ultimately change their citizenship.\nWhen several colonies were elevated before the Second World War to dominion status, collectively forming the old British Commonwealth (as distinct from the United Kingdom and its dependent colonies), their citizens remained British subjects, and in theory, any British subject born anywhere in the world had the same basic right to enter, reside, and work in the United Kingdom as a British subject born in the United Kingdom whose parents were also both British subjects born in the United Kingdom (although many governmental policies and practices acted to thwart the free exercise of these right by various demographic groups of colonials, including Greek Cypriots).\nWhen the dominions and an increasing number of colonies began choosing complete independence from the United Kingdom after the Second World War, the Commonwealth was transformed into a community of independent nations, each recognising the British monarch as their own head of state (creating separate monarchies with the same person occupying all of the separate Thrones; the exception being republican India). \"British subject\" was replaced by the British Nationality Act 1948 with \"citizen of the United Kingdom and colonies\" for the residents of the United Kingdom and its colonies, as well as the Crown dependencies. however, as it was desired to retain free movement for all Commonwealth citizens throughout the Commonwealth, \"British subject\" was retained as a blanket nationality shared by citizens of the United Kingdom and colonies as well as the citizens of the various other Commonwealth realms.\nThe inflow of coloured people to the United Kingdom during the 1940s and 1950s from both remaining colonies and newly independent Commonwealth nations was responded to with a racist backlash that led to the passing of the Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1962, which restricted the rights of Commonwealth nationals to enter, reside and work in the United Kingdom. This act also allowed certain colonials (primarily ethnic Indians in African colonies) to retain citizenship of the United Kingdom and colonies if their colonies became independent, intended as a measure to ensure these persons did not become stateless if they were denied the citizenship of their newly independent nation.\nMany ethnic-Indians did find themselves marginalised in newly independent nations (notably Kenya) and relocated to the United Kingdom, in response to which the Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968 was rapidly passed, stripping all British subjects (including citizens of the United Kingdom and colonies) who were not born in the United Kingdom, and who did not have a citizen of the United Kingdom and colonies parent born in the United Kingdom or some other qualification (such as existing residence status), of the rights to freely enter, reside and work in the United Kingdom.\nThis was followed by the Immigration Act 1971, which effectively divided \"citizens of the United Kingdom and colonies\" into two types, although their citizenship remained the same: Those from the United Kingdom itself, who retained the rights of free entry, abode, and work in the United Kingdom; and those born in the colonies (or in foreign countries to British colonial parents), from whom those rights were denied.\nThe British Nationality Act 1981, which entered into force on 1 January 1983, abolished \"British subject\" status, and stripped colonials of their full British \"citizen of the United Kingdom and colonies\", replacing it with \"British dependent territories citizenship\", which entailed no right of abode or to work anywhere (other categories with even fewer rights were created at the same time, including British overseas citizen for former citizens of the United Kingdom and colonies born in ex-colonies).\nThe exceptions were the Gibraltarians (permitted to retain British nationality to retain citizenship of the European Union) and the Falkland Islanders, who were permitted to retain the same new \"British citizenship\" that became the default citizenship for those from the United Kingdom and the Crown dependencies. As the act was widely understood to have been passed in preparation for the 1997 handover of Hong Kong to the People's Republic of China (to prevent ethnic-Chinese British nationals from migrating to the United Kingdom), and given the history of neglect and racism those colonies with sizeable \"non-European\" (to use the British government's parlance) populations had endured from the British government since the \"end of Empire\", the application of the act only to those colonies in which the citizenship was changed to \"British dependent territories citizenship\" has been perceived as a particularly egregious example of the racism of the British government.\nThe stripping of birth rights from at least some of the colonial CUKCs in 1968 and 1971, and the change of their citizenships in 1983, actually violated the rights granted them by royal charters at the founding of the colonies. Bermuda (fully \"The Somers Isles or Islands of Bermuda\"), by example, had been settled by the London Company (which had been in occupation of the archipelago since the 1609 wreck of the \"Sea Venture\") in 1612, when it received its Third Royal Charter from King James I, amending the boundaries of the First Colony of Virginia far enough across the Atlantic to include Bermuda. The citizenship rights guaranteed to settlers by King James I in the original royal charter of the 10 April 1606, thereby applied to Bermudians:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Alsoe wee doe, for us, our heires and successors, declare by theise presentes that all and everie the parsons being our subjects which shall dwell and inhabit within everie or anie of the saide severall Colonies and plantacions and everie of theire children which shall happen to be borne within the limitts and precincts of the said severall Colonies and plantacions shall have and enjoy all liberties, franchises and immunites within anie of our other dominions to all intents and purposes as if they had been abiding and borne within this our realme of Englande or anie other of our saide dominions\".\nThese rights were confirmed in the royal charter granted to the London Company's spin-off, the Company of the City of London for the Plantacion of The Somers Isles, in 1615 on Bermuda being separated from Virginia:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And wee doe for vs our heires and successors declare by these Pnts, that all and euery persons being our subjects which shall goe and inhabite wthin the said Somer Ilandes and every of their children and posterity which shall happen to bee borne within the limits thereof shall haue and enjoy all libertyes franchesies and immunities of free denizens and natural subjectes within any of our dominions to all intents and purposes, as if they had beene abiding and borne wthin this our Kingdome of England or in any other of our Dominions\nIn regards to former CUKCs of Saint Helena, Lord Beaumont of Whitley in the House of Lords debate on the \"British Overseas Territories Bill\" on the 10 July 2001, stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Citizenship was granted irrevocably by Charles I. It was taken away, quite wrongly, by Parliament in surrender to the largely racist opposition to immigration at the time.\nSome Conservative Party backbenchers stated that it was the unpublished intention of the Conservative British government to return to a single citizenship for the United Kingdom and all of the remaining territories once Hong Kong had been handed over to China. Whether this was so will never be known as by 1997 the Labour Party was in government. The Labour Party had declared prior to the election that the colonies had been ill-treated by the British Nationality Act 1981, and it had made a promise to return to a single citizenship for the United Kingdom and the remaining territories part of its election manifesto. Other matters took precedence, however, and this commitment was not acted upon during Labour's first term in government. The House of Lords, in which many former colonial governors sat, lost patience and tabled and passed its own bill, then handed it down to the House of Commons to confirm. As a result, the British dependent territories were renamed the British overseas territories in 2002 (the term \"dependent territory\" had caused much ire in the former colonies, such as well-heeled Bermuda that had been largely self-reliant and self-governed for nearly four centuries, as it implied not only that they were \"other than British\", but that their relationship to Britain and to \"real British people\" was both inferior and parasitic).\nAt the same time, although Labour had promised a return to a single citizenship for the United Kingdom, Crown dependencies, and all remaining territories, \"British dependent territories citizenship\", renamed \"British overseas territories citizenship\", remained the default citizenship for the territories, other than the Falkland Islands and Gibraltar (for which \"British citizenship\" is still the default citizenship). The bars to residence and work in the United Kingdom that had been raised against holders of \"British dependent territories citizenship\" by The British Nationality Act 1981 were, however, removed, and \"British citizenship\" was made attainable by simply obtaining a second British passport with the citizenship recorded as \"British citizen\" (requiring a change to passport legislation as prior to 2002, it had been illegal to possess two British passports).\nPrior to 2002, all British passports obtained in a British dependent territory were of a design modified from those issued in the United Kingdom, lacking the \"European Union\" name on the front cover, having the name of the specific territorial government noted on the front cover below \"British passport\", and having the request on the inside of the front cover normally issued by the secretary of state on behalf of the Queen instead issued by the governor of the territory on behalf of the Queen. Although this design made it easier for United Kingdom Border Control to distinguish a colonial from a 'real' British citizen, these passports were issued within the territory to the holder of any type of British citizenship with the appropriate citizenship stamped inside. The \"normal\" British passports issued in the United Kingdom and by British consulates in Commonwealth and foreign countries were similarly issued to holders of any type of British citizenship with the appropriate citizenship, or \"citizenships\", stamped inside. From 2002, the thenceforth local governments of the British overseas territories in which British overseas territories citizenship was the default citizenship were no longer allowed to issue or replace any British passport except the type for their own territory only with British overseas territories citizen recorded inside (and a stamp from the local government showing the holder has legal status as a local (in Bermuda, by example, the stamp records \"the holder is registered as a Bermudian\"), as neither British dependent territories citizenship nor British overseas territories citizenship actually entitles the holder to any more rights in any territory than in the United Kingdom, simply serving to enable colonials to be distinguished from \"real British people\" for the benefit of United Kingdom Border Control.\nSince 2002, only the United Kingdom Government has issued \"normal\" British passports with the citizenship stamped as \"British citizen\". Since June 2016, only the Passport Office in the United Kingdom is permitted to issue any type of British passport. Local governments of territories can still accept passport applications, but must forward them to the Passport Office. This means that the territorial pattern of British passport is no longer available, with all passports issued since then being of the standard type issued in the United Kingdom, with the appropriate type of British citizenship recorded inside; a problem for Bermudians as they have always enjoyed freer entry into the United States than other British citizens, but the United States had updated its entry requirements (prior to the 2001 terrorist attacks on New York City and Washington, D.C., Bermudians did not need a passport to enter the US, and Americans did not need a passport to enter Bermuda. Since then, anyone entering the US, including US citizens, must present a passport) to specify that, to be admitted as a Bermudian the passport must be of the territorial type specific to Bermuda, with the country code inside being that used for Bermuda as distinct from other parts of the British Realm, with the citizenship stamped as \"British dependent territories citizenship\" or \"British overseas territories citizenship\", and the stamp from Bermuda Immigration showing the holder has Bermudian status. From the point of view of Bermuda Immigration, only the stamp showing the holder has Bermudian status indicates the holder is Bermudian, and that can be entered into any type of British passport with any type of British citizenship recorded, so the United States requirements are more stringent than Bermuda's, and impossible to meet with any British passport issued to a Bermudian since the end of June 2016.\nThe eleven inhabited territories are self-governing to varying degrees and are reliant on the UK for foreign relations and defence. Most former British colonies and protectorates are among the 52 member states of the Commonwealth of Nations, a non-political, voluntary association of equal members, comprising a population of around 2.2\u00a0billion people. Fifteen Commonwealth realms, including Canada and several countries in the Caribbean, voluntarily continue to share the British monarch, King Charles III, as their head of state.\nList of colonies.\nFormer North American colonies.\nCanadian territories.\nThese colonies and territories (known, together with Bermuda, as British North America following independence of the United States of America) were confederated to form modern Canada between 1867 and 1873 unless otherwise noted:\n*British Columbia (previously part of Oregon Country before its 1846 division between Britain and the United States)\n*Province of Canada (formed from the merger of Upper Canada and Lower Canada in 1841)\n*Nova Scotia\n*New Brunswick\n*Dominion of Newfoundland (became part of Canada in 1949)\n*Prince Edward Island\n*Rupert's Land (became part of Canada as Manitoba and the Northwest Territories)\nThirteen Colonies.\nThe Thirteen Colonies, which became the original states of the United States following the 1781 ratification of the Articles of Confederation:\n*Province of Massachusetts Bay\n*Province of New Hampshire\n*Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations\n*Connecticut Colony\n*Province of New York\n*Province of New Jersey\n*Province of Pennsylvania\n*Delaware Colony\n*Province of Maryland\n*Colony of Virginia\n*Province of North Carolina\n*Province of South Carolina\n*Province of Georgia\nOther North American colonies.\nThese colonies were acquired in 1763 and ceded to Spain in 1783:\n*Province of East Florida (from Spain, retroceded to Spain)\n*Province of West Florida (from France as part of eastern French Louisiana, ceded to Spain)\nFormer colonies in the Caribbean and South America.\nThese present-day countries formed part of the British West Indies prior to gaining independence during the 20th century:\n*Antigua and Barbuda (gained independence in 1981)\n*The Bahamas (gained independence in 1973)\n*Barbados (gained independence in 1966)\n*Belize (gained independence in 1981; formerly known as British Honduras)\n*Dominica (gained independence in 1978)\n*Grenada (gained independence in 1974)\n*Guyana (gained independence in 1966; formerly known as British Guiana)\n*Jamaica (gained independence in 1962)\n*Saint Kitts and Nevis (gained independence in 1983)\n*Saint Lucia (gained independence in 1979)\n*Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (gained independence in 1979)\n*Trinidad and Tobago (gained independence in 1962)\nCurrent territories.\nThese British Overseas Territories in the Americas remain under the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom:\n*Anguilla\n*Bermuda\n*British Virgin Islands\n*Cayman Islands\n*Falkland Islands\n*Montserrat\n*Turks and Caicos Islands\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52508", "revid": "599562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52508", "title": "Gwynedd", "text": "County in Wales\nGwynedd () is a county in the north-west of Wales. It borders Anglesey across the Menai Strait to the north, Conwy, Denbighshire, and Powys to the east, Ceredigion over the Dyfi estuary to the south, and the Irish Sea to the west. The city of Bangor is the largest settlement, and the administrative centre is Caernarfon. The preserved county of Gwynedd, which is used for ceremonial purposes, includes the Isle of Anglesey.\nGwynedd is the second largest county in Wales but sparsely populated, with an area of and a population of 117,400. After Bangor (18,322), the largest settlements are Caernarfon (9,852), Bethesda (4,735), and Pwllheli (4,076). The county has the highest percentage of Welsh speakers in Wales, at 64.4%, and is considered a heartland of the language.\nThe geography of Gwynedd is mountainous, with a long coastline to the west. The county contains much of Snowdonia (), a national park which contains Wales's highest mountain, Snowdon (; ). To the west, the Ll\u0177n Peninsula is flatter and renowned for its scenic coastline, part of which is protected by the Ll\u0177n AONB. Gwynedd also contains several of Wales's largest lakes and reservoirs, including the largest, Bala Lake ().\nThe area which is now the county has played a prominent part in the history of Wales. It formed part of the core of the Kingdom of Gwynedd and the native Principality of Wales, which under the House of Aberffraw remained independent from the Kingdom of England until Edward I's conquest between 1277 and 1283. Edward built the castles at Caernarfon and Harlech, which form part of the Castles and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd World Heritage Site. During the Industrial Revolution the slate industry rapidly developed; in the late nineteenth century the neighbouring Penrhyn and Dinorwic quarries were the largest in the world, and the Slate Landscape of Northwest Wales is now a World Heritage Site. Gwynedd covers the majority of the historic counties of Caernarfonshire and Merionethshire.\nToponymy.\nIn the past, historians such as J. E. Lloyd assumed that the Celtic source of the word \"Gwynedd\" meant 'collection of tribes' \u2013 the same root as the Irish , meaning 'tribe'. Further, a connection is recognised between the name and the Irish , an early ethnonym for the Irish themselves, related to , 'company of hunting and fighting men, company of warriors under a leader'. Perhaps ('strive, hope, wish') is the Indo-European stem. The Irish settled in NW Wales, and in Dyfed, at the end of the Roman era. was the Latin form, and in Penmachno there is a memorial stone from c.\u2009AD 500 which reads: ('Here lies Cantiorix, citizen of Gwynedd'). The name was retained by the Brythons when the kingdom of Gwynedd was formed in the 5th century, and it remained until the invasion of Edward I. This historical name was revived when the new county was formed in 1974.\nHistory.\nGwynedd was an independent kingdom from the end of the Roman period until the 13th century, when it was conquered by England. The modern Gwynedd was one of eight Welsh counties created on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972. It covered the entirety of the historic counties of Anglesey and Caernarfonshire, and all of Merionethshire apart from Edeirnion Rural District (which went to Clwyd); and also a few parishes of Denbighshire: Llanrwst, Llansanffraid Glan Conwy, Eglwysbach, Llanddoged, Llanrwst and Tir Ifan.\nThe county was divided into five districts: Aberconwy, Arfon, Dwyfor, Meirionnydd and Anglesey.\nThe Local Government (Wales) Act 1994 abolished the 1974 county (and the five districts) on 1 April 1996, and its area was divided: the Isle of Anglesey became an independent unitary authority, and Aberconwy (which included the former Denbighshire parishes) passed to the new Conwy County Borough. The remainder of the county was constituted as a principal area, with the name \"Caernarfonshire and Merionethshire\", as it covers most of the areas of those two historic counties. As one of its first actions, the Council renamed itself \"Gwynedd\" on 2 April 1996. The present Gwynedd local government area is governed by Gwynedd Council. As a unitary authority, the modern entity no longer has any districts, but Arfon, Dwyfor and Meirionnydd remain as area committees.\nThe pre-1996 boundaries were retained as a preserved county for a few purposes such as the Lieutenancy. In 2003, the boundary with Clwyd was adjusted to match the modern local government boundary, so that the preserved county now covers the two local government areas of Gwynedd and Anglesey. Conwy county borough is now entirely within Clwyd.\nA Gwynedd Constabulary was formed in 1950 by the merger of the Anglesey, Caernarfonshire and Merionethshire forces. A further amalgamation took place in the 1960s when Gwynedd Constabulary was merged with the Flintshire and Denbighshire county forces, retaining the name Gwynedd. In one proposal for local government reform in Wales, Gwynedd had been proposed as a name for a local authority covering all of north Wales, but the scheme as enacted divided this area between Gwynedd and Clwyd. To prevent confusion, the Gwynedd Constabulary was therefore renamed the North Wales Police.\nThe Snowdonia National Park was formed in 1951. After the 1974 local authority reorganisation, the park fell entirely within the boundaries of Gwynedd, and was run as a department of Gwynedd County Council. After the 1996 local government reorganisation, part of the park fell under Conwy County Borough, and the park's administration separated from the Gwynedd council. Gwynedd Council still appoints nine of the eighteen members of the Snowdonia National Park Authority; Conwy County Borough Council appoints three; and the Welsh Government appoints the remaining six.\nThere has been considerable inwards migration to Gwynedd, particularly from England. According to the 2021 census, 66.6% of residents had been born in Wales whilst 27.1% were born in England.\nEconomy.\nThe county has a mixed economy. An important part of the economy is based on tourism: many visitors are attracted by the many beaches and the mountains. A significant part of the county lies within the Snowdonia National Park, which extends from the north coast down to the district of Meirionnydd in the south. But tourism provides seasonal employment and thus there is a shortage of jobs in the winter.\nAgriculture is less important than in the past, especially in terms of the number of people who earn their living on the land, but it remains an important element of the economy.\nThe most important of the traditional industries is the slate industry, but these days only a small percentage of workers earn their living in the slate quarries.\nIndustries which have developed more recently include TV and sound studios: the record company Sain has its HQ in the county.\nThe education sector is also very important for the local economy, including Bangor University and Further Education colleges, and , both now part of .\nWelsh speakers.\nGwynedd has the highest proportion of people in Wales who can speak Welsh. According to the 2021 census, 64.4% of the population aged three and over stated that they could speak Welsh, while 64.4% noted that they could speak Welsh in the 2011 census.\nIt is estimated that 83% of the county's Welsh-speakers are fluent, the highest percentage of all counties in Wales. The age group with the highest proportion of Welsh speakers in Gwynedd were those between ages 5 and 15, of whom 92.3% stated that they could speak Welsh in 2011.\nThe proportion of Welsh speakers in Gwynedd declined between 1991 and 2001, from 72.1% to 68.7%, even though the proportion of Welsh speakers in Wales as a whole increased during that decade to 20.5%.\nThe Annual Population Survey estimated that as of March 2023, 77.0% of those in Gwynedd aged three years and above could speak Welsh.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52509", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52509", "title": "Nobel Prize for Peace", "text": ""}
{"id": "52510", "revid": "6575218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52510", "title": "Mores", "text": "Customary behaviour\nMores (, sometimes ; from la , plural form of singular , meaning \"manner, custom, usage, or habit\") are social norms that are widely observed within a particular society or culture. Mores determine what is considered morally acceptable or unacceptable within any given culture. A folkway is what is created through interaction and that process is what organizes interactions through routine, repetition, habit and consistency.\nWilliam Graham Sumner (1840\u20131910), an early U.S. sociologist, introduced both the terms \"mores\" (1898)\nand \"folkways\" (1906) into modern sociology.\nMores are strict in the sense that they determine the difference between right and wrong in a given society, and people may be punished for their immorality which is common place in many societies in the world, at times with disapproval or ostracizing. Examples of mores include traditional prohibitions on lying, cheating, causing harm, alcohol use, drug use, marriage beliefs, gossip, slander, jealousy, disgracing or disrespecting parents, refusal to attend a funeral, politically incorrect humor, sports cheating, vandalism, leaving trash, plagiarism, bribery, corruption, saving face, respecting your elders, religious prescriptions and fiduciary responsibility.\nFolkways are ways of thinking, acting and behaving in social groups which are agreed upon by the masses and are useful for the ordering of society. Folkways are spread through imitation, oral means or observation, and are meant to encompass the material, spiritual and verbal aspects of culture. Folkways meet the problems of social life; we feel security and order from their acceptance and application. Examples of folkways include: acceptable dress, manners, social etiquette, body language, posture, level of privacy, working hours and five day work week, acceptability of social drinking\u2014abstaining or not from drinking during certain working hours, actions and behaviours in public places, school, university, business and religious institution, ceremonial situations, ritual, customary services and keeping personal space.\nTerminology.\nThe English word morality comes from the same Latin root \"m\u014dr\u0113s\", as does the English noun \"moral\". However, mores do not, as is commonly supposed, necessarily carry connotations of morality. Rather, morality can be seen as a subset of mores, held to be of central importance in view of their content, and often formalized into some kind of moral code or even into customary law. Etymological derivations include \"More danico\", \"More judaico\", \"More veneto\", \"Coitus more ferarum\", and \"O tempora, o mores!\".\nThe Greek terms equivalent to Latin \"mores\" are \"ethos\" (\u1f14\u03b8\u03bf\u03c2, \u1f26\u03b8\u03bf\u03c2, 'character') or \"nomos\" (\u03bd\u03cc\u03bc\u03bf\u03c2, 'law'). As with the relation of \"mores\" to \"morality\", \"ethos\" is the basis of the term \"ethics\", while \"nomos\" gives the suffix \"-onomy\", as in astronomy.\nAnthropology.\nThe meaning of all these terms extend to all customs of proper behavior in a given society, both religious and profane, from more trivial conventional aspects of custom, etiquette or politeness\u2014\"folkways\" enforced by gentle social pressure, but going beyond mere \"folkways\" or conventions in including moral codes and notions of justice\u2014down to strict taboos, behavior that is unthinkable within the society in question, very commonly including incest and murder, but also the commitment of outrages specific to the individual society such as blasphemy. Such religious or sacral customs may vary. Some examples include funerary services, matrimonial services; circumcision and covering of the hair in Judaism, Christian Ten Commandments, New Commandment and the sacraments or for example baptism, and Protestant work ethic, Shahada, prayer, alms, the fast and the pilgrimage as well as modesty in Islam, and religious diet.\nWhile cultural universals are by definition part of the \"mores\" of every society (hence also called \"empty universals\"), the customary norms specific to a given society are a defining aspect of the cultural identity of an ethnicity or a nation. Coping with the differences between two sets of cultural conventions is a question of intercultural competence.\nDifferences in the \"mores\" of various nations are at the root of ethnic stereotype, or in the case of reflection upon one's own \"mores\", autostereotypes.\nThe customary norms in a given society may include indigenous land rights, honour, filial piety, customary law and the customary international law that affects countries who may not have codified their customary norms. Land rights of indigenous peoples is under customary land tenure, its a system of arrangement in-line with customs and norms. This is the case in colonies. An example of a norm is a culture of honor exists in some societies, where the family is viewed as the main source of honor and the conduct of family members reflects upon their family honor. For instance some writers say in Rome to have an honorable stance, to be equals with someone, existed for those who are most similar to one another (family and friends) this could be due to the competing for public recognition and therefore for personal and public honor, over rhetoric, sport, war, wealth and virtue. To protrude, stand out, be recognized and demonstrate this \"A Roman could win such a \"competition\" by pointing to past evidences of their honor\" and \"Or, a critic might be refuted by one's performance in a fresh showdown in which one's bona fides could be plainly demonstrated.\" Honor culture only can exist if the society has for males the shared code, a standard to uphold, guidelines and rules to follow, do not want to break those rules and how to interact successfully and to engage, this exists within a \"closed\" community of equals.\nFilial piety is ethics towards one's family, as Fung Yu-lan states \"the ideological basis for traditional [Chinese] society\" and according to Confucious repay a burden debt back to ones parents or caregiver but its also traditional in another sense so as to fulfill an obligation to ones own ancestors, also to modern scholars it suggests extends an attitude of respect to superiors also, who are deserving to have that respect.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52512", "revid": "4604963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52512", "title": "Record industry", "text": ""}
{"id": "52515", "revid": "89293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52515", "title": "Recording industry", "text": ""}
{"id": "52517", "revid": "49369052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52517", "title": "Ulrike Meinhof", "text": "German left-wing militant (1934\u20131976)\nUlrike Marie Meinhof (7 October 1934 \u2013 9 May 1976) was a\u00a0German left-wing militant, journalist and founding member of the Red Army Faction (RAF) in West Germany, commonly referred to in the press as the \"Baader-Meinhof gang\". She is the reputed author of \"The Urban Guerilla Concept\" (1971). The manifesto acknowledges the RAF's \"roots in the history of the student movement\"; condemns \"reformism\" as \"a\u00a0brake on the anti-capitalist struggle\"; and invokes Mao Zedong to define \"armed struggle\" as \"the highest form of Marxism-Leninism\".\nMeinhof, who took part in the RAF's \"May Offensive\" in 1972, was arrested that June and spent the rest of her life in custody, largely isolated from outside contact. In November 1974, she was sentenced to 8\u00a0years in prison for complicity in a\u00a0near-fatal shooting in what had been her first RAF operation, the successful jailbreak of Andreas Baader in 1970.\nFrom 1975, with Baader and two other RAF leaders, Gudrun Ensslin and Jan-Carl Raspe, she stood trial on further charges of murder and attempted murder. Before the end of the trial, she was found hanged in her cell in the Stammheim Prison. The official finding of suicide sparked controversy, with her sister, Wienke Zitzlaff, stating that Meinhof had told her only days before her death: \"You can stand up and fight only while you are alive. If they say I committed suicide, be sure that it was murder.\"\nOne year later, on 7 April 1977, two members of the RAF assassinated the Federal Attorney-General Siegfried Buback as revenge.\nEarly life.\nMeinhof was born in 1934 in Oldenburg. Her father Werner Meinhof, a curator of Jena Museum, died of cancer in 1940, causing her mother to take in a boarder, Renate Riemeck, to make money. In 1946, the family moved back to Oldenburg after Jena fell under Soviet occupation as a result of the Yalta agreement. Meinhof's mother, Ingeborg Meinhof, an art historian, began to work as a teacher and died from cancer in 1949. Riemeck took on the role of guardian of Meinhof and her elder sister, Wienke.\nStudent activist 1950s.\nIn 1952, Meinhof took her \"Abitur\" at a school in Weilburg. She then studied philosophy, sociology, education and German at Marburg, where she became involved with reform movements. In 1957, she transferred to the University of M\u00fcnster, where she met the Spanish Marxist intellectual Manuel Sacrist\u00e1n (who later translated and edited some of her writings), joined the \"Sozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund\" (SDS), the German Socialist Student Union. She participated in protests against the Bundeswehr and the proposal of Konrad Adenauer's government to deploy nuclear weapons. Despite her involvement, Meinhof was critical of the SDS leaders' subconscious misogyny and the organisation's marginalisation of female members. Meinhof eventually became the spokeswoman of the local \"Anti-Atomtod-Ausschuss\" (Anti Atomic-Death Committee). In 1958, she spent a short time on the AStA (German: \"Allgemeiner Studierendenausschuss\", or General Committee of Students) of the university and wrote articles for various student newspapers.\n\"Konkret\" and protest in the 1960s.\nIn 1959, Meinhof joined the banned Communist Party of Germany (KPD) and later began working at the magazine \"konkret\", a monthly which, until 1964, had clandestine financing from the East German government. \"Konkret\" was widely read by student activists and progressive intellectuals, and as its chief editor from 1962 to 1964, Meinhof was able to elicit contributions from established journalists and authors.\nOn 2 June 1967, Meinhof's exposure in \"konkret\" of German complicity in supporting the Pahlavi dynasty helped rally students to a demonstration in West Berlin against the visit of the Shah of Iran. When Iranian counter-demonstrators, including agents of the Shah's intelligence service, attacked the students, the police joined the affray beating the demonstrators into a side street where an officer shot and killed the student protester Benno Ohnesorg The leading \"Stern\" columnist, Sebastian Haffner whom Meinhof had befriended, took to \"konkret\" to suggest \"with the [anti-] Student pogrom of 2 June 1967 fascism in West Berlin had thrown off its mask\".\nIn February 1968, Meinhof was a participant in the International Vietnam Conference in West Berlin, which the authorities had permitted only in the face of large-scale protests. She was co-signatory, along with intellectuals including Ernst Bloch, Noam Chomsky, Eric Hobsbawn, Ernest Mandel, and Jean Paul Sartre, of the final declaration. This defined the U.S. intervention in Vietnam as \"the Spain of our generation\" and called for mobilisation against the \"extermination\" (\"Vernichtung\") of the Vietnamese people.\nMarriage to Klaus Rainer R\u00f6hl.\nIn 1961, Meinhof married the co-founder and publisher of \"konkret\", Klaus Rainer R\u00f6hl. Their marriage produced twins, Regine and Bettina, born on 21 September 1962. Meinhof and R\u00f6hl separated in 1967 and divorced a year later.\nBenign brain tumor surgically removed.\nIn 1962, Meinhof had a benign brain tumor surgically removed; the 1976 autopsy showed that remnants of the tumor and surgical scar tissue impinged on her amygdala.\nEstablishment of the Red Army Faction.\nThe attempted assassination of SDS leader Rudi Dutschke on 11 April 1968 provoked Meinhof to write an article in \"konkret\" demonstrating her increasingly militant attitude and containing perhaps her best-known quote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Protest is when I say this does not please me.\nResistance is when I ensure what does not please me occurs no more.&lt;/poem&gt;\nLater that year, her writings on arson attacks in Frankfurt as protests against the Vietnam War resulted in her developing an acquaintance with the perpetrators, most significantly Andreas Baader and Gudrun Ensslin. She stopped writing for \"konkret\" which had in her opinion evolved into a completely commercial magazine in the early part of 1969, and many other authors followed her. She stated that neither she nor her collaborators wanted to give a left-wing alibi to the magazine that sooner or later \"would become part of the counter-revolution, a thing that I cannot gloss over with my co-operation, especially now that it is impossible to change its course\". Later, they organised an occupation at \"konkret\"'s office (along with several members of the ), to distribute proclamations to the employees, something that failed since R\u00f6hl learned about it, and moved the employees to their homes to continue their work from there. Finally, R\u00f6hl's house was vandalized by some of the protesters. Meinhof arrived in R\u00f6hl's villa at 11:30, after police and journalists had already arrived. She was accused by R\u00f6hl (and subsequently described by the media) as the organizer of the vandalism. It was difficult to prove, as she was not there when it happened.\nPerhaps her last work as an individual was the writing and production of the film \"Bambule\" in 1970, which focused on a group of West Berlin girls in juvenile detention; by the time it was scheduled to be aired, she was wanted for her part in the violent escape from police custody of Baader, and its broadcast was delayed until 1994.\nRelease of Baader.\nIn May 1970, Meinhof had been approached to help in Baader's escape by his girlfriend, Gudrun Ensslin. Meinhof persuaded the left-wing publisher Klaus Wagenbach to assist in the release of what he saw as a political prisoner. He issued her with a book contract, on the basis of which she petitioned authorities to allow Baader to travel from Moabit Prison for an interview at an institute for social research in the Dahlem district of Berlin. The plan was for armed comrades to enter the building, overpower the guards, and escape with Baader. No shooting was to take place, and Meinhof was to stay behind and deny any complicity in the action. \nBaader arrived with two guards and set to work with Meinhof in the institute's library. Two women in Ensslin's group, along with a man with a criminal record (hired because of his supposed experience with armed encounters) broke into the institute. The man shot the elderly librarian Georg Linke, severely wounding him in his liver. It was later claimed that the man was holding two weapons, a pistol and a gas canister gun, and accidentally fired the wrong weapon in the confusion. Following the unanticipated shooting, Meinhof joined the others in jumping out of the institute's window. She then called a friend to pick up her children from school. Within days wanted posters appeared throughout Berlin offered a 10,000 DM reward for her capture for attempted murder.\nAction in the Red Army Faction and arrest.\nIn the next two years, Meinhof participated in the various bank robberies and bombings perpetrated by the group. She and other RAF members attempted to kidnap her children so that they could be sent to a camp for Palestinian orphans and educated there according to her wishes, but the twins were intercepted in Sicily and returned to their father, in part due to the intervention of Stefan Aust.\nDuring this period, Meinhof wrote or recorded many of the manifestos and tracts for the RAF. The most significant of these is probably \"The Concept of the Urban Guerrilla\", a response to an essay by Horst Mahler, that attempts to set out more correctly their prevailing ideology. It also included the first use of the name \"Rote Armee Fraktion\" and, in the publications of it, the first use of the RAF insignia. Her practical importance in the group, however, was often overstated by the media, the most obvious example being the common name \"Baader-Meinhof gang\" for the RAF. (Gudrun Ensslin is often considered to have been the effective female co-leader of the group rather than Meinhof.)\nMeinhof wrote an essay defending the Munich massacre as part of a Palestinian strategy of resistance against Israeli land theft and ethnic cleansing of Palestinians.\nOn 14 June 1972, in Langenhagen, Fritz Rodewald, a teacher who had been providing accommodation to deserters from the U.S. Armed Forces, was approached by a stranger asking for an overnighting house the next day for herself and a friend. He agreed but later became suspicious that the woman might be involved with the RAF and called the police. The next day the pair arrived at Rodewald's dwelling while the police watched. The man was followed to a nearby telephone box and was found to be Gerhard M\u00fcller, who was armed. After arresting M\u00fcller, the police then arrested the woman \u2013 Meinhof.\nImprisonment and trial.\n\"Letter from a prisoner\" 1972\u201373.\nDuring her solitary confinement at K\u00f6ln-Ossendorf Prison from June 1972 to February 1973, Meinhof wrote what was later published as \"A Letter from a Prisoner in Isolation\" (\"Brief einer Gefangenen aus dem Toten Trakt\"). It conveys what may be references to the effects of lengthy solitary confinement, having a brain tumour, (removed earlier in her life), and a sense of disorientation and despair:&lt;poem&gt;The feeling that one's head is exploding\u2026\nThe feeling that the brain is shriveling up like a baked fruit\nThe feeling that\u2026 one is being controlled remotely\nThe feeling that all one's associations are being cut away\nThe feeling of pissing the soul out of one's body, like someone who can no longer hold water.\n\u2026The raging aggressiveness for which there is no outlet. That's the worst. The clear understanding that one has no chance of survival\u2026&lt;/poem&gt;\nResponse to 1972 Munich Massacre.\nIn December 1972, Meinhof, who was awaiting trial, was called to testify at Horst Mahler's trial where Mahler questioned her about the statement of support the two had issued for the massacre at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich. The \"Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung\" published the following hostile account of her response:\n\"Unless we absolve the German people of fascism\u2014that the people really didn't know what was going on in the concentration camps\u2014they can't be mobilized for our struggle,\" she said. After the war, the left, in dealing with fascism, were \"negligent, stupid, and insolent.\" They dealt with the people in the foreground, but didn't look any deeper. \"How was Auschwitz possible; what was antisemitism?\" That is something that someone should have clarified at the time. Instead of collectively understanding Auschwitz as an expression of evil, Meinhof stated.\n\"The worst thing is that all of us, communists as well as others, were united in this.\" However, she now recognizes that antisemitism can in its own way be anticapitalist. It separates the hatred of people about their dependency on money as a means of exchange from their desire for communism.\n\"Auschwitz meant that six million Jews were murdered and carted off to Europe's garbage heap, dispensed with for what they were presented as: money Jews.\" Finance capital and banks, \"the hard core of the system\" of imperialism and capitalism deflected the hate of the people for money and oppression from itself and transferred it to the Jews. Not having made this connection clear was the failure of the left and the communists.\nGermans were antisemitic, therefore they are today RAF supporters. Only they don't know it, because they've forgotten that they must be absolved of fascism and murdering Jews, and that antisemitism is in reality hatred of capitalism. In this regard Ulrike Meinhof ably constructed a remarkable statement about the failure of the Baader-Meinhof Group. With it, it is also possible to praise the Black September attack in Munich. She claimed to feel an \"historical identity\" with the Jews of the Warsaw Ghetto, who attempted an unarmed uprising leading to their defeat. \"We have broken through the entire blah blah. We have provided the left with obvious encouragement, which they have voluntarily allowed to dissipate, because we've all been arrested.\"\nSentencing.\nAfter two years of preliminary hearings, Meinhof was sentenced to eight years imprisonment on 29 November 1974. Eventually, Meinhof, Baader, Ensslin, and Jan-Carl Raspe were jointly charged on 19 August 1975, with four counts of murder, fifty-four of attempted murder, and a single count of forming a criminal association. Before the trial was concluded, Meinhof was found hanged by a rope, fashioned from a towel, in her cell in the Stammheim Prison, Stuttgart, on 9 May 1976. It is highly probable that, if not for her death, she would have been sentenced to life imprisonment plus 15 years. (The remaining three defendants received such a sentence, designed to minimize the possibility of early parole.)\nDeath.\nOn 9 May 1976, Meinhof was found dead in her prison cell in Stuttgart-Stammheim. The official verdict was Meinhof had died by suicide, but this was disputed by her sister and many others. Meinhof was buried in Berlin-Mariendorf, six days after her death. Her funeral attracted a demonstration of about 7,000 people. Demonstrations took place across the country, and social and political prisoners in Berlin and Hessen held a three-day hunger strike. Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir in an open letter compared her death to the worst crimes of the Nazi era.\nIn late 2002, following investigations by her daughter Bettina, it was discovered that Meinhof's brain had been retained (apparently without permission) following the autopsy performed as part of the investigation into her death. The original autopsy had found brain injury near the amygdala, resulting from successful surgery in 1962 to remove a benign cyst. The unpublished autopsy results at the time stated that the brain injuries \"justified questions as to the culpability\" of Meinhof. Bernhard Bogerts, a psychiatrist at Magdeburg University, later re-examined the brain and also doubted that Meinhof was fully criminally responsible. On Bettina's request, the brain was interred in Meinhof's burial place on 19 December 2002.\nControversy surrounding her death.\nThe official response was to declare her death a suicide, and try and justify it with claims that she had become increasingly isolated from other RAF prisoners. Notes exchanged between them in prison included one by Ensslin, describing her as \"too weak\". The official findings were not accepted by many in the RAF and other militant organisations, and there are still some who doubt their accuracy and believe that she was murdered by the authorities.\nA second investigation was carried out by an international group. The findings of the inquiry were published under the title \"Der Tod Ulrike Meinhofs. Bericht der Internationalen Untersuchungskommission\" (\"The Death of Ulrike Meinhof. Report of the International Investigation Committee\") in 1979.\nLast days in prison.\nMeinhof's last appearance in court was on 4 May 1976, in a hearing the defendants had requested in order to provide evidence about the participation of West Germany in the Vietnam War. This, they claimed, was the cause of their radicalisation, and was their basis for demanding the status of prisoners of war (see above). According to Jutta Ditfurth, the last days before Meinhof's death went smoothly. The prisoners (including Meinhof) spent their meeting time (30 minutes, twice per day) discussing various philosophers and political issues. One of the guards noted that they were laughing.\nIn early May, attorney contacted his client (Meinhof). They were hopeful about the possibilities that the new strategy seemed to offer. They also discussed whether Meinhof could testify as a witness at the International Law Conference in Geneva where a delegation of lawyers planned to denounce the measure of detention in solitary confinement. Finally, Meinhof was planning to reveal main witness Gerhard M\u00fcller's role in the trial. Federal prosecutors had indicted the four defendants for the murder of a policeman , who was shot by M\u00fcller himself.\nDuring the press conference called by defense attorneys, one of Meinhof's lawyers, Michael Oberwinder, stated that it was less than a week before Meinhof's death that they had a very involved conversation. He claimed that there was not the least sign of depression or lack of interest on her part and that it was an animated discussion in the context of which Meinhof explained the group's point of view.\nMeinhof's last visitor was Giovanni Capelli, lawyer of the Red Brigades. He conveyed the desire of the Red Brigades to contact her and described the conditions of detention in Italy where prisoners were not held in isolation (except Renato Curcio) and were politically active. They also discussed the establishment of an international committee of lawyers to defend the RAF. Capelli later said that Meinhof gave him the impression of \"a vivid, lifelike woman\", \"open to all questions\". They arranged to meet again soon. \"She behaved like a woman who wanted to live\".\nAutopsy and investigation.\nAt 9.20 a.m. on 9 May, the Ministry of Justice of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg announced that Meinhof had died by suicide, although the initial post-mortem body examination by Professor Joachim Rauschke did not begin until at least 9:25\u00a0a.m. At 9:34\u00a0a.m. the German news agency (dpa) announced \"Suicide by hanging\".. Two hours later Professor Rauschke together with performed the official autopsy in the general hospital of Stuttgart from 11:45\u00a0a.m. until 12:45\u00a0p.m., whose outcome was \"death by hanging beyond doubt\". According to Ditfurth the hasty press releases that followed Meinhof's death, were similar to those of April 1972, when it was incorrectly broadcast that Meinhof had killed herself.. In the following days, the newspapers reported in detail what were supposed to be Meinhof's thoughts, like: \"she realised her mistake,\" \"she had become aware of the futility,\" and that she \"resigned to death\".\nThere was a concern among Meinhof supporters about the forensic surgeons chosen by the state to perform the autopsy. Mallach (NSDAP Member No. 9154986) had been a member of the SS. He served in World War II as corporal in a Panzer division. In 1977, he made (without approval) and kept for a long time the death masks of Baader, Ensslin, and Raspe. Rauschke also performed the autopsy of Siegfried Hausner one year earlier and was accused by fellows and supporters of the RAF of ignoring the injuries to Hausner's head, so as to cover up the true cause of his death.\nOn 11 May a second autopsy was performed on demand of Wienke Zitzlaff by Werner Janssen and J\u00fcrgen Schr\u00f6der, even though the brain, a lot of critical organs, and tissue parts had been removed from the body. Also, her nails had been cut, so the doctors could not determine clearly if there were traces of struggle. Some examinations could not take place since a critical time had passed. Janssen concluded that the most probable cause of death was \"suicide by hanging\", however in order to come to a definite conclusion he insisted on being given access to the report of the first autopsy, something that never happened.\nFinally, on demand of Meinhof's attorney Klaus Croissant and the International Committee for Political Prisoners, an international investigation commission was created in order to examine the conditions surrounding Meinhof's death. Once more the German authorities refused to give the complete (first) autopsy report to the commission, hindering their investigation. In 1978 the committee published its report, concluding that: \"The formal claim that Ulrike Meinhof committed suicide by hanging is unfounded, given the fact that the investigation results reasonably converge to the conclusion that she could not hang herself. Most probably Ulrike Meinhof was already dead before she was hanged and there are warning signs indicating the involvement of a third party regarding her death.\"\nSuicide disputation.\nThe circumstances around Meinhof's death have been disputed by people close to her, including many of her relatives, friends, lawyers, and comrades, presenting various arguments. According to Meinhof's sister, Wienke Zitzlaff, during her last visit to the prison, Meinhof had told her: \"You can stand up and fight only while you are alive. If they say I committed suicide, be sure that it was a murder.\"\nThere are inquiries regarding the procedure followed by the authorities, including the autopsy reports and the findings of the international commission. Some of them are:\nSome other questions still remain, including:\nFinally, there is a dispute over the arguments regarding Meinhof's motive. Some of the points usually mentioned are:\nLegacy in culture, and portrayals.\nThe book \"\" (Better angry than sad) by Alois Prinz was intended as a mainly faithful account of Meinhof's life story for adolescents.\nMeinhof's life has been the subject, to varying degrees of fictionalisation, of several films and stage productions. Treatment in films include Reinhard Hauff's 1986 \"Stammheim\", an account of the Stammheim trial, Margarethe von Trotta's 1981 \"Marianne and Juliane\" and Uli Edel's 2008 film \"The Baader Meinhof Complex\". Stage treatments include the 1990 opera \"Ulrike Meinhof\" by Johann Kresnik, the 1993 play \"Leviathan\" by Dea Loher, the 2005 play \"La extraordinaria muerte de Ulrike M.\" by Spanish playwright Carlos Be and the 2006 play \"Ulrike Maria Stuart\" by Austrian playwright Elfriede Jelinek. The 1981 French movie \"Birgitt Haas Must Be Killed\" is inspired by Meinhof's death.\nIn 1978, Dario Fo and Franca Rame wrote the monologue \"Moi, Ulrike, je crie...\" \nThe 2010 feature documentary \"Children of the Revolution\" tells Meinhof's story from the perspective of her daughter, journalist and historian Bettina R\u00f6hl.\n\"Subtopia\", a novel published in 2005 by Australian author and academic A.L. McCann, is partially set in Berlin and contains a character who is obsessed with Meinhof and another who claims to have attended her funeral.\nThe 2013 book \"Revolutionary Brain\" by Harold Jaffe features a titular section devoted to the brain of Meinhof.\nThe 2018 film \"7 Days in Entebbe\" about Operation Entebbe mentions Meinhof as motivation for the participation of the Germans in the hijacking, particularly Brigitte Kuhlmann. The film suggests Meinhof was a friend of Kuhlmann and B\u00f6se and that a mistake Kuhlmann made resulted in her imprisonment and subsequent death.\nMusic.\nIn 1975, the Italian singer-songwriter Claudio Lolli published the song Incubo Numero Zero (Nightmare #0), with the verse \"turn off the light, thought Ulrike\", and more.\nMarianne Faithfull's 1979 album \"Broken English\" had the title track dedicated to Meinhof.\nThe anarcho punk band Chumbawamba's 1990 album, \"Slap!\" featured an opening and closing track, both named after Meinhof. The first track was entitled \"Ulrike\" and featured lyrics that directly involve Meinhof as the protagonist and the final track was an instrumental reprise of the first track. and was entitled \"Meinhof\". The album's liner notes included information and an article relating to the song Ulrike.\nElectronica act Doris Days created a track entitled \"To Ulrike M.\", in which there is a passage spoken in German throughout the song, presumably an archived audio file from Meinhof herself. This track has since been remixed by other electronica acts like Zero 7, Kruder &amp; Dorfmeister, and The Amalgamation of Soundz.\nThe German duo Andreas Ammer and F.M. Einheit released an album in 1996 entitled \"Deutsche Krieger\", a substantial portion of which consists of audio recordings of and about Meinhof.\nDer Plan, the electronic music group from D\u00fcsseldorf published 2004 the song \"Ulrike\", as part of the Die Verschw\u00f6rung album.\nLondon-based experimental group Cindytalk has an electronic side-project called Bambule, named after the Meinhof film .\nGerman Neue Deutsche H\u00e4rte band Rammstein feature Meinhof, played by lead singer Till Lindemann, in the music video to their 2019 song Deutschland.\nThe English alternative rock band Ulrika Spacek took their name from Meinhof and American performer Sissy Spacek.\nBibliography.\nWorks of the Red Army Faction\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52519", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52519", "title": "Vale of Glamorgan", "text": "County borough in Wales\nThe Vale of Glamorgan ( ), locally referred to as \"The Vale\", is a county borough in the south-east of Wales. It borders Bridgend County Borough to the west, Cardiff to the east, Rhondda Cynon Taf to the north, and the Bristol Channel to the south. With an economy based largely on agriculture and chemicals, it is the southernmost unitary authority in Wales. Attractions include Barry Island Pleasure Park, the Barry Tourist Railway, Medieval wall paintings in St Cadoc's Church, Llancarfan, Porthkerry Park, St Donat's Castle, Cosmeston Lakes Country Park and Cosmeston Medieval Village. The largest town is Barry. Other towns include Penarth, Llantwit Major, and Cowbridge. There are many villages in the county borough.\nHistory.\nThe area is the southernmost part of the county of Glamorgan. Between the 11th century and 1536 the area was part of the Lordship of Glamorgan.\nIn medieval times, the village of Cosmeston, near what is today Penarth in the south east of the county, grew up around a fortified manor house constructed sometime around the 12th century by the De Costentin family. The De Costentins, who originated on the Cotentin peninsula in northern France, were among the first Norman invaders of Wales in the early 12th century following William the Conqueror's invasion of neighbouring England in 1066. The village would have consisted of a number of small stone round houses, or crofts, with thatched roofs.\nClemenstone, to the west, was the seat of several high sheriffs of Glamorganshire, including John Curre who was known to have occupied the estate in 1712. William Curre, known to have lived in Clemenstone in 1766, was also an occupant of Itton Court in Monmouthshire. In the early 19th century, Lady Sale n\u00e9e Wynch, wife of Sir Robert Sale, spent much of her early life on the Clemenstone Estate.\nIn 1974, the Vale of Glamorgan Borough was created, with a population of 103,000. The Vale of Glamorgan was a second tier district, part of the new county of South Glamorgan, under the Local Government Act 1972. It created several problems in local governance, between the South Glamorgan County Council, Cardiff City Council and the Vale of Glamorgan Borough Council owing to their conflicting interests. It was a turbulent time for governance in the city of Cardiff, as for the first time in its history it had to share authority with the county council, which was larger and better resourced. In April 1996, the Vale of Glamorgan became a county borough (unitary authority) of Wales.\nGeography.\nLocated immediately to the west of Cardiff between the M4 motorway and the Severn Estuary, the county borough of Vale of Glamorgan covers 33,097 hectares (130 square miles) and has of coastline. The physiographical district from which the modern administrative area derives its name is the slightly larger, generally low-lying area which extends from the River Kenfig in the west, eastwards as far as the Rhymney. The Pennant Sandstone scarp forms its northern boundary.\nThe largest centre of population in the borough is Barry (51,502 inhabitants). Other towns include Cowbridge (6,180), Dinas Powys (7,799), Llantwit Major (10,621) and Penarth (22,083). Much of the population inhabits villages, hamlets and individual farms. The area is low-lying, with a maximum height of above sea level at Tair Onen to the east of Cowbridge.\nThe borough borders Cardiff to the north east, Rhondda Cynon Taf to the north, Bridgend to the north west and the Bristol Channel to the south.\nThe yellow-grey cliffs on the Glamorgan Heritage Coast (which stretches between Gileston and Ogmore-by-Sea) are unique on the Celtic Sea coastline (i.e. Cornwall, Wales, Ireland and Brittany) as they are formed of a combination of Liassic limestone, shale and Carboniferous Limestone. The rocks were formed between 360 and 200 million years ago when the whole area lay underneath a warm, shallow sea at the start of the Jurassic period. Thus today the cliffs contain traces of Jurassic sea creatures, such as ammonites. The calcium carbonate (limestone) in the soil allows crops to be grown which would be difficult elsewhere in Wales. The Liassic limestone and Carboniferous Limestone are also used in the Vale as building materials; in previous centuries it was taken by sloops across the Bristol Channel to North Cornish ports such as Bude, Boscastle and Port Isaac to fertilise Cornwall's poor slate soils; the hard Devonian slate was brought back from Cornwall as a roofing material for houses in the Vale.\nAs the Glamorgan Heritage Coast faces westwards out to the Atlantic, it bears the brunt of onshore (westerly and south-westerly) winds: ideal for surfing, but a nuisance for ships sailing up the Bristol Channel to Cardiff. As in North Cornwall and South-West Ireland, the fierce Atlantic gales created ideal conditions for deliberate shipwrecking, which until 100 years ago was very common along the coast. Nash Point, Southerndown and Ogmore-by-Sea have some of the highest shipwreck victims on the coast of Wales; as recently as 1962 an oil tanker, the BP Driver, crashed into Nash Point during a violent westerly storm, was torn to shreds by the reefs and eventually sank, although the crew were saved by various Bristol Channel lifeboats and helicopters.\nEconomy.\nThe Vale of Glamorgan was determined to be the wealthiest area in Wales in a 2003 survey conducted by Barclays Bank that measured disposable income. Chemical industries are located to the east of the port of Barry while further inland the main activity is agriculture, especially beef and dairy cattle, with marketing facilities at Cowbridge.\nGovernment.\nThe Vale of Glamorgan UK parliament and Senedd constituencies (which do not include Penarth and Sully which are in the constituency of Cardiff South and Penarth) sway between Labour control and Conservative Party control in both the Senedd and Westminster. The UK parliament constituency was created in 1983 and the Welsh Assembly (later Senedd) constituency in 1999. There is substantial Labour support in the east of the constituency and in the town of Barry, and substantial Conservative support in the agricultural area in the west.\nSince 1996 local government is led by Vale of Glamorgan Council. The Labour Party had a large majority initially, though between 1999 and 2012 the Conservatives were the largest group. Since 2017, there has been no overall political majority on council.\nCommunities.\nAll except one (Rhoose) of the Vale's communities elects a community (or town) council, the lowest tier of local government.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVillages and hamlets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSport.\nThe principal football club in the Vale is Barry Town United F.C., of the Cymru Premier who play their home games at Jenner Park Stadium in Barry. The club was founded in 1912 and enjoyed success in the 1990s, when they won the League of Wales and the Welsh Cup. The club experienced declining fortunes in the following decade and were relegated to Welsh Football League Division Two, but were promoted to Division One after winning the league in the 2014\u201315 season. In 2014 it was announced that Jenner Park stadium would undergo a \u00a3350,000 plus development with the laying of a synthetic pitch. There are several other smaller football clubs in the county such as Llantwit Major F.C., established in 1962, which competes in the Cymru South, and Penarth Town AFC in the Vale of Glamorgan League.\nRugby has a strong presence in the county, though none of its clubs compete in the higher leagues. As of the 2015\u20136 season, Penarth RFC competes in the WRU Division Three South East, Llantwit Major RFC in WRU Division Four South East, and Old Penarthians RFC and Cowbridge RFC in the WRU Division Five South East. Several of the clubs are feeders for Cardiff Blues.\nThere are cricket grounds in Cowbridge and Sully and several golf clubs, including the Glamorganshire, Southerndown and Wenvoe Castle clubs.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nOwing to its close proximity to Cardiff, most of the major roads in the county borough originate in the capital.\nRunning east\u2013west, the A48 runs through the centre portion of the Vale of Glamorgan between Cardiff and Bridgend, passing along the northern edge of Cowbridge. The M4 motorway also runs east\u2013west along the northern edge of the Vale, linking the area to major cities such as London, Bristol, Newport, and Swansea. Junctions 33 (Cardiff West) and 34 (Llantrisant) provide direct access to the Vale of Glamorgan.\nThe M4 is economically important to the county borough as it \"facilitates the movements of goods and people\" from the region to other areas of the UK, enabling local firms \"access to domestic and international markets.\" The county borough benefits from its location in the M4 technology corridor, according to the Welsh Government.\nRail.\nThe Vale of Glamorgan Line is the county borough's principal rail connection. The line runs between Cardiff Central and Bridgend, with spurs to Barry Island and Penarth. All services on the line are operated by Transport for Wales, linking the Vale directly to other areas of the capital region, including Cardiff Queen Street, Pontypridd, and Merthyr Tydfil. Railway stations in the Vale of Glamorgan are:\nThe South Wales Main Line passes through the Vale, but trains do not stop. The nearest stations on the South Wales Main Line are (from east to west): Cardiff Central; Pontyclun; Llanharan; Pencoed; Bridgend. Most services are operated by Transport for Wales, but Bridgend and Cardiff are additionally served by Great Western Railway services between Swansea and London Paddington. Cardiff Central is further served by Great Western Railway services to destinations in South West England and CrossCountry services to the Midlands.\nThe Barry Tourist Railway is a short heritage railway and museum on Barry Island.\nBus.\nBus services in the Vale of Glamorgan are principally operated by New Adventure Travel (NAT) and Cardiff Bus.\nThe Vale of Glamorgan Council operates a community 'on-demand' transport service in rural communities called Greenlinks.\nAir.\nCardiff Airport is in the Vale of Glamorgan, near Rhoose.\nIn 2019, Cardiff Airport claimed to have a \u00a3135 million direct economic benefit to the region. Destinations from Cardiff Airport at the time included Alicante, Amsterdam, Anglesey, Dublin, and Doha. A \"Masterplan\" for the airport sets out the Welsh Government's ambition to grow the airport's passenger numbers and freight operations by 2040.\nMOD St Athan is also situated in the Vale of Glamorgan.\nInternational links.\nThe Vale of Glamorgan is twinned with:\nand has friendship agreements with:\nFreedom of the Borough.\nThe following people and military units have received the Freedom of the Borough of the Vale of Glamorgan.\nDemographics.\nEthnicity.\nAs of the 2021 United Kingdom census, the county borough's ethnic groups are as follows:\nReligion.\nAs of the 2021 United Kingdom census, the county borough's religious make-up is as follows:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52520", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52520", "title": "Glamorgan", "text": "Historic county of Wales\nGlamorgan (), or sometimes Glamorganshire ( or ), was one of the thirteen counties of Wales that existed from 1536 until their abolition in 1974. It is located in South Wales. Originally an early medieval petty kingdom of varying boundaries known in Welsh as Morgannwg (or Glywysing), which was then invaded and taken over by the Normans as the Lordship of Glamorgan. The area that became known as Glamorgan was both a rural, pastoral area, and a conflict point between the Norman lords and the Welsh princes. It was defined by a large concentration of castles.\nAfter falling under English rule in the 16th century, Glamorgan became a more stable county, and exploited its natural resources to become an important part of the Industrial Revolution. Glamorgan was the most populous and industrialised county in Wales, and was once called the \"crucible of the Industrial Revolution\", as it contained the world centres of three metallurgical industries (iron, steel and copper) and its rich resources of coal.\nUnder the Local Government Act 1972, the county boroughs and administrative county of Glamorgan were abolished on 1 April 1974, with three new counties being established, each containing a former county borough: West Glamorgan, Mid Glamorgan, South Glamorgan. The name also survives in that of Vale of Glamorgan, a county borough.\nGlamorgan comprised distinct regions: the industrial valleys, the agricultural vale and the scenic Gower Peninsula. The county had boundaries with Brecknockshire (north), Monmouthshire (east), Carmarthenshire (west), and to the south it was bordered by the Bristol Channel. The total area was . Glamorgan contained two cities, Cardiff, the county town and from 1955 the capital city of Wales, and Swansea. The highest point in the county was Craig y Llyn () near the village of Rhigos in the Cynon Valley.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nGlamorgan's terrain has been inhabited by humankind for over 200,000 years. Climate fluctuation caused the formation, disappearance, and reformation of glaciers which, in turn, caused sea levels to rise and fall. At various times life has flourished, at others the area is likely to have been completely uninhabitable. Evidence of the presence of Neanderthals has been discovered on the Gower Peninsula. Whether they remained in the area during periods of extreme cold is unclear. Sea levels have been lower and higher than at present, resulting in significant changes to the coastline during this period.\nArchaeological evidence shows that humans settled in the area during an interstadial period. The oldest known human burial in Great Britain \u2013 the \"Red Lady of Paviland\" \u2013 was discovered in a coastal cave between Port Eynon and Rhossili, on the Gower Peninsula. The 'lady' has been radiocarbon dated to c.\u00a029,000\u00a0years before present (BP) \u2013 during the Late Pleistocene \u2013 at which time the cave overlooked an area of plain, some miles from the sea.\nFrom the end of the last ice age (between 12,000 and 10,000\u00a0BP) Mesolithic hunter-gatherers began to migrate to the British Peninsula \u2013 through Doggerland \u2013 from the European mainland. Archaeologist Stephen Aldhouse-Green notes that while Wales has a \"multitude\" of Mesolithic sites, their settlements were \"focused on the coastal plains\", the uplands were \"exploited only by specialist hunting groups\".\nHuman lifestyles in North-West Europe changed around 6000\u00a0BP; from the Mesolithic nomadic lives of hunting and gathering, to the Neolithic agrarian life of agriculture and settlement. They cleared the forests to establish pasture and to cultivate the land and developed new technologies such as ceramics and textile production. A tradition of long barrow construction began in continental Europe during the 7th millennium BP \u2013 the free standing megalithic structures supporting a sloping capstone (known as \"dolmens)\"; common over Atlantic Europe. Nineteen Neolithic chambered tombs (or \"long barrows\") and five possible henges have been identified in Glamorgan. These megalithic burial chambers, or \"cromlechi\", were built between 6000 and 5000\u00a0BP, during the early Neolithic period, the first of them about 1500 years before either Stonehenge or the Egyptian Great Pyramid of Giza was completed. Two major groups of Neolithic architectural traditions are represented in the area: portal dolmens (e.g. St Lythans burial chamber (Vale of Glamorgan), and Cae'rarfau (near Creigiau)); and Severn-Cotswold chamber tombs (e.g. \"Parc Cwm\" long cairn, (\"Parc le Breos Cwm\", Gower Peninsula), and Tinkinswood burial chamber (Vale of Glamorgan)), as well as tombs that do not fall easily into either group. Such massive constructions would have needed a large labour force \u2013 up to 200 men \u2013 suggestive of large communities nearby. Archaeological evidence from some Neolithic sites (e.g. Tinkinswood) has shown the continued use of cromlechi in the Bronze Age.\nThe Bronze Age \u2013 defined by the use of metal \u2013 has made a lasting impression on the area. Over six hundred Bronze Age barrows and cairns, of various types, have been identified all over Glamorgan. Other technological innovations \u2013 including the wheel; harnessing oxen; weaving textiles; brewing alcohol; and skillful metalworking (producing new weapons and tools, and fine gold decoration and jewellery, such as brooches and torcs) \u2013 changed people's everyday lives during this period. Deforestation continued to the more remote areas as a warmer climate allowed the cultivation even of upland areas.\nBy 4000\u00a0BP people had begun to bury, or cremate their dead in individual cists, beneath a mound of earth known as a round barrow; sometimes with a distinctive style of finely decorated pottery \u2013 like those at Llanharry (discovered 1929) and at Llandaff (1991) \u2013 that gave rise to the Early Bronze Age being described as \"Beaker culture\". From c.\u00a03350\u00a0BP, a worsening climate began to make agriculture unsustainable in upland areas. The resulting population pressures appear to have led to conflict. Hill forts began to be built from the Late Bronze Age (and throughout the Iron Age (3150\u20131900\u00a0BP)) and the amount and quality of weapons increased noticeably \u2013 along the regionally distinctive tribal lines of the Iron Age.\nArchaeological evidence from two sites in Glamorgan shows Bronze Age practices and settlements continued into the Iron Age. Finds from \"Llyn Fawr\", thought to be votive offerings, include weapons and tools from the Late Bronze Age and the Early Iron Age. The hoard, described as \"one of the most significant prehistoric metalwork hoards in Wales\" has given its name to the Llyn Fawr Phase, the last Bronze Age phase in Britain. Excavations at Llanmaes, Vale of Glamorgan, indicate a settlement and \"feasting site\" occupied from the Late Bronze Age until the Roman occupation. Until the Roman conquest of Britain, the area that would become known as Glamorgan was part of the territory of the Silures \u2013 a Celtic British tribe that flourished in the Iron Age \u2013 whose territory also included the areas that would become known as Breconshire and Monmouthshire. The Silures had hill forts throughout the area \u2013 e.g., Caerau (Cardiff), Caerau hill fort, Rhiwsaeson (Llantrisant), and Y Bwlwarcau [Mynydd Margam], south west of Maesteg \u2013 and cliff castles along the Glamorgan coast \u2013 e.g., Burry Holms (Gower Peninsula). Excavations at one \u2013 Dunraven hill fort (Southerndown, Vale of Glamorgan) \u2013 revealed the remains of twenty-one roundhouses.\nMany other settlements of the Silures were neither hill forts nor castles. For example, the fort established by the Romans near the estuary of the River Taff in 75\u00a0AD, in what would become Cardiff, was built over an extensive settlement established by the Silures in the 50s\u00a0AD.\nMorgannwg.\nEarly history.\nThe region originated as an independent petty kingdom named \"Glywysing\", believed to be named after a 5th-century Welsh king called Glywys, who is said to have been descended from a Roman Governor in the region. Saint Paul Aurelian was born in Glamorgan in the 6th century. The names ' (' + territorial suffix ', 'territory of Morgan') and ' (' + ', 'land of Morgan') reputedly derive from the 8th-century king Morgan ab Athrwys, otherwise known as \"Morgan Mwynfawr\" ('great in riches') who united \"Glywysing\" with the neighbouring kingdoms of Gwent and Ergyng, although some have argued for the similar 10th-century ruler Morgan Hen. It is possible it was only the union of Gwent and Glywysing that was referred to as Morgannwg. By virtue of its location and geography, Morgannwg or Glywysing was the second part of Wales, after Gwent, to fall under the control of the Normans and was frequently the scene of fighting between the Marcher Lords and Welsh princes.\nEarly buildings.\nThe earliest buildings of note included earthwork dykes and rudimentary motte-and-bailey hillside defences. All that remains of these fortifications are foundations that leave archaeological evidence of their existence, though many were built upon to create more permanent defensive structures. The earliest surviving structures within the region are early stone monuments, waypoints and grave markers dating between the 5th and 7th century, with many being moved from their original position to sheltered locations for protection. The most notable of the early stone markers still in its original place is on a high mountain ridge at Gelligaer. Of the later plaitwork patterned standing crosses the finest and best preserved is the 9th century 'Houelt' stone at Llantwit Major.\nLordship of Glamorgan.\nHistory, 1080\u20131536.\nThe Lordship of Glamorgan was established by Robert Fitzhamon following the defeat of Iestyn ap Gwrgant, c.\u20091080. The Lordship of Morgannwg was split after it was conquered; the kingdom of Glamorgan had as its caput the town of Cardiff and took in the lands from the River Tawe to the River Rhymney. The Lordship took in four of the Welsh cantrefi, Gorfynydd, Penychen, Senghenydd and Gwynllwg. The area later known as the Gower Peninsula was not under the Lordship of Glamorgan, and became the Gower Lordship which had previously been the cantref of G\u0175yr. The lowlands of the Lordship of Glamorgan were manorialized, while much of the sparsely populated uplands were left under Welsh control until the late 13th century. Upon the death of William, Lord of Glamorgan, his extensive holdings were eventually granted to Gilbert de Clare in 1217. The subjugation of Glamorgan, begun by Fitzhamon, was finally completed by the powerful De Clare family, and in 1486 the kingdom was granted to Jasper Tudor.\nBuildings, 1080\u20131536.\nThe legacy of the Marcher Lords left the area scattered with historic buildings including Norman castles, Cistercian Abbeys, churches and medieval monuments.\nThe kingdom of Glamorgan was also notable for the number of castles built during the time of the Marcher Lords, many surviving to the present day though many are now ruinous. Of the castles built during the medieval period, those still standing above foundation level include, Caerphilly Castle, Cardiff Castle, Ogmore Castle, St Donat's Castle, St Quintins Castle, Coity Castle, Neath Castle, and Oystermouth Castle. Many of the castles within Morgannwg were attacked by forces led by Owain Glynd\u0175r during the Welsh Revolt of 1400\u20131415. Some were captured, and several were damaged to such an extent they were never maintained as defences again.\nWhen the Diocese of Llandaff became incorporated into the Province of Canterbury, the Bishop of Llandaff rebuilt over the small church with the beginnings of Llandaff Cathedral in 1120. In the western region of Morgannwg two monastic foundations were sited, a Savigniac house in Neath in 1130 and the Cistercian Margam Abbey in 1147. In the Vale a Benedictine monastery was founded in 1141, Ewenny Priory, a community under the patronage of St. Peter's Gloucester. The building of parish churches also began in the 12th century, densely in the Vale, but very sparsely in the upland and northern areas.\nCounty of Glamorgan.\nHistory 1536\u20131750.\nThe Laws in Wales Acts of 1535 established the County of Glamorgan through the amalgamation of the Lordship of Glamorgan with the lordships of Gower and Kilvey; the area that had previously been the cantref of Gwynllwg was lost to Monmouthshire. With Wales finally incorporated with the English dominions, the administration of justice passed into the hands of the crown. The Lordship became a shire and was awarded its first parliamentary representative with the creation of the Glamorganshire constituency in 1536. The Reformation, which was closely followed by the Dissolution of the Monasteries, led to vast social changes across Britain. These events, along with the Act of Union, allowed the leading Welsh families to gain in wealth and prosperity, allowing equal footing to those families of English extraction. Old monasteries, with their lands, were acquired by the wealthy and turned into country houses; their notable residents preferring to live in gentry houses rather than the fortified castles of the past. Major families in Glamorgan included the Carnes at Ewenny, the Mansels at Margam, Williams of Neath, the Herberts at Cardiff and Swansea, Sir David Ap Mathew of Llandaff, and the Stradlings of St Donats.\nThe main industry of Glamorgan during this period was agriculture. In the upland, or \"Blaenau\" area, the hilly terrain along with many areas being densely wooded, made arable farming unprofitable, so the local farming concentrated on the rearing of horses, cattle and sheep. The lowland, or \"Bro\" was devoted to more general branches of farming, cereal, grass for pasture, hay and stock raising. Non-agricultural industries were generally small scale, with some shallow coal pits, fulling mills, weaving and pottery-making. The main heavy industry of note during this period was copper smelting, and this was centred on the towns of Swansea and Neath. Although copper had been mined in Wales since the Bronze Age, it was not until non-ferrous metalworking became a major industry in the late 17th century that Glamorgan saw a concentration of works appearing in a belt between Kidwelly and Port Talbot. Smelting of copper started around Neath under the Mines Royal Society c.\u20091584 but the scale of the works increased dramatically from the early 18th century when Swansea displaced Bristol as Britain's copper smelting capital. Easy access to Cornish ores and a local outcropping of coal near the surface, gave Swansea economic advantages in the smelting industry.\nEarly iron smelting within Glamorgan was a localised and minor industry, with historical evidence pointing to scattered ironworks throughout the county. John Leland mentions a works at Llantrisant in 1539, an operation in Aberdare existed during the reign of Edward VI and two iron furnaces were recorded as being set up by Sir W. Mathew in Radyr during the Elizabethan era. By 1666 a furnace was in operation in Hirwaun and in 1680 a smelting hearth was established in Caerphilly. Despite the existence of these industries, the scale of production was small, and in 1740 the total output of iron from Glamorgan was reported at 400 tons per year.\nGlamorgan, now falling under the protection of the crown, was also involved in the conflicts of the crown. With the start of the First English Civil War, there was little support from the Welsh for the Parliamentarians. Glamorgan sent troops to join Charles I at the Battle of Edgehill, and their Member of Parliament Sir Edward Stradling was captured in the conflict. In the Second English Civil War, the war came to Glamorgan at the Battle of St Fagans (1648), where the New Model Army overcame a larger Royalist to prevent a siege of Cardiff.\nBuildings, 1536\u20131750.\nThe period between the Laws in Wales Acts and the industrialisation of Glamorgan saw two distinct periods architecturally. From the 1530s throughout to 1650, the newly empowered gentry attempted to show their status by building stately homes to show their wealth; but the period from 1650 through to the mid-1750s was a fallow time for architectural grandeur, with few new wealthy families moving to the area. Of the eight major gentry houses of the time only St Fagans Castle survives with its interior intact; five, Neath Abbey, Old Beaupre Castle, Oxwich Castle, Llantrithyd and Ruperra Castle are ruinous. Of the remaining two manors, The Van at Caerphilly was reconstructed in 1990 while Cefnmabli was gutted by a fire in 1994. The old castles became abandoned throughout this period due to the new security brought by Glamorgan coming under the protection of the crown, with only the Stradlings of St Donat's Castle electing to remain in their old ancestral home.\nBy the 17th century, the availability of fine building stone permitted the construction of high-quality lime-washed rural cottages and farmhouses in the Vale of Glamorgan, which drew favourable remarks from travellers. A Glamorgan yeoman of the time generally lived in greater comfort than his contemporaries of the more westerly or upland parts of Wales such as Cardiganshire or north Carmarthenshire.\nIndustrial Glamorgan, 1750\u20131920.\nMetals industry.\nFrom the mid-18th century onwards, Glamorgan's uplands underwent large-scale industrialisation and several coastal towns, in particular Swansea and later Cardiff, became significant ports. From the late 18th century until the early 20th century Glamorgan produced 70 per cent of the British output of copper. The industry was developed by English entrepreneurs and investors such as John Henry Vivian and largely based in the west of the county, where coal could be purchased cheaply and ores imported from Cornwall, Devon and later much further afield. The industry was of immense importance to Swansea in particular; in 1823 the smelting works on the River Tawe, and the collieries and shipping dependent on them, supported between 8,000 and 10,000 people. Imports of copper ores reached a peak in the 1880s, after which there was a steep fall until the virtual end of the trade in the 1920s. The cost of shipping ores from distant countries, and the growth of foreign competitors, ended Glamorgan's dominance of the industry. Some of the works converted to the production of zinc and the Tawe valley also became a location for the manufacture of nickel after Ludwig Mond established a works at Clydach in 1902.\nEven at its peak, copper smelting was never as significant as iron smelting, which was the major industrial employer of men and capital in south Wales before the rise of the sale-coal industry. Ironmaking developed in locations where ironstone, coal and limestone were found in close proximity \u2013 primarily the northern and south-western parts of the South Wales coalfield. In the second half of the 18th century four ironworks were built in Merthyr Tydfil. In 1759 the Dowlais Ironworks were established by a partnership of nine men. This was followed by the Plymouth Ironworks in 1763, which was formed by Isaac Wilkinson and John Guest, then in 1765 Anthony Bacon established the Cyfarthfa Ironworks. The fourth of the great ironworks, Penydarren Ironworks was built in 1784. These works made Merthyr Tydfil the main centre of the industry in Wales.\nAs well as copper and iron, Glamorgan became an important centre for the tinplate industry. Although not as famous as the Llanelli or Pontypool works, a concentrated number of works emerged around Swansea, Aberavon and Neath towards the late 19th century. Glamorgan became the most populous and industrialised county in Wales and was known as the 'crucible of the Industrial Revolution'.\nOther areas to house heavy industries include ironworks in Maesteg (1826), tinplate works in Llwydarth and Pontyclun and an iron ore mine in Llanharry.\nAlongside the metalworks, industries appeared throughout Glamorgan that made use of the works' output. Pontypridd was well known for the Brown Lenox Chainworks, which during the 19th century was the town's main industrial employer.\nCoal industry.\nThe largest change to industrial Glamorgan was the opening up of the South Wales coalfield, the largest continuous coalfield in Britain, which occupied the greater part of Glamorgan, mostly north of the Vale. The coalfield provided a vast range in quality and type, but prior to 1750 the only real access to the seams was through bell pits or digging horizontally into a level where the seam was exposed at a river bank or mountainside. Although initially excavated for export, coal was soon also needed for the smelting process in Britain's expanding metallurgical industries. Developments in coal mining began in the north-eastern rim of Glamorgan around the ironworks of Merthyr and in the south-west around the copper plants of Swansea. In 1828 the South Wales coalfield was producing an estimated 3 million tons of coal, by 1840 that had risen to 4.5 million, with about 70 percent consumed by local commercial and domestic usage.\nThe 1840s saw the start of a dramatic increase in the amount of coal excavated within Glamorgan. Several events took place to precipitate the growth in coal mining, including the discovery of steam coal in the Cynon Valley, the building of a large masonry dock at Cardiff and the construction of the Taff Vale Railway. In 1845, after trials by the British Admiralty, Welsh steam coal replaced coal from Newcastle-upon-Tyne as the preferred fuel for the ships of the Royal Navy. Glamorgan steam coal quickly became a sought-after commodity for navies all over the world and its production increased to meet the demand.\nThe richest source for steam coal was the Rhondda Valleys, and by 1856 the Taff Vale Railway had reached the heads of both valleys. Over the next fifty years the Rhondda would grow to become the largest producer of coal of the age. In 1874, the Rhondda produced 2.13 million tons of coal, which rose to 5.8 million tons by 1884. The coal now produced in Glamorgan far exceeded the interior demand, and in the later half of the 19th century the area became a mass exporter for its product. In the 1890s the docks of South Wales accounted for 38 percent of British coal exports and a quarter of global trade.\nAlong with the increase in coal production came a very large increase in the population, as people emigrated to the area to seek employment. In Aberdare the population grew from 6,471 in 1841 to 32,299 in 1851 while the Rhondda grew from 3,035 in 1861 to 55,632 in 1881, peaking in 1921 at 162,729. Much of this population growth was driven by immigration. In the ten years from 1881 to 1891, net migration to Glamorgan was over 76,000, 63 percent of which was from the non-border counties of England \u2013 a proportion that increased in the following decade.\nAgriculture.\nUntil the beginning of the 18th century, Glamorgan was almost entirely agriculture based. With the industrialisation of the county, farming became of far less importance, with industrial areas encroaching into farming lands. In Glamorgan, from the late 19th century, there was a significant reduction away from arable land towards pasture land. There were two main factors behind this trend; firstly the increase in the population of the county required more milk and other dairy produce, in an age before refrigeration. Secondly there was an employment shortage in farming due to the call of better paid industrial work, and pastoral land was less work intensive. Stock rearing became prominent with breeds such as Hereford, Devon and Shorthorn cattle being bred in the Vale of Glamorgan, while the unenclosed wilds of the Gower saw Welsh Ponies bred on the commons.\nBuildings of note 1750\u20131920.\nThe industrial period of Glamorgan saw a massive building program throughout the uplands and in the coastal regions, reflecting the increasing population and the need for new cheap housing to accommodate the hundreds of thousands of workers coming into the area. As the towns urbanised and the hamlets became villages, the trappings of modern life were reflected in the buildings required to sustain new and growing communities. The period saw the appearance, not only of the works and pits themselves, but of the terrace house or miners cottage, railway stations, hospitals, churches, chapels, bridges, viaducts, stadiums, schools, universities, museums and workingmen's halls.\nAs well as the architecture of Glamorgan entering modernity, there was also a reflection to the past, with some individuals who made the most from the booming industrial economy restoring symbols of the past, building follies and commissioning Gothic-style additions to ancient churches. Robert Lugar's Cyfarthfa Castle in Merthyr (1825) and the late 19th century additions to Cardiff Castle, designed by William Burges, exemplify how Gothic was the favoured style for rich industrialists and entrepreneurs. Greek Revival architecture, popularised in France and Germany in the late 18th century, was used for a number of public and educational buildings in Wales including the Royal Institution of South Wales in Swansea (1841) and Bridgend Town Hall (1843).\nIn 1897, Cardiff Corporation acquired land from the Marquess of Bute with the intention of erecting buildings to meet the administrative, legal and educational needs of Glamorgan's county town. From 1901 onwards, Cathays Park was developed into \"possibly the finest... civic centre in Britain\" with a range of public buildings including the Baroque City Hall and the rococo-style University College.\nThe majority of Nonconformist chapels were built in the 19th century. They progressed from simple, single-storey designs to larger and more elaborate structures, most built in the classical style. Perhaps the most ambitious chapel was John Humphrey's Morriston Tabernacle (1872), incorporating Classical, Romanesque and Gothic elements, which has been called the 'Noncomformist Cathedral of Wales'.\nIndustrial architecture tended to be functional, although some structures, such as the four-storey engine house at Cyfarthfa Ironworks (1836), were built to impress. Coal mining eventually became the dominant industry in Glamorgan and tall winding towers \u2013 originally made of timber or cast iron, later steel \u2013 became symbolic icons.\nLate-period Glamorgan, 1920\u20131974.\nAfter the First World War, there was an initial drop in coal and iron production, there was still enough demand to push the coalfields to their limits, helped by events such as the American coal miners' strike. Cardiff Docks reached an exporting peak in 1923, but soon production fell and unemployment in the upland valleys began to increase at a dramatic rate. Between April 1924 and August 1925 the unemployment rate amongst South Wales miners jumped from 1.8% to 28.5%. Several factors came together to cause this collapse, including the over-valuation of sterling, the end of the coal subsidy, the growth of electric power, the adoption of oil as the fuel of choice for many industries, and over-expansion of the mines in the late nineteenth century. The Welsh coal owners had failed to invest mechanisation during the good years, and by the 1930s the South Wales Coalfield had the lowest productivity, highest production costs and smallest profits of all Britain's coal-producing regions.\nThese structural problems were followed by the General Strike of 1926 and then most disastrously the interwar depression of 1929\u20131931, which changed the face of industrial Glamorgan forever. In 1932, Glamorgan had an unemployment rate of more than 40 per cent, and one of the highest proportions of people receiving poor relief in the United Kingdom. This was a contrast with relatively recent prosperity: for example, in 1913 unemployment in Merthyr was below 2 per cent and the borough had 24,000 miners. By 1921, the number of employed miners had fallen to 16,000, and in 1934, it was down to 8,000.\nSteel production was no less depressed than the coal industry. The inter-war years saw the closure of the old Cyfarthfa and Dowlais works, as steel-making became increasingly concentrated in the coastal belt. Both the coal and steel industries were increasingly dominated by large amalgamations, such as Powell Duffryn and Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds. The smaller companies progressively disappeared.\nGlamorgan suffered disproportionately during the Great Depression because of the high proportion of its workforce employed in primary production rather than the manufacture of finished products. Other parts of Britain began to recover as domestic demand for consumer products picked up, but unemployment in the South Wales Valleys continued to rise: the jobless rate in Merthyr reached 47.5 per cent in June 1935. However, the coastal ports, Cardiff and Swansea, managed to sustain a \"reasonable\" level of economic activity, and the anthracite coalfield in western Glamorgan (and eastern Carmarthenshire) also managed to maintain production and exports above pre-war levels.\nWith the outbreak of World War II the coalfields of Glamorgan saw a sharp rise in trade and employment. Despite the demand the want for the youth to conscript in the war effort in the valley areas meant that there was a shortage of workers to run the mines; this in turn saw the introduction of the Bevin Boys, workers conscripted to work in the mines. During the war both Cardiff and Swansea were targets for German air attacks due to their important docks.\nBuildings and structures, 1920\u20131974.\nAfter the First World War, Glamorgan, as was typical for Britain as a whole, entered a period of modernity, which saw buildings built and designed for functionality rather than splendour with period features watered down. As the century progressed, symbols of the past industrial period were torn down and replaced with industrial estates populated by unadorned geometric factories. With concrete becoming the favourite post-war building material, larger office blocks began appearing within the cities, though few were of any architectural significance.\nDespite entering a fallow period of architectural design, several structures of note did emerge. Although work began in 1911, The National Museum of Wales (Smith and Brewer) was not completed until 1927 due to the First World War. Designed to reflect sympathetically in dimensions with its neighbouring city hall, the dome-topped museum combines many architectural motifs with Doric columns at its facade, while internally a large entrance hall with stairs, landings and balconies. Percy Thomas' Guildhall in Swansea, an example of the 'stripped modernist' style completed in 1936, was described as \"Wales' finest interwar building\".\nAlthough functionality often deprived a building of interest, Sully Hospital (Pite, Son &amp; Fairweather) is an example of a building which gained from its functional requirements. Initially built for tubercular patients, whose cure required the maximum amount of light and air, the functional architecture left a striking glass-fronted building, completed in 1936.\nAnother hospital to which functionalism was applied was the University Hospital of Wales (S.W. Milburn &amp; Partners). Begun in the 1960s, and completed in 1971, the building is the third largest hospital in the United Kingdom and the largest in Wales. It was designed to bring the care of patients, research and medical teaching together under one roof.\nThe demands of modern living saw the growth of housing estates throughout Glamorgan, moving away from the Victorian terrace of Cardiff or the ribbon cottages of the valleys. Several of these projects were failures architecturally and socially. Of note were the Billybanks estate in Penarth and Penrhys Estate (Alex Robertson, Peter Francis &amp; Partners) in the Rhondda, both described by Malcolm Parry, the former Head of the School of Architecture at Cardiff University, as \"...the worst examples of architecture and planning in Wales.\"\nGeography.\nThe area that was Glamorgan can be divided into three distinct and contrasting geographical areas. To the south east is a gently undulating limestone plateau, virtually coterminous with the modern county borough of Vale of Glamorgan, mainly comprising farmland and small villages stretching from Porthcawl to Cardiff. The lowlands are geographically the best environment for agriculture of the three areas. Settlements in the area included Cardiff, Barry, Bridgend, Cowbridge, Penarth and Porthcawl.\nThe northern part of the county was a mountainous area, dissected by deep narrow valleys. At the southern edge of the Brecon Beacons, the simple geological structure of Old Red Sandstone gives way to Carboniferous rocks; limestone, shales and millstone grit. In the 19th century, industrial and population growth in the coal-bearing valleys of the Rhymney, Taff, Dare and Rhondda gave rise to a form of urbanisation characterised as ribbon development. The last deep mine, Tower Colliery at Hirwaun, closed in January 2008. A few small drift mines like Unity Mine (formerly Pentreclwydau South) near Glynneath remain. Towns in the region included Aberdare, Caerphilly, Pontypridd, Maesteg, Merthyr Tydfil and Mountain Ash.\nFurther west was Swansea Bay and the Gower Peninsula, an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. Of all the areas, Gower was the least affected by heavy industry and the ancient landscape was the least impaired. The high ground that runs centrally through the Gower was largely uncultivated common land and its beaches and rocky coastal headlands showed little signs of the tourist trade that played an increasing role on the local economy. The major settlements of the region included Swansea, Neath and Port Talbot.\nCoastline.\nThe coastline of Glamorgan stretched for 88 miles from Trowbridge in the east to Gower in the west. It was divided naturally into three distinct sections. The coast of the Vale of Glamorgan was mainly characterised by cliffs, while from Porthcawl to Swansea Bay wide sandy shores prevail. The final section, the Gower coast, was made up of a rugged and serrated peninsula.\nFrom the east the first major coastline feature was the Rhymney River, once seen as the natural border between Glamorgan and Monmouthshire, until the absorption of Trowbridge into the Cardiff district in 1936. Heading west, the coast was an expanse of alluvial deposits stretching to the mouth of Glamorgan's most well known river, the River Taff. Once marshland, the area was consumed by the rapid growth of the Cardiff Docks during the industrial revolution, but with the downturn in Glamorgan's iron and coal industries, the docks declined. Also flowing into Cardiff Docks is the River Ely, which separates Cardiff from the headland and seaside resort of Penarth in the Vale of Glamorgan. Here the coast stretches southwards for two and a half miles from Penarth Head to Lavernock Point, hidden from vessels travelling up the Bristol Channel. South easterly from Lavernock Point, roughly three miles out in the Channel Estuary is Flat Holm, an island which although geographically is within the Vale, is administered as part of the city of Cardiff. Flat Holm was the most southerly point of Glamorgan and Wales.\nFrom Lavernock Point the coast heads sharply west to the town of Barry, a well-known seaside resort, Barry is most notable for its rapid expansion during the late 19th century to become an important dock, at one stage surpassing Cardiff Dock for the tonnage of coal exported. Passing the cliffs of Barry Island the coastline becomes a low-lying promontory called the Lays, which continues west taking in the villages of Rhoose and Aberthaw before reaching Breaksea Point, the most southerly point of mainland Wales. Beyond the point is Limpert Bay, which was overlooked by the village of Gileston and the ancient encampment of Summerhouse Point. Here the cliffs rise and run for eleven miles as far as the estuary of the Ogmore. Along this run of cliffs the coast passes Llantwit Major and St Donats, before heading in a rough north-west direction at Nash Point.\nThe coastline remains as steep cliffs until after Dunraven Head, where the cliff face drops away to expose Southerndown Beach. Two miles beyond, the Ogmore River runs out into a sand-locked bay which can be seen as commencing the second section of the Glamorgan coast, as here the scenery undergoes an abrupt change; from a series of unbroken cliffs to vast regions of sandy beaches. The Ogmore Bay at Ogmore-by-Sea was not only floored with sand but was also backed by high and extensive sand dune system, these impressive natural sand features are commonly known as the Merthyr Mawr sand dunes. Beyond the bay the underlying rocks emerge from the sand to form the promontory of Porthcawl Point. Porthcawl town, once possessing a small dock, abandoned the trade in favour of tourism. The coast continues to the north west as a low rocky formation for three miles to Sker Point, after which the sand line begins again, forming an arid wilderness all the way to Port Talbot. Port Talbot was one of the later industrial towns of Glamorgan, and grew out of the medieval village of Aberavon, a settlement built on the banks of the River Afan. To the west of the mouth of the Afan is the new district of Sandfields, built over the holiday dunes of Aberavon beach in the 1950s to house the workforce of Port Talbot Steelworks.\nThe River Afan commences the wide sweep of Swansea Bay, which from Port Talbot arcs around taking in Baglan Bay, Briton Ferry, Swansea and ending in Mumbles. The whole bay is shut in by high hills and is thickly encircled with sands. Within the bay are two of the major estuaries of Glamorgan; from Port Talbot the first is the River Neath, which is protected by long breakwaters. The second is the Tawe, the central river of Swansea. Beyond the Tawe the bay sweeps for six miles before reaching Mumbles Head, its most westerly point. Mumbles Head is served by Mumbles Lighthouse, which sits on the further of two small islands off the head.\nAt The Mumbles, the coastline begins its third phase, commencing the wild and rugged cliffs of the Gower. From Mumbles Head to Worm's Head, 20 miles to the west, the coast consists of a series of precipitous cliffs, interrupted by a number of sandy bays. The most notable of the bays include Langland Bay, Caswell Bay, Pwlldu Bay, Three Cliffs Bay and Oxwich Bay. Three Cliffs Bay and the adjoining Oxwich Bay are overlooked by three medieval defences, Pennard Castle, Penrice Castle and Oxwich Castle, all three now ruinous. Oxwich Bay ends in the large wooded promontory of Oxwich Point, which leads west to the beach front villages of Horton and Port Eynon. From Port Eynon Point, a five-mile stretch of wild and impressive cliffs leads to Worm's Head and the western termination of the peninsula. This rock face is pierced in places by caverns, the most notable being Culver Hole a bone cave near Port Eynon Point.\nWorm's Head is one of the stand out features of the Glamorgan coastline, a long narrow ledge of limestone, projecting into the sea, ending in a 200-foot high wedge shaped crag; the Head takes its name from its resemblance to a dragon. On the northern side of the Worm's Head is the village and Bay of Rhossili, a westerly facing bay that leads backwards to a series of downs, some of the highest land in the Gower. Rhossili Bay ends in the northern formation of Llangenydd Burrows and the islet of Burry Holms. The final stretch of Glamorgan coastline turns north-east to form the Burry Inlet, a shallow and sand-choked estuary which leads to a tract of salt marshes which stretch to the mouth of the River Loughor. The Loughor forming the border between Glamorgan and Carmarthenshire.\nRivers.\nThe major rivers of Glamorgan include the Taff, the Ely, the Ogmore, the Neath, Dulais, the Tawe, the Rhymney (which forms the historic boundary with Monmouthshire), and the Loughor (which forms the historic boundary with Carmarthenshire).\nAdministration.\nAfter the fall of the Welsh kingdom of Morgannwg to Robert FitzHamon in 1091, the region became the English Lordship of Glamorgan, sometimes called the Lordship of Glamorgan and Morgan because it was divided into the Norman settled Plain or Vale of Glamorgan and the Welsh upland area called Morgannwg, anglicised to Morgan. Both areas were under the control of the Norman Lords of Glamorgan (often the Earls of Gloucester). As well as building a military and defensive network, the Normans also undertook an ecclesiastical reorganisation on Glamorgan. In Llandaff there was a small monastic community based on a small church; which was made the headquarters of the diocese, incorporated into the Province of Canterbury. The Diocese of Llandaff covered almost the entirety of Glamorgan and continued throughout the history of the county of Glamorgan, and through to modern times.\nIn 1536, the Laws in Wales Act 1535 attached the Lordship of Gower and Kilvey to Glamorgan and created the historic county of Glamorgan. Along with gaining parliamentary representation in 1536, Glamorgan became part of the King's circuit, with judges from England administering law at the Great Session or Assizes. Local magistrates were appointed to deal with petty sessions while Lords Lieutenant were appointed as the King's representative. Law enforcement within the confines of the shire was the responsibility of the High Sheriff of Glamorgan.\nFrom the 1790s a call was made for parliamentary reform to address the imbalance between the number of Members of Parliament for each Welsh county and the population each seat represented. Radnorshire had only a tenth of the population of Glamorganshire, though Radnorshire had one MP to Glamorganshire's two (Glamorgan and the District of Cardiff). The First Reform Act (1832) gave five more seats to Wales, three went to Glamorganshire. The Act increased the number of MPs for Glamorganshire from one to two, it created the separate District of Swansea and Merthyr Tydfil became a borough constituency. Reflecting the increased importance and wealth of Merthyr the borough was given a second MP after the Reform Act 1867. However, the 1867 Act had only a limited impact in Glamorgan as the majority of the population lived in the county constituency. Out of 162,241 inhabitants of the county in 1880, only 12,785 had the vote. Conversely, the borough electorate, in Cardiff, Swansea and Merthyr Tydfil had been greatly expanded. This was particularly true of Merthyr where the electorate was increased tenfold to 14,577. As a result, the nonconformist radical, Henry Richard, was returned as senior member for Merthyr, an important watershed in Welsh political history.\nIn 1884, the county members were the octogenarian C.R.M. Talbot, who had served since 1830 and the Swansea industrialist, Hussey Vivian, first elected in 1857. In 1885, all ten of the Glamorgan seats were captured by the Liberal Party and this election represented the triumph of the nonconformist middle classes. However, the political representation of Glamorgan was transformed between 1884 and 1922. By 1922, the county was represented by eleven Labour MPs. The transformation commenced with the Redistribution of Seats Act 1885. Glamorganshire was split from its two Members of Parliament to five, with the creation of constituencies for East, Mid and South Glamorganshire, Gower and Rhondda. An additional Swansea Town constituency was created, distinct from Swansea District but the Cardiff constituency remained unchanged, and with over 85,000 inhabitants became the largest single-member constituency in the United Kingdom. At this election, all ten members returned for Glamorgan were Liberals, an event which marked the ascendancy of the nonconformist middle-class as a powerful political force. Although most of these seats now had the working-class electorate in a majority they were safe for the Liberals as long as the labour element remained in the Liberal fold.\nAn administrative county of Glamorgan was created under the Local Government Act 1888, excluding Swansea and Cardiff, which became independent county boroughs. In 1908, county borough status was also granted to Merthyr Tydfil, despite protests from the southern part of the borough, where it was claimed that links were stronger with Pontypridd. In 1935, a Royal Commission argued that Merthyr Tydfil County Borough, then heavily burdened by the cost of maintaining many unemployed people, should be abolished and merged with Glamorgan. The county council refused the proposal.\nThe first chairman of the County Council was Henry Vivian, 1st Baron Swansea. The county council's coat of arms, granted in 1950, was: \"Or, three chevronels gules between as many Tudor roses barbed and seeded proper\". The red chevronels on a gold shield were the arms of the De Clare Marcher Lords, while the roses recorded the shiring of Glamorgan by Henry VIII. The crest above the shield was a Welsh dragon rising from flames, symbolising the revival of the county's industry following a period of economic depression. The dragon supported a flag bearing a clarion from the arms of the De Granville family, lords of Neath. The supporters of the arms were a coalminer and a steel worker. The motto adopted by the county council: or 'He Who suffered, conquered' was that of the lineage of Iestyn ap Gwrgant, and was considered appropriate to an area whose wealth depended on great hardship.\nUnder the Local Government Act 1972, the county boroughs and administrative county of Glamorgan were abolished on 1 April 1974, with three new counties being established, each containing a former county borough: West Glamorgan, Mid Glamorgan, South Glamorgan. It 1996 these areas were reorganised into several unitary authorities by the Local Government Act of 1994. The South Wales Police force covers an area that is similar to Glamorgan. Since 2013, Glamorgan has had its own official flag, red with three white chevrons.\nCivil parishes.\nUntil 1974 Glamorgan was divided into civil parishes, which in the medieval period comprised the following 125 parishes, listed by hundred (with chapelries in \"italics\"):\nTransport.\nRoads.\nThe earliest forms of transport within Glamorgan were mere paths or trackways linking one settlement to another. With continual use the tracks widened to allow different forms of travel, including the use by pack horses; and as the tracks became more recognisable the first primitive roads came into being. The Romans established a route, Via Julia Maritima, to service their garrisons across South Wales and this is followed largely by the present A48. However, for 1,000 years after the Romans there was little need for major roads. Early roads were not systematically managed, and in Glamorgan as in the rest of Wales, they were in a very poor state. Towards Tudor times the upkeep and repair of the roads came under the administration of each parish, with six days of the week during the summer allowed for track repairs. These repairs were rarely completed and the roadways continued to suffer. The Highways Act 1555 required each landowner to produce a cart, horses or bullocks, and two men to work 4 days on roads. Supervision was by two unpaid surveyors appointed by the parish. By the late 1600s the situation improved as surveyors were appointed by the magistrates, who were allowed to levy a rate to pay for some of the work.\nIn 1756, after the shire of Glamorgan had come under the rule of the crown, Wales adopted a toll system for the maintenance of the roads; with the governance falling under the control of the turnpike trusts. Further Turnpike Acts came into force in 1799 and 1810, and these Acts allowed trustees to collect a toll for the use of certain roads within a district. In South Wales there were turnpikes along the coast, more or less following the present motorway line, up the Merthyr Valley and across the hills to Abergavenny, Brecon, Llandovery and down to Carmarthen. This system improved travelling conditions, allowing for stage coaches which were then coming into general use. Although the roads improved there were those who felt that the tolls were unjust, and there was a popular uprising between 1839 and 1843 known as the Rebecca Riots where agitators attacked and destroyed the toll houses. Although most of these attacks occurred in Carmarthenshire, there were reports of attacks within Glamorgan, most notably in Swansea. In 1846, county highway boards were established in south Wales, to buy out the turnpike trusts and take over their functions. In 1878 all roads that had ceased to be turnpiked after 1870 were deemed as 'main roads' by the Highways and Locomotives (Amendment) Act 1878. The turnpike system was eventually abolished by the Local Government Act 1888 and the roads were placed under the management of the local county council. County highway boards were disbanded. There were, however, a number of urban areas within Glamorgan that retained the right to control their own highways, and the county council never achieved control of the whole highway network.\nProposals for a high-quality new road across South Wales were first made in the 1930s. However, the dualling of the A48 Neath bypass was only completed in 1960, with the A48(M) Port Talbot bypass following in 1966. The latter road, an early example of dual carriageway construction through a built-up area, was the first length of motorway opened to traffic in Wales. The Ministry of Transport initially envisaged that the new M4 motorway would terminate at Tredegar Park near Newport, with a series of bypasses to improve the A48 further west. The creation of the Welsh Office led to a re-appraisal of policy and a decision to extend the M4 further into Glamorgan. By 1970, the Welsh Office was committed to building a new route all the way to Pont Abraham in Carmarthenshire. The 1960s also saw the construction of the first road across the Heads of the Valleys, with the A465 Neath-Abergavenny trunk road opening in 1964. However, even at the outset there were complaints about the capacity and safety of its single carriageway, three-lane design.\nWaterways and ports.\nDue to Glamorgan's long coastline, several settlements grew and prospered as harbour and port towns. In 1801, Swansea was Glamorgan's largest urban area with a population five times that of Cardiff's. Cowbridge was the capital town of the Vale, and the centre of agricultural trade, with surplus stock being shipped to the coastal village of Aberthaw and to a lesser extent Newton. Where there were breaks in the rocky coastline, small fishing and cockling communities existed, such as Port Eynon and Penclawdd.\nThe event that changed the face of coastal Glamorgan was the growth of the Merthyr iron industry. Merthyr needed a coastal export point for its iron and Cardiff was the obvious choice being at the mouth of the River Taff. A road was built to connect the two towns, but with only horses to move the cargo, transportation was cumbersome; therefore an alternative was planned. Although Glamorgan had a large number of rivers, few were navigable for any considerable length. Between 1790 and 1794, acts of Parliament were obtained for the construction of three canals within Glamorgan, the Glamorganshire Canal (1790), Neath Canal (1791) and the Swansea Canal (1794). All three were vital in increasing the transportation of iron, copper, steel and coal from the uplands of the county to the ports at Swansea and Cardiff. Although the first stages of all three canals were completed by 1800 and revolutionised the commercial transportation systems of Glamorgan; in 1804 at Penydarren Ironworks, Richard Trevithick's \"Pen-y-Darren\" locomotive became the first engine to pull a load along rails; heralding the coming of the railways, which would eventually replace the canals.\nThe port at Cardiff grew quickly during the 19th century, not as a mass exporter of iron but of coal, transported from Pontypridd and the Cynon and Rhondda Valleys. From 1840 to 1870 Cardiff's export tonnage of coal increased from 44,350 to 2,219,000. By 1871, Cardiff had outgrown all of its Welsh rivals to become the most populous town in the country Swansea Docks continued to be the world's leading exporter of copper, but did not experience the growth of Cardiff due to poor links to the coalfields. Ambitious attempts were made to link Swansea's docks to coal rich areas, such as the Rhondda and Swansea Bay Railway, but these plans were never truly economically successful. The biggest threat to Cardiff's dominance came in the early 20th century at Barry. In 1881, Barry had 484 inhabitants, after an 1884 act of Parliament authorising the construction of a docks and railway link, the town grew to over 27,000 by 1901. The chief advocate of Barry's growth as a dock was David Davies, and in 1901 Barry was exporting more coal than Cardiff, peaking in 1913 when it shipped 11.41 million tons.\nThe interwar depression experienced by Great Britain brought an end to the prosperity of the Glamorgan ports. During the Second World War, the main ports of Glamorgan were heavily targeted by German bombing raids, though exports were not severely disrupted. By the second half of the 20th century none of the county's docks showed any growth, and with the collapse of the coal trade in South Wales Cardiff and Barry Docks became near derelict, shipping mainly general cargo. Swansea also suffered a vast reduction on trade with the end of the area as a world leader in copper smelting. The only dock to remain a viable exporter was the Port of Port Talbot. First built in 1839, the docks at Port Talbot were a minor concern in relation to the more established ports, but exports increased after the 1916 with the completion of the Margam Steelworks. Exports continued strongly when the Abbey Works were built in 1952. Port Talbot would eventually become the biggest exporting port in Glamorgan, and the second largest in Wales, only surpassed by Milford Haven.\nRail.\nBefore the use of locomotives, railway track was used at various stages of the canal system to link locations to which the waterways could not reach. These wagons on these tramlines would be pulled by horse over wooden rails, which later were replaced by wrought iron. In 1809 Richard Griffiths built a private tram-road to the Glamorganshire Canal from his coal mine in Gyfeillion. The Gyfeillion site was extended further in 1811 to link Walter Coffin's mine at Dinas Rhondda, allowing the first viable transport link from the Rhondda coal fields to the ports of Cardiff.\nThe first railway network to be built in Glamorgan, the Taff Vale Railway, was also the first in Wales. Linking the ironworks of Merthyr to the ports of Cardiff, the Taff Vale line was given royal assent in 1836, with work commencing the same year. It was completed in 1840, and as well as carrying goods the trains made limited passenger trips from the very beginning. By 1856 the Taff Vale Railway was extended to service the top of the Rhondda Valleys at Treherbert and Maerdy, which allowed the exploitation of the minefields in one of the most coal-rich areas of Britain. The second major railway to open was the South Wales Railway, linking Gloucester in England to Neyland. The line was designed to link the coalfields of Glamorgan to London, and was also part of Isambard Kingdom Brunel's vision of a transport link from London to New York. The South Wales Railway serviced Cardiff, Bridgend, Neath and Swansea, with its final destination within Glamorgan being Loughor, before continuing through Carmarthenshire. Other railway lines that opened during the mid to late 19th century included the Vale of Neath Railway, the Swansea Vale Railway and the Rhymney Railway; all designed with the primary purpose of transporting metals and coal from the uplands of the county to the ever-expanding ports. The cargo carried on these lines was of a very high volume, and in 1850 the Taff Vale Railway was transporting 600,000 tons of coal per annum.\nTowards the turn of the 19th century, two notable events occurred connected to the Taff Vale Railway. In 1888, the Barry Railway Company was formed as part of David Davies' plan to create an alternative export port in south Wales at Barry Docks. As a threat to the monopoly of the TVR, the plans were heavily contested in Parliament, and more parliamentary time was spent on the Barry bill than on any other railway bill in British history. The second event saw the Taff Vale Railway Strike of 1900, an event that saw the House of Lords, in the Taff Vale Case, deem trade unions accountable for the financial losses caused by strike action. The need to reverse the decision was a central factor in the creation of the British Labour Party.\nIn the 20th century, the railways saw a gradual drop in usage as the heavy industrial works and mines began to reduce output and close and many stations became redundant. Following the Second World War, the railways were nationalised in 1948. In the 1960s the main line services in Wales underwent dieselisation, but this modernisation failed to save the rail system and by 1968 many passenger lines were discontinued by the Beeching Axe.\nAirports.\nGlamorgan was served by several airports and airfields, with Cardiff Airport being the county's chief airport. Cardiff Airport grew from a former RAF station built in 1942 at Rhoose, and was originally known as Rhoose Airport. In 1970 it became 'Glamorgan, Rhoose Airport' before becoming 'Cardiff-Wales airport' in the 1980s.\nGlamorgan's second commercial airport was Swansea Airport which also began as an RAF station, before being released to commercial usage in 1956. The airport saw varying degrees of success until regular flights ceased in 1969. Several other airports and aerodromes have serviced Glamorgan, but usually for private flights. The most notorious aviation disaster in Wales occurred in Glamorgan in 1950, when a privately hired Avro Tudor crashed at Llandow Aerodrome. The Llandow air disaster was, at the time, the world's worst aviation disaster.\nCulture and recreation.\nSport.\nSport was an important part of life in Glamorgan, and the county produced several individuals and teams of note. One of the first recorded team sports in Wales was bando, a variant of bandy. The game was very popular in Glamorgan between the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries before losing in popularity to rugby football. The most notable team to carry the name Glamorgan, is Glamorgan County Cricket Club. Although cricket had been established in Glamorgan since the creation of Cardiff Cricket Club in 1819; county team Glamorgan CCC did not form until 1888. The team gained first-class status in 1921, and still play under the name of Glamorgan. In the first hundred years, the only Welshman to captain an England major tour abroad was Tony Lewis, Glamorgan captain 1967\u201372.\nThe other bat and ball team sport of note in the area was baseball, which was very popular in Cardiff, reaching its peak in the 1930s.\nOne of the most popular sports in Glamorgan was rugby union, producing some of the oldest rugby clubs in the world. Swansea RFC, Cardiff RFC and Merthyr RFC were founding members of the Welsh Rugby Union in 1881, and both St. Helen's Rugby and Cricket Ground (Swansea) and the Cardiff Arms Park (Cardiff), have been sporting venues for international rugby. Like cricket, rugby union was also played at county level, with Glamorgan represented by Glamorgan County RFC, an invitational team which faced the likes of the All Blacks and the Springboks in the early part of the 20th century. Other rugby clubs of note from the region include Bridgend RFC, Glamorgan Wanderers RFC, Neath RFC and Pontypridd RFC. Although never finding any lasting appeal within Glamorgan, a number of rugby league teams emerged in the early 1900s; and on 1 January 1908, the first true international rugby league game took place in Aberdare between Wales and New Zealand.\nAs well as rugby and cricket, association football was a very popular sport in Glamorgan, producing two teams with a long tradition in British football, Swansea City (formed 1912 as Swansea Town A.F.C.) and Cardiff City (formed 1899 as Riverside AFC). Both clubs played in the English football league system, rather than the Welsh leagues, though Cardiff were more successful during this period, spending 15 seasons in the First Division and winning the FA Cup in 1927. Other teams of note include Merthyr Tydfil F.C. (1945), who have won the Welsh Cup on three occasions.\nOf all the individual sports, boxing was perhaps Glamorgan's most prolific. From the northern coalfields and ironworks a string of world class boxers were produced, which was later matched by notable fighters from Cardiff. Of note were Rhondda's Percy Jones (World Flyweight Champion), Tom Thomas (British Middleweight Champion), Jimmy Wilde (World Flyweight Champion) and Tommy Farr (Empire Heavyweight Champion); Merthyr's Eddie Thomas (European Welterweight Champion) and Howard Winstone (European Featherweight Champion); Pontypridd's Freddie Welsh (World Lightweight Champion) and Frank Moody (Empire Middleweight Champion). From Cardiff came 'Peerless' Jim Driscoll (British Featherweight Champion) and Jack Petersen (British Heavyweight Champion). Other fighters of note include Dai Dower (European Flyweight Champion) from Abercynon and Bill Beynon (Empire Bantamweight Champion) from Taibach.\nTourism.\nGlamorgan, and Wales, were never exploited as a tourist destination until the late 18th century. The destination of choice for English gentlemen during the period was the Grand Tour, but after conflicts in mainland Europe, British travellers looked for 'wild' destinations within their own country. These first tourists were important archivists in their writings, paintings and sketches but there was no real tourist trade to receive them. The coming of industrialisation in the early 19th century gave rise to a new prosperous middle-class and improved communications; both led to a burgeoning tourist trade. The late 19th century, with improving rail links, saw the coastal areas of Glamorgan that benefited from a beachfront grow as tourist destinations. These towns, most notably Barry Island, Porthcawl, Aberavon and Mumbles, owed their existence as tourist locations to the development of the south Wales coal field and the introduction of the workers' annual holidays. By the mid 20th century these locations improved the number of visitors they could accommodate with the introduction of caravan parks and chalet parks.\nAs the 20th century progressed, and people's leisure activities extended beyond a once-a-year weeks holiday, the county responded with county parks, museums, art galleries and activity centres.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52524", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52524", "title": "Nonempty", "text": ""}
{"id": "52525", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52525", "title": "Non-empty set", "text": ""}
{"id": "52526", "revid": "1320147226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52526", "title": "Bar and bat mitzvah", "text": "Jewish coming of age rituals\nA bar mitzvah (masc.) or bat mitzvah (fem.) is a coming of age ritual in Judaism. According to Jewish law, before children reach a certain age, the parents are responsible for their child's actions. Once Jewish children reach that age, they are said to \"become\" \"b'nai mitzvah\", at which point they begin to be held accountable for their own actions. Traditionally, the father of a \"bar\" or \"bat mitzvah\" offers thanks to God that he is no longer punished for his child's sins.\nIn Orthodox communities, boys become \"bar mitzvah\" at 13 and girls become \"bat mitzvah\" at 12. In most Reform, Reconstructionist, and Conservative communities, the milestone is 13 regardless of gender. After this point, children are also held responsible for knowing Jewish ritual law, tradition, and ethics, and are able to participate in all areas of Jewish community life to the same extent as adults. In some Jewish communities, men's and women's roles differ in certain respects. For example, in Orthodox Judaism, once a boy turns 13, it is permitted to count him for the purpose of determining whether there is a prayer quorum, and he may lead prayer and other religious services in the family and the community.\n\"Bar mitzvah\" is mentioned in the Mishnah and the Talmud. Some classic sources identify the age at which children must begin to participate in the ritual at the age of 13 for boys and 12 for girls. The age of \"b'nai mitzvah\" roughly coincides with the onset of puberty. The \"bar\"/\"bat mitzvah\" ceremony is usually held on the first Shabbat after the birthday on which the child reaches the eligible age.\nEtymology.\n\"Bar\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d1\u05b7\u05bc\u05e8\u200e) is a Jewish Babylonian Aramaic word meaning 'son' (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d1\u05b5\u05bc\u05df\u200e, \"ben\" in Hebrew), while \"bat\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d1\u05b7\u05bc\u05ea\u200e), in Hebrew, means 'daughter'. \"Mitzvah\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05de\u05b4\u05e6\u05b0\u05d5\u05b8\u05d4\u200e) is Hebrew for 'commandment' or 'law'. Thus, \"bar mitzvah\" and \"bat mitzvah\" literally translate to 'son of commandment' and 'daughter of commandment', respectively. However, in rabbinical usage, the word \"bar\" means 'under the category of' or 'subject to'. \"Bar mitzvah\" therefore translates to '[one] who is subject to the law'. Although the term is commonly used to refer to the ritual itself, the phrase originally refers to the person.\nHistory.\nThe modern method of celebrating becoming a \"bar mitzvah\" did not exist in the time of the Hebrew Bible, Mishnah, or Talmud. Early rabbinic sources specify 13 as the age at which a boy becomes a legal adult; however, the celebration of this occasion is not mentioned until the Middle Ages (from approximately 500 CE to 1500 CE; see post-classical history).\nSome late midrashic sources, and some medieval sources refer to a synagogue ceremony performed upon the boy's reaching age thirteen:\nLater on are references to a festive celebration on this occasion:\nAge thirteen.\nThe Bible does not explicitly specify the age of 13. Passages in the books of Exodus and Numbers note the age of majority for army service as twenty. Machzor Vitri notes that refers to Levi as a \"man\", when a calculation from other verses suggests that Levi was aged 13 at the time.\nThe age of thirteen is mentioned in the Mishnah as the time one is obligated to observe the Torah's commandments: \"At five years old one should study the Scriptures, at ten years for the Mishnah, at 13 for the commandments...\"\nElsewhere, the Mishnah lists the ages (13 for boys and 12 for girls) at which a vow is considered automatically valid; the Talmud explains this as a result of the 13-year-old being a \"man\", as required in . (For one year before this age, the vows are conditionally valid, depending on whether the boy or girl has signs of physical maturity.)\nOther sources also list thirteen as the age of majority with respect to following the commandments of the Torah, including:\nThe term \"bar mitzvah\".\nThe term \"bar mitzvah\" appears first in the Talmud, meaning \"one who is subject to the law\", though it does not refer to age. The term \"bar mitzvah\", in reference to age, cannot be clearly traced earlier than the 14th century, the older rabbinical term being \"gadol\" (adult) or \"bar 'onshin\" (one legally responsible for own misdoings).\nSignificance.\nReaching the age of bar or bat mitzvah signifies becoming a full-fledged member of the Jewish community with the responsibilities that come with it. These include moral responsibility for one's own actions; eligibility to be called to read from the Torah and lead or participate in a minyan; the right to possess personal property and to legally marry on one's own according to Jewish law; the duty to follow the 613 laws of the Torah and keep the halakha; and the capacity to testify as a witness in a beth din (rabbinical court) case.\nMany congregations require pre-bar mitzvah children to attend a minimum number of Shabbat prayer services at the synagogue, study at a Hebrew school, take on a charity or community service project and maintain membership in good standing with the synagogue. In addition to study and preparation offered through the synagogue and Hebrew schools, bar mitzvah tutors may be hired to prepare the child through the study of Hebrew, Torah cantillation and basic Jewish concepts.\nAccording to Rabbi Mark Washofsky, \"The Reform Movement in North America has struggled over the bar/bat mitzvah. At one time, this ceremony was on the verge of extinction in Reform congregations. Most of them preferred to replace bar/bat mitzvah with confirmation, which they considered a more enlightened and appropriate ceremony for modern Jews. Yet the enduring popularity of bar/bat mitzvah prevailed and today, in our communities, bar/bat mitzvah is 'virtually universally observed' by Reform Jews.\"\nIn 2012, concern about the high post-bar/bat mitzvah drop-out rate led the Union for Reform Judaism to launch the B'nai Mitzvah Revolution, an effort to shift Reform congregations away from \"the long-held assumption that religious school is about preparing kids for their bar/bat mitzvah\" and focus instead on teaching them how to become committed and involved members of the Jewish community.\nAliyah to the Torah.\nThe widespread practice is that shortly after a boy turns 13, they are called up for an \"aliyah,\" the ceremony of reading a portion of the Torah section of the day.\nOn the Sabbath, there are seven main sections, plus an eighth, known as \"maftir,\" which is also connected to the reading of that day's \"haftorah\" section. It is most common to give the child the \"maftir\" reading.\nIn most synagogues, a designated officiant, the \"ba'al korei,\" reads all of the Torah portions, and the people receiving each \"aliyah\" only say the blessings before and after their portion is read. A bar mitzvah boy may learn to act as the \"ba'al korei\", either for the entire service, for just his \"aliyah,\" or any range in-between. He may also be ba'al korei for the \"haftorah\" portion if he receives the \"maftir,\" or may only be ba'al korei for the haftorah, without reading from the Torah at all. Any of these undertakings involves a steep learning curve and much practice, possibly taking a year of study, and is an impressive accomplishment.\nGirls may have an aliyah in Reform, Reconstructionist, and Conservative Jewish synagogues. In Orthodox synagogues, aliyot were and typically still are restricted to boys, with a girl potentially giving a d'var Torah at the end of the service. Some Modern Orthodox girls give aliyot at women's services, with fewer than ten men (so as not to constitute a minyan).\nIn Orthodox circles, the occasion is sometimes celebrated during a weekday service that includes reading from the Torah, such as a Monday or Thursday morning service.\nSome communities or families may delay the celebration for reasons such as availability of a Shabbat during which no other celebration has been scheduled, or to allow family members to travel to the event. However, this does not delay the onset of rights and responsibilities of being a Jewish adult which comes about strictly by virtue of age.\nTefillin.\nThe obligation to lay tefillin begins when a boy reaches bar mitzvah age. The common custom is for the bar mitzvah boy to begin putting on tefillin one to three months before his bar mitzvah. This way, by the time he is obligated in the commandment, he will already know how to fulfill it properly.\nParties.\nAs the first mention of a party associated with a synagogue bar mitzvah was in the 13th century, hosting some sort of party is traditional and frequently considered necessary.\nBar mitzvah festivities typically include a joyous seudat mitzvah, a celebratory meal with family, friends, and members of the community, the bar mitzvah boy delivering on this occasion a learned discourse or oration at the table before the invited guests, who offer him presents, while the rabbi or teacher gives him his blessing, accompanying it at times with an address.\nSome Jews celebrate in other ways such as taking the bat or bar mitzvah on a special trip or organizing some special event in the celebrant's honour. In many communities, the celebrant is given a certificate.\nIn some times and places, local Jewish leaders have officially limited the size and elaborateness of mitzvahs. For example, only ten men were permitted to attend the party in 1730 in Berlin, and music was banned at these parties in 1767 in Prague. These rules were usually meant to avoid offending non-Jewish neighbours, and to maintain the rule that it be a smaller celebration than a wedding.\nBar and bat mitzvah parties among wealthy Jewish families in North America are often lavish affairs held at hotels and country clubs with hundreds of guests. The trend has been mocked, most notably in the movie \"Keeping Up with the Steins\". These lavish parties were also heavily featured in the film \"You Are So Not Invited to My Bat Mitzvah\". In the 1950s, Rabbi Harold Saperstein of New York described them as too often being \"more bar than mitzvah\". Rabbi Shmuley Boteach says that over-the-top bar mitzvah parties were already common when he was growing up in Miami in the 1970s.\nIn 1979, the Responsa Committee of the Central Conference of American Rabbis addressed the Reform attitude toward bat/bar mitzvah: \"Every effort should be exerted to maintain the family festivities in the religious mood at the bar/bat mitzvah. Some of the efforts of early Reform in favor of confirmation [and] against bar mitzvah were prompted by the extravagant celebration of bar mitzvah, which had removed its primary religious significance. We vigorously oppose such excesses, as they destroy the meaning of bar/bat mitzvah.\"\nIn May 1992, the board of trustees of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations (now the Union for Reform Judaism), the synagogue arm of the Reform Movement, unanimously passed a resolution decrying \"excesses of wasteful consumption...glitzy theme events, sophisticated entertainment...and expensive party favors\", calling instead for \"family cohesion, authentic friendship, acts of \"tzedakah\" (righteous giving), and parties suitable for children.\"\nThe cost of the party depends upon what the family is willing and able to spend. Some families spend tens, or even hundreds, of thousands of dollars on the party. Generally speaking, these celebrations are less costly and elaborate than a wedding in that family. In addition to food and drink for the guests, the money at an elaborate party is mostly spent on renting and decorating a venue and hiring staff, from the catering team to emcees, DJs, entertainers, and dancers (also called \"motivators\") to encourage the guests to dance or play games.\nBat mitzvah customs.\nToday many non-Orthodox Jews celebrate a girl's bat mitzvah in the same way as a boy's bar mitzvah. All Reform and Reconstructionist, and most Conservative synagogues have egalitarian participation, in which women read from the Torah and lead services. In Orthodox communities, a bat mitzvah is celebrated when a girl reaches the age of 12.\nThe majority of Orthodox and some Conservative Jews reject the idea that a woman can publicly read from the Torah or lead prayer services whenever there is a minyan (quorum of 10 males) available to do so. However, the public celebration of a girl becoming bat mitzvah in other ways has made strong inroads into Modern Orthodox Judaism and also into some elements of Haredi Judaism. In these congregations, women do not read from the Torah or lead prayer services, but they occasionally lecture on a Jewish topic to mark their coming of age, learn a book of Tanakh, recite verses from the Book of Esther or the Book of Psalms, or say prayers from the siddur. In some Modern Orthodox circles, bat mitzvah girls will read from the Torah and lead prayer services in a women's tefillah. Rabbi Moshe Feinstein, a prominent Orthodox \"posek,\" described the bat mitzvah celebration as \"meaningless\", and of no greater halakhic significance than a birthday party. However, he reluctantly permitted it in homes, but not synagogues, as the latter would be construed as imitating Reform and Conservative customs; in any case, they do not have the status of seudat mitzvah. Rabbi Ovadiah Yosef holds that it is a seudat mitzvah.\nThere were occasional attempts to recognize a girl's coming of age in eastern Europe in the 19th and 20th centuries, the former in Warsaw (1843) and the latter in Lemberg (1902). The occasion was marked by a party without any ritual in the synagogue.\nThere are documents that record an Italian rite for becoming bat mitzvah, known as an \"entrance into the minyan\" ceremony, in which boys of thirteen and girls of twelve recited a blessing, since the mid-19th century. There were also some bat mitzvah rituals held in the 19th century in Iraq. However, it was the American rabbi Mordecai M. Kaplan held the first public celebration of a bat mitzvah as we understand it in modern times for his daughter on March 18, 1922, at the Society for the Advancement of Judaism, his synagogue in New York City. Kaplan was unaware of the earlier Italian precedent and learned of them several months later, while on holiday in Italy. Judith Kaplan recited the preliminary blessing, read a portion of that week's Torah portion in Hebrew and English, and then intoned the closing blessing. Mordecai Kaplan, an Orthodox rabbi who joined Conservative Judaism and then became the founder of Reconstructionist Judaism, influenced Jews from all branches of non-Orthodox Judaism, through his position at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America. At the time, most Orthodox rabbis strongly rejected the idea of a bat mitzvah ceremony.\nAs the ceremony became accepted for females as well as males, many women chose to celebrate the ceremony even though they were much older, as a way of formalizing and celebrating their place in the adult Jewish community.\nAlternative ceremonies.\nInstead of reading from the Torah, some Humanist Jews prefer a research paper on a topic in Jewish history to mark their coming of age. Secular Jewish Sunday schools and communities\u2014including those affiliated with the Congress of Secular Jewish Organizations and The Workers Circle\u2014encourage the youngsters to select any topic that interests them and relates to the Jewish part of their identities.\nThe kibbutz movement in Israel also encouraged the celebration of the bar mitzvah. All those coming of age in the community for that year would take on a project and research in a topic of Jewish or Zionist interest. Today many kibbutz children are opting for a more traditional bar mitzvah celebration.\nAmong some Jews, a man who has reached the age of 83 will celebrate a second bar mitzvah, under the logic that in the Hebrew Bible it says that a normal lifespan is 70 years, so that an 83-year-old can be considered 13 in a second lifetime. This ritual is becoming more common as people live longer, healthier lives.\nA bark mitzvah is a pseudo-traditional observance and celebration of a dog's coming of age, as in the Jewish traditional bar and bat mitzvahs. The term has been in use since at least 1958, when Beverly Hills couple Janet and Sonny Salter held a bark mitzvah for their 13 year old dog, Windy. Bark mitzvahs are sometimes held as an adjunct to the festival of Purim.\nGifts.\nBar or bat mitzvah celebrations have become an occasion to give the celebrant a commemorative gift. Traditionally, common gifts include books with religious or educational value, religious items, writing implements, savings bonds (to be used for the child's college education), gift certificates, or money. Gifts of cash have become commonplace in recent times. As with charity and all other gifts, it has become common to give in multiples of 18, since the \"gematria\", or numerical equivalent of the Hebrew word for \"life\", (\"chai\"), is the number 18. Monetary gifts in multiples of 18 are considered to be particularly auspicious and have become common for the bar and bat mitzvah. Many b'nai mitzvah also receive their first tallit from their parents to be used for the occasion and tefillin where this is appropriate. Jewelry is a common gift for girls at a bat mitzvah celebration. Another gift for the bat mitzvah girl is Shabbat candlesticks because it is the duty and honor of the woman to light the candles.\nIn adults.\nWhile the traditional age to hold a bar or bat mitzvah is 13 for boys and 12 or 13 for girls, some adults choose to have a bar or bat mitzvah if they do not have them as adolescents, alongside the previously mentioned non-traditional ceremony of having a second bar mitzvah when one turns 83.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52528", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52528", "title": "Planned city", "text": ""}
{"id": "52530", "revid": "36722704", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52530", "title": "Bat mitzvah", "text": ""}
{"id": "52533", "revid": "40724855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52533", "title": "7-Dehydrocholesterol", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\n7-Dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) is a zoosterol that functions in the serum as a cholesterol precursor, and is photochemically converted to vitamin D3 in the skin, therefore functioning as provitamin-D3. The presence of this compound in human skin enables humans to manufacture vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol). Upon exposure to ultraviolet UV-B rays in the sun light, 7-DHC is converted into vitamin D3 via previtamin D3 as an intermediate isomer. It is also found in the milk of several mammalian species. Lanolin, a waxy substance that is naturally secreted by wool-bearing mammals, contains 7-DHC which is converted into vitamin D by sunlight and then ingested during grooming as a nutrient. In insects 7-dehydrocholesterol is a precursor for the hormone ecdysone, required for reaching adulthood. 7-DHC was discovered by Nobel-laureate organic chemist Adolf Windaus.\nBiosynthesis.\nIt is synthesized from lathosterol by the enzyme lathosterol oxidase (lathosterol 5-desaturase). This is the next-to-last step of cholesterol biosynthesis. Defective synthesis results in the human inherited disorder lathosterolosis resembling Smith\u2013Lemli\u2013Opitz syndrome. Mice where this gene has been deleted lose the ability to increase vitamin D3 in the blood following UV exposure of the skin.\nLocation.\nThe skin consists of two primary layers: an inner layer, the dermis, comprising largely connective tissue, and an outer, thinner epidermis. The thickness of the epidermis ranges from 0.04\u00a0mm to greater than 0.6\u00a0mm. The epidermis comprises five \"strata\"; from outer to inner, they are the stratum corneum, stratum lucidum, stratum granulosum, stratum spinosum, and stratum basale. The highest concentrations of 7-dehydrocholesterol are found in the epidermal layer of skin\u2014specifically in the stratum basale and stratum spinosum. The production of pre-vitamin D3 is, therefore, greatest in these two layers.\nRadiation.\nSynthesis of pre-vitamin D3 in the skin involves UVB radiation, which effectively penetrates only the epidermal layers of skin. 7-Dehydrocholesterol absorbs UV light most effectively at wavelengths between 295 and 300 nm and, thus, the production of vitamin D3 will occur primarily at those wavelengths. The two most important factors that govern the generation of pre-vitamin D3 are the quantity (intensity) and quality (appropriate wavelength) of the UVB irradiation reaching the 7-dehydrocholesterol deep in the stratum basale and stratum spinosum. Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) can be used to produce the radiation.\nAnother important consideration is the quantity of 7-dehydrocholesterol present in the skin. Under normal circumstances, ample quantities of 7-dehydrocholesterol (about 25\u201350 \u03bcg/cm2 of skin) are available in the stratum spinosum and stratum basale of human skin to meet the body's vitamin D requirements. 7-DHC insufficiency has been proposed as an alternate cause for Vitamin D deficiency.\nSources.\n7-DHC can be produced by animals and plants via different pathways. It is not produced by fungi in significant amounts. It is made by some algae, but the pathway is poorly understood.\nIndustrially, 7-DHC generally comes from lanolin, and is used to produce vitamin D3 by UV exposure. Lichen (Cladonia rangiferina) is used to produce vegan D3.\n7-DHC is used for vitamin D3 synthesis via lanosterol in land animals, via cycloartenol in plants, and in algae together with another provitamin D ergosterol for D2. In fungi solely ergosterol is used for synthesis of D2 via lanosterol.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52534", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52534", "title": "Axiom of empty set", "text": "Axiom of Set Theory\nIn axiomatic set theory, the axiom of empty set, also called the axiom of null set and the axiom of existence, is a statement that asserts the existence of a set with no elements. It is an axiom of Kripke\u2013Platek set theory and the variant of general set theory that Burgess (2005) calls \"ST,\" and a demonstrable truth in Zermelo set theory and Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory, with or without the axiom of choice.\nFormal statement.\nIn the formal language of the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms, the axiom reads:\nformula_1.\nOr, alternatively, formula_2.\nIn words:\nThere is a set such that no element is a member of it.\nInterpretation.\nWe can use the axiom of extensionality to show that there is only one empty set. Since it is unique we can name it. It is called the \"empty set\" (denoted by {\u00a0} or \u2205). The axiom, stated in natural language, is in essence:\n\"An empty set exists\".\nThis formula is a theorem and considered true in every version of set theory. The only controversy is over how it should be justified: by making it an axiom; by deriving it from a set-existence axiom (or logic) and the axiom of separation; by deriving it from the axiom of infinity; or some other method.\nIn some formulations of ZF, the axiom of empty set is actually repeated in the axiom of infinity. However, there are other formulations of that axiom that do not presuppose the existence of an empty set. The ZF axioms can also be written using a constant symbol representing the empty set; then the axiom of infinity uses this symbol without requiring it to be empty, while the axiom of empty set is needed to state that it is in fact empty.\nFurthermore, one sometimes considers set theories in which there are no infinite sets, and then the axiom of empty set may still be required. However, any axiom of set theory or logic that implies the existence of any set will imply the existence of the empty set, if one has the axiom schema of separation. This is true, since the empty set is a subset of any set consisting of those elements that satisfy a contradictory formula.\nIn many formulations of first-order predicate logic, the existence of at least one object is always guaranteed. If the axiomatization of set theory is formulated in such a logical system with the axiom schema of separation as axioms, and if the theory makes no distinction between sets and other kinds of objects (which holds for ZF, KP, and similar theories), then the existence of the empty set is a theorem.\nIf separation is not postulated as an axiom schema but derived as a theorem schema from the schema of replacement (as is sometimes done), the situation is more complicated and depends on the exact formulation of the replacement schema. The formulation used in the axiom schema of replacement article only allows to construct the image \"F\"[\"a\"] when \"a\" is contained in the domain of the class function \"F\"; then the derivation of separation requires the axiom of empty set. On the other hand, the constraint of totality of \"F\" is often dropped from the replacement schema, in which case it implies the separation schema without using the axiom of empty set (or any other axiom for that matter).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52536", "revid": "24496035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52536", "title": "Nationalist Party (Australia)", "text": "Former Australian political party\nThe Nationalist Party, also known as the National Party, was an Australian political party. It was formed in February 1917 from a merger between the Liberal Party and the National Labor Party, the latter formed by Prime Minister Billy Hughes and his supporters after the 1916 Labor Party split over World War I conscription. The Nationalist Party was established as a 'united' non-Labor opposition that had remained a political trend once the Labor party established itself in federal politics. The party was in government (from 1923 in coalition with the Country Party) until electoral defeat in 1929. From that time it was the main opposition to the Labor Party until it merged with pro-Joseph Lyons Labor defectors to form the United Australia Party (UAP) in 1931. The party is a direct ancestor of the Liberal Party of Australia, the main centre-right party in Australia.\nHistory.\nIn October 1915, the Australian prime minister, Andrew Fisher of the Australian Labor Party, retired; Billy Hughes was chosen unanimously by the Labor caucus to succeed him. Hughes was a strong supporter of Australia's participation in World War I, and after a visit to Britain in 1916, where the Military Service Act 1916 had been passed earlier in the year, he became convinced that conscription was necessary if Australia was to sustain its contribution to the war effort. A majority of his party, most notably Roman Catholics and trade union representatives, was opposed to this, especially given the British government's reprisals against the Irish Easter Rising of 1916.\nIn October, Hughes held a plebiscite to try to gain approval for conscription, but the proposition was narrowly defeated. Daniel Mannix, the Catholic Archbishop of Melbourne, was his main opponent on the conscription issue. The defeat did not deter Hughes, who continued to vigorously argue in favour of conscription. This produced a deep and bitter split within the Australian public, as well as within his own party. The extent to which he engineered this split has been hotly debated ever since, and was even at the time regarded as ironic by many in the Labor movement, given Hughes' violent hostility to earlier Labor dissidents like Joseph Cook.\nOn 15 September 1916, the New South Wales executive of the Political Labour League (the Labor Party organisation at the time) expelled Hughes from the Labor Party. When the parliamentary Labor caucus met on 14 November 1916, lengthy discussions took place until Hughes walked out with 24 other Labor members. The remaining 43 members of the caucus then passed a motion of no confidence in the leadership, effectively expelling Hughes and his allies.\nHughes and his followers rebranded themselves as the \"National Labor Party\", and continued in office as a minority government with support from Cook and his Commonwealth Liberal Party. With the war dragging on, Hughes began negotiations with Cook to turn their confidence-and-supply agreement into formal party unity. That February, at the urging of the governor-general, Sir Robert Munro Ferguson, the two groups formally merged to form the Nationalist Party, with Hughes as leader and Cook as deputy leader. The new party was dominated by former Liberals, and as such was basically an upper- and middle-class party. However, the presence of many former Labor men\u2014many of whom had been early leaders in that party\u2014allowed the Nationalists to project an image of national unity.\nIn May 1917, the Nationalists won a huge electoral victory, and formed what was at the time the biggest majority government since Federation. The size of the landslide was magnified by the large number of Labor MPs who followed Hughes into the Nationalist Party. At this election Hughes abandoned his working-class division of West Sydney, and was elected for Bendigo in Victoria. He had promised to resign if his Government did not win the power to conscript. A second plebiscite on conscription was held in December 1917, but the proposition was again defeated, this time by a wider margin. Hughes, after receiving a vote of no confidence in his leadership by his party, resigned as prime minister. However, with no alternative candidates available, Ferguson used his reserve power to immediately re-commission Hughes as prime minister. Hughes was thus able to remain in office while having kept his promise to resign.\nHughes and the Nationalists were reelected almost as easily in 1919. They governed on their own until the elections of 1922, when the newly emerged Country Party gained the balance of power in the House of Representatives. The Nationalists had come up 12 seats short of a majority, and could only realistically hope for support from the Country Party. It was obvious that a confidence-and-supply agreement would not be enough to keep the Nationalists in office. However, the Country Party had never liked Hughes' rural policy, and its leader Earle Page let it be known that he would not serve under him. Several of the more conservative elements of the Nationalist Party had only tolerated Hughes after the war, suspecting he was still a socialist at heart. Page's demand finally gave them an excuse to dump Hughes, who was forced to resign in January 1923. Former treasurer Stanley Bruce was chosen as leader, and quickly entered into a coalition with the Country Party. The price, however, was high: five seats for the Country Party in cabinet (out of 11), with Page as treasurer and number-two man in the government. Such demands were unheard of for such a young party in a Westminster system. However, Bruce agreed to the terms rather than force another election. This was the start of the traditional coalition of non-Labor parties.\nWith the ouster of Hughes, the Nationalists took on a decidedly more conservative hue. Despite initial concerns that Australians wouldn't readily support the aloof Bruce, the Nationalist-Country Coalition won a great victory in the federal election of 1925. It was re-elected in 1928, though with a significantly reduced mandate. However, only a year later, Hughes led a group of backbenchers to cross the floor on a vote on Bruce's plans to reform the industrial arbitration system. In the subsequent election the Coalition was heavily defeated, suffering what was at the time the second-worst defeat of a sitting government since federation. Bruce even lost his own seat, and was succeeded as leader by former attorney-general John Latham.\nThe Nationalists were never a real force in Australian politics again. The party had spent its entire 12-year existence in government, and was ill-prepared for a role in opposition. In 1931, following negotiations with a group of Labor Party defectors led by Joseph Lyons, the Nationalist Party was absorbed into the new United Australia Party. Although the UAP was dominated by former Nationalists, Lyons was chosen as leader rather than Latham. The UAP replaced the Nationalists as the main non-Labor party.\nThe Western Australian branch retained the Nationalist name after the formation of the UAP, and did so until it and most of the major non-Labor parties were folded into the present-day Liberal Party of Australia.\nYoung Nationalists Organisation.\nAround 1929, Robert Menzies, then a member of the Victorian Legislative Council, joined with Wilfrid Kent Hughes to form the Young Nationalists Organisation. Menzies was its first president.\nThe organisation kept its name when its parent party became part of the UAP. Half of the UAP members elected in the 1932 Victorian state election were Young Nationalists, almost trebling their parliamentary representation. The premier, Sir Stanley Argyle, included three of them in his eight-person cabinet, including Menzies as deputy premier.\nLater, when Menzies founded the Liberal Party of Australia, he invited delegates from the Young Nationalists to attend. The Young Nationalists followed the UAP into the Liberal Party, and formed the nucleus of the new party's youth wing, the Young Liberals.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52537", "revid": "11042835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52537", "title": "54 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 54 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Appius and Ahenobarbus (or, less frequently, year 700 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 54 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52538", "revid": "33839581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52538", "title": "55 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 55 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Crassus and Pompey (or, less frequently, year 699 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 55 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nParthia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52541", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52541", "title": "Melanocyte", "text": "Melanin-producing cells of the skin\nMelanocytes are melanin-producing neural crest-derived cells located in the bottom layer (the stratum basale) of the skin's epidermis, the middle layer of the eye (the uvea), the inner ear, vaginal epithelium, meninges, bones, and heart found in many mammals and birds. Melanin is a dark pigment primarily responsible for skin color. Once synthesized, melanin is contained in special organelles called melanosomes which can be transported to nearby keratinocytes to induce pigmentation. Thus darker skin tones have more melanosomes present than lighter skin tones. Functionally, melanin serves as protection against UV radiation. Melanocytes also have a role in the immune system.\nFunction.\nThrough a process called melanogenesis, melanocytes produce melanin, which is a pigment found in the skin, eyes, hair, nasal cavity, and inner ear. This melanogenesis leads to a long-lasting pigmentation, which is in contrast to the pigmentation that originates from oxidation of already-existing melanin.\nThere are both basal and activated levels of melanogenesis; in general, lighter-skinned people have low basal levels of melanogenesis. Exposure to UV-B radiation causes increased melanogenesis. The purpose of melanogenesis is to protect the hypodermis, the layer under the skin, from damage by UV radiation. The color of the melanin is black, allowing it to absorb a majority of the UV light and block it from passing through the epidermis.\nSince the action spectrum of sunburn and melanogenesis are virtually identical, they are assumed to be induced by the same mechanism. The agreement of the action spectrum with the absorption spectrum of DNA points towards the formation of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) - direct DNA damage.\nTypically, between 1000 and 2000 melanocytes are found per square millimeter of skin or approximately 5% to 10% of the cells in the basal layer of epidermis. Although their size can vary, melanocytes are typically 7 \u03bcm in length.\nBoth lightly and darkly pigmented skin contain similar numbers of melanocytes, with difference in skin color due to differences the packing of eumelanin into the melanosomes of keratinocytes: those in dark-toned skin are \"packaged into peri-nuclear distributed, ellipsoid\" melanosomes while those light-tone skin are \"assembled into clustered small, circular melanosomes\". There are also differences in the quantity and relative amounts of eumelanin and pheomelanin. Pigmentation including tanning is under hormonal control, including the MSH and ACTH peptides that are produced from the precursor proopiomelanocortin.\nVitiligo is a skin disease where people lack melanin in certain areas in the skin.\nPeople with oculocutaneous albinism typically have a very low level of melanin production. Albinism is often but not always related to the \"TYR\" gene coding the tyrosinase enzyme. Tyrosinase is required for melanocytes to produce melanin from the amino acid tyrosine. Albinism may be caused by a number of other genes as well, like \"OCA2\", \"SLC45A2\", \"TYRP1\", and \"HPS1\" to name some. In all, already 17 types of oculocutaneous albinism have been recognized. Each gene is related to different protein having a role in pigment production.\nPeople with Ch\u00e9diak\u2013Higashi syndrome have a buildup of melanin granules due to abnormal function of microtubules.\nRole in the immune system.\nIn addition to their role as UV radical scavengers, melanocytes are also part of the immune system, and are considered to be immune cells. Although the full role of melanocytes in immune response is not fully understood, melanocytes share many characteristics with dendritic cells: branched morphology; phagocytic capabilities; presentation of antigens to T-cells; and production and release of cytokines. Although melanocytes are dendritic in form and share many characteristics with dendritic cells, they derive from different cell lineages. Dendritic cells are derived from hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow. Melanocytes on the other hand originate from neural crest cells. As such, although morphologically and functionally similar, melanocytes and dendritic cells are not the same.\nMelanocytes are capable of expressing MHC Class II, a type of MHC expressed only by certain antigen presenting cells of the immune system, when stimulated by interactions with antigen or cytokines. All cells in any given vertebrate express MHC, but most cells only express MHC class I. The other class of MHC, Class II, is found only on \"professional\" antigen presenting cells such as dendritic cells, macrophages, B cells, and melanocytes. Importantly, melanocytes stimulated by cytokines express surface proteins such as CD40 and ICAM1 in addition to MHC class II, allowing for co-stimulation of T cells.\nIn addition to presenting antigen, one of the roles of melanocytes in the immune response is cytokine production. Melanocytes express many proinflammatory cytokines including IL-1, IL-3, IL-6, IL-8, TNF-\u03b1, and TGF-\u03b2. Like other immune cells, melanocytes secrete these cytokines in response to activation of Pattern Recognition Receptors (PRRs) such as Toll Like Receptor 4 (TLR4) which recognize MAMPs. MAMPs, also known as PAMPs, are microbial associated molecular patterns, small molecular elements such as proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids present on or in a given pathogen. In addition, cytokine production by melanocytes can be triggered by cytokines secreted by other nearby immune cells.\nMelanocytes are ideally positioned in the epidermis to be sentinels against harmful pathogens. They reside in the stratum basale, the lowest layer of the epidermis, but they use their dendrites to interact with cells in other layers, and to capture pathogens that enter the epidermis. They likely work in concert with both keratinocytes and Langerhans cells, both of which are also actively phagocytic, to contribute to the immune response.\nMelanogenesis.\nTyrosine is the non-essential amino acid precursor of melanin. Tyrosine is converted to dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) via the enzyme tyrosinase. Then DOPA is polymerized into melanin. The copper-ion based enzyme-catalyzed oxidative transformation of catechol derivative dopa to light absorbing\ndopaquinone to indole-5,6-quinone is clearly seen following the polymerization to melanin, the color of the pigment ranges from red to dark brown.\nStimulation.\nNumerous stimuli are able to alter melanogenesis, or the production of melanin by cultured melanocytes, although the method by which it works is not fully understood. Increased melanin production is seen in conditions where adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) is elevated, such as Addison's and Cushing's disease. This is mainly a consequence of alpha-MSH being secreted along with the hormone associated with reproductive tendencies in primates. Alpha-MSH is a cleavage product of ACTH that has an equal affinity for the MC1 receptor on melanocytes as ACTH.\nMelanosomes are vesicles that package the chemical inside a plasma membrane. The melanosomes are organized as a cap protecting the nucleus of the keratinocyte. When ultraviolet rays penetrate the skin and damage DNA, thymidine dinucleotide (pTpT) fragments from damaged DNA will trigger melanogenesis and cause the melanocyte to produce melanosomes, which are then transferred by dendrites to the top layer of keratinocytes.\nStem cells.\nThe precursor of the melanocyte is the melanoblast. In adults, stem cells are contained in the bulge area of the outer root sheath of hair follicles. When a hair is lost and the hair follicle regenerates, the stem cells are activated. These stem cells develop into both keratinocyte precursors and melanoblasts - and these melanoblasts supply both hair and skin (moving into the basal layer of the epidermis). There is additionally evidence that melanocyte stem cells are present in cutaneous nerves, with nerve signals causing these cells to differentiate into melanocytes for the skin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52544", "revid": "19605159", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52544", "title": "Aldo Moro", "text": "Italian politician (1916\u20131978)\nAldo Moro (; 23 September 1916 \u2013 9 May 1978) was an Italian statesman and prominent member of Christian Democracy (DC) and its centre-left wing. He served as prime minister of Italy for five terms from December 1963 to June 1968 and from November 1974 to July 1976.\nMoro served as Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs from May 1969 to July 1972 and again from July 1973 to November 1974. During his ministry, he implemented a pro-Arab policy. He was Italy's Minister of Justice and of Public Education during the 1950s. From March 1959 until January 1964, he served as secretary of the DC. On 16 March 1978, he was kidnapped by the far-left terrorist group Red Brigades; he was killed after 55 days of captivity.\nMoro was one of Italy's longest-serving post-war prime ministers, leading the country for more than six years. Moro implemented a series of social and economic reforms that modernized the country. Due to his accommodation with the Italian Communist Party leader Enrico Berlinguer, known as the Historic Compromise, Moro is widely considered to be one of the most prominent fathers of the modern Italian centre-left.\nEarly life.\nAldo Romeo Luigi Moro was born on 23 September 1916 in Maglie, near Lecce, into a family from Ugento in the Apulia region of the Kingdom of Italy. His father, Renato Moro, was a school inspector, while his mother, Fida Sticchi, was a teacher. At the age of 4, he moved with his family to Milan; they soon moved back to Apulia, where he gained a classical high school degree at Archita lyceum in Taranto. In 1934, his family moved to Bari. There, he studied law at the University of Bari and graduated in 1939. After graduation, he became a professor of philosophy of law and colonial policy (1941) and of criminal law (1942) at the University of Bari.\nIn 1935, Moro joined the Italian Catholic Federation of University Students (FUCI) of Bari. In 1939, under the approval of Giovanni Battista Montini, the future Pope Paul VI, whom he had befriended, Moro was chosen as president of the association. He kept the post until 1942 when he was forced to fight in World War II and was succeeded by Giulio Andreotti, who at the time was a law student from Rome. During his university years, Italy was ruled by the fascist regime of Benito Mussolini, and Moro took part in student competitions known as Lictors of Culture and Art organized by the local fascist students' organization, the University Fascist Groups. In 1943, along with other Catholic students, he founded the periodical \"La Rassegna\", which was published until 1945.\nIn July 1943, Moro contributed, along with Andreotti, Mario Ferrari Aggradi, Paolo Emilio Taviani, Guido Gonella, Giuseppe Capogrossi, Ferruccio Pergolesi, Vittore Branca, Giorgio La Pira, and Giuseppe Medici, to the creation of the Code of Camaldoli, an economic policy plan drawn up by members of the Italian Catholic forces. It served as inspiration and guideline for the economic policy of the future Christian democrats. In 1945, he married Eleonora Chiavarelli (1915\u20132010), with whom he had four children: Maria Fida (born 1946), Anna (born 1949), Agnese (born 1952), and Giovanni (born 1958). In 1963, Moro was transferred to La Sapienza University of Rome as a professor of the institutions of law and criminal procedure.\nEarly political career.\nMoro developed his interest in politics between 1943 and 1945. Initially, he seemed to be very interested in the social-democratic component of the Italian Socialist Party (PSI) but then started cooperating with other Christian-democratic politicians in opposition to the Italian fascist regime. During these years, he met Alcide De Gasperi, Mario Scelba, Giovanni Gronchi, and Amintore Fanfani. On 19 March 1943, the group reunited in the house of Giuseppe Spataro and officially formed the Christian Democracy (DC) party. In the DC, he joined the left-wing faction led by Giuseppe Dossetti, of whom he became a close ally. In 1945, he became director of the magazine \"Studium\" and president of the Graduated Movement of Catholic Action (\"Azione Cattolica\", AC), a widespread Catholic lay association.\nAfter being appointed vice-president of the DC, Moro was elected in the 1946 Italian general election a member of the Constituent Assembly of Italy, where he took part in the work to redact the Italian Constitution. It was during this period that his relations with the Italian Socialist Democratic Party (PSDI) and Italian social-democrats began. In 1946, Moro ran for the Bari\u2013Foggia constituency, where he received nearly 28,000 votes. In the 1948 Italian general election, he was elected with 63,000 votes to the newly formed Chamber of Deputies, and was appointed Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs in the fifth De Gasperi government from 23 May 1948 to 27 January 1950. After Dossetti's retirement in 1952, Moro founded, along with Antonio Segni, Emilio Colombo, and Mariano Rumor, the Democratic Initiative faction, which was led by his old friend Fanfani.\nIn government.\nIn the 1953 Italian general election, Moro was re-elected to the Chamber of Deputies, where he held the position of chairman of the DC parliamentary group. In 1955, was appointed as Italian Minister of Grace and Justice in the first Segni government led by Segni as Prime Minister of Italy. In 1956, he was among the most popular candidates, receiving the most votes during the party's congress. In May 1957, the PSDI withdrew its support to the government and Segni resigned on 6 May 1957.\nOn 20 May 1957, Adone Zoli was sworn in as the new head of government and Moro was appointed Italian Minister of Education. After the 1958 Italian general election, Zoli resigned. On 1 July 1958, Fanfani was sworn in as the new prime minister at the head of a coalition government with the PSDI and case-by-case support by the Italian Republican Party (PRI). Moro was confirmed as the head of Italian education and remained in office until February 1959. During his tenure, he introduced the study of civic education in schools.\nIn March 1959, after Fanfani's resignation as prime minister, a new congress was called. The leaders of the Democratic Initiative faction reunited themselves in the Convent of Dorothea of Caesarea, where they abandoned the leftist policies promoted by Fanfani and founded the \"Dorotei\" (Dorotheans) faction. In the party's national council, Moro was elected secretary of the DC and was then confirmed in the October's congress held in Florence. After the brief right-wing government led by Fernando Tambroni in 1960, supported by the decisive votes of the neo-fascist Italian Social Movement (MSI), the renovated alliance between Moro as secretary and Fanfani as prime minister led the subsequent National Congress, held in Naples in 1962, to approve with a large majority a line of collaboration with the Italian Socialist Party (PSI).\nThe 1963 Italian general election was characterized by a lack of consensus for the DC; in fact, the election was held after the launch of the centre-left formula by the DC, a coalition based upon the alliance with the PSI, which had left their alignment with the Soviet Union. Some rightist electors abandoned the DC for the Italian Liberal Party (PLI), which was asking for a centre-right government and received votes also from the quarrelsome monarchist area. Moro refused the office of prime minister, preferring to provisionally maintain his more influential post at the head of the party. Initially, the DC decided to replace Fanfani with a provisional administration led by an impartial president of the Chamber of Deputies, Giovanni Leone. When the congress of the PSI in autumn authorized a full engagement of the party into the government, Leone resigned and Moro became the new prime minister.\nFirst term as prime minister, 1963\u20131968.\nMoro's first government was unevenly supported by the DC but also by the PCI, along with the PSDI and the Italian Republican Party (PRI). The coalition, which replaced the previous Centrism system, was known as the Organic centre-left and was characterized by consociationalist and social corporatist tendencies.\nSocial reforms.\nDuring Moro's premiership, a wide range of social reforms was carried out. This included the 1967 Bridge Law (\"Legge Ponte\"). A bill approved on 21 July 1965 extended the program of social security.\nDespite mistrust and opposition, particularly when the Italian economic miracle came to an end and the government had to control the rise of inflation, the reforms continued. There was an increase in minimum wage. Two 1966 laws provided traders with insurance.\nVajont Dam disaster.\nDuring his premiership, Moro had to face the outcome of one of the most tragic events in Italian republican history, the Vajont Dam disaster. On 9 October 1963, a few weeks before his oath as prime minister, a landslide occurred on Monte Toc, in the province of Pordenone. The landslide caused a megatsunami in the artificial lake in which 50 million cubic metres of water overtopped the dam in a wave of , leading to the complete destruction of several villages and towns, and 1,917 deaths. In the previous months, the Adriatic Society of Electricity (SADE) and the Italian government, which both owned the dam, dismissed evidence and concealed reports describing the geological instability of Monte Toc on the southern side of the basin and other early warning signs reported prior to the disaster.\nImmediately after the disaster, government and local authorities insisted on attributing the tragedy to an unexpected and unavoidable natural event. Numerous warnings, signs of danger, and negative appraisals had been disregarded in the previous months and the eventual attempt to safely control the landslide into the lake by lowering its level came when the landslide was almost imminent and was too late to prevent it. The PCI newspaper \"L'Unit\u00e0\" was the first to denounce the actions of management and government. The DC accused the PCI of political profiteering from the tragedy, promising to bring justice to the people killed in the disaster.\nDifferently from Leone, who was his predecessor and became the head of SADE's team of lawyers, Moro acted strongly to condemn the managers of the society. He immediately dismissed the administrative officials who had supervised the construction of the dam.\nCoalition crisis and presidential election.\nOn 25 June 1964, the government was beaten on the budget law for the Italian Ministry of Education concerning the financing of private education. On the same day, Moro resigned. During the presidential consultations for the formation of a new cabinet, Segni, the then moderate DC member and president of Italy, asked the PSI leader Pietro Nenni to exit from the government majority.\nOn 16 July 1964, Segni sent the \"Carabinieri\" general Giovanni de Lorenzo to a meeting of representatives of DC, in order to deliver a message in case the negotiations around the formation of a new centre-left government would fail. According to some historians, De Lorenzo reported that Segni was ready to give a subsequent mandate to the president of the Senate of the Republic, Cesare Merzagora, and would ask him to form a president's government composed by all the conservative forces in the Italian Parliament. This attempted coup, which came to be known as the \"Piano Solo\", only became public in 1967 through the investigative reporting of \"L'Espresso\". Ultimately, Moro managed to form another centre-left majority. During the negotiations, Nenni had accepted the downsizing of his reform programs. On 17 July 1964, Moro went to the Quirinal Palace, with the acceptance of the assignment and the list of ministers of his second government.\nIn August 1964, Segni had a serious cerebral haemorrhage and resigned after a few months. In the 1964 Italian presidential election, which was held in December, Moro and his majority tried to elect a leftist politician at the Quirinal Palace. On the twenty-first round of voting, the leader of the PSDI and former president of the Constituent Assembly, Giuseppe Saragat, was elected with 646 votes out of 963. Saragat was the first left-wing politician to become president of Italy.\nResignation.\nDespite the opposition by Segni and other prominent rightist members of the DC, the centre-left coalition, the first one for the Italian post-war political life, stayed in power for nearly five years until the 1968 Italian general election, which was characterized by a defeat for DC's centre-left allies. The PSI and PSDI ran in a joint list named Unified Socialist Party (PSU), which lost many votes compared to the previous election, while the PCI gained ground, achieving 30% of votes in the Senate. The PSI and PSDI decided to exit from the government and Saragat appointed Leone at the head of the new cabinet composed only by DC members.\nMinister of Foreign Affairs.\nIn the 1968 DC congress, Moro yielded the secretariat and passed to internal opposition. On 5 August 1969, he was appointed Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs by the then prime minister Mariano Rumor, a position that he also held under the premierships of Emilio Colombo and Giulio Andreotti.\nPro-Arab policies.\nDuring his ministry, Moro continued the pro-Arab policy of his predecessor Fanfani. He forced Yasser Arafat to promise not to carry out terrorist attacks in Italian territory, with a commitment that was known as the Moro pact (\"lodo Moro\"). The existence of this pact and its validity was confirmed by Bassam Abu Sharif, a long-time leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP). Interviewed by Italian newspapers, such as \"Corriere della Sera\" and \"La Stampa\", he confirmed the existence of an agreement between Italy and the PFLP, thanks to which the PFLP could \"transport weapons and explosives, guaranteeing immunity from attacks in return\".\nAbout the pact, Abu Sharif commented: \"I personally followed the negotiations for the agreement. Aldo Moro was a great man, a true patriot, who wanted to save Italy some headaches, but I never met him. We discussed the details with an admiral and agents of the Italian secret service. The agreement was defined and since then we have always respected it; we were allowed to organize small transits, passages, and purely Palestinian operations, without involving Italians. After the deal, every time I came to Rome, two cars were waiting for me to protect myself. For our part, we also guaranteed to avoid embarrassment to your country, that is attacks which started directly from the Italian soil.\" This version was confirmed by former president Francesco Cossiga, who stated that Moro was the real and only creator of the pact. Moro also had to cope with the difficult situation which erupted following the coup by Muammar Gaddafi in Libya, a very important country for Italian interests not only for colonial ties but also for its energy resources and the presence of about 20,000 Italians.\n1971 presidential election.\nIn the 1971 Italian presidential election, Fanfani was proposed as the DC candidate for the office. His candidacy was weakened by the divisions within his own party and the candidacy of the PSI member Francesco De Martino, who received votes from PCI, PSI, and some PSDI members. Fanfani retired after several unsuccessful ballots and Moro was then proposed as a candidate by the left-wing faction. The right-wing strongly opposed him and the moderate conservative Leone was slightly preferred to him. At the twenty-third round, Leone was finally elected with a centre-right majority, with 518 votes out of 996, including those of the MSI.\nItalicus Express bombing.\nOn 4 August 1974, a bomb exploded on the Italicus Express, killing 12 people and injuring 48. The train was travelling from Rome to Munich; having left Florence about 45 minutes earlier, it was approaching the end of the long San Benedetto Val di Sambro tunnel under the Apennines. The bomb had been placed in the fifth passenger carriage and exploded at 01:23, while the train was reaching the end of the tunnel. The effects of the explosion and subsequent fire would have been even more terrible if the train had remained inside the tunnel. According to what his daughter Maria Fida stated in 2004, Moro should have been on board. A few minutes before departure, he was joined by some officials of the ministry who made him get off to sign some important documents. According to some reconstructions, Moro would have been the real target of the Italicus Express bombing.\nSecond term as prime minister, 1974\u20131976.\nIn October 1974, Rumor resigned as prime minister after failing to come to an agreement on how to deal with rising economic inflation. In November, Leone gave Moro the task of forming a new cabinet; he was sworn in on 23 November 1974, at the head a cabinet composed by DC and PRI, and externally supported by PSI and PSDI.\nDuring Moro's second term as prime minister, the government implemented a series of other important social reforms. A bill, approved on 3 June 1975, introduced various changes for pensioners.\nOsimo Treaty.\nDuring his premiership, Moro signed the Osimo Treaty with the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, defining the official partition of the Free Territory of Trieste. The port city of Trieste with a narrow coastal strip to the northwest (Zone A) was given to Italy, while a portion of the north-western part of the Istrian peninsula (Zone B) was given to Yugoslavia. The Italian government was harshly criticized for signing the treaty, particularly for the secretive way in which negotiations were carried out, skipping the traditional diplomatic channels. Since Istria had been an ancient Italian region, dating back to Roman Italy, together with the Venetian region of the Roman Empire, as \"Venetia et Histria\", Italian nationalists of the MSI rejected the idea of giving it up.\nBetween World War I and the end of World War II, Istria had belonged to Italy for twenty-five years, and the west coast of Istria had long had a sizeable Italian minority population.&lt;ref name=\"Valussi/Ressmann\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Some nationalist politicians called for the prosecution of Moro and Rumor, his long-time friend who was the then foreign affairs minister, for the crime of treason, as stated in Article 241 of the Italian Criminal Code, which mandated a life sentence for anybody found guilty of aiding and abetting a foreign power to exert its sovereignty on the national territory.\nResignation.\nDespite the tensions within the government's majority, the close relations between Moro and the PCI leader Enrico Berlinguer guaranteed a certain stability to Moro's governments, allowing them a capacity to act that went beyond the premises that had seen them born. The fourth Moro government, with Ugo La Malfa as Deputy Prime Minister of Italy, started the first dialogue with the PCI, with the aim of beginning a new phase to strengthen the Italian democratic system. In 1976, the PSI secretary Francesco De Martino withdrew the external support to the government and Moro was forced to resign.\nHistoric compromise.\nAfter the 1976 Italian general election, the PCI gained a historic 34% votes and Moro became a vocal supporter of the necessity of starting a dialogue between DC and PCI. Moro's main aim was to widen the democratic base of the government, including the PCI in the parliamentary majority, in which the cabinets should have been able to represent a larger number of voters and parties. According to him, the DC should have been at the centre of a coalition system based on the principles of consociative democracy. This process was known as Historic Compromise.\nBetween 1976 and 1977, Berlinguer's PCI broke with the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, implementing, together with the Spanish and French Communist parties, a new political theory and strategy known as Eurocommunism. Such a move made eventual cooperation more acceptable for DC voters, and the two parties began an intense parliamentary debate in a moment of deep social crises. In 1977, Moro was personally involved in international disputes. He strongly defended Rumor during the parliamentary debate on the Lockheed scandal, and some journalists reported that Moro himself might have been involved in the bribery. The allegation, with the aim of politically destroying Moro and avoiding the risk of a DC\u2013PCI\u2013PSI cabinet, failed when Moro was cleared on 3 March 1978, thirteen days before his kidnapping.\nThe early 1978 proposal by Moro of starting a cabinet composed of DC and PSI members, externally supported by the PCI was strongly opposed by both superpowers of the Cold War era. The United States feared that the cooperation between PCI and DC might have allowed the PCI to gain information on strategic NATO military plans and installations. Moreover, the participation in the government of communists in a Western country would have represented a cultural failure for the United States. On the other hand, the Soviets considered the potential participation by the PCI in a cabinet as a form of emancipation from Moscow and rapprochement to the Americans.\nKidnapping and murder.\nOn 16 March 1978, on via Fani, in Rome, a unit of the militant far-left organization known as Red Brigades (BR) blocked the two-car convoy that was carrying Moro and kidnapped him, murdering his five bodyguards. On the day of his kidnapping, Moro was on his way to a session of the Chamber of Deputies, where a discussion was to take place regarding a vote of confidence for a new government led by Andreotti, that would for the first time have the support of the PCI. It was to be the first implementation of Moro's strategic political vision. Additionally, he was considered to be the frontrunner for the 1978 Italian presidential election.\nIn the following days, trade unions called for a general strike, while security forces made hundreds of raids in Rome, Milan, Turin, and other cities searching for Moro's location, as places linked to Moro and the kidnapping became centres of minor pilgrimage. An estimated 16 million Italians took part in the mass public demonstrations. After a few days, even Pope Paul VI, a close friend of Moro's, intervened, offering himself in exchange for Moro. Despite the 13,000 police officers mobilized, 40,000 house searches, and 72,000 roadblocks, the police did not carry out any arrests.\nThe event has been compared to the assassination of John F. Kennedy, and referred to as Italy's 9/11. Although Italy was not the sole European country to experience terrorism, the list including France, Germany, Ireland, and Spain, the murder of Moro was the apogee of Italy's Years of Lead. Many details of Moro's kidnapping remain heavily disputed and unknown. This has led to the promotion of a number of alternative theories about the events, including conspiracy theories, which remain popular in Italy, where the judicial truth, which attributes responsibility for the operation exclusively to the Red Brigades, has failed to take root in the collective memory of Italians. Alternative theories gained traction with the institution of a special inquiring committee by the Italian Parliament in 2014 that concluded its operations in 2018. The committee concluded that the judicial truth was produced on the basis of the confession of the terrorist Valerio Morucci and that other evidence which contradicted his version was downplayed. Among these, other witness testimonies indicated that more than four people fired at Moro's convoy, multiple sources report that Moro was held captive in the apartment of Via Massimi 91 in Rome (a property of IOR), and then in Villa Odescalchi on the coast of Palo Laziale, and not in Via Camillo Montalcini 8. In August 2020, about sixty individuals from the world of historical research and political inquiry signed a document denouncing the growing weight that the conspiratorial view on the kidnapping and killing of Moro has in public discourse.\nNegotiations and captivity letters.\nThe Red Brigades proposed exchanging Moro's life for the freedom of several prisoners. There has been speculation that during his detention many government officials, including the then interior minister Francesco Cossiga, knew where he was being held. Italian politicians were divided into two factions: one favourable to negotiation (\"linea del negoziato\") and the other totally opposing the idea of a negotiated settlement (\"linea della fermezza\"). The government immediately took a hardline position, namely that the state must not bend to terrorist demands. This position was openly criticized by prominent DC party members, such as Amintore Fanfani and Giovanni Leone, who at the time was serving as president of Italy. All major political forces followed this hardline stance. This included the PCI, which supported democracy and was part of the Italian Parliament; the PCI was accused by the Red Brigades of being a pawn of the bourgeoisie. Exceptions were the Italian Socialist Party led by Bettino Craxi and the extra-parliamentary left.\nOn 2 April 1978, Romano Prodi, Mario Baldassarri, and Alberto Cl\u00f2, three professors of the University of Bologna, passed on a tip about a safe-house where the Red Brigades might be holding Moro. Prodi stated he had been given the tip by the DC founders from beyond the grave in a s\u00e9ance through the use of a Ouija board, which gave the names of Viterbo, Bolsena, and Gradoli. During the investigation of Moro's kidnapping, some members of law enforcement in Italy and of the secret services advocated for the use of torture against terrorists; prominent military members and generals, such as Carlo Alberto dalla Chiesa, were against this. Dalla Chiesa once stated: \"Italy is a democratic country that could allow itself the luxury of losing Moro, [but] not of the introduction of torture.\"\nDuring his kidnapping, Moro wrote several letters to the DC leaders and to Pope Paul VI. Some of those letters, including one that was very critical of Andreotti, were kept secret for more than a decade and published only in the early 1990s. In his letters, Moro said that the state's primary focus should be saving lives and that the government should comply with his kidnappers' demands. Most of the DC's leaders argued that the letters did not express Moro's genuine wishes, arguing they were written under duress, and thus refused all negotiations. This position was held in stark contrast to the requests of Moro's family. In his appeal to the terrorists, Pope Paul VI asked them to release Moro \"without conditions\". The specified \"without conditions\" is controversial; according to some sources, it was added to Paul VI's letter against his will, and that the Pope wanted to negotiate with the kidnappers to secure the safety of Moro. According to Antonio Mennini, Pope Paul VI had saved \u20a410 billion to pay a ransom in order to save Moro.\nMurder.\nWhen it became clear that the government would continue to refuse to negotiate, the Red Brigades held a summary trial, known as \"the people's trial\", in which Moro was found guilty and sentenced to death. They then sent a last demand to the Italian authorities, stating that if 16 Red Brigades prisoners were not released, Moro would be killed. The Italian authorities responded with a large-scale manhunt, which was unsuccessful. On 7 May 1978, Moro sent a farewell letter to his wife. He wrote: \"They have told me that they are going to kill me in a little while, I kiss you for the last time.\"\nOn 9 May 1978, after 55 days of captivity, the terrorists placed Moro in a car and told him to cover himself with a blanket, saying that they were going to transport him to another location. After Moro was covered, they shot him ten times. According to the official reconstruction after a series of trials, the killer was Mario Moretti. Moro's body was left in the trunk of a red Renault 4 on Via Michelangelo Caetani towards the Tiber River near the Roman Ghetto. After the recovery of Moro's body, Cossiga resigned as interior minister. Pope Paul VI personally officiated at Moro's funeral mass.\nNew theories, revelations, and controversies.\nOn 23 January 1983, an Italian court sentenced 32 members of the BR to life imprisonment for their role in the kidnapping and murder of Moro, among other crimes. Many elements and facts have never been fully cleared up, despite a series of trials, and this led to a number of other alternative theories about the events to become popularized. In 1993, historian Giuseppe Tamburrano expressed doubts about what was said by the Mafia \"pentiti\" in relation to the Moro affair because, comparing the two memorials (the amputee of 1978 and the complete of 1990), he said that Moro's allegations addressed to Andreotti were the same, so Andreotti had no interest to order the murder of Carmine Pecorelli, who could not threaten him to publish things already known and publicly available. Andreotti underwent a trial for his role in the assassination of Pecorelli. He was acquitted in the first instance trial (1999), convicted in the second (2002), and acquitted by Italy's Supreme Court of Cassation (2003). In a 2012 interview with Ulisse Spinnato Vega of Agenzia Clorofilla, the BR co-founders Alberto Franceschini and Renato Curcio remembered Pecorelli. Franceschini stated: \"Pecorelli, before dying, said that both the United States and the Soviet Union wanted Moro's death.\" Additionally, that Moro was suffering from Stockholm syndrome was questioned by the two reports of the Italian Parliament's inquiry about the Moro affair. According to this view, Moro was at the height of his faculties, he was very recognizable, and at some point it was he who was leading the negotiation for his own liberation and salvation. This position was supported by Leonardo Sciascia, who discussed it in the minority report he signed as a member of the first parliamentary commission and in his book \"L'affaire Moro\".\nIn 2005, Sergio Flamigni, a leftist politician and writer who had served on a parliamentary inquiry on the Moro case, suggested the involvement of the Operation Gladio network directed by NATO. He asserted that Gladio had manipulated Moretti as a way to take over the Red Brigades to effect a strategy of tension aimed at creating popular demand for a new, right-wing law-and-order regime. In 2006, Steve Pieczenik was interviewed by Emmanuel Amara in his documentary film \"Les derniers jours d'Aldo Moro\" (\"The Last Days of Aldo Moro\"). In the interview, Pieczenik, a conspiracy theorist, and expert on international terrorism and negotiating strategies who had been brought to Italy as a consultant to Cossiga's Crisis Committee, stated: \"We had to sacrifice Aldo Moro to maintain the stability of Italy.\" Pieczenik maintained that the United States had to \"instrumentalize the Red Brigades\". According to him, the decision to have Moro killed was taken during the fourth week of his detention, when Moro was thought to be revealing state secrets in his letters, namely the existence of Gladio. In another interview, Cossiga revealed that the Crisis Committee had also leaked, in a form of black propaganda, a false statement attributed to the Red Brigades that Moro was already dead. This was intended to communicate to the kidnappers that further negotiations would be useless since the government had written Moro off.\nLegacy.\nAs a Christian democrat with social-democratic tendencies, Moro is widely considered one of the ideological fathers of modern Italian centre-left, having led the first centre-left government in the history of the Italian Republic, the Organic centre-left. He was the leading figure of the left wing of the DC, which he steered towards the left as the party's secretary-general from 1959 to 1964. While he was prime minister, a land reform was implemented in 1964; it has been described as the first step towards abolishing sharecropping (Mezzadria). Landless tenants were given cheap credit in order to allow them to own the land. Economically, Moro's policies are seen as a response to socialist influence. Although central planning instruments were never used, a five-year economic programme was established in 1965.\nDuring his political life, Moro implemented numerous reforms that deeply changed Italian social life; along with his long-time friend and at the same time opponent, Amintore Fanfani, he was the protagonist of a long-standing political phase, which brought the DC towards more left-wing politics through a cooperation with the Italian Socialist Party first and the Italian Communist Party later. Due to his reformist stances but also for his tragic death, Moro has often been compared to John F. Kennedy and Olof Palme.\nAccording to media reports on 26 September 2012, the Holy See received a file on beatification for Moro; this is the first step to becoming a saint in the Catholic Church. In April 2015, it was reported that the process of beatification might be suspended or closed following the recent controversies. The postulator stated that the process would continue when the discrepancies were cleared up. The halting of proceedings was due to Mennini, the priest who heard his last confession, being allowed to provide a statement to a tribunal in regards to Moro's kidnapping and confession. Following this, the beatification process was resumed. \nIn January 2022, a note claiming responsibility for the abduction of Moro was auctioned despite widespread condemnation.\nCinematic adaptations.\nA number of films have portrayed the events of Moro's kidnapping and murder with varying degrees of fictionalization. They include the following:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "52545", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52545", "title": "Semiology (Gregorian chant)", "text": "Semiology (from Greek \u03c3\u03b7\u03bc\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bf\u03bd \"s\u0113meion\", \"a sign, a mark\") is a branch of Gregorian Chant research. Semiology refers specifically to the study of the neumes as found in the earliest fully notated manuscripts of Gregorian Chant, the oldest of which have been dated to the 9th century. The first application of the term 'semiology' (which first appeared in the 1960s) for the study of Latin chant was made by Dom Eug\u00e8ne Cardine (1905\u20131988), a monk of the Abbey of Solesmes. In this context, 'semiology' is understood as 'the study of musical signs'. Text and neumatic notation, together with significative letters adjoined to the neumes, presents an effective and integrated mnemonic for the rhythmical interpretation and the melody. While Gregorian palaeography offers a description of the various neumes and their rhythmical and melodic values, Gregorian semiology explains their meaning for practical interpretation. \nHistory of Gregorian chant.\nIn the 19th century, palaeographical work relating to chant was done in various places in Europe against the background of a performance style based on proportional durational values that were assigned to various deteriorated forms of chant used in various locales.\nThe main player in the history of Gregorian chant semiology in the 19th century is the Benedictine community of the Abbey of St Peter in Solesmes, which was established in 1833 by Fr Prosper Gu\u00e9ranger, who wished to create single authoritative editions of chant via paleographical study. This led to the scholarly monks of the abbey, chief among whom was Dom Paul Jausions, spending over half a century finding and copying the most ancient chant manuscripts. Under Gu\u00e9ranger, the monks of Solesmes advocated singing Gregorian chant in a free musical metre giving the majority of sung notes the same durational length. This interpretation was contrary to much contemporary practice elsewhere and at odds with scholars who backed the use of long and short notes related in strict durational proportion as per polyphonic singing.\nThe publication of Gonti\u00e9r's \"M\u00e9thode Raison\u00e9e de plain-chant\" (1859) was followed by Dom Pothier's \"M\u00e9lodie Gr\u00e9gorienne d'apr\u00e8s la tradition\" (1880) in which he advocated singing the chant in 'rythme oratoire' (oratorical rhythm), which still involved giving the majority of sung notes the same durational length. In 1889, Dom Andr\u00e9 Mocquereau initiated the \"Paleographie Musicale\" periodicals which saw the publication of \"facsimiles\" of most ancient chant manuscripts to make them more accessible to scholars. Dom Pothier disapproved of this initiative.\nIn his third volume of \"\u00c9tudes de science musicale\", published in 1898, Antoine Dechevrens laid out a comprehensive system of interpreting the neumes of Sankt Gallen style in proportional note lengths. Peter Wagner's \"Neumenkunde\" (1905) volume set out the various musical signs of all the most ancient notational styles historically and paleographically, including Jewish and Byzantine neumes, while providing a number of facsimile illustrations, giving rhythmically proportional values for the musical signs along with a few examples of proportional interpretations of certain chants in modern Western European notation.\nThe Holy See set up a commission which ran from 1904 till 1913, headed by Pothier, and an editorial team, run by Mocquereau, to create official chant editions for the Vatican. Mocquereau's editorial team only lasted a year: owing to editorial disagreements with Mocquereau, Pothier ended up in charge of the editing which, amongst other things, led to the production of a revised Graduale Romanum in 1908. Mocquereau published \"Le nombre musical gr\u00e9gorienne ou rhythmique gr\u00e9gorienne\" (two volumes) in 1908 &amp; 1927, in which he presented his own understanding of Gregorian rhythm, several elements of which have since been generally discredited. Two elements which have not been discredited are the recognition of the existence of note lengthening, and the notion of 'nuancing', i.e., altering note durations by very small, non-proportional values. One-note syllables were declared to be normally short in duration, their written length being interpreted as 'graphic licence'.\nIn 1934, Dom Gregory Murray's anti-proportionalist \"A Pilgrim's Progress\" was published. In the same year, a series of articles on the subject of the rhythmic quantities of Gregorian musical signs began to be published, entitled 'La Question Rhythmique Gr\u00e9gorienne' by the Abb\u00e9 G Delorme. This work concluded that certain notational styles contained two distinct signs for any single note and that this difference must be related to rhythm rather than pitch.\nThe next person to work out a comprehensively coherent analysis of the various neumes and their rhythmic durations was Dr Jan Vollaerts. Using comparative analysis of all the material available to him, Vollaerts was able to show the internal logic and coherence in the neumatic notation with regard to a proper articulation of the verbal-melodic line. In his posthumously published book, 'Rhythmic Proportions in Early Medieval Ecclesiastical Chant' (Brill, 1958), where the term 'semiotic' is used, tables are presented of neumes of different notational styles once used in various parts of Europe (e.g., Nonantola, Laon, Brittany, Aquitaine, Switzerland). One-note, two-note, three-note neumes as found in the various notations are dealt with chapter by chapter. The neumes of one-note syllables were declared to be generally long in duration, as marked in Nonantola and Laon notation.\nIn the book, singing chant to proportional durations is advocated. This is supported in the book by the evidence of Latin medieval theoretical writings which overwhelmingly advocate singing note lengths according to long and short notes bearing durations defined by simple ratios. Certain of the same writings criticise any lengthening or shortening of these ratios, although certain writings also recognise that such practice existed.\nIn a volte face, Dom Gregory Murray published two booklets, presenting the same views as Vollaerts. In 1957, he published \"Gregorian Rhythm in the Gregorian Centuries; the Literary Evidence\" which presented excerpts from the medieval theoretical writings in English and Latin. In 1959, he published \"The Authentic Rhythm of Gregorian Chant\" which statedly presented, in edited fashion,\nDelorme's and Vollaerts' arguments.\nThis work was followed in 1968 by the book 'Semiologia Gregoriana' by Dom Eug\u00e8ne Cardine. In this book, a fairly comprehensive table of the neumes used by the school of Sankt Gallen is presented. Unlike Fr. Vollaerts, Dom Cardine did not view the musical signs as representing proportional note values, and he viewed one-note syllables in Sankt Gallen notation as normally representing a short duration. Unlike Vollaerts, Cardine did not present all the styles of notation to the reader for examination, which means that the reader had no access to certain notations, such as those of Nonantola and Laon, which mark most one-note syllables with a sign indicating a lengthening of duration.\nVertical, from top to bottom, in the first column, Cardine starts off with neumes representing a single note, then two-, three- and four-note groups and many compound neumes and ornamental neumes. Horizontally, Cardine enters all the variations of the main neume. The system of neumes used in most of the earliest notational styles is rhythmically complex and sophisticated, particularly the styles of Laon and Einsiedeln Abbey.\nCardine states that natural speech-rhythms provide a rhythmic basis for the declamation of Gregorian chant. He divides syllabic time into three categories: \"normal\" \"enlarged, more heavy\" and \"light, more liquid\". Under this interpretation, a one-note syllable would not be considered usually \"long\" or \"longer\".\nCardine was employed as a teacher of palaeography and semiology by the Vatican from 1952 to 1984 at the Pontifical Institute of Sacred Music in Rome. His work in the field of semiology was recognized and supported by commissions and led to the publication of the 'Graduale Triplex' in 1979, which was based on Cardine's personal Roman Gradual in which, over the years, he had copied many neumes from Sankt Gallen school manuscripts. Two students of Cardine, Rupert Fischer and M.C. Billecocq, undertook the strenuous task to manually copy the neumes of two schools of generally concordant rhythmic manuscripts (Einsiedeln/Sankt Gallen and Laon) into the new type-set Roman Gradual of 1974. In hindsight, the 'Graduale Triplex' proved a great stimulus for self-study as it made important material available in a handy book. The momentum of its publication has created a demand for a new Gradual as the 1974 Gradual contains many incidental or structural melodic errors. As a response to this need and following the Holy See's invitation to edit a more critical edition, in 2011the first volume \"De Dominicis et Festis\" of the \"Graduale Novum Editio Magis Critica Iuxta SC 117\"was published by Libreria Editrice Vatican and ConBrio Verlagsgesellschaft, Regensburg. \nThe growing number of choirs or scholae that perform Gregorian Chant according to these developments are thus said to follow the 'semiological approach'. The International Society for the Study of Gregorian Chant (Associazione Internazionale Studi di Canto Gregoriano) carries on the legacy of Eug\u00e8ne Cardine, putting special emphasis on bridging the gap between Gregorian research and praxis. The Society has some 500 members in 30 countries worldwide.\nOther students of Cardine, who, like Fischer and Billecocg, held a professorate at the Pontifical Institute of Sacred Music in Rome or other church music institutes, include Marie-Noel Colette, Luigi Agustoni, Johannes Berchmans G\u00f6schl and Godehard Joppich.\nA smaller school of singing chant using proportional durations, as per Fr Vollaerts, has continued in the hands of Jan van Biezen in the Netherlands, R John Blackley in Maine, USA, and Luca Ricossa in Switzerland.\nIn the 1983 \"Liber Hymnarius\" from Solesmes, it is stated that, \"When an ordinary syllable is set to one note, this represents the fundamental rhythmic value used in Gregorian chant (i.e. valor syllabicus medius).\" This implies that the one-note syllable (and thus the fundamental rhythmic value of chant) is no longer interpreted by Solesmes as being normally short in duration.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52546", "revid": "50590115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52546", "title": "Genesis (band)", "text": "English rock band (1967\u20132022)\nGenesis were an English rock band formed at Charterhouse School, in Godalming, Surrey, in 1967. The band's longest-lasting and most commercially successful line-up consisted of keyboardist Tony Banks, bassist/guitarist Mike Rutherford and drummer/singer Phil Collins. In the 1970s, during which the band also included singer Peter Gabriel and guitarist Steve Hackett, Genesis were among the pioneers of progressive rock. Banks and Rutherford have been the only constant members throughout the band's history.\nThe band were formed by Charterhouse pupils Banks, Rutherford, Gabriel, guitarist Anthony Phillips and drummer Chris Stewart. Their name was provided by former Charterhouse pupil and pop impresario Jonathan King, who arranged for them to record several singles and their debut album \"From Genesis to Revelation\" in 1969. After splitting from King, the band began touring, signed with Charisma Records and shifted to progressive rock with their succeeding album \"Trespass\" (1970). Phillips departed after the album's recording, with Banks, Rutherford and Gabriel recruiting Collins and Hackett before recording \"Nursery Cryme\" (1971). Their live shows began to feature Gabriel's theatrical costumes and performances. \"Foxtrot\" (1972) was their first charting album in the UK and \"Selling England by the Pound\" (1973) reached number three, featuring their first UK hit \"I Know What I Like (In Your Wardrobe)\". The concept album \"The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway\" (1974) was promoted with a transatlantic tour and an elaborate stage show, before Gabriel left the group.\nCollins took over as lead singer, and as a four-piece the group released \"A Trick of the Tail\" and \"Wind &amp; Wuthering\" (both 1976) with continued success. Hackett left the band in 1977, reducing the band to a three-piece of Banks, Rutherford and Collins. Their ninth studio album, \"...And Then There Were Three...\" (1978), contained the band's first major hit \"Follow You Follow Me\". Their next five studio albums \u2013 \"Duke\" (1980), \"Abacab\" (1981), \"Genesis\" (1983), \"Invisible Touch\" (1986) and \"We Can't Dance\" (1991) \u2013 saw the band embracing a more pop-oriented sound and were all commercially successful. Collins left Genesis in 1996 and was replaced by singer Ray Wilson, who appeared on their final studio album \"Calling All Stations\" (1997). The album's disappointing critical and commercial reception led the group to disband. Banks, Rutherford and Collins reunited for the in 2007 and again in 2021 for The Last Domino? Tour.\nWith between 100 million and 150 million albums sold worldwide, Genesis are one of the world's best-selling music artists. Their discography includes fifteen studio and six live albums. They have won numerous awards, including a Grammy Award for Best Concept Music Video for \"Land of Confusion\", and have inspired a number of tribute bands recreating Genesis shows from various stages of the band's career. In 2010, Genesis were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.\nHistory.\n1967\u20131969: Formation, early demos and \"From Genesis to Revelation\".\nThe founding members of Genesis, Peter Gabriel, Tony Banks, Anthony \"Ant\" Phillips, Mike Rutherford and drummer Chris Stewart, met at Charterhouse School, a public school in Godalming, Surrey. Banks and Gabriel arrived at the school in September 1963, Rutherford in September 1964 and Phillips in April 1965. The five were members in either one of the school's two bands; Phillips and Rutherford were in Anon with singer Richard Macphail, bassist Rivers Jobe and drummer Rob Tyrrell, while Gabriel, Banks and Stewart made up Garden Wall.\nIn January 1967, after both groups had split, Phillips and Rutherford continued to write together and proceeded to make a demo tape at a friend's home-made studio, inviting Banks, Gabriel and Stewart to record with them in the process. The group recorded six songs: \"Don't Want You Back\", \"Try a Little Sadness\", \"She's Beautiful\", \"That's Me\", \"Listen on Five\" and \"Patricia\", an instrumental. When they wished to have them professionally recorded they sought Charterhouse alumnus Jonathan King, who seemed a natural choice as their publisher and producer following the success of his 1965 UK top five single, \"Everyone's Gone to the Moon\". A friend of the group gave the tape to King, who was immediately enthusiastic. Under King's direction, the group, aged between 15 and 17, signed a one-year recording contract with Decca Records.\nFrom August to December 1967, the five recorded a selection of potential singles at Regent Sound Studios in Denmark Street, London, where they attempted longer and more complex pieces, but King advised them to stick to more straightforward pop. In response Banks and Gabriel wrote \"The Silent Sun\", a pastiche of the Bee Gees, one of King's favourite bands, which was recorded with orchestral arrangements added by Arthur Greenslade. The group exchanged various names for the band, including King's suggestion of \"Gabriel's Angels\", before taking King's suggestion of \"Genesis\", indicating the start of his production career. King chose \"The Silent Sun\" as their first single, with \"That's Me\" on the B-side, released in February 1968. It achieved some airplay on BBC Radio One and Radio Caroline, but failed to sell. A second single, \"A Winter's Tale\"\u00a0/ \"One-Eyed Hound\", followed in May 1968, which also sold little. Three months later, Stewart left the group to continue with his studies. He was replaced by fellow Charterhouse pupil John Silver.\nKing believed that the group would achieve greater success with an album. The result, \"From Genesis to Revelation\", was produced at Regent Sound in ten days during their school's summer break in August 1968. King assembled the tracks as a concept album, which he produced. Greenslade added further orchestral arrangements to the songs, but the band were not informed of this fact until the album was released. Phillips was upset about Greenslade's additions. When Decca found an American band already named Genesis, King refused to change his group's name. He reached a compromise by removing their name from the album cover, resulting in a minimalist design with the album title printed on a plain black background. When the album was released in March 1969, it became a commercial failure because many record shops filed it in the religious music section upon seeing the title. Banks recalled that \"after a year or so\", the album had \"sold 649 copies\". A third single, \"Where the Sour Turns to Sweet\"\u00a0/ \"In Hiding\", was released in June 1969. None of the releases was commercially successful. The lack of commercial success led to the band's split with King and Decca. King continued to hold the rights to the album, which has seen numerous reissues. In 1974, it peaked on the US chart at No. 170.\nAfter the album was recorded, the band went their separate ways for a year; Gabriel and Phillips stayed at Charterhouse to finish exams, Banks enrolled at Sussex University and Rutherford studied at Farnborough College of Technology. They regrouped in mid-1969 to discuss their future, for their offers in further education might result in the group splitting up. Phillips and Rutherford decided to make music their full-time career, for they were starting to write more complex music than their earlier songs with King. After Banks and Gabriel decided to follow suit, the four returned to Regent Sound in August 1969 and recorded four more demos with Silver: \"Family\" (later known as \"Dusk\"), \"White Mountain\", \"Going Out to Get You\" and \"Pacidy\". The tape was rejected by each record label that heard it. Silver then left the group to study leisure management in the United States. His replacement, drummer and carpenter John Mayhew, was found when Mayhew looked for work and left his phone number \"with people all over London\".\n1969\u20131970: First gigs, signing with Charisma, \"Trespass\" and Phillips' departure.\nIn late 1969, Genesis retreated to a cottage owned by Macphail's parents, in Wotton, Surrey, to write, rehearse and develop their stage performance. They took their work seriously, playing together for as much as eleven hours a day. Their first live gig as Genesis followed in September 1969 at a teenager's birthday. It was the start of a series of live shows in small venues across the UK, which included a radio performance broadcast on the BBC's \"Night Ride\" show, on 22 February 1970, and a spot at the Atomic Sunrise Festival held at the Roundhouse in Chalk Farm a month later. During this time the band met with various record labels regarding contract offers. Initial discussions with Chris Blackwell of Island and Chris Wright of Chrysalis were unsuccessful. In March 1970, during the band's six-week Tuesday night residency at Ronnie Scott's Jazz Club in Soho, members of Rare Bird, whom Genesis had previously supported live, recommended the band to producer and A&amp;R man John Anthony of Charisma Records. Anthony attended one of their shows and enjoyed them enough to convince his boss, label owner Tony Stratton Smith, to watch their next appearance. Smith recalled, \"Their potential was immediately apparent\u00a0... the material was good and their performance was good\u00a0... It was a long shot, because they needed time to find their strength\u00a0... but I was prepared to make that commitment\". He agreed to a record and management deal within two weeks, paying Genesis an initial sum of \u00a310 a week ().\nGenesis stayed at Wotton until April 1970, by which time they had enough new material for a second album. Recording for \"Trespass\" began in June at Trident Studios in London, with Anthony as producer and David Hentschel hired as assistant engineer. The album included longer and more complex songs than their first, blending folk and progressive rock elements with various time signature changes, as in the nine-minute song \"The Knife\". \"Trespass\" is the first in a series of three Genesis album cover designs by Paul Whitehead. He had completed the design before the band decided to include \"The Knife\" on the album. Feeling the cover no longer reflected the album's overall mood, the band persuaded Whitehead to slash a knife across the canvas and have the result photographed. Released in October 1970, \"Trespass\" reached No. 1 in Belgium in 1971 and No. 98 in the UK in 1984. \"The Knife\" was released as a single in May 1971. \"Rolling Stone\" briefly mentioned the album unfavourably following its 1974 reissue: \"It's spotty, poorly defined, at times innately boring\". \"Genesis seemed to be dying a death around our second album\", Gabriel told Mark Blake. \"We couldn't get arrested. So I got a place at the London School of Film Technique.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThat was the closest we came to busting up. For some reason we felt so close that if one left, we thought we couldn't carry on. Of all the changes we've been through, surviving Ant leaving was the hardest.\n\u2014Mike Rutherford.\nAfter \"Trespass\" was recorded, ill-health and developing stage fright caused Phillips to leave Genesis. His last show with the band took place in Haywards Heath on 18 July 1970. He felt the increased number of gigs affected the group's creativity and several songs he wrote were not recorded or performed live. He had contracted bronchial pneumonia and became isolated from the rest of the band, feeling that it had too many songwriters in it. Banks, Gabriel and Rutherford saw Phillips as an important member, being the most instrumental in encouraging them to turn professional. They regarded his exit as the greatest threat to the band and the most difficult to overcome. Gabriel and Rutherford decided the group should continue; Banks agreed on the condition that they find a new drummer that was of equal stature to the rest of the group. Mayhew was therefore fired, though Phillips later thought Mayhew's working-class background clashed with the rest of the band, which affected his confidence.\n1970\u20131972: Collins and Hackett join and \"Nursery Cryme\".\nThe search for a new guitarist and drummer began with advertisements placed in copies of \"Melody Maker\". The invitation was spotted by drummer Phil Collins, formerly of Flaming Youth, who already knew Stratton Smith. He recalled, \"My only knowledge of Genesis was through seeing the ads for their gigs. It seemed like they were constantly working.\u00a0... I thought 'At least I'm going to be working if I get the gig'.\" Roger Taylor, subsequently of Queen, turned down an invitation to audition. Collins went to the audition at Gabriel's parents' house in Chobham, Surrey with his Flaming Youth bandmate, guitarist Ronnie Caryl. As they arrived early, Collins took a swim in the pool and heard what the other drummers were playing. \"They put on \"Trespass\" and my initial impression of a very soft and round music, not edgy, with vocal harmonies and I came away thinking Crosby, Stills and Nash\". Gabriel and Rutherford noticed the confident way Collins approached and sat at his drum kit and knew he would be the right replacement. Banks said, \"It was a combination of things. He could make it swing a little bit\u00a0... he could also tell good jokes and make us laugh\u00a0... And he could sing, which was an advantage because Mike and I were not very good at back-up vocals\". In August 1970, Collins became the new drummer for Genesis. Caryl's audition was unsuccessful; Rutherford thought he was not the player the group were looking for.\nAfter a short holiday, Genesis began to write and rehearse as a four-piece band in Farnham, Surrey. The now empty guitar sections in their songs allowed Banks and Rutherford to expand their sound and play what Gabriel described as \"interesting chords\". As they had not found a new guitarist, Genesis resumed as a live act with Rutherford adding bass pedals and Banks playing lead guitar lines on a Pianet through a distorted fuzz box amplifier in addition to his keyboard parts, something that he credits in helping him develop his technique. In November 1970, after a second audition with Caryl fell through, Dave Stopps, owner of Friars club in Aylesbury, suggested they use Mick Barnard of The Farm, who joined the band for their gigs; which included Genesis' television debut on BBC's \"Disco 2\". After two months of performances, the band found Barnard lacked in expertise and wished to try someone else. In December, Gabriel spotted a \"Melody Maker\" advert from Steve Hackett, formerly of Quiet World, who wanted to join a band of \"receptive musicians, determined to drive beyond existing stagnant music forms\". Gabriel advised Hackett to become familiar with \"Trespass\" and attend their upcoming gig at the Lyceum Theatre in London. Hackett auditioned with the group in a flat in Earl's Court and formed an instant rapport with Rutherford through a common interest in inverted chords. After Hackett joined in January 1971, Stratton Smith organised a UK tour with Genesis opening for fellow Charisma acts Lindisfarne and Van der Graaf Generator. Their first overseas dates took place in March with gigs in Belgium followed by their first of three consecutive appearances at the annual Reading Festival on 26 June.\nRehearsals for the band's third album, \"Nursery Cryme\", took place at Luxford House near Crowborough, East Sussex, which Stratton Smith had owned. Recording began at Trident Studios in August 1971 with Anthony and Hentschel reprising their respective roles as producer and assistant engineer. The band's sound evolved, with Hackett's more aggressive electric guitar work and Banks adding a Mellotron previously owned by King Crimson to his set of keyboards. The opening track, \"The Musical Box\", originated when Phillips and Mayhew were in the group. The band developed the piece further including the addition of new guitar parts from Hackett. \"The Musical Box\" and \"The Return of the Giant Hogweed\" are the first recordings in which Hackett uses the tapping technique. Hackett and Collins wrote \"For Absent Friends\", which was the first Genesis track with Collins on lead vocals. On the album's cover, Whitehead depicted a Victorian manor house based on Gabriel's parents' home, and scenes and characters from the lyrics to \"The Musical Box\".\n\"Nursery Cryme\" was released in November 1971 and reached No. 39 in the UK in 1974. Though the group still had a minor cult following at home, they started to achieve commercial and critical success in mainland Europe, with the album reaching No. 4 in the Italian charts. From November 1971 to August 1972, Genesis toured to support the album, including further visits to Belgium and, for the first time, Italy, where they played to enthusiastic crowds. In January and March 1972 they recorded radio sessions for BBC's \"Sounds of the Seventies\" programme and later in the year performed at the Reading Festival to some critical acclaim. During the tour, Genesis recorded \"Happy the Man\", a non-album single, with \"Seven Stones\" from \"Nursery Cryme\" on its B-side.\n1972\u20131974: \"Foxtrot\" and \"Selling England by the Pound\".\nFollowing rehearsals in a dance school in Shepherd's Bush, Genesis recorded \"Foxtrot\" at Island Studios in August and September 1972. During the early sessions, disagreements between Charisma and Anthony contributed to the end of his association with Genesis. After two replacement engineers were tried out, the band settled on John Burns and a new producer, Dave Hitchcock.\nThe album features the 23-minute track \"Supper's Ready\", a suite of various musical segments. The track included an opening acoustic piece, a Gabriel-penned song called \"Willow Farm\" and a piece derived from a jam by Banks, Rutherford and Collins called \"Apocalypse in 9/8\". Other songs were the science-fiction-themed \"Watcher of the Skies\" and the property-development-themed \"Get 'Em Out by Friday\". \"Foxtrot\" was released in on 15 September 1972 and reached No. 12 in the UK. It fared even better in Italy, where it went to No. 1. \"Foxtrot\" was well received by critics. Chris Welch of \"Melody Maker\" thought \"Foxtrot\" was \"a milestone in the group's career\", \"an important point of development in British group music\" and that Genesis had reached \"a creative peak\". Stephen Thomas Erlewine thought \"Foxtrot\" marked the first time \"Genesis attacked like a rock band, playing with a visceral power\".\nThe \"Foxtrot\" tour covered Europe and North America from September 1972 to August 1973. Gabriel surprised the other members of the band at the National Stadium in Dublin on 28 September 1972 by wearing a costume on stage, following a suggestion by Charisma booking agent Paul Conroy. He went off stage during an instrumental section in \"The Musical Box\" and reappeared in his wife's red dress and a fox's head. The incident resulted in front cover reports in the music press, allowing the band to double their performance fee. In December 1972 Stratton Smith organised the band's first gigs in the US, with a show at Brandeis University in Waltham, Massachusetts and one at Philharmonic Hall in New York City with openers String Driven Thing, in aid of the United Cerebral Palsy Fund. They were well received despite the band complaining of technical issues. Gabriel's costumes expanded in the following months to include fluorescent face paint and a cape fitted with bat wings for \"Watcher of the Skies\", several guises throughout \"Supper's Ready\" and a mask of an old man for \"The Musical Box\". An album of recordings from the following UK leg, initially recorded for the American radio programme \"King Biscuit Flower Hour\", was released as \"Genesis Live\" in July 1973. It reached No. 9 in the UK and No. 105 in the US.\nIn the summer of 1973, Genesis re-signed their contracts with Charisma. Stratton Smith said they got \"a much improved deal\" despite them being able to get a better one with a bigger label, but the group were loyal and trusted the label with their careers. With a new contract and thus a green-light for a new album, Genesis recorded \"Selling England by the Pound\" at Island Studios in August 1973, the second Genesis album that Burns co-produced. Much of it was written at Una Billings School of Dance and Chessington. Gabriel contributed lyrics based on the idea of commercialism and the decline of English culture and the rise in American influences. Its title refers to a UK Labour Party slogan to make it clear to music critics who may have thought Genesis were beginning to \"sell out\" to the US. \"Firth of Fifth\" features an extended electric guitar solo from Hackett. The album's cover is a modified version of a painting named \"The Dream\" by Betty Swanwick who added a lawn mower to tie the image to the lyrics of \"I Know What I Like (In Your Wardrobe)\".\n\"Selling England by the Pound\" was released on 5 October 1973 and received favourably by critics, though slightly less enthusiastically than \"Foxtrot\". The album reached No. 3 in the UK and No. 70 in the US. By this time, Genesis had made little effort to organise their finances and were \u00a3150,000 in debt ().. They hired promoter Tony Smith as their new manager to improve their fortunes and published the band's subsequent music through his company, Hit &amp; Run Music Publishing. The \"Selling England by the Pound\" tour visited Europe and North America between September 1973 and May 1974. Their six shows in three days at The Roxy in Los Angeles were well received by audiences and critics. The success of the tour earned the group the \"Top Stage Band\" title by readers of \"NME\". At its conclusion, Macphail resigned as their tour manager as he wished to pursue other interests. \"I Know What I Like (In Your Wardrobe)\" was released as a UK single with \"Twilight Alehouse\", a non-album track recorded in 1972; it reached No. 21 following its release in February 1974. Its success led to an offer for Genesis to appear on BBC's national show \"Top of the Pops\". The group thought this would not suit their image and they declined the offer.\n1974\u20131975: \"The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway\" and Gabriel's departure.\nIn June 1974, Genesis started work on their double concept album \"The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway\". This marked a point at which Gabriel's relationship with the rest of the group became increasingly strained, which contributed to his departure. The album was written at Headley Grange in East Hampshire, where upon their arrival the building had been left in a very poor state by the previous band, with rat infestations and excrement on the floor. Gabriel objected to Rutherford's idea of an album based on \"The Little Prince\" by Antoine de Saint-Exup\u00e9ry, thinking the idea was \"too twee\". He proposed to the band a less fantastical and more complicated story involving Rael, a Puerto Rican youth living in New York City who embarks on a spiritual quest to establish his freedom and identity while meeting several bizarre characters on the way. Gabriel wrote the story with influences from \"West Side Story\", \"a kind of punk\" twist to \"Pilgrim's Progress\", author Carl Jung and the film \"El Topo\" by Alejandro Jodorowsky. Most of the album's lyrics were written by Gabriel, leaving much of its music to the rest of the group. His absence from a considerable amount of writing sessions due to difficulties with his wife's first birth was something about which Rutherford and Banks \"were horribly unsupportive\". Gabriel also left the group when director William Friedkin asked him to write a screenplay, but returned after the project was shelved. In August 1974, production moved to Glaspant Manor in Carmarthenshire, Wales with Burns as co-producer, operating Island Studios' mobile equipment. Further work and mixing took place at Island, where Brian Eno contributed synthesizers and effects that the album's sleeve credits as \"Enossification\". When Gabriel asked Eno how the band could repay him, Eno said he needed a drummer for his track \"Mother Whale Eyeless\". Collins said, \"I got sent upstairs as payment\". Gabriel was pleased with Eno's work but Banks was less enthusiastic.\n\"The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway\" was released in November 1974 and reached No. 10 in the UK and No. 41 in the US. \"Counting Out Time\" and \"The Carpet Crawlers\" were released as singles in 1974 and 1975, respectively. Its sleeve is the first of four Genesis albums designed by Storm Thorgerson and Aubrey Powell of Hipgnosis. From November 1974 to May 1975, Genesis completed 102 dates across North America and Europe as part of \"The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway\" tour. Their set included \"The Lamb...\" performed in its entirety with an encore, a decision that was not supported by the entire band considering most of the audience were not yet familiar with the large amount of new material. The stage show involved new, more elaborate costumes worn by Gabriel, three backdrop screens that displayed 1,450 slides from eight projectors, and a laser lighting display. Music critics often focused their reviews on Gabriel's theatrics and took the band's musical performance as secondary, which irritated the rest of the band.\nDuring their stay in Cleveland during the tour, Gabriel told the band he would leave at its conclusion. He wrote a statement regarding his departure to the English press that was published in August 1975 titled \"Out, Angels Out\", explaining he had become disillusioned with the music industry and wanted to spend extended time with his family. Banks later stated, \"Pete was also getting too big for the group. He was being portrayed as if he was 'the man' and it really wasn't like that. It was a very difficult thing to accommodate. So it was actually a bit of a relief.\"\n1975\u20131977: Collins becomes frontman, \"A Trick of the Tail\", \"Wind &amp; Wuthering\" and Hackett's departure.\nFollowing the \"Lamb\" tour, Hackett recorded his first solo album \"Voyage of the Acolyte\" as he felt unsure that Genesis would survive following Gabriel's departure. He reconvened with the remaining group members in London in July 1975. During this time, Collins began drumming with instrumental jazz rock band Brand X, with whom he would be a semi-regular member whenever Genesis were on down time for the next five years. Collins' idea of Genesis continuing as an instrumental group was quickly rejected by the others as they thought it would become boring. Rehearsals for \"A Trick of the Tail\" took place in Acton where material was quickly written and with little effort; most of \"Dance on a Volcano\" and \"Squonk\" was put together in the first three days. Recording began in October 1975 at Trident Studios with Hentschel as producer. As a replacement singer had not been found, the band decided to record the album without vocals and audition singers as they went. They placed an anonymous advertisement in \"Melody Maker\" for \"a singer for a Genesis-type group\", which received around 400 replies. Collins proceeded to teach selected applicants the songs; Witches Brew frontman and flautist Mick Strickland was invited into the studio to sing, but the backing tracks were in a key outside of his natural range and the band decided not to work with him. Having failed to find a suitable vocalist, Collins went into the studio and attempted to sing \"Squonk\". His performance was well received by the band and they decided that he should be their new lead vocalist. Collins then sang on the remaining tracks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMy real worry was actually what to say to the audience, because Peter had always had this offbeat charisma that gave the band a strange aura. I was much more friendly and approachable\u00a0... I spent more time\u00a0... worrying about what to say between songs than I did about what I was going to do once the songs started.\n\u2014Phil Collins.\n\"A Trick of the Tail\" was released in February 1976 and was a commercial and critical success for the band. The album reached No. 3 in the UK and No. 31 in the US. The title track was released as a single, though it did not chart. In June, the album was certified Gold by the British Phonographic Institute for selling over 100,000 copies which helped the band clear the \u00a3400,000 of debt () they owed when Gabriel left. For the first time in their career Genesis filmed promotional videos for their songs, including \"A Trick of the Tail\" and \"Robbery, Assault and Battery\". Before the upcoming tour, Collins sought a drummer he felt comfortable with while singing; he chose Bill Bruford who offered to do the job. From March to July 1976, Genesis performed across North America and Europe with the \"A Trick of the Tail\" tour, to enthusiastic crowds. Collins adopted a more humorous rapport with the audience, unlike Gabriel's theatrical approach, which was successful. The shows in Glasgow and Stafford were filmed for their concert film \"\", released in cinemas in February 1977 as a double bill with \"White Rock\".\nIn September 1976, Genesis relocated to Relight Studios at Hilvarenbeek in the Netherlands with Hentschel to record \"Wind &amp; Wuthering\". It was put together in a short amount of time and a considerable amount of material was written beforehand, of which the most suitable songs were picked for development. Rutherford spoke of the band's conscious effort to distance themselves from songs inspired by fantasy, something that their past albums \"were full of\". The band spent roughly six weeks writing the album with a basic form of each track put down in twelve days. Additional recording and production work was done at Trident Studios that October. Hackett, having already released a solo album, enjoyed the greater amount of control over the recording process that working within a group could not provide. He felt his songs, including \"Please Don't Touch\" (which he later released on his second album \"Please Don't Touch!\") were rejected from the final track order in favour of material that Banks, in particular, had put forward. Collins spoke of the situation, \"We just wanted to use what we agreed was the strongest material, irrespective of who wrote it\". \"Wind &amp; Wuthering\" was released in December 1976 and reached No. 6 in the UK and No. 26 in the US. Rutherford's track, \"Your Own Special Way\", became its sole single and went to No. 43 in the UK. Its B-side is \"It's Yourself\", originally intended for \"A Trick of the Tail\".\nPrior to the 1977 tour, Bruford declined an offer to return as second drummer, leaving Collins searching for a replacement. He heard American drummer Chester Thompson, of Frank Zappa's band and Weather Report, play a drum passage on \"More Trouble Every Day\" from Zappa's live album \"Roxy &amp; Elsewhere\". Collins said, \"It floored me completely\u00a0... I had never met him. I rang him up and said, 'Hi Chester, I've heard your stuff, would you like to play with Genesis?'\u00a0... He didn't even audition!\" Genesis toured \"Wind &amp; Wuthering\" from January to July 1977 across Europe, North America and, for the first time, Brazil. The stage show cost \u00a3400,000 (. which featured a new PA system, lasers and smoke, and lighting supplied from two rows of Boeing 747 aircraft landing lights. Touring began on 1 January with three sold-out shows at the Rainbow Theatre in London, where 80,000 applications were made for the 8,000 available tickets. They returned to London for three nights at Earls Court, then the largest arena in Britain, supported by Richie Havens. The band's growing popularity in North America led to television appearances and concerts organised in larger venues than previous tours, including Madison Square Garden in New York City. Their Brazilian dates were attended by over 150,000 people and a proposed 100,000-person gig was cancelled over rioting fears. An armed bodyguard accompanied each member throughout their stay.\nIn May 1977 Genesis released \"Spot the Pigeon\", an extended play of three tracks left off \"Wind &amp; Wuthering\". It peaked at No. 14 on the UK singles chart. It was the final Genesis release before Hackett left the group. He had been writing more material on his own and found it increasingly difficult to contribute more of his ideas within a group context. He wished to embark on a solo career and \"take the risk in order to find out just how good I was on my own\". News of Hackett's departure coincided with the band's double live album \"Seconds Out\", recorded in Paris on the \"A Trick of the Tail\" and \"Wind &amp; Wuthering\" tours and released in October 1977. It reached No. 4 in the UK and No. 47 in the US.\n1977\u20131980: \"...And Then There Were Three...\" and \"Duke\".\nBy the time \"Seconds Out\" was released, Banks, Rutherford and Collins had already recorded \"...And Then There Were Three...\", the first Genesis album recorded as a trio, in September 1977 at Relight Studios with Hentschel as producer. It was then mixed at Trident Studios in London. In order to put across a greater number of musical ideas, the album is a collection of shorter songs. Most of its eleven songs were written individually; Banks contributed four, Rutherford three and Collins one while the remaining three were written collectively. Their new material signalled a change in the band's sound with songs becoming more pop-oriented, including the group-written track \"Follow You Follow Me\". Collins recalled it was the only song on the album written from scratch during rehearsals. Rutherford felt comfortable taking on lead guitar duties in addition to his usual rhythm and bass roles, although the band had considered auditioning replacement guitarists or using a session guitarist on the album. Collins later saw the album as \"a very vocal, solid album\" that lacked more rhythmic tracks like \"Los Endos\" or songs from \"Wind &amp; Wuthering\", as coming up with ideas on the drums while living in his flat in Ealing with his family was difficult.\n\"...And Then There Were Three...\" was released in March 1978. It received some mixed reviews from critics at the time owing to the album only containing short songs, which excited new fans but disillusioned those who had been used to the band's previous work. Chris Welch wrote a positive review in \"Melody Maker\", citing a \"remarkably powerful\" album. It was a commercial success and peaked at No. 3 in the UK and No. 14 in the US. \"Follow You Follow Me\" was released as its lead single and reached No. 7 in the UK and No. 23 in the US, their highest-charting single in both countries since their formation. Its success introduced the band to a new audience, including a larger female interest, helped by its music video airing on \"Top of the Pops\". Its success caused some fans to accuse the group of selling out to more commercial music. A follow-up single, \"Many Too Many\", was less successful, for it had already appeared on the album.\nIn the search for a new touring guitarist, Rutherford tried out Pat Thrall and Elliot Randall, followed by Alphonso Johnson of Weather Report, but he was primarily a bassist and could not play Hackett's lead guitar parts comfortably. Johnson then suggested American guitarist Daryl Stuermer of Jean-Luc Ponty's jazz fusion group, who was more comfortable with various guitar styles. During Stuermer's rehearsal in New York City, Rutherford was satisfied with his performance after they played through \"Down and Out\" and \"Squonk\". When Stuermer was chosen, he familiarised himself with a list of 26 songs he was asked to learn by going through five per day. The \"...And Then There Were Three...\" tour ran from March to December 1978 and visited North America, Europe and, for the first time, Japan. It cost an estimated \u00a32 million to stage (). which included the sound system, light and laser displays and additional effects from six computer-controlled mirrors, all of which took eight hours to set up and five to dismantle. One of their shows featured a guest appearance from Gabriel, who sang \"I Know What I Like (In Your Wardrobe)\". In June, Genesis headlined the year's Knebworth Festival, their only UK show that year.\nIn December 1978, Genesis began a period of inactivity as Collins' marriage was at risk of collapse after touring had made him frequently absent from his wife and children. Following a meeting with Banks, Rutherford and Smith, Collins went to Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, to try and rebuild the family. He explained: \"I was never going to leave the band. It was just that if I was going to be living in Vancouver then we'd have had to organise ourselves differently.\" Banks and Rutherford decided to put Genesis on an extended break and make their respective debut solo albums, \"A Curious Feeling\" and \"Smallcreep's Day\", at Polar Studios in Stockholm, Sweden. In April 1979, Collins returned to the UK after his attempt to save his marriage failed. With time to spare before working on a new Genesis album, Collins rejoined Brand X for the album \"Product\", played the drums on former bandmate Peter Gabriel's third album and started writing his own first solo album, \"Face Value\", at his home in Shalford, Surrey.\nIn 1979, Banks and Rutherford moved into Collins' home in Shalford to write and rehearse material for \"Duke\". The three found the writing process easier and less complicated than \"And Then There Were Three\". Rutherford reasoned that this was the case because they were \"getting back to the basic stage of ideas being worked on jointly\". Banks put it down to their break in activity, resulting in \"good ideas\u00a0... which hasn't happened for some time\". \"Duke\" continued the band's transition into writing shorter songs. Each member contributed two songs for the group to develop: Banks put forward \"Heathaze\" and \"Cul-de-Sac\", Rutherford used \"Man of Our Times\" and \"Alone Tonight\" and Collins had \"Misunderstanding\" and \"Please Don't Ask\". All three wrote the remaining five tracks, including \"Duchess\", the first Genesis song to feature a drum machine, specifically a Roland CR-78 imported from Japan. In its original form, the album was to contain a 30-minute track based on a fictional character named Albert, but the idea was cancelled to avoid comparisons to \"Supper's Ready\" from \"Foxtrot\". In November, the band recorded \"Duke\" at Polar Studios with Hentschel reprising his role as producer. Its cover was by French illustrator Lionel Koechlin and featured the character Albert.\nReleased in March 1980, \"Duke\" was the band's biggest commercial success at the time of release, spending two weeks at No. 1 in the UK and peaking at No. 11 in the US. The album spawned three singles; \"Turn It On Again\" went to No. 8 in the UK, \"Misunderstanding\" reached No. 14 in the US, and \"Duchess\" peaked at No. 46 in the UK. \"Duke\" was supported with a UK and North American tour from April to June 1980, which began with a 40-date tour of the UK for which all 106,000 tickets were sold within hours of going on sale.\n1980\u20131985: \"Abacab\" and \"Genesis\".\nIn November 1980, Genesis bought Fisher Lane Farm, a farmhouse with an adjoining cowshed near Chiddingfold, Surrey, as their new rehearsal and recording facility. The building was remodelled into a studio in four months before recording for \"Abacab\" began in March 1981. The new environment had a productive effect on the writing process as the band wrote enough for a double album, but they discarded one hour's worth of songs that sounded too similar to their past albums. Banks said the band made an effort to keep melodies as simple as possible, which signalled further changes in their direction. The shift was underlined in its production when Hentschel, their producer and engineer since 1975, was replaced by Hugh Padgham after Collins liked his production on \"Face Value\" and Gabriel's third solo album. Production duties were solely credited to the band for the first time with Padgham as their engineer. The album is formed of group written material with an individual song from each member. \"No Reply at All\" features the Phenix Horns, the horn section of American band Earth, Wind &amp; Fire.\n\"Abacab\" was released in September 1981 and reached No. 1 in the UK and No. 7 in the US. Three singles from the album entered the top forty in both countries; \"Abacab\" reached No. 9 in the UK and No. 26 in the US, \"No Reply at All\" reached No. 29 in the US, and \"Keep It Dark\", a European-only single, went to No. 33 in the UK. \"Abacab\" was supported with a tour of Europe and North America from September to December 1981, ending with shows at Wembley Arena and the NEC Birmingham. The tour marked the band's first use of the Vari-Lite, a computer-controlled intelligent lighting system. Following a demonstration at The Farm, the band and Smith showed an immediate interest in the technology and became shareholders of the company. In May 1982, three tracks recorded during the \"Abacab\" sessions \u2013 \"Paperlate\", \"You Might Recall\" and \"Me and Virgil\" \u2013 were released as an EP in Europe, \"3\u00d73\", which peaked at No. 10 in the UK. Its cover is a homage to the \"Twist and Shout\" EP by the Beatles, with sleeve notes written by that group's former publicist Tony Barrow.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBasically, we reached the point\u00a0... where we either became a caricature of ourselves, and settled into a rut, or we changed. There was no doubt in our minds that change was the answer.\n\u2014Mike Rutherford on the band's change in direction\nIn June 1982, Genesis released the double live album \"Three Sides Live\" in two different versions. The North American edition contains three sides of live recordings with the fourth comprising the \"3\u00d73\" tracks and two from the \"Duke\" sessions. The European release contains a fourth side of extra live tracks. The album coincided with the home video release of the \"Three Sides Live\" concert film recorded in 1981. A tour of North America and Europe followed that ran from August to September 1982, featuring guest appearances from Bill Bruford and the Phenix Horns. On 2 October, Genesis headlined a one-off concert with Gabriel at the Milton Keynes Bowl under the name Six of the Best. The concert was organised to raise money for Gabriel's World of Music, Arts and Dance project that was, by that point, in considerable debt. Hackett, who flew in from abroad, arrived in time to perform the last two songs.\nWork on the twelfth Genesis album, \"Genesis\", began in March 1983 with Padgham returning as engineer. It was the first album written, recorded and mixed at the remodelled studio at the Farm. Banks remembered the band were scarce for new musical ideas that \"felt at times as though we were stretching the material as far as we could\". \"Mama\" concerns a man's obsession with a prostitute at a Cuban brothel. It originated from a beat Rutherford came up with on a LinnDrum machine that was fed through his guitar amplifier and an echo gate. Collins' laugh on the track originated from \"The Message\" by Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five. Released in October 1983, \"Genesis\" went to No. 1 in the UK and peaked at No. 9 in the US, where it reached Platinum by December that year and went on to sell over four million copies. Three tracks were released as singles; \"Mama\" reached No. 4 in the UK, their highest-charting UK single to date, and \"That's All\" reached No. 6 in the US. The Mama Tour ran from late 1983 through to 1984, covering North America and five UK shows in Birmingham. The latter shows were filmed and released as \"Genesis Live \u2013 The Mama Tour\".\nIn February 1984, Genesis took a break in activity to allow each member to continue with their solo careers. Rutherford formed his group Mike + The Mechanics, Banks worked on his solo album \"Soundtracks\" and Collins released \"No Jacket Required\", which achieved worldwide success and increased his popularity as a result. The music press took note that Collins' success as a solo artist made him more popular than Genesis. Before the release of \"No Jacket Required\", Collins insisted that he would not leave the band. \"The next one to leave the band will finish it\", Collins told \"Rolling Stone\" magazine in May 1985. \"I feel happier with what we're doing now, because I feel it's closer to me. I won't be the one.\" He added, \"Poor old Genesis does get in the way sometimes. I still won't leave the group, but I imagine it will end by mutual consent.\" In June, Collins spoke of the band's intention to start work on a new album that year, ending rumours to a false announcement that aired on BBC Radio 1 suggesting Genesis had split.\n1985\u20131996: \"Invisible Touch\", \"We Can't Dance\" and Collins' departure.\nGenesis reconvened at The Farm in October 1985 to start work on \"Invisible Touch\", which lasted for six months. They continued their method of songwriting used on \"Genesis\" by developing material from group improvisations. Banks remembered the time as a strong period creatively for the band, with ideas \"flowing out of us\". \"Invisible Touch\" was developed in such a way, when the group were working on \"The Last Domino\", the second part of \"Domino\". During the session, Rutherford began to play an improvised guitar riff to which Collins replied with an off-the-cuff lyric \u2013 \"She seems to have an invisible touch\" \u2013 which became the song's chorus hook.\nFollowing its release in June 1986, the album spent three weeks at No. 1 in the UK and reached No. 3 in the US, and became the best-selling Genesis album with seven million copies sold. The album's five singles \u2013 \"Invisible Touch\", \"Throwing It All Away\", \"Land of Confusion\", \"In Too Deep\" and \"Tonight, Tonight, Tonight\" \u2013 entered the top five on the US singles chart between 1986 and 1987 with \"Invisible Touch\" topping the chart for one week. Genesis became the first group and foreign act to achieve this feat, equalling the five singles record set by Michael Jackson, Janet Jackson and Madonna. After Collins was parodied by the British satirical television series \"Spitting Image\", he commissioned them to make puppets of the band for the video of \"Land of Confusion\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNearly 300,000 people at Wembley\u00a0... I thought at the time, and I still think now, that moment was the peak of our career.\n\u2014Tony Banks\nThe Invisible Touch Tour was the band's largest world tour in its history, which included 112 dates from September 1986 to July 1987. Genesis received some criticism for their decision to have Michelob beer as a sponsor. The tour concluded with four consecutive sold-out shows at Wembley Stadium in London. The shows were released in 1988 as \"The Invisible Touch Tour\". When the tour ended, Genesis took a break while each member committed to their solo projects. They performed twice during this time; on 14 May 1988, they performed a 20-minute set at the Atlantic Records 40th Anniversary concert at Madison Square Garden. This was followed by a set at a charity gig at the 1990 Knebworth Festival on 30 June, headlined by Pink Floyd.\nIn 1991 Genesis recorded their fourteenth album, \"We Can't Dance\", from March to September with their new engineer and co-producer, Nick Davis. The band took advantage of the increased capacity the CD offered and released over 71 minutes of new music across 12 tracks. Collins wrote the lyrics to \"Since I Lost You\" for his friend Eric Clapton following the death of Clapton's four-year-old son Conor. The album was released in November and reached No. 1 in the UK for one week and No. 4 in the US, where it went on to sell over 4 million copies.\nThe album spawned several hit singles; \"No Son of Mine\" went to No. 6 in the UK and \"I Can't Dance\" reached No. 7 in the UK and the US. In 1993, \"We Can't Dance\" was nominated for a Brit Award for Best British Album.\nThe \"We Can't Dance\" tour visited North America and Europe from May to November 1992 with each concert attended by an average of 56,000 people. The tour spawned two live albums; ' reached No. 3 in the UK and ' went to No. 1 in the UK. A live home video, also titled \"The Way We Walk\", documented one of the band's six consecutive shows at Earl's Court during November 1992. Following the tour, the band took a break in recording and performing activity. Banks, Rutherford and Collins performed at Cowdray Castle, Midhurst in September 1993 for a money-raising event with Pink Floyd touring guitarist Tim Renwick and drummer Gary Wallis and Queen drummer Roger Taylor. Rutherford also played bass on Pink Floyd's set at the same concert.\nIn March 1996, Collins announced his departure from Genesis. In a statement, he said, \"Having been in Genesis for 25 years, I felt it time to change direction in my musical life. For me now, it will be music for movies, some jazz projects and of course my solo career. I wish the guys in Genesis all the very best in their future. We remain the best of friends.\"\n1996\u20132006: Wilson as frontman, \"Calling All Stations\" and hiatus.\nShortly after Banks and Rutherford decided to continue Genesis in 1996, they went to The Farm to start writing \"Calling All Stations\". Rutherford initially found the sessions difficult as he saw Collins as \"the guy in the middle\" who made Banks and himself work better. Their best ideas developed in this period were put forward while they auditioned new singers, including Francis Dunnery and Nick Van Eede. The two main contenders, David Longdon (later of Big Big Train) and Scottish singer Ray Wilson of Stiltskin, auditioned throughout 1996, which involved singing along to Genesis tracks with the lead vocals removed. Wilson was announced as the new Genesis singer in June 1997. Though much of the album was already written by the time he joined, Banks was pleased with his contributions to the album, which included writing the lyrics to \"Small Talk\" and riffs on \"Not About Us\" and \"There Must Be Some Other Way\". Banks and Rutherford opted for two drummers on \"Calling All Stations\" \u2013 Israeli session musician Nir Zidkyahu and Nick D'Virgilio of Spock's Beard.\n\"Calling All Stations\" was released in September 1997. It was a commercial and critical success in Europe, where it reached No. 2 in the UK, but the album only reached No. 54 in the US, their lowest charting album there since \"Selling England by the Pound\". A single from the album, \"Congo\" reached the top 30 in the UK and Genesis completed a European tour from January to May 1998, adding Zidkyahu on drums and Irish guitarist Anthony Drennan. A North American concert tour was planned, but it was cancelled following a poor commercial response and lack of ticket sales, which led to Banks and Rutherford announcing in 2000 that the group would no longer be recording and touring.\nIn 1998, Banks, Collins, Gabriel, Hackett, Phillips, Rutherford and Silver gathered for a photo session and dinner to celebrate the release of the four-disc box set, \"Genesis Archive 1967\u201375\". The set features \"Supper's Ready\" and \"It\" with new overdubs by Gabriel and Hackett. In 1999, Banks, Collins, Rutherford, Hackett and Gabriel released a new version of \"The Carpet Crawlers\" for the compilation album \"\". On 21 September 2000, Collins, Banks, Rutherford reunited to perform a brief acoustic set at the Music Managers Forum, in honour of their manager Tony Smith. Gabriel attended the ceremony but chose not to perform with the band. Genesis briefly performed at Gabriel's wedding in 2002. In 2004, Genesis released \"Platinum Collection\", a three-disc compilation album covering the band's career that reached No. 21 in the UK.\n2006\u20132020: Turn It On Again Tour, BBC documentary and reunion speculation.\nIn a press conference held in London in November 2006, Banks, Rutherford and Collins announced their reunion for the , their first with Collins in fourteen years. They revealed the initial plan of touring \"The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway\" with Gabriel and Hackett. The five met in Glasgow in November 2004 to discuss the idea further, but it never developed further as Gabriel was unable to commit due to other projects. Instead, Banks, Rutherford and Collins decided to proceed with Chester Thompson and Daryl Stuermer returning on drums and guitar, respectively. In March 2007, a press conference was held in New York City to announce the North American leg.\nThe Turn It On Again Tour featured a stage designed by architect Mark Fisher with a lighting display by Patrick Woodroffe, included a 55-metre long LED backdrop formed of 9 million LED lights. The European leg saw close to 400,000 tickets sold in 40 minutes for shows in Germany and the Netherlands. The European leg ended with a free concert on 14 July at the Circus Maximus in Rome in front of around half a million people. This was filmed and released on DVD the following year as \"When in Rome 2007\". A live album formed of recordings from various European dates was released in 2007 as \"Live over Europe 2007\". On 7 July, the band played at the Live Earth concert in London at Wembley Stadium.\nThe band's autobiography \"Genesis Chapter &amp; Verse\" was published in 2007 as a full colour 359 page hardback book. The writing credits were Tony Banks, Phil Collins, Peter Gabriel, Steve Hackett and Mike Rutherford, edited by Philip Dodd.\nIn 2007, the band's studio albums from \"Trespass\" to \"Calling All Stations\" were digitally remastered by Nick Davis across three box sets: \"Genesis 1970\u20131975\", \"Genesis 1976\u20131982\" and \"Genesis 1983\u20131998\". Each album is presented as a two-disc set containing a CD/Super Audio CD of a new stereo mix and a DVD with a 5.1 surround sound mix and bonus features including previously unreleased live performances, interviews and concert programmes. Two more box sets followed in 2009, \"Genesis Live 1973\u20132007\", which collected all of the band's live albums and \"Genesis Movie Box 1981\u20132007\", which compiled all of the band's live home video releases.\nAfter 2011, Genesis members expressed mixed opinions about the possibility of a reunion. Collins retired from the music industry as an active musician during that year in favour of family commitments, and has stated he can no longer play the drums due to medical issues. Hackett has said \"I would say it's possible, but highly improbable. I've always been open to it. I'm not the guy who says no.\" Gabriel addressed the possibility of a reunion, stating \"I never say never. It really didn't happen last time. I think there's a small chance, but I don't think it's very high.\" In 2014, Collins reiterated, \"Have people thought it through? It's not as if you're going to get Peter as the singer, me as the drummer. I can't play any more, so it's never going to happen\", adding it would not be likely for Gabriel to perform songs on which Collins originally sang lead vocals.\nIn 2014, Gabriel, Banks, Rutherford, Collins and Hackett reunited for \"\", a BBC documentary about the band's history and the various solo albums the members have released over the course of their careers. Although he participated in the documentary and promoted it, Hackett was very critical following its broadcast, saying that it was biased and did not give him editorial involvement, adding that it ignored his solo work despite his speaking at length about it. The documentary also did not cover Ray Wilson's time in Genesis. In 2015, Hackett was doubtful about the idea of a Genesis reunion, saying: \"Look at the documentary and you'll get an idea of the priorities that come across.\"\nIn 2015, Collins announced an end to his retirement and speculated that a reunion with Banks and Rutherford would be possible, a view that Banks endorsed. In 2017, Rutherford said he was also amenable to a reunion tour if Collins was interested. Hackett said he would like a reunion of the Gabriel-led Genesis' 1971\u20131975 line-up with Gabriel on vocals again, but stressed it was very unlikely, adding \"I won't say any more because I don't want to raise expectations.\" Collins published his autobiography in 2016 and stated in the introduction that he retired from Genesis in 2007.\n2020\u20132022: The Last Domino? Tour.\nOn 23 January 2020, Collins, Banks and Rutherford were spotted together at a basketball game in New York City's Madison Square Garden, sparking rumours about a possible Genesis reunion. On 4 March, the trio announced their reformation and The Last Domino? Tour on Zoe Ball's BBC Radio 2 show. The tour was originally planned for seventeen dates across the UK and Ireland between November and December of the same year, with longtime touring guitarist/bassist Daryl Stuermer and Collins' son Nic on drums. Their usual touring drummer, Chester Thompson, was not invited and said he had not spoken to Collins in ten years. The tour was rescheduled twice due to the subsequent COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown, firstly from April 2021 and then from September 2021. Collins asserted that the tour would be his last with Genesis due to his health issues, and said there were no plans for the band to record new music, but added: \"Never say never\". A North American leg was later added for November 2021, following the UK leg. The tour was supported with the release of a greatest hits set \"The Last Domino? \u2013 The Hits\".\nThe tour began on 20 September 2021. On 8 October, with four dates remaining, the UK leg was postponed due to a positive test for COVID-19 in the band. With the exception of the second Glasgow date, the dates were rescheduled for March 2022, ending with three shows in London on 24\u201326 March. Genesis performed their final concert of The Last Domino? Tour on 26 March in London. Gabriel was in attendance for the show, but he did not join the band on stage.\nIn September 2022, Genesis announced that they had sold a portion of their music rights to Concord for an estimated \u00a3270 million. The deal includes publishing copyrights and streaming income from their post-1978 output and solo albums by Banks, Rutherford and Collins. Their earnings from the deal with Concord and The Last Domino? Tour made Genesis top a list of highest-paid entertainers of 2022 by \"Forbes'\" magazine, with $230 million.\nOn 3 March 2023, the 5 CD live box set \"BBC Broadcasts\" was released, featuring material originally broadcast between 1970 and 1998.\nOn 26 September 2025, a remastered version of \"The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway\" was released in honor of the album's 50th anniversary. Gabriel and Banks worked together on the new mix, and the album included a compendium from the group about creating the album, photographs, interviews, as well as a Blu-Ray of the entire January 1975 concert at Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles.\nMusical style and influences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor years, we've been telling people that we're primarily songwriters\u00a0... I see myself primarily as a writer, not a player.\n \u2014Mike Rutherford\nGenesis have been described as progressive rock, art rock, pop rock, soft rock, and progressive pop. They identify first and foremost as songwriters. Though styles changed dramatically over the group's career, they were always built on musical contrasts and the willingness to experiment. Bruce Eder of AllMusic described Genesis' music as \"ambitious, classical-tinged art rock\" which \"gradually became more accessible by the '80s\".\nMembers of the original line-up were exposed to classical and church music as well as rock artists of the 1960s, particularly the Beatles. Gabriel's vocal style was influenced by Otis Redding and other Stax artists. Some of Genesis' music was inspired by blues according to Hackett, who says that the sonic innovation of the electric guitar in the early 1970s came straight from this. In their early years, Genesis' music combined elements of the pop, folk and psychedelic genres. Several songs developed during Phillips' time in the band originated on 12-string guitars, often with unconventional tunings. By the 1970s, the group began to include fantasy and surreal elements in their lyrics, such as \"The Musical Box\". \"Nursery Cryme\" marks the first time electric instruments were used more extensively. \"A Trick of the Tail\" marked a return to the band's roots with acoustic passages and songs inspired by fantasy.\nEarly lyrics drew from psychedelia, fantasy, mythological figures and fairytale themes. Gabriel emerged as one of the band's main lyricists who often incorporated puns and double entendres in his lines and track titles and addressed various themes including social commentary. \"Selling England by the Pound\" contains references to English culture of the time including \"Aisle of Plenty\", where four British supermarket chains are referenced to reflect the album's theme of commercialism. Literary sources are used as inspiration for many Genesis tracks; \"The Cinema Show\" is based on T. S. Eliot's poem \"The Waste Land\", and Arthur C. Clarke's novel \"Childhood's End\" inspired the lyrics to \"Watcher of the Skies\".\nBy the time the group had slimmed down to the trio of Banks, Rutherford and Collins, they had decided to change lyrical styles, dealing more with everyday matters which connected with female fans. Collins' songs, in particular, were personal in nature. The group still featured humour in songs such as \"Illegal Alien\", and dealt with serious themes such as politics on \"Land of Confusion\" and commercialization on \"I Can't Dance\". Eder observed that by this point in the band's career, \"Collins possessed pop instincts that could thrive on mainstream radio and on the emerging MTV.\"\nBanks said that a common way of developing songs throughout the band's career was for Collins to play the rhythm, Rutherford to set up a groove and riffs and for him to add the harmonies and melodies on top. He cited the \"Apocalypse in 9/8\" section of \"Supper's Ready\", \"The Cinema Show\" and \"Domino\" as examples of this and says the restrictions it gave him allowed the group to produce straightforward pop songs such as \"Invisible Touch\" and \"Land of Confusion\" in later years. \nBanks has used a number of keyboards during Genesis' career, continually trying out new models, though he has used the piano regularly throughout the group's lifetime. In the 1970s he frequently used the Hammond organ, Hohner Pianet, Mellotron, RMI Electronic Piano and ARP Pro Soloist. In the 1980s, he used the Sequential Circuits Prophet 5 and Prophet 10, the ARP Quadra and various Korg synthesizers. For the Turn It On Again tour in 2007, his main keyboard was a Korg OASYS. As both a guitarist and bassist, Rutherford regularly swapped between the two roles and his trademark instrument with Genesis, particularly throughout the 1970s, was a double-neck guitar. In the 1980s and beyond, he favoured the Eric Clapton Stratocaster.\nLegacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGenesis has had a hard time getting respect. In the early '70s\u00a0... it attracted an avid cult following but was largely ignored by the rock press and public at large\u00a0... Even in the early '80s\u00a0... the press was unimpressed, dismissing the group as easy-listening lightweights\u00a0... All of which, to be honest, has been grossly unfair to the group.\n \u2014Music critic J. D. Considine\nGenesis have been estimated to have sold between 100 and 150 million albums worldwide. Their total certified album sales include 21.5 million in the US, 7.2 million in the UK, 5.6 million in Germany, and 3.4 million in France. Genesis have been awarded eleven Gold and four Multi-Platinum albums in the UK, while in the US they have seven Gold, two Platinum and four Multi-Platinum albums.\nIn March 2010, Genesis were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame by Phish guitarist Trey Anastasio. The band's awards include a Silver Clef Award for outstanding contributions to British music at its second annual ceremony in 1977. In 1988, the band received one of the only two Grammy Awards issued for the short-lived Best Concept Music Video category for \"Land of Confusion\". In 2004, \"Q\" ranked Genesis as the seventeenth-biggest band in a list compiled based on album sales, time spent on the UK charts and largest audience for a headlining show. Genesis were honoured at the second VH1 Rock Honors in May 2007, which featured Banks, Rutherford and Collins. In June 2008, the band received a lifetime achievement award at the Mojo Awards. In September 2012, another lifetime achievement was given to the band at the inaugural Progressive Music Awards by \"Prog\".\nGenesis were targets for criticism throughout the 1970s from those who disliked progressive rock. The influential BBC DJ John Peel championed the band in their early years and they performed three sessions for him between 1970 and 1972, but he \"grew disillusioned with their later excesses\". Some regarded the group as overtly middle-class, paying particular attention to the founder members' private education, and believed rock music was being taken away from the working class, whom they regarded as its core audience. Likening his background to that of the punk artist Joe Strummer, who had become a \"people's hero\" musician, Gabriel stated in 2013, \"To this day, we've never outgrown the snotty rich-kid thing\u00a0... we were always very straight about where we came from, and we were middle-class, not aristocratic.\" Gabriel's theatrics were unpalatable to some of the mainstream rock audience, resulting in a cult following rather than that of a mainstream rock band.\nAt their commercial peak in the 1980s, Genesis were called \"flabbergastingly insignificant\" by leading American music critic Robert Hilburn, and the hits have been described as \"barely distinguishable\" from Collins' solo work. According to \"Rolling Stone\"'s Erik Hedegaard, Collins in particular was blamed by those who accused the band of selling out. Retrospectively, \"The New Rolling Stone Album Guide\" critic J. D. Considine documented how the band had been \"largely ignored\" by the music press and public in their earliest years, before being \"derided as middlebrow throwbacks still in thrall to the pomposities of art rock\" in the late 1970s and then dismissed as \"easy-listening lightweights\" in the 1980s. He argued this was unfair, as the band had made their \"share of mediocre albums\" but no bad ones. Critics disagree about which albums were mediocre; Considine cites \"Selling England by the Pound\" as one of the band's three worst (those meriting two stars out of five), while AllMusic chooses it as one of their three best. Banks later reflected, \"We never had that definitive album the way Floyd had \"The Dark Side Of The Moon\" or the Eagles had \"Hotel California\". [...] We haven't got that universality of somebody like Queen, who everybody likes to some degree. We were considered too fey to be street cred, so some like us, some don't.\"\nJournalists have reported that fans preferring one era of the band strongly dislike others. Rock author Colin McGuire has described the arguments from fans of the Gabriel era as \"they sold out and became too corporate when Collins stepped into the spotlight\", while fans of the Collins era argue \"the Gabriel years were boring and hard to stomach\". He concluded both eras of the band should be judged on their own merits. The band themselves have been aware of these divides; press interviews for \"Abacab\" explicitly stated that fans of \"Foxtrot\" might not like the album, but should keep an open mind. Ultimate Classic Rock stated, \"There are few groups in the classic-rock canon with a more divisive discography than Genesis\u00a0... there's no arguing that they helped create the template for prog-rock and made some of the genre's most essential albums\", but continued \"the Genesis sound gradually grew less and less progressive, until the band became a straight-up pop act. Good luck finding anybody out there who's equally enamored of both sides of the band's story.\" On their legacy, \"Q\" reviewer Andy Fyfe wrote in 2007 that \"little of the band's output has aged well\" and \"transcends in the way real classics do\", stating they would \"remain perennial whipping boys for decades to come\". \"The Daily Telegraph\" chief rock music critic Neil McCormick said that Genesis were \"a daring and groundbreaking band (certainly in their early career)\", described Collins as \"an outstanding drummer\" and stated that \"after Gabriel left, he stepped up to prove himself a charismatic frontman with a very distinctive vocal character\".\nInfluence.\nGenesis have been cited as a principal influence on the neo-prog subgenre that emerged in the 1980s, featuring bands including Marillion and Pallas. Steve Hackett's work in Genesis influenced guitarists such as Brian May of Queen, Alex Lifeson of Rush, and Eddie Van Halen of Van Halen. Iron Maiden founder Steve Harris cited Gabriel-era Genesis as one of his main influences, describing \"Supper's Ready\" (along with Jethro Tull's song \"Thick as a Brick\") as one of his two favourite pieces of music of all time in an interview with \"Prog\". Genesis were also an influence on post-punk artists such as Simple Minds and Will Sergeant, guitarist of Echo &amp; the Bunnymen, as well as the electronic new wave band the Human League. Trey Anastasio of Phish said, \"It's impossible to overstate what impact this band and musical philosophy had on me as a young musician. I'm forever in their debt.\" Mostly Autumn \"fuse the music of Genesis and Pink Floyd with Celtic themes\" in their sound. The alternative rock band Elbow acknowledged Genesis as an influence, such as on their breakthrough song \"Newborn\".\nThere are a number of Genesis tribute bands, including ReGenesis, who focus on the group's 1970s music. The most successful act is the Canadian band the Musical Box, who have been officially endorsed by the band and had Hackett and Collins perform as guests with them. Gabriel took his children to see the Musical Box so \"they could see what their father did back then\", while Hackett said \"They not only manage to sound, but look virtually identical\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52547", "revid": "522013", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52547", "title": "Jehovah's Witnesses", "text": "Restorationist Christian denomination\nJehovah's Witnesses is a nontrinitarian, millenarian, and restorationist Christian denomination, stemming from the Bible Student movement founded by Charles Taze Russell in the nineteenth century. Russell co-founded Zion's Watch Tower Tract Society in 1881 to organize and print the movement's publications. A leadership dispute after Russell's death resulted in several groups breaking away, with Joseph Franklin Rutherford retaining control of the Watch Tower Society and its properties. Rutherford made significant organizational and doctrinal changes, including adoption of the name \"Jehovah's witnesses\" in 1931 to distinguish the group from other Bible Student groups and symbolize a break with the legacy of Russell's traditions. In 2024, Jehovah's Witnesses reported a peak membership of approximately 9\u00a0million worldwide.\nJehovah's Witnesses are known for their evangelism, distributing literature such as \"The Watchtower\" and \"Awake!\", and for refusing military service and blood transfusions. They consider the use of God's name vital for proper worship. They reject Trinitarianism, inherent immortality of the soul, and hellfire, which they consider unscriptural doctrines. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that the destruction of the present world system at Armageddon is imminent, and the establishment of God's kingdom over earth is the only solution to all of humanity's problems. They do not observe Christmas, Easter, birthdays, or other holidays and customs they consider to have pagan origins incompatible with Christianity. They prefer to use their own Bible translation, the \"New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures\". \nJehovah's Witnesses consider human society morally corrupt and under the influence of Satan, and most limit their social interaction with non-Witnesses. The denomination is directed by a group known as the Governing Body of Jehovah's Witnesses, which establishes all doctrines. Congregational disciplinary actions include formal expulsion and shunning, for what they consider serious offenses. Members who formally leave are considered to be \"disassociated\" and are also shunned. Some members who leave voluntarily successfully \"fade\" without being shunned. Former members may experience significant mental distress as a result of being shunned, and some seek reinstatement to maintain contact with their friends and family.\nThe group's position on conscientious objection to military service and refusal to salute state symbols\u2014for example, national anthems and flags\u2014has brought it into conflict with several governments. Jehovah's Witnesses have been persecuted, with their activities banned or restricted in some countries. Persistent legal challenges by Jehovah's Witnesses have influenced legislation related to civil rights in several countries. The organization has been criticized regarding biblical translation, doctrines, and alleged coercion of its members. The Watch Tower Society has made various unfulfilled predictions about major biblical events, such as Jesus' Second Coming, the advent of God's kingdom, and Armageddon. Their policies for handling cases of child sexual abuse have been the subject of various formal inquiries.\nDemographics.\nJehovah's Witnesses have an active presence in most countries. In 2024, Jehovah's Witnesses reported approximately 8.8\u00a0million \"publishers\"\u2014the term they use for members actively involved in preaching\u2014in about 119,000 congregations. In the same year, they conducted Bible studies with 7,480,146 individuals (including those conducted by Witness parents with their children). 4,091 members served as missionaries in 2021. In 2024, Jehovah's Witnesses reported a worldwide annual increase of 2.4%. 21,119,442 people attended the annual memorial of Christ's death. The official published membership statistics, such as those above, include only those who submit reports for their personal ministry. As a result, only about half of those who self-identify as Jehovah's Witnesses in independent demographic studies are considered \"active\" by the faith itself. Research regarding the demographics of Jehovah's Witnesses is incredibly limited; sample sizes tend to be small and focused to a specific region. Cross-cultural studies are \"virtually non-existent\".\nThe 2008 US Pew Forum on Religion &amp; Public Life survey found a low retention rate among members of the denomination: about 37% of people raised in the group continued to identify as Jehovah's Witnesses. The next lowest retention rates were for Buddhism at 50% and Catholicism at 68%. The study also found that 65% of adult American Jehovah's Witnesses are converts. In 2016, Jehovah's Witnesses had the lowest average household income among surveyed religious groups, with approximately half of Witness households in the United States earning less than $30,000 per year. As of 2016, Jehovah's Witnesses were considered to be the most racially diverse Christian denomination in the United States. A sociological comparative study by the Pew Research Center found that American Jehovah's Witnesses ranked highest in belief in God, importance of religion in one's life, frequency of religious attendance, frequency of prayers, frequency of Bible reading outside of religious services, belief that their prayers are answered, belief that their religion can only be interpreted one way, belief that theirs is the only one true faith leading to eternal life, opposition to abortion, and opposition to homosexuality. Jehovah's Witnesses also ranked lowest in interest in politics.\nHistory.\nScholarly analysis of Jehovah's Witnesses is limited in academia, with most works focusing on legal challenges faced by the group. The denomination does not cooperate with scholars beyond limited communication from anonymous individuals. Consequently, academics often rely on literature written by former members such as James Penton and Raymond Franz to understand its inner workings. The denomination has been variously described as a \"church\", \"sect\", \"new religious movement\", or \"cult\". Usage of the various terms has been debated among sociologists. When the term \"sect\" is used by sociologists, it is within the framework of church-sect typology for their activities within a specific country. Sociologists from the 1940s to the 1960s frequently compared the group's structure with totalitarianism. Throughout the 1970s and 80s, sociologists determined that \"cult\" was a reductionist label when applied to Jehovah's Witnesses, noting that new members did not undergo \"sudden transformations\" and made a rational choice to join the group. Academics generally stopped using the term \"cult\" in the 1980s due to its pejorative association and its usage by the Christian countercult movement, with \"new religious movement\" largely replacing it. George Chryssides and Zoe Knox avoid using the term \"new religious movement\" because it also has negative connotations. Chryssides refers to the denomination as an \"old new religion\". \nBackground.\nIn 1870, Charles Taze Russell and others formed a group in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to study the Bible. During his ministry, Russell disputed many of mainstream Christianity's tenets, including immortality of the soul, hellfire, predestination, Christ's return, the Trinity, and the burning up of the world. In 1876, he met Nelson H. Barbour. Later that year they jointly produced the book \"Three Worlds,\" which combined restitutionist views with end time prophecy.\nThe book taught that God's dealings with humanity were divided dispensationally, with each period ending with a \"harvest\", and that Jesus inaugurated the \"harvest of the Gospel age\" by means of his invisible return in 1874. The book asserted that 1914 would mark the end of a 2,520-year period called \"the Gentile Times\", at which time world society would be replaced by the full establishment of God's kingdom on earth. Beginning in 1878, Russell and Barbour jointly edited a religious magazine, \"Herald of the Morning\". In June 1879, the two split over doctrinal differences, and in July, Russell began publishing the magazine \"Zion's Watch Tower and Herald of Christ's Presence\", saying its purpose was to demonstrate that the world was in \"the last days\" and that a new age of earthly and human restitution under Jesus' reign was imminent.\nFrom 1879, \"Watch Tower\" supporters gathered as autonomous congregations to study the Bible topically. Thirty congregations were founded, and during 1879 and 1880, Russell visited each to provide the format he recommended for conducting meetings. In 1881, \"Zion's Watch Tower Tract Society\" was presided over by William Henry Conley, and in 1884, Russell incorporated the society as a nonprofit business to distribute tracts and Bibles. He also published a six book series entitled \"Studies in the Scriptures\". By about 1900, Russell had organized thousands of part- and full-time colporteurs, and was appointing foreign missionaries and establishing branch offices. By the 1910s, Russell's organization maintained nearly a hundred \"pilgrims\", or traveling preachers. Russell engaged in significant global publishing efforts during his ministry, and by 1912, he was the most distributed Christian author in the United States. He also directed \"The Photo-Drama of Creation\".\nRussell moved the Watch Tower Society's headquarters to Brooklyn, New York, in 1909, combining printing and corporate offices with a house of worship; volunteers were housed in a nearby residence he named \"Bethel\". He identified the religious movement as \"Bible Students\", and more formally as the International Bible Students Association. By 1910, about 50,000 people worldwide were associated with the movement and congregations reelected him annually as their pastor. Russell died on October 31, 1916, at the age of 64 while returning from a ministerial speaking tour.\nJoseph Rutherford.\nIn January 1917, the Watch Tower Society's legal representative, Joseph Franklin Rutherford, was elected as its next president. His election was disputed, and members of the Board of Directors accused him of acting in an autocratic and secretive manner. The divisions between his supporters and opponents triggered a major turnover of members over the next decade. Because of disappointment over the changes and , tens of thousands of defections occurred during the first half of Rutherford's tenure, leading to the formation of several Bible Student organizations independent of the Watch Tower Society, the largest of which was the Dawn Bible Students Association. There are varying estimates of how many Bible Students left during Rutherford's tenure, with Alan Rogerson believing the total number to be unclear. By mid-1919, an estimated one in seven of Russell-era Bible Students had ceased their association with the Society. By the 1920s, three-quarters were estimated to have left.\nRutherford enacted several changes under his leadership, many of which are considered \"distinctive\" to modern Jehovah's Witness beliefs and practices. Some of these changes include advocating for door-to-door preaching, prohibiting celebrations believed to be pagan such as Christmas, the belief that Jesus died on a stake instead of a cross, and a more uniform organizational hierarchy. In 1919, Rutherford instituted the appointment of a director in each congregation, and a year later all members were instructed to report their weekly preaching activity to the Brooklyn headquarters. In 1920, he announced that the Hebrew patriarchs (such as Abraham and Isaac) would be resurrected in 1925, marking the beginning of Christ's thousand-year earthly kingdom. In July 1917, he released \"The Finished Mystery\" as a seventh volume to the \"Studies in the Scriptures\" series. Rutherford claimed it to be Russell's posthumous work, but it was actually written by Clayton Woodworth, George Fisher, and Gertrude Seibert. It strongly criticized Catholic and Protestant clergy and Christian involvement in the Great War. As a result, Watch Tower Society directors were jailed for sedition under the \"Espionage Act\" in 1918 and members were subjected to mob violence; the directors were released in March 1919 and charges against them were dropped in 1920. \nOn July 26, 1931, at a convention in Columbus, Ohio, Rutherford introduced the new name \"Jehovah's witnesses\", based on Isaiah 43:10: \"Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me\" (King James Version). It was adopted by resolution. The name was chosen to distinguish his group of Bible Students from other independent groups that had severed ties with the Society, as well as to symbolize the instigation of new outlooks and the promotion of fresh evangelizing methods. \nIn 1932, Rutherford eliminated the system of locally elected elders. In 1938, he introduced what he called a theocratic organizational system, under which appointments in congregations worldwide were made from the Brooklyn headquarters. Doctrine regarding life after death also evolved under his tenure. In addition to the preexisting belief that there would be 144,000 people to survive Armageddon and live in heaven to rule over earth with Jesus, a separate class of members, the \"great multitude\", was introduced. This group would live in a paradise restored on earth; from 1935, new converts to the movement were considered part of that class. By the mid-1930s, the timing of the beginning of Jesus' presence, his enthronement as king, and the start of the last days were each moved to 1914. As their interpretations of the Bible evolved, Witness publications decreed that saluting national flags is a form of idolatry, which led to a new outbreak of mob violence and government opposition in various countries.\nNathan Knorr.\nNathan Knorr was appointed as third president of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society in 1942. Knorr organized large international assemblies, instituted new training programs for members, and expanded missionary activity and branch offices worldwide. He also increased the use of explicit instructions guiding Jehovah's Witnesses' lifestyle and conduct as well as a greater use of congregational judicial procedures to enforce a strict moral code. Watch Tower Society literature stopped crediting individual contributors during his tenure, as he believed that recognition should only be given to God. \nKnorr commissioned a new translation of the Bible, the \"New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures\", the full version of which was released in 1961. Various Bible scholars, including Bruce M. Metzger and MacLean Gilmour, have said that while scholarship is evident in \"New World Translation\", its rendering of certain texts is inaccurate and biased in favor of Witness practices and doctrines. Critics of the group such as Edmund C. Gruss and Christian writers such as Ray C. Stedman, Walter Martin, Norman Klann, and Anthony Hoekema say the \"New World Translation\" is scholastically dishonest. Most criticism of the \"New World Translation\" relates to its rendering of the New Testament, particularly regarding the introduction of the name \"Jehovah\" and in passages related to the Trinity doctrine.\nThe offices of elder and ministerial servant were restored to Witness congregations in 1972. In a major organizational overhaul in 1976, the power of the Watch Tower Society president was diminished, with authority for doctrinal and organizational decisions being passed to the Governing Body. Knorr introduced these changes as he believed that people making spiritual decisions should be \"called by Christ\" rather than elected. The presidency's role transitioned into heading the denomination's legal entity. The distinction between these roles grew further when all Governing Body members resigned as directors and the Christian Congregation of Jehovah's Witnesses, Inc. was formed in 2000. Since Knorr's death in 1977, the presidency has been held by Frederick Franz, Milton Henschel, Don Alden Adams and Robert Ciranko.\nFurther development.\nFrom 1966, Witness publications and convention talks built anticipation of the possibility that Jesus' thousand-year reign might begin in 1975 or shortly thereafter. The number of baptisms increased significantly, from about 59,000 in 1966 to more than 297,000 in 1974. By 1975, the number of active members exceeded two million. From 1971 to 1981, there was a net increase of 737,241 publishers worldwide, while baptisms totaled 1.71 million for the same period. Watch Tower Society literature did not say that 1975 would definitely mark the end, though it was strongly implied. Frederick Franz, then\u2013president of the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, stated at a 1975 convention that the great tribulation could be expected to start by the end of that year. Many Jehovah's Witnesses acted upon this information by quitting their jobs and preaching more fervently. After that prediction failed, ordinary Jehovah's Witness members were blamed for believing in the date rather than the Governing Body acknowledging responsibility. Membership declined significantly for a few years after the failed prediction. \nJehovah's Witnesses have not set any specific dates for the end since 1975. Their publications emphasize that \"one cannot know the day or the hour\", but they still believe Armageddon to be imminent. Verse 34 of Matthew 24, where Jesus tells his disciples that \"this generation will by no means pass away until all these things happen\", was interpreted to refer to the generation of people alive in 1914. The initial teaching was that Armageddon would begin before the last person alive during that timeframe had died. The time limit was removed in 1995. This doctrine changed further in 2008, where \"generation\" was interpreted to refer to both the original anointed class and their remnant, the latter of which would be alive when Armageddon began. In 2010, the meaning of \"generation\" was re-interpreted to include individuals whose lives overlapped with anointed individuals alive during 1914.\nOrganization.\nJehovah's Witnesses are organized hierarchically, in what the leadership calls a theocratic organization, reflecting their belief that it is God's visible organization on earth. Jehovah's Witnesses establish branch offices to manage their activities in various countries or regions. Each branch office is also referred to as Bethel. Supporting staff live on these properties where they operate as a religious community and administrative unit. Their living expenses and those of other full-time volunteers are covered along with a basic monthly stipend. These volunteers are called Bethelites and are assigned specific tasks such as printing literature or doing laundry. They are allowed to marry but must leave Bethel if they have children. Bethelites are expected to read the Bible cover-to-cover during their first year of service. Consultants are sometimes hired for specialized tasks such as legal advice. Regular Jehovah's Witness members are encouraged to visit Bethel as a recreational activity.\nTraveling overseers appoint local elders and ministerial servants, while branch offices may appoint regional committees for matters such as Kingdom Hall construction or disaster relief. Each congregation has a body of appointed unpaid male elders and ministerial servants. Elders maintain general responsibility for congregational governance, setting meeting times, selecting speakers and conducting meetings, directing the public preaching work, and creating judicial committees to investigate and decide disciplinary action for cases involving sexual misconduct or doctrinal breaches. New elders are appointed by a traveling overseer after recommendation by the existing body of elders. Ministerial servants\u2014appointed in a similar manner as elders\u2014fulfill clerical and attendant duties, but may also teach and conduct meetings. Jehovah's Witnesses do not use \"elder\" as a title to signify a formal clergy-laity division, though elders may employ ecclesiastical privilege regarding confession of sins.\nMuch of the denomination's funding is donated, primarily by members. There is no tithing or collection. In 2001 \"Newsday\" listed the Watch Tower Society as one of New York's 40 richest corporations, with revenues exceeding $950\u00a0million. In 2016, it ranked eighteenth for donations received by registered charities in Canada at $80 million. From 1969 until 2015, the denomination's headquarters were housed in Brooklyn, with plans to completely move its operations to Warwick in 2017. The property was sold to Kushner Companies for $340 million in 2016.\nGoverning Body.\nThe denomination is led by the Governing Body\u2014an all-male group that varies in size. The Governing Body directs several committees that are responsible for administrative functions, including publishing, assembly programs and evangelizing activities. Doctrines of Jehovah's Witnesses are established by the Governing Body, which assumes responsibility for interpreting and applying scripture. The Governing Body does not issue a single, comprehensive statement of faith, but expresses its doctrinal positions in a variety of ways through publications published by the Watch Tower Society. The publications teach that doctrinal changes and refinements result from a process of progressive revelation, in which God gradually reveals his will and purpose, and that such enlightenment or \"new light\" results from the application of reason and study. \nSociologist Andrew Holden's ethnographic study of the group concluded that pronouncements of the Governing Body, through Watch Tower Society publications, carry almost as much weight as the Bible. The organization makes no provision for members to criticize or contribute to its teachings. Witness publications strongly discourage followers from questioning doctrine and counsel received from the Governing Body, reasoning that it is to be trusted as part of \"God's organization\". The denomination does not tolerate dissent over doctrines and practices; members who openly disagree with the group's teachings are expelled and shunned.\nGender roles.\nJehovah's Witnesses have a complementarian view of women. Only men may hold positions of authority, such as ministerial servant or elder. Women may actively participate in the public preaching work, serve at Bethel, and profess to be members of the 144,000. They are not typically allowed to address the congregation directly. In rare circumstances, women can substitute in certain capacities if there are no eligible men. In these situations, women must wear a head covering if they are performing a teaching role. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that transgender people should live as the gender they were assigned at birth and view gender-affirming surgery as mutilation. Modesty in dress and grooming is frequently emphasized for both men and women.\nBeliefs.\nJehovah's Witnesses believe their denomination is a restoration of first-century Christianity. They believe that mainstream Christianity departed from true worship over time, that groups such as Cathars attempted to restore some aspects of it, and that the Protestant Reformation \"did not go far enough\". Older books published by the Watch Tower Society such as those by Charles Russell and Joseph Rutherford are usually unfamiliar to a modern Jehovah's Witness, although some congregations have these publications in their libraries. Jehovah's Witnesses consider the Bible scientifically and historically accurate and reliable and interpret much of it literally, but accept parts of it as symbolic. Jehovah's Witnesses are old Earth creationists. The entire Protestant canon of scripture is considered the inspired, inerrant word of God. Regular personal Bible reading is frequently recommended. Members are discouraged from formulating doctrines and \"private ideas\" reached through Bible research independent of Watch Tower Society publications and are cautioned against reading other religious literature. Adherents commonly call their body of beliefs \"The Truth\".\nJehovah.\nJehovah's Witnesses emphasize the use of God's name, and they prefer the form \"Jehovah\"\u2014a vocalization of God's name based on the Tetragrammaton. They believe that Jehovah is the only true god, the creator of all things, and the \"Universal Sovereign\". They believe that all worship should be directed toward him, and that he is not part of a Trinity; consequently, the group places more emphasis on God than on Christ. They believe that the Holy Spirit is God's applied power or \"active force\". Jehovah's Witnesses believe that they can have a personal relationship with God.\nJesus.\nJehovah's Witnesses believe that Jesus is God's only direct creation, that everything else was created through him by means of God's power, and that the initial unassisted act of creation uniquely identifies Jesus as God's \"only-begotten Son\". As part of their nontrinitarian beliefs, they do not believe that Jesus is God the Son. They do believe that he was the first angel, and is the only archangel. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that Mary conceived Jesus as a virgin but do not believe that she was born free from sin or that she remained a virgin after his birth. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that Jesus served as a redeemer and a ransom sacrifice to atone for original sin. They believe that he died on a single upright post rather than a cross, which they regard as a pagan symbol. Accordingly, they do not use the word \"crucifixion\" when referring to Jesus' death. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that Jesus was resurrected with a \"spirit body\", and that he assumed human form only temporarily after his resurrection. Biblical references to the Michael, Abaddon (Apollyon), and the Word are interpreted as names for Jesus in various roles. Jesus is considered the only intercessor and high priest between God and humanity, appointed by God as the king and judge of his kingdom.\nLife after death.\nJehovah's Witnesses believe death is a state of nonexistence with no consciousness. There is no Hell of fiery torment; Hades and Sheol are understood to refer to the condition of death, termed the \"common grave\". They consider the soul a life or a living body that can die. They believe that humanity is in a sinful state, from which release is possible only by means of Jesus' shed blood as a ransom, or atonement, for humankind's sins. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that a \"little flock\" of 144,000 selected humans go to heaven, but that God will resurrect the majority (the \"other sheep\") to a cleansed earth after Armageddon. They interpret to mean that the number of Christians going to heaven is limited to exactly 144,000, who will rule with Jesus as kings and priests over earth. They believe that baptism as a Jehovah's Witness is vital for salvation, and do not recognize baptism from other denominations as valid. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that some people who died before Armageddon will be resurrected, taught the proper way to worship God, and then face a final test at the end of the millennial reign. This judgment will be based on their actions after resurrection rather than past deeds. At the end of the thousand years, Jesus will hand all authority back to God. Then a final test will take place when Satan is released to mislead humankind. Those who fail will die, along with Satan and his demons. They also believe that those who rejected their beliefs while still alive will not be resurrected.\nEschatology.\nJehovah's Witnesses believe that Satan was originally a perfect angel who developed feelings of self-importance and craved worship. Satan influenced Adam and Eve to disobey God, and humanity subsequently became participants in a challenge involving the competing claims of Jehovah and Satan to universal sovereignty. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that Jesus began to rule invisibly in heaven as king of God's kingdom in October 1914 and that Satan was subsequently ousted from heaven to the earth. They base this belief on a rendering of the Greek word \"parousia\"\u2014usually translated as \"coming\" when referring to Jesus\u2014as \"presence\". Jehovah's Witnesses believe that they are the kingdom's representatives on earth. They also believe that they must remain separate from human governments, which they consider to be controlled by Satan. The kingdom is viewed as the means by which God will accomplish his original purpose for the earth, transforming it into a paradise without sickness or death. Jehovah's Witnesses do not currently suggest any specific date for the end of the world, but Watch Tower Society literature has previously made such statements about 1914, 1925 and 1975. These failed predictions were presented as \"beyond doubt\" and \"approved by God\". Some Watch Tower Society publications state that God has used Jehovah's Witnesses and the International Bible Students as a modern-day prophet.\nA central teaching of Jehovah's Witnesses is that the world faces imminent destruction through intervention by God and Jesus Christ. This belief has been present since the group's founding. They believe that Jesus' inauguration as king in 1914 is a sign that the great tribulation is about to take place. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that all other present-day religions are false, identifying them with Babylon the Great, the \"harlot\" of Revelation 17. They believe that Nebuchadnezzar II had a dream where he saw a statue with a gold head, silver chest and arms, copper abdomen, iron legs, and feet that were a mixture of clay and iron. This dream is interpreted as a prophecy representing the rise and fall of empires: gold represents Babylon, silver represents Persia, copper represents Greece, iron represents Rome, and clay represents an Anglo-American empire. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that humanity is currently living in the last empire that will eventually be destroyed by the United Nations, which is also interpreted as the scarlet-colored wild beast. Satan will subsequently use world governments to attack Jehovah's Witnesses, which will prompt God to begin the war of Armageddon, during which all forms of human government will be destroyed and all people not counted as Jesus' sheep will be killed. After Armageddon, God will extend his heavenly kingdom to include earth, which will be transformed into a paradise like the Garden of Eden. They thus depart from the mainstream Christian belief that the \"second coming\" of Matthew 24 refers to a single moment of arrival on earth to judge humans.\nFamily life.\nJehovah's Witnesses believe that dating should only occur if the couple is seriously considering marriage. Dating outside the denomination is strongly discouraged and can lead to religious sanctions. Dating Jehovah's Witnesses are encouraged to have a chaperone when they are together to avoid acting on sexual desires. All sexual relations outside marriage are grounds for expulsion if the person is not deemed repentant; homosexual activity is considered a serious sin, and same-sex marriage is forbidden. Masturbation is also prohibited.\nJehovah's Witnesses may get married at a Kingdom Hall in a simple ceremony and practices considered pagan such as wishing good luck or throwing rice are prohibited. An elder will give a talk to the congregation. Once married, a husband is considered to have spiritual headship over his wife, unless he is not one of Jehovah's Witnesses. Contraception is allowed. Divorce is forbidden if not sought on the grounds of adultery, which is called a \"scriptural divorce\". If a divorce is obtained for any other reason, remarriage is considered adulterous unless the former spouse has died or is considered to have committed sexual immorality. Spouses may separate in cases of domestic violence. Jehovah's Witness households are expected to have a family worship session each week.\nPractices.\nBaptism.\nBaptism is considered a requirement for salvation. Baptisms performed by other denominations are not considered valid. Before being baptized, a member will become an unbaptized publisher. Jehovah's Witnesses do not practice infant baptism but allow children to be baptized as long as they meet the same requirements as other candidates. To qualify for baptism, an individual must correctly answer more than a hundred questions about their own lifestyle and the denomination's beliefs. Individuals undergoing baptism are directed to affirm publicly that their dedication and baptism identifies each \"as one of Jehovah's Witnesses in association with God's spirit-directed organization,\" though Witness publications say baptism symbolizes personal dedication to God and not \"to a man, work or organization.\"\nWorship.\nMeetings for worship and study are held at Kingdom Halls, which are typically functional in character, and do not contain religious symbols. Witnesses are assigned to a congregation in whose \"territory\" they usually reside and attend weekly services they call \"meetings\", scheduled by congregation elders. The meetings are largely devoted to study of Watch Tower Society literature and the Bible. Jehovah's Witnesses have \"considerable worldwide uniformity\", as all congregations study the same materials on a schedule. Outsiders are encouraged to attend. \nHistorically, congregations met three times each week, but since 2009 meet for two sessions each week: one on a weekday and one on a weekend. Jehovah's Witnesses are expected to study the assigned material before attending. Children also attend meetings and do not have separate arrangements such as Sunday School. Gatherings are opened and closed with hymns called Kingdom songs and brief prayers. A Kingdom Hall may have multiple congregations that share the building. In 2014, decisions about which congregations would share a Kingdom Hall or whether additional Kingdom Halls should be built was transferred from individual congregations to the nearest branch office. After this change, many Kingdom Halls were sold.\nTwice each year, Jehovah's Witnesses from a number of congregations that form a \"circuit\" gather for a one-day assembly. Larger groups of congregations meet annually for a three-day \"regional convention\", usually at an Assembly Hall built for this purpose. Rented stadiums or auditoriums are sometimes used instead. New members are baptized at these conventions. Jehovah's Witnesses consider their most important annual event to be the Memorial, which is observed on the fourteenth day of the Jewish month Nisan during Passover, and members advertise the event to outsiders. Unleavened bread and red wine is passed between attendees, but only those who consider themselves to be anointed partake (often with no one in attendance partaking), and a talk is given about the event's significance.\nEvangelism.\nJehovah's Witnesses are known for their efforts to spread their beliefs, distributing Watch Tower Society literature. The objective is to start a regular \"Bible study\" with anyone who is not already a member, with the intention that the student be baptized as a member of the group; members are advised to consider discontinuing Bible study with students who show no interest in becoming members. While Jehovah's Witnesses are well known for visiting people's homes, they have a variety of preaching methods. Literature carts were introduced in 2012, where Jehovah's Witnesses stay in a public place and wait for other people to approach them. Methods usually undertaken by those physically unable to engage in the door-to-door ministry include calling people by phone and writing letters. Jehovah's Witnesses are sometimes confused with Mormon missionaries. Converts as a result of their door-to-door evangelism are rare and happen at a rate comparable with other denominations that practice similar preaching methods.\nJehovah's Witnesses are taught that they are under a biblical command to engage in public preaching and often do so by working in pairs. They are instructed to devote as much time as possible to their ministry, and to submit a monthly \"Field Service Report\". Those who do not submit reports for six consecutive months are termed \"inactive\". Children also preach. Until 2023, every active Jehovah's Witness was expected to submit the amount of hours they spent preaching in their monthly field service report. In November 2023, this requirement was modified to only apply to members who have agreed to a specific hour requirement. As of 2025, auxiliary pioneers preach for 30 hours, regular pioneers preach for 50 hours per month; special pioneers preach for 100 hours each month, often in remote or under-represented areas, and receive a stipend to help pay for their living expenses. Other members are only required to indicate they engaged in some form of ministry during the month, along with any Bible studies they conducted. In 2024, Jehovah's Witnesses conducted about 7.5\u00a0million Bible studies (including studies conducted with their own children), and approximately 300,000 new members were baptized.\nThe denomination produces a significant amount of literature as part of its evangelism activities. In 2010, \"The Watchtower\" and \"Awake!\" were the world's most widely distributed magazines. Jehovah's Witnesses consider their literature to be \"spiritual food\" and provide it to interested parties for free. The group launched its first website in 1997: watchtower.org. In 2008, it was replaced with jw.org. Their website is often referenced in their evangelism, with its logo appearing in literature displays and outside Kingdom Halls. An increased reliance on electronic media has reduced their printing costs. The denomination archives most of its literature online, although certain entries have been changed after publication. It also offers a streaming service called JW Broadcasting. An animated series aimed at children has been produced called \"Become Jehovah's Friend\". An application, JW Language, has been designed to facilitate preaching with people who speak different languages. A specialized device for use in areas with limited internet access offers downloaded materials relevant to Jehovah's Witnesses.\nDisciplinary action.\nJehovah's Witnesses require individuals to be baptized by the denomination in order to be subject to their disciplinary procedures. The denomination does not tolerate dissent over doctrines and practices; members who openly disagree with the group's teachings are expelled, shunned, and condemned as apostates who are \"mentally diseased\". Some adherents \"fade\" and stop attending meetings without being formally subjected to the group's disciplinary procedures, although some former members have still experienced shunning through this method.\nMembers accused of persistent wrongdoing are brought to the attention of the elders who will then evaluate possible consequences. Members that have violated the group's standards\u2014for example, dating a non-member\u2014but not otherwise committed a serious sin may be \"marked\". Congregation members who are aware of another member's errant behaviour are advised to limit social contact with the marked individual. Elders may decide to form a committee in cases involving serious sin, which may result in the member being reproved or shunned. This process requires three elders to meet with the accused. These cases usually involve sexual misconduct or apostasy. Other serious sins involve accepting blood transfusions (which does not require a judicial committee), smoking, using recreational drugs, divorce (unless a spouse committed adultery), celebration of holidays or birthdays, abortion (which is considered murder), and political activities such as voting in elections. Procedures related to congregational discipline are primarily described in the book, \"Shepherd the Flock of God\", provided only to elders. People who formally leave Jehovah's Witnesses are considered to be \"disassociated\" and are also shunned. Jehovah's Witnesses can also be disassociated for accepting a blood transfusion.\nThe practice of shunning may serve to deter other members from dissident behavior. Shunning also helps maintain a \"uniformity of belief\". Shunned individuals may experience suicidal ideation and often struggle with feelings of low self esteem, shame, and guilt. Former members may experience significant mental distress as a result of being shunned and some seek reinstatement to keep contact with their friends and family. Former members may also experience ambiguous loss or panic attacks. Expelled individuals may eventually be reinstated to the congregation if deemed repentant by congregation elders, and some seek reinstatement to maintain contact with their friends and family. Reinstatement can be a long process, which may be mentally and emotionally draining. Funerals for expelled members may not be performed at Kingdom Halls.\nBaptized children are also subject to the same moral standards and consequences for failing to comply. They are allowed to stay with their families until reaching the age of majority. Jehovah's Witnesses lost state funding as a religious community in Norway because of its shunning policy, with the country concluding that shunning, particularly of children, constitutes psychological violence. Subsequently, the group made some changes to its shunning policy in 2024; individuals may offer \"simple greetings\" to shunned members instead of completely avoiding them if the individual is not deemed to be an apostate. As of 2024, two elders may have a more informal meeting with a minor who is considered to have committed a \"serious sin\" along with his or her parents before deciding whether a formal committee meeting is required. Parents are also no longer prohibited from attending judicial committees with minors.\nSeparateness.\nJehovah's Witnesses believe that the Bible condemns mixing religions, on the basis that there can only be one truth from God, and therefore reject interfaith and ecumenical movements. They believe that only Jehovah's Witnesses represent true Christianity and that other denominations do not meet God's requirements; all other Christian denominations (collectively referred to as \"Christendom\") along with all other religions are considered \"false religion\". Jehovah's Witnesses are taught that it is vital to remain \"separate from the world.\" Their literature defines the \"world\" as \"the mass of mankind apart from Jehovah's approved servants\" and teach that it is morally contaminated and ruled by Satan. Jehovah's Witnesses are taught that association with \"worldly\" people presents a danger to their faith. \nFor many years, the Watch Tower Society has stated that secondary education is \"spiritually dangerous\" as it requires extended association with those outside the group. The denomination has also presented further education as unnecessary in view of their belief that Armageddon is imminent. Trade schools are suggested as an alternative. Adolescent Jehovah's Witnesses are also encouraged to become Bethelites. In 2025, the view of higher education was adjusted, with a statement that, \"While there are dangers involved in pursuing certain forms of education, basically, whether to obtain additional education or not is a matter for personal decision,\" and that, \"no Christian\u2014including the elders\u2014should judge a fellow Christian's personal decision on this matter.\"\nJehovah's Witnesses do not celebrate religious holidays such as Christmas and Easter, nor do they observe birthdays, national holidays, or other celebrations they consider to honor people other than Jesus. They believe that these and many other customs have pagan origins or reflect nationalistic spirit. Members are told that spontaneous giving at other times can help their children to not feel deprived of birthdays or other celebrations. Wedding anniversaries are allowed. Jehovah's Witnesses are not permitted to work in industries associated with the military and refuse national military service, which in some countries may result in their arrest and imprisonment. They also refuse to salute flags or participate in patriotic activities. Adherents see themselves as a worldwide brotherhood that transcends national boundaries and ethnic loyalties. \nJehovah's Witnesses are often viewed as being without agency or brainwashed by the anti-cult movement. Andrew Holden believes that most members who join millenarian movements such as Jehovah's Witnesses have made an informed choice, but that defectors \"are seldom allowed a dignified exit\", and describes the administration as autocratic. Rodney Stark believes that Jehovah's Witness leaders are \"not always very democratic\" and that members \"are expected to conform to rather strict standards,\" but adds that \"enforcement tends to be very informal, sustained by the close bonds of friendship within the group\", and that members see themselves as \"part of the power structure rather than subject to it.\" \nAfter the publication of \"The Elementary Forms of New Religious Life\", academics began to describe various new religious movements as either \"world-affirming\", \"world-accommodating\", or \"world-rejecting\". Jehovah's Witnesses were labelled as \"world-rejecting\". Bryan R. Wilson believed that Jehovah's Witnesses conflict with society at large, impose \"tests of merit on would-be members\", have strict disciplinary procedures, and expect absolute commitment. Sociologist Ronald Lawson has suggested that the group's intellectual and organizational isolation, coupled with the intense indoctrination of adherents, rigid internal discipline, and considerable persecution, has contributed to the consistency of its sense of urgency in its apocalyptic message.\nAlan Rogerson describes the group's leadership as totalitarian, while historian James Irvin Lichti rejects this interpretation. James A. Beckford classified the group's organizational structure as \"totalizing\", with assertive leadership, specific and narrow objectives, control over competing demands on members' time and energy, and control over the quality of new members. Other characteristics of the classification include likelihood of friction with secular authorities, reluctance to cooperate with other religious organizations, a high rate of membership turnover, a low rate of doctrinal change, and strict uniformity of beliefs among members. Beckford also identified the group's chief characteristics as \"historicism\" (identifying historical events as relating to the outworking of God's purpose), \"absolutism\" (conviction that Jehovah's Witness leaders dispense absolute truth), \"activism\" (capacity to motivate members to perform missionary tasks), \"rationalism\" (conviction that Witness doctrines have a rational basis devoid of mystery), \"authoritarianism\" (rigid presentation of regulations without the opportunity for criticism) and \"world indifference\" (rejection of certain secular requirements and medical treatments). \nFormer members Heather Botting and Gary Botting compare the cultural paradigms of the denomination to George Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". Critics believe that by disparaging individual decision-making, the group's leaders cultivate a system of unquestioning obedience in which members abrogate responsibility and rights over their personal lives. Critics also accuse the group's leaders of exercising \"intellectual dominance\" over adherents, controlling information, and creating \"mental isolation\", which former Governing Body member Raymond Franz argued were all elements of mind control. Some Jehovah's Witnesses describe themselves to academics as \"Physically In, Mentally Out\" (PIMO); these individuals privately question certain doctrine but remain inside the organization to maintain contact with their friends and family.\nRejection of blood transfusions.\nJehovah's Witnesses typically refuse blood transfusions, which they consider a violation of God's law based on their interpretation of Acts\u00a015:28,\u00a029 and other scriptures. This prohibition has existed since 1945. They also do not eat blood-based foods, such as blood sausage. Since 1961, acceptance of a blood transfusion without subsequent repentance has been grounds for expulsion from the group. Members are directed to refuse blood transfusions, even in \"a life-or-death situation\". Their literature implies that there is a blood alternative for every medical situation and \"emphasizes the danger of blood transfusions\". Jehovah's Witnesses do not accept the transfusion of \"whole blood, packed red cells, platelets, white cells or plasma\". Autologous blood donation, where one's blood is stored for later use, is also considered unacceptable. Members may accept some blood plasma fractions at their own discretion. Some Jehovah's Witnesses may accept prohibited blood products if medical confidentiality is upheld, although Jehovah's Witnesses who work in a hospital may break such confidentiality. Jehovah's Witness patients are generally open to non-blood alternative treatments, even if they are less effective.\nCourts have intervened in life-threatening situations involving children that require blood transfusions to allow the treatment to take place. Courts may allow mature minors to reject blood transfusions based on their beliefs. The May 22, 1994 issue of \"Awake!\" entitled \"Youths Who Put God First\" featured children who refused blood transfusions and subsequently died.\nThe Watch Tower Society provides pre-formatted durable power of attorney documents prohibiting major blood components, in which members can specify which allowable fractions and treatments they will accept. The denomination has established Hospital Liaison Committees as a cooperative arrangement between individual Jehovah's Witness members and medical professionals and hospitals to provide information about bloodless treatment options. Patients who accept certain blood products in the committee's presence are deemed to have disassociated and are shunned. The National Secular Society advocates against hospitals partnering with hospital liaison committees due to medical coercion.\nHandling of sexual abuse cases.\nJehovah's Witnesses have been accused of having policies and culture that help to conceal cases of sexual abuse within the organization. When investigating cases of child abuse, elders are instructed to immediately call the organization's headquarters or branch office. The group states that this requirement is to ensure compliance with the law. An investigation by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation determined that elders were asked questions such as, \"How many elders believe the victim is to blame or willingly participated in the act?\" Jehovah's Witnesses have been criticized for the \"two witness rule\" for congregational discipline, based on an application of scriptures in Deuteronomy 19:15 and Matthew 18:15\u201317, which requires sexual abuse to be substantiated by secondary evidence if the accused person denies wrongdoing. In cases where corroboration is lacking, the Watch Tower Society's instruction is that \"the elders will leave the matter in Jehovah's hands\". A former member has said that the policy effectively requires that there be third-party witness to an act of molestation, \"which is an impossibility\". Jehovah's Witnesses maintain a database of confidential files in regards to child abuse, which are marked as \"Do Not Destroy\". An elder in New Zealand was tasked with destroying \"personal notes\" in their database when the organization was under investigation for child abuse. In the United States, the group was fined four-thousand dollars daily (accruing a total of two million dollars) for delaying an order to provide its documentation.\nThe group's failure to report abuse allegations to authorities has also been criticized. The Watch Tower Society's policy is that elders inform authorities when required by law to do so, but otherwise leave that up to the victim and their family. In jurisdictions with priest\u2013penitent privilege, confessions of abuse may be considered confidential. William Bowen, a former Jehovah's Witness elder who established the Silentlambs organization to assist sex abuse victims in the denomination, has claimed that Witness leaders discourage followers from reporting incidents of sexual misconduct to authorities. Other critics have alleged that the organization is reluctant to alert authorities to protect its \"crime-free\" reputation. However, in response to the charge that their policies \"protect pedophiles rather than protect the children\", the organization has maintained that the best way to protect children is to educate parents; they also say they do not sponsor activities that separate children from parents. In court cases in the United Kingdom and the United States, the Watch Tower Society has been found negligent in its protection of children from known sex offenders within the congregation. The Society has settled other child abuse lawsuits out of court, paying $780,000 in one case. In 2015, the Australian Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse found that \"there was no evidence before the Royal Commission of the Jehovah's Witness organisation having or not having reported to police any of the 1,006 alleged perpetrators of child sexual abuse identified by the organisation since 1950.\" The Royal Commission also found that the Watch Tower Society legal department routinely provided incorrect information to elders based on an incorrect understanding of what constitutes a legal obligation to report crimes in Australia. In 2017, the Charity Commission for England and Wales began an inquiry into Jehovah's Witnesses' handling of allegations of child sexual abuse in the United Kingdom. In 2021, Jehovah's Witnesses in Australia agreed to join the nation's redress scheme for sexual assault survivors to maintain its charity status there.\nGovernment interactions.\nControversy about various beliefs, doctrines and practices of Jehovah's Witnesses has led to opposition from governments, communities, and other religious groups. Religious commentator Ken Jubber wrote, \"Viewed globally, this persecution has been so persistent and of such intensity that it would not be inaccurate to regard Jehovah's Witnesses as the most persecuted group of Christians of the twentieth century.\" Several cases involving Jehovah's Witnesses have been heard by Supreme Courts worldwide. They generally relate to the right to practice their religion, displays of patriotism and military service, and blood transfusions. Cases in their favor have been heard in the United States, Canada and many European countries.\nPolitical and religious animosity toward Jehovah's Witnesses has at times led to mob action and government oppression in various countries. Their political neutrality and refusal to serve in the military has led to imprisonment of members who refused conscription during World War II and other periods of compulsory national service, especially in countries that do not provide religious exemptions. Their religious activities are banned or restricted in some countries, including China, Russia, Vietnam, and many Muslim-majority countries.\nAustralia.\nIn 1931, the Australian government monitored radio broadcasts of Rutherford's sermons as they had received complaints about anti-Catholic rhetoric. The religious group became especially unpopular after 1940 due to their political neutrality in the second world war, prompting people to write to government officials about the names and addresses of known members. In 1941, Jehovah's Witnesses became an illegal organization. Various groups supported the ban, which caused political pressure to enforce it; Member of Parliament Maurice Blackburn opposed a ban, believing it to be caused by religious intolerance. Once the ban was enacted, the assets of the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society were seized by the government. Witness homes were raided to confiscate their religious literature. Despite these measures, Jehovah's Witnesses continued their activities. The ban was overturned in 1943 when the High Court concluded that these restrictions violated the constitution.\nCanada.\nIn the early 1900s, radio stations were operated by congregations in Saskatoon, Edmonton, Vancouver, and Toronto. In 1927, the federal government minister responsible for radio licensing, Arthur Cardin, revoked the licenses for these radio stations because they shared airspace with the Ku Klux Klan in Canada. According to Gary Botting, this \"strange alliance\" was formed due to a mutual opposition against the Roman Catholic church. In response, Rutherford bought airtime from other radio stations. When Hector Charlesworth banned this activity as well, he was \"indirectly attacked\" in an issue of the \"Golden Age\" and Jehovah's Witnesses launched a petition to regain their licenses that resulted in 406,270 signatures. Charlesworth's actions were debated by the House of Commons in 1933. While multiple members expressed concern that this prohibition was censorship of free speech, the ban was not lifted.\nIn 1940, a year after Canada entered World War II, the denomination itself was banned under the War Measures Act as a subversive organization. This ban continued until 1943. A separate ban on the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society was not lifted until 1945. More than 100,000 dollars in assets were seized by the Canadian government and tonnes of literature produced by the group were confiscated. Hundreds of adherents were prosecuted as members of an illegal organization. Jehovah's Witnesses were interned in camps along with political dissidents and people of Chinese and Japanese descent. During this period, many Jehovah's Witness children were expelled from school, while others were placed in foster homes or juvenile detention. After the ban was lifted, men who had been jailed tried to apply for the ordained minister exemption of the \"National Selective Service Mobilization Regulations\" without success. This led to a legal case being filed, \"R. v. Stewart\", which ruled that Jehovah's Witnesses were participants in a \"commercial undertaking\" and did not qualify as ministers. A similar outcome was reached in \"Greenlees v. A.G. Canada\", where the judge decided that Jehovah's Witnesses could not be ministers because they considered every member to be one and that they did not have an organizational structure independent of the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society.\nJehovah's Witnesses faced discrimination in Quebec until the Quiet Revolution, including bans on distributing literature or holding meetings. \"Roncarelli v Duplessis\" was a 1959 legal case heard by the Supreme Court of Canada. The court held that in 1946 Maurice Duplessis, Premier and Attorney General of Quebec, had overstepped his authority by ordering the manager of the Liquor Commission to revoke the liquor licence of Frank Roncarelli, a Montreal restaurant owner and Jehovah's Witness who was an outspoken critic of the Roman Catholic Church in Quebec. Roncarelli provided bail for Jehovah's Witnesses arrested for distributing pamphlets attacking the Roman Catholic Church. The Supreme Court found Duplessis liable for $33,000 in damages plus Roncarelli's court costs. Another legal case heard that year was \"Lamb v Benoit\", where a Jehovah's Witness woman was arrested for distributing religious pamphlets.\nChina.\nJehovah's Witnesses are banned in China. Missionaries like Amber Scorah were sent there to preach clandestinely.\nCuba.\nDuring the Cuban Revolution and its aftermath, Jehovah's Witnesses became one of the largest religious groups in Cuba. Despite initially cordial relations with the government, led by Fidel Castro, attempts made to suppress religious groups became apparent. In 1962, the Cuban Ministry of Communications imposed restrictions on the distribution of Jehovah's Witnesses' literature. According to the 1963 \"Witness Yearbook\", arrests for preaching increased in 1962. The following year, foreign missionaries were exiled and hundreds of Jehovah's Witnesses were arrested for holding public and private gatherings without permission from local authorities. In 1965, the Cuban government banned the Cuban Watch Tower Society. This marked the beginning of heightened hostility towards Jehovah's Witnesses, who began to face legal repercussions for refusing to salute the flag or serve in the military when conscripted. Military Units to Aid Production were established by the government to isolate groups deemed to be \"deviant\" or \"undesirable\", including Jehovah's Witnesses. Those who refused military conscription were typically sentenced to one to six years in these camps. A 1966 report documented instances of torture and murder of Witnesses by the government agents who worked at these camps. Despite the repercussions, Jehovah's Witnesses remained persistent in their activism. This ultimately prompted the Cuban government to officially ban the sect on July 1, 1974. The 1976 Constitution reaffirmed the ruling.\nEritrea.\nReligious groups must be registered in order to legally worship in Eritrea. Jehovah's Witnesses, as well as other Christian and Muslim groups, have been refused this legal recognition. Jehovah's Witnesses have been imprisoned for their refusal to perform military service and for attending religious services.\nFrance.\nJehovah's Witnesses were officially registered as a religious group in France in 1947. In 1995, they were designated as a \"dangerous sect\" by French law. In 1999, the country demanded back taxes on donations to the religious group's organization from 1993 and 1996, which would have been \u20ac57.5 million. This tax ruling was overturned by the European Court of Human Rights on June 30, 2011.\nGermany.\nIn 1933, there were approximately 20,000 Jehovah's Witnesses in Nazi Germany, of whom about 10,000 were imprisoned. Jehovah's Witnesses suffered religious persecution by the Nazis because they refused military service and allegiance to Hitler's National Socialist Party. Of those, 2,000 were sent to Nazi concentration camps, where they were identified by purple triangles; as many as 1,200 died, including 250 who were executed. They were hanged, beheaded, beaten to death, or shot dead. Conditions for Jehovah's Witnesses improved in 1942, when they were increasingly given work details that required little supervision, such as farming, gardening, transportation and unloading goods, while others worked in civilian clothing in a health resort, as housekeepers for Nazi officials, or were given construction and craft tasks at military buildings.\nUnlike Jews and Romani, who were persecuted on the basis of their ethnicity, Jehovah's Witnesses could escape persecution and personal harm by signing a document indicating renunciation of their faith, submission to state authority, and support of the German military. Historian Sybil Milton writes, \"their courage and defiance in the face of torture and death punctures the myth of a monolithic Nazi state ruling over docile and submissive subjects.\" Jehovah's Witnesses would preach inside the concentration camps, hold meetings, and smuggle in their religious literature.\nApproximately 800 children of Jehovah's Witnesses were taken away from their families. Witness children typically expressed defiance to the Nazi regime's attempts to make them act against their beliefs. They were often expelled from public schools due to their refusal to say \"Heil Hitler\". Some children were sent to reeducation centers, while others were adopted by families in good standing with the Nazi regime.\nIn East Germany, from the 1950s to the 1980s, Jehovah's Witnesses were persecuted extensively by the Stasi, which frequently used decomposition methods against them. Jehovah's Witnesses were considered a threat because their beliefs did not conform to socialist standards and their members sometimes had contact with the West.\nGreece.\nGreece had a ban on public evangelism in the 1930s. Approximately 60 Jehovah's Witnesses were imprisoned for violating this law. The case was eventually appealed to the European Court of Human Rights, who ruled in favour of Jehovah's Witnesses in 1993. This decision also benefited other religious groups in the country. \nJapan.\nIn Japan, following the publication of \"Sh\u016bky\u014d nisei\"-related guidelines, a survey was conducted about child abuse within Jehovah's Witnesses, the results of which were forwarded to the government. Ninety-two percent of 583 respondents reported that they had experienced physical abuse as children. The lawyer's group conducting the survey believed this to be evidence of systemic religious abuse.\nNorway.\nNorway provides state subsidies to religious communities, with some restrictions. Although Jehovah's Witnesses qualified for more than thirty years, they did not receive this funding in Oslo and Viken in 2022. The decision was appealed and upheld by the Ministry of Children and Families. In 2023, Jehovah's Witnesses were fully deregistered as a religious community in Norway as a result of their shunning practice. The Supreme Court ruled that religious communities can determine who can be members but that restrictions on additional funding are acceptable. Therefore, the organization no longer receives 1.3 million euros each year in state subsidies. The denomination's deregistration also means that they lost the right to perform civil marriages. The director of Human Rights Without Frontiers believes that by deregistering Jehovah's Witnesses, Norway is interfering with the group's religious freedom.\nRussia.\nIn April 1951, about 9,300 Jehovah's Witnesses in the Soviet Union were deported to Siberia as part of Operation North.\nIn April 2017, the Supreme Court of Russia labeled Jehovah's Witnesses an extremist organization, banned its activities in Russia, and issued an order to confiscate its assets.\nSingapore.\nDuring British colonial rule in 1941, Watch Tower Society literature was banned in Singapore due to Jehovah's Witnesses' continued refusal to enlist in the Allied Forces during World War II. The group was officially registered as a society in 1960 under the Societies Ordinance Act of 1890. While freedom of religion is constitutionally protected in post-independence Singapore, Jehovah's Witnesses continue to face restrictions, especially where conscription is concerned. In 1972, the group was deregistered for being \"prejudicial to public welfare and order\", with their refusal of mandatory military service cited as a key concern. Since then, male adherents who reject enlistment, typically about six individuals each year, are imprisoned under the Enlistment Act 1970 as conscientious objection is not recognized. However, they do not receive permanent criminal records, and are usually assigned tasks such as cooking, gardening and laundry in lieu of military activities for about two years.\nSouth Korea.\nSouth Korea did not have a religious exemption for military service until 2018, which led to more than 19,000 Jehovah's Witnesses being imprisoned there.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, legal challenges by Jehovah's Witnesses prompted a series of state and federal court rulings that reinforced judicial protections for civil liberties. Among the rights strengthened by Witness court victories in the US are the protection of religious conduct from federal and state interference, the right to abstain from patriotic rituals and military service, the right of patients to refuse medical treatment, and the right to engage in public discourse. Authors including William Whalen, Shawn Francis Peters and former members Barbara Grizzuti Harrison, Alan Rogerson, and William Schnell have claimed the arrests and mob violence in the 1930s and 1940s were the consequence of what appeared to be a deliberate course of provocation of authorities and other religious groups by Jehovah's Witnesses. Harrison, Schnell, and Whalen have suggested Rutherford invited and cultivated opposition for publicity purposes in a bid to attract dispossessed members of society, and to convince members that persecution by the outside world was evidence of the truth of their struggle to serve God.\nIn 1943, the Supreme Court ruled in \"West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette\" that requiring students to salute the flag was a violation of their First Amendment rights.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52548", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52548", "title": "Carl Bildt", "text": "Swedish politician\nNils Daniel Carl Bildt (born 15 July 1949) is a Swedish politician and diplomat who served as Prime Minister of Sweden from 1991 to 1994. He led the Moderate Party from 1986 to 1999, appearing as its lead candidate in four general elections, before his appointment as Minister for Foreign Affairs under Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt from 2006 to 2014. Bildt first entered the Riksdag in 1979, holding a seat until 2001. A member of the Bildt family, he is a great-great grandson of Baron Gillis Bildt, who was Prime Minister of Sweden from 1888 to 1889.\nBildt had been noted internationally as a mediator in the Yugoslav wars, serving as the European Union's Special Envoy to the Former Yugoslavia from June 1995, co-chairman of the Dayton Peace Conference in November 1995 and High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina from December 1995 to June 1997, immediately after the Bosnian War. From 1999 to 2001, he served as the United Nations Secretary-General's Special Envoy for the Balkans. Since 2021, Bildt also has been the World Health Organization's Special Envoy for the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator (ACT Accelerator).\nEarly life and education.\nBildt was born on 15 July 1949 in Halmstad, Halland, to an old Danish-Norwegian-Swedish noble family, the Bildt family, traditionally domiciled in Bohusl\u00e4n. His grandfather's grandfather, Gillis Bildt, was a Conservative politician and diplomat, long-time Ambassador to the German Empire and Prime Minister of Sweden 1888\u20131889, mainly remembered for his protectionist trade policies.\nBildt's father Daniel Bildt (1920\u20132010) was a major in the reserves of the now defunct Halland Regiment and a bureau director in the now defunct Civil Defense Board's Education Bureau. Daniel Bildt married Kerstin Andersson-Alw\u00e5 in 1947. Carl Bildt's brother, Nils, was born in 1952. Bildt was married to Kerstin Zetterberg from 1974 to 1975; to Mia Bohman (daughter of former Moderate party leader and Minister of Economy, G\u00f6sta Bohman) from 1984 to 1997; and, since 1998, to Anna Maria Corazza. Bildt has three children; two from his second marriage and one from his third marriage.\nBildt attended Stockholm University.\nEarly career.\nIn May 1968, Bildt opposed the occupation of the Student Union Building by leftist political forces and co-founded the Borgerliga Studenter \u2013 Opposition '68 group which went on to win the Student Union elections in Stockholm for a number of years. He served as chairman of the FMSF Confederation of Swedish Conservative and Liberal Students, a centre-right student organisation, in the early 1970s, and also chaired European Democrat Students, bringing together like-minded centre-right student organisations from across Europe.\nWhen the non-socialist formed government in 1976, Bildt served as the head of the Policy Coordinating Office in the Ministry of Economic Affairs and close collaborator to the party leader and Minister of Economy G\u00f6sta Bohman. Bildt became a Member of Parliament in 1979, although he served instead as State Secretary for Policy Coordination in the reformed non-socialist government after that election.\nAs an MP in the early eighties, he became noted as an incisive and combative debater on foreign affairs. He was a member of the Submarine Defence Commission investigating the 1982 incursions of foreign submarines in the Stockholm archipelago and naval base areas, and often found himself pitted against prime minister Olof Palme. Bildt was elected leader of the Moderate Party in 1986, succeeding Ulf Adelsohn.\nIn 1991, the Social Democrats were defeated by a four-party coalition led by Bildt's Moderate Party.\nPrime minister.\nOn 4 October 1991, Bildt became the first conservative prime minister in Sweden in 61 years, leading a four-party coalition government. The policies of his government aimed at giving Sweden a \"new start\" in the middle of a rapidly mounting economic crisis caused by a speculation bubble in housing, focusing on privatising and de-regulating the economy in order to improve the conditions for businesses.\nLong a champion of European integration and Sweden's participation in this, negotiating membership in the European Union was a priority for the Bildt premiership. The preceding Social Democratic government had, as part of an emergency economic crisis package in the autumn of 1990, done a sudden U-turn, abandoned its previous opposition and in the summer of 1991 submitted a formal application for membership in the EU.\nBenefiting also from his close links with German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, Bildt was able to initiate and conclude membership negotiations with the EU in record time, signing the Treaty of Accession at the EU summit in Corfu on 23 June 1994. The accession was supported by a referendum in November, and Sweden entered the EU as full member on 1 January 1995, thus fulfilling a key part of the platform of the Bildt government.\nBy that time his governing coalition had lost its majority in the September 1994 elections, in spite of his Moderate party making slight gains.\nThe economic program of the government was focused primarily on a series of structural reforms aiming at improving competitiveness and improving growth. Economic reforms were enacted, including voucher schools, liberalizing markets for telecommunications and energy, privatizing publicly owned companies and health care, contributing to substantially liberalizing the Swedish economy.\nThese reforms were highly controversial at the time, and the government also had to deal with a rapid increase in unemployment as well as public deficits during 1991 and 1992. The period was marked by a severe economic crisis. These problems were reinforced by the economic crisis in other European countries and the crisis within the European Exchange Rate Mechanism in 1992. As a result, Sweden in November 1992 was forced to abandon its policy of a fixed exchange rate and allow the Swedish crown to float freely. As part of the effort to handle the economic crisis, the government was able to conclude an agreement with the Social Democratic opposition on some of its expenditure-cutting measures.\nBy 1994 the economy was registering strong growth, and the deficits were declining, although unemployment was still at levels higher than in 1991.\nPrior to becoming prime minister, Bildt had been severely anti-Soviet Union and a strong supporter of the three Baltic nations, and during his period as PM devoted considerable efforts to trying to assist the three newly-independent Baltic states in handling their immediate challenges in the form of the withdrawal of ex-Soviet forces and strategic installations, as well as deciding on sensitive issues of citizenship. In this he worked closely together with the leaders of the three countries as well as with the Russian foreign minister Andrei Kozyrev.\nHis government also had to handle a large increase in refugee flows from primarily the war in Bosnia, defending a liberal approach against the anti-immigration New Democracy party that had entered parliament in 1991.\nBildt was an early champion of the Internet and information technologies. He led the first IT Commission in 1994, and in that year also had the first exchange of emails between two heads of government with US president Bill Clinton, sending Clinton the following email:Dear Bill,\nApart from testing this connection on the global Internet system, I want to congratulate you on your decision to end the trade embargo on Vietnam. I am planning to go to Vietnam in April and will certainly use the occasion to take up the question of the MIA's. From the Swedish side we have tried to be helpful on this issue in the past, and we will continue to use the contacts we might have.\nSweden is\u2014as you know\u2014one of the leading countries in the world in the field of telecommunications, and it is only appropriate that we should be among the first to use the Internet also for political contacts and communications around the globe.\nYours,\nCARLIn the same year, Bildt established and chaired an IT Commission to introduce digital initiatives in Sweden while at the same time the government donated 1 billion SEK to create the .\nIn 1992, he had the reform of private schools under contract and the abolition of the school map adopted, reforms that favored the privatization of education.\nThe government's effectiveness was sometimes hampered by in-fighting, most memorably over the construction of the \u00d8resund Bridge, which led to the departure of the leader of the Centre Party Olof Johansson from the government, paving the way for the government to take the decision to approve the construction of the link.\nBildt continued to serve as leader of the Moderate party \u2013 and thus of the opposition \u2013 until 1999, when he was succeeded as party leader by Bo Lundgren.\nBalkan conflict.\nAfter his term as prime minister, Bildt was active as a mediator in the Balkans conflict, serving as the European Union Special Envoy to Former Yugoslavia from June 1995, co-chairman of the Dayton Peace Conference that led to the Dayton Peace Accords in November 1995, and High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina from December 1995 to June 1997 immediately after the Bosnian War. From 1999 to 2001, he served as the United Nations Secretary General's Special Envoy for the Balkans.\nKosovo unilaterally declared its independence from Serbia on 17 February 2008, without the approval of the UN Security Council, and Sweden recognised it on 4 March 2008. On 8 March 2008, Bildt became the first foreign minister to officially visit Kosovo after it declared its independence.\nMinister for Foreign Affairs.\nOn 6 October 2006, Bildt was appointed as minister of foreign affairs in the newly formed cabinet of Fredrik Reinfeldt. This was seen by many as a surprising move. Not only had Bildt already served both as prime minister and as leader of the Moderate Party, but he and Reinfeldt had previous antipathy. He retained this post following the 2010 general election.\nDuring his time in office, Bildt was widely credited with steering efforts to set up the EU's Eastern Partnership in 2008. When Sweden held the rotating presidency of the Council of the European Union in 2009, he chaired the sessions of the EU's General Affairs and External Relations Council. For several years, he was widely seen as a candidate to become the first High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy under the new rules established by the Treaty of Lisbon; instead, the role went to Catherine Ashton.\nBildt later supported the 2011 military intervention in Libya. On 29 March, the government approved the deployment of JAS 39 Gripen multirole jet fighters to Libya to enforce the no-fly zone.\nFollowing the 2014 European elections, the \"Financial Times\" and other news media considered Bildt as a potential candidate to succeed Ashton as High Representative; this time, the position went to Federica Mogherini.\nBildt lost his post after the 2014 general election, and moved on to become a board member of the International Crisis Group.\nTurkey.\nBildt was as foreign minister in 2007 an active supporter for Turkey to join the EU. He called Istanbul a \"true center of European history\" and called Kemal Atat\u00fcrk \"undoubtedly the most significant European revolutionary of the last century\" in 2004. Bildt's campaign for Turkey's EU membership was controversial in central Europe.\nEU membership of Turkey was hindered by its government not recognizing Cyprus, an EU member along with reservations from the president of France, Nicolas Sarkozy.\nIn November 2014 Bildt was criticised for having written an opinion piece in \"Dagens industri\" newspaper where Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan was described as being \"on the right track\" despite the persecution of Kurds and political opponents and jailed journalists in Turkey.\nSouth Ossetian conflict.\nAfter the 2008 South Ossetia war, Bildt wrote on his blog that the Russian rationale for its intervention, concern for the welfare of its expatriates in the Near Abroad, had similarities with the rationale for the annexation of Sudetenland. Bildt called South Ossetian independence \"a joke\", and said it would be supported only by a \"miserable\" lot of countries.\nActivities.\nWork in private sector.\nAfter leaving his position as leader of the Moderate Party in 1999, other than engaging in international issues, Bildt took positions in the private sector and positions with international think tanks. His positions in think tanks included serving as the first non-US member on the Board of Trustees of the RAND Corporation in Santa Monica, California, and on the Advisory Board of the Centre for European Reform in London. He was a member of the board of the European Policy Centre in Brussels, the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London, and the International Advisory Board of the Council on Foreign Affairs in New York.\nBildt served as non-executive director of the Baltimore-based US assets management company Legg Mason, Inc. He served as chairman of the board of Teleopti and chairman of the public affairs consultancy Kreab AB, and board member of the IT consultancy HiQ AB. He was chairman of Nordic Venture Network, which brought Nordic high-tech VC firms together in an informal network.\nIn 2000, Bildt joined the Lundin Group's board of directors, a company with oil interests in Ethiopia and Sudan \u2013 the seven years with the Lundin Group that followed made Bildt a wealthy man.\nFrom March to November 2000, Bildt was part of an independent panel \u2013 together with Jean Peyrelevade and Lothar Sp\u00e4th \u2013 to advise the European Space Agency's Director General Antonio Rodot\u00e0 on the organization's future.\nIn 2002, Bildt joined the board of directors of Vostok Nafta, a financial company primarily with holdings in Gazprom.\nHe left his positions on all these boards upon becoming foreign minister in October 2006\nBosnian war mediator criticisms.\nThough decorated for his services in the Bosnian conflict and its immediate aftermath by Great Britain, France, and Germany, his mediation of the conflict and aftermath was castigated as well as celebrated.\nBildt opposed any military intervention and criticized the former British prime minister Margaret Thatcher in 1993 for calling NATO to intervene against the Bosnian Serb forces, which led to the \"Sunday Times\" describing Bildt and other EU leaders as \"robotic political pygmies\" and their acceptance of the ongoing genocide as \"shameful\".\nFollowing Bildt's appointment as the EU special envoy to Yugoslavia, Tom Warrick from the Coalition for International Justice described Bildt as \"dangerously misinformed about his own job description\" and largely ignorant about the region. \"The New York Times\" criticized Bildt for a nonchalant attitude towards the Srebrenica genocide when over 8,000 Bosniaks were killed, and described him as being burdened with a reputation for accepting Bosnian Serb claims of good behavior at face value and overlooking evidence of atrocities against civilians.\nMiddle East.\nBildt has been questioned for his role as a member of the International Advisory Council of the Committee for the Liberation of Iraq, a group with ties to the Bush administration pushing for an invasion of Iraq in 2003.\nOn 8 April 2008, during his visit in Israel and the Palestinian Authority, Bildt gave an interview to Swedish state radio, where he responded to a question on whether it would be possible to strike a peace deal without the involvement of the Palestinian group Hamas, which remained under international boycott. He responded that the Palestinian Fatah-backed government could deal with Israel, in the same way that it was possible for the Israeli government to make peace with Fatah over the objections of the former Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who, similarly to Hamas opposed a two-state deal. Israeli officials issued very strongly worded condemnations of this, describing it as \"horrible and stupid\" and an example of \"chutzpah\" and \"complete ignorance of the Middle East\", on the grounds that they saw it as comparing Hamas and Netanyahu as equals.\nIn 2012, Bildt said he saw no problem with exporting Swedish weapons to Saudi Arabia. According to Bildt, \"Would the situation in the world be better if they had bought French manufactured ones instead?\" Bildt called friendly Saudi Arabia as a \"family business\" and said that he sees Saudi Prince Turki bin Faisal Al Saud \"quite regularly\". In 2015, Bildt criticized Sweden's foreign minister Margot Wallstr\u00f6m for damaging Saudi-Swedish relations. Wallstr\u00f6m tweeted criticism of Saudi Arabia's flogging of Saudi blogger and activist Raif Badawi.\nAnnexation of Crimea.\nBildt, together with Polish foreign minister Rados\u0142aw Sikorski, was one of the main architects of the 2013 Eastern policy of the EU.\nDuring Euromaidan, Carl Bildt has been criticized in Swedish media for ignoring and downplaying the issues with the Ukrainian Svoboda party. Johan Croneman at \"Dagens Nyheter\" has also condemned Bildt for pushing Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt to rephrase himself after having expressed understanding of the Russians' concerns about the situation.\nIn a public message on Twitter, Bildt compared Viktor Yanukovych to Vidkun Quisling, writing that he was \"sitting on foreign soil begging a foreign army to give his country to him\". This has been described as \"undiplomatic\" by Christer J\u00f6nsson, professor in Political Science at the Lund University. Norwegian politician Anniken Huitfeldt also criticized Bildt's statement, saying that it showed \"ignorance of history\" and that it \"does not contribute to solving the conflict\". Torsten K\u00e4lvemark from \"Aftonbladet\" has criticized Bildt's statement as well. \"Our Foreign Minister is ignorant, because it was actually Norway's legal head of state, Haakon VII, that during the war sat on foreign soil and hoped that he would with help from the British get back his country\", he remarked. The culture editorial of the \"Aftonbladet\" newspaper where Torsten K\u00e4lvemark works has repeatedly been criticized since for being a tool of Russian propaganda in Sweden.\nStefan Hedlund, professor at Uppsala University, stated that \"Carl Bildt's threatening rhetoric should in this context be regarded as extremely destructive\", in an article about the Russo-Ukrainian war. Hedlund also suggested that Bildt should take a \"time-out\", and that progress can only be made through dialogue with Russia.\nIn a radio interview with channel SR P1 on 15 March, Bildt stated that he considers the Crimean referendum illegal, and \"invalid, no matter which way people vote\". He continued his refusal to answer questions about Svoboda, saying that he \"won't describe what that party is\". His overall comment on the new regime in Kyiv was that it was a \"reasonable and democratic government\" and that he does not want to \"play along with Russian propaganda\".\nIn early 2015, a study made at the Swedish Defence Research Agency stated that Bildt had been a target of information warfare and that he was \"regularly smeared in Russian state-controlled media\". The reason was described to be Bildt's involvement in the Eastern Partnership program and that the project was perceived as a threat by the Russian government.\nIn September 2015, Bildt visited Kyiv, where he argued that the EU should provide more financial support to Ukraine.\nInternet activities.\nBildt was an early pioneer among politicians of using the Internet for communicating. On 4 February 1994, he sent an email message to US president Bill Clinton, which was the first publicly known electronic message sent between two heads of government. In the message he praised Clinton's decision to end the trade embargo on Vietnam. In the same year, he also started a weekly electronic newsletter which was active until 2005. He is an active blogger, starting his first blog in February 2005. His current blog, started in January 2007, is one of the most widely read political blogs in Sweden.\nOn 30 May 2007, Bildt officially opened a \"Swedish embassy\" in the virtual world \"Second Life\". The embassy, called \"Second House of Sweden\", is a virtual replica of House of Sweden, the Swedish embassy building in Washington, D.C. During Bildt's time as foreign minister, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has opened a channel on YouTube which has been active since early 2008. He maintains a personal Twitter feed in English with approximately 780,000 subscribed followers. By 2013, an annual Burson Marsteller survey showed him as the best connected world leader. As of 2014, Bildt has served as chair of the Global Commission on Internet Governance.\nLife after politics.\nBildt served as chair of the Global Commission on Internet Governance, a joint project of the Centre for International Governance Innovation and Chatham House, from 2014 that concluded its two-year work and produced its report in June 2016. On 19 December 2014 Bildt was announced as a distinguished fellow of the Centre for International Governance Innovation.\nIn mid-May 2015, Bildt was appointed to Ukraine's International Advisory Council on Reforms. The group consisting of several foreign advisors to President Petro Poroshenko, aims to improve security and economy in the country which has been ravaged by armed conflict in its Eastern part. On 14 May 2015, Bildt was also appointed as an advisor to Russian-controlled investment group LetterOne. In 2016, he joined international law firm Covington as a Senior Policy Advisor in the firm's global Public Policy and Government Affairs practice.\nBildt also writes monthly columns for international syndication organization \"Project Syndicate\".\nFollowing the 2022 Swedish general election and the election of Ulf Kristersson as Prime Minister Bildt revealed Kristersson had approached him offering to once again make Bildt Minister for Foreign Affairs in his cabinet. Bildt declined the offer, citing he does not like to do the same thing twice.\nControversy.\nOn 9 April 2021, the anniversary of the German occupation of Norway, Bildt tweeted that the Swedish defence forces were stronger than Norway and Denmark. His tweet provoked severe backlash, both from the public, and politicians, notably from Norwegian Minister of Culture Abid Raja, saying that he \"had hoped our closest neighbour would be more sympathetic towards who this day is reflected by Norwegians and Norwegian Jews\". Bildt stated that his intention was to commemorate the events of the occupation, and that what he tweeted was historically correct. He also added that people have read an assumption between the lines.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52549", "revid": "49189014", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52549", "title": "Star Wars (film)", "text": "1977 film by George Lucas\nStar Wars (also known as Star Wars: Episode IV \u2013 A New Hope) is a 1977 American epic space opera film written and directed by George Lucas, produced by Lucasfilm Ltd. and released by Twentieth Century-Fox. It is the first film in the \"Star Wars\" franchise and the fourth chronological chapter of the \"Skywalker Saga\". Set in a fictional galaxy under the rule of the tyrannical Galactic Empire, the film follows a resistance movement, called the Rebel Alliance, that aims to destroy the Empire's ultimate weapon, the Death Star. When the rebel leader Princess Leia is captured by the Galactic Empire, Luke Skywalker acquires stolen architectural plans for the Death Star and sets out to rescue her while learning the ways of a metaphysical power known as \"the Force\" from the Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi. The cast includes Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Peter Cushing, Alec Guinness, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker, Peter Mayhew, David Prowse, and James Earl Jones.\nLucas had the idea for a science fiction film in the vein of Flash Gordon around the time he completed his first film, \"THX 1138\" (1971), and he began working on a treatment after the release of \"American Graffiti\" (1973). After numerous rewrites, principal photography began in March of 1976 in locations including Tunisia and Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire, England. Lucas formed the visual effects company Industrial Light &amp; Magic to help create the film's visual effects. \"Star Wars\" suffered production difficulties: the cast and crew believed the film would be a failure, and it went $3 million over budget due to delays.\nFew were confident in the film's box office prospects. It was released in a small number of theaters in the United States on May 25, 1977, and quickly became a surprise blockbuster hit, leading to it being expanded to a much wider release. \"Star Wars\" opened to universal acclaim, with praise for its special effects. It grossed $410 million worldwide during its initial run, surpassing \"Jaws\" (1975) to become the highest-grossing film until the release of \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" (1982); subsequent releases have brought its total gross to $775 million. When adjusted for inflation, \"Star Wars\" is the second-highest-grossing film in North America (behind \"Gone with the Wind\") and the fourth-highest-grossing film of all time. It received six Academy Awards, two BAFTA Awards, and thirteen Saturn Awards, among others. The film has been reissued many times with Lucas's support, including the 1981 reissue giving the film the subtitle \"Episode IV \u2013 A New Hope\", and the 1997 \"Special Edition\". The reissues have contained many changes, including new scenes, visual effects, and dialogue.\nOften regarded as one of the greatest and most influential films of all time, \"Star Wars\" quickly became a worldwide pop culture phenomenon, launching an industry of tie-in products, including novels, comics, video games, amusement park attractions and such as toys, games, and clothing. It became one of the first 25 films selected by the United States Library of Congress for preservation in the National Film Registry in 1989, and its soundtrack was added to the U.S. National Recording Registry in 2004. \"The Empire Strikes Back\" (1980) and \"Return of the Jedi\" (1983) followed \"Star Wars\", rounding out the original \"Star Wars\" trilogy. A prequel trilogy and a sequel trilogy have since been released, in addition to two standalone films and various television series.\nPlot.\nIn a period of galactic civil war, Rebel Alliance spies have stolen blueprints to the Death Star, a colossal space station built by the Galactic Empire that is capable of destroying entire planets. Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan, secretly a rebel leader, has obtained the schematics, but her ship is intercepted and boarded by Imperial forces under the command of Darth Vader. Leia is taken prisoner, but the droids R2-D2 and C-3PO escape with the plans, crashing on the nearby desert planet of Tatooine. Darth Vader orders his troops to pursue the droids.\nThe droids are captured by Jawa traders, who sell them to the moisture farmers Owen and Beru Lars and their nephew, Luke Skywalker. While Luke is cleaning R2-D2, he discovers a recording of Leia requesting help from a former ally named Obi-Wan Kenobi. R2-D2 goes missing, and while searching for him, Luke is attacked by Sand People. He is rescued by the elderly hermit Ben Kenobi, who soon reveals himself as Obi-Wan. He tells Luke about his past as one of the Jedi Knights, peacekeepers of the former Galactic Republic, who drew mystical abilities from the Force and were all but exterminated by the Empire. Luke learns that his father, also a Jedi, fought alongside Obi-Wan during the Clone Wars until Vader, Obi-Wan's former pupil, turned to the dark side of the Force and murdered him. Obi-Wan gives Luke his father's lightsaber, the signature weapon of the Jedi. R2-D2 plays Leia's full message, in which she begs Obi-Wan to take the Death Star plans to Alderaan and give them to her father, a fellow veteran, for analysis. Luke initially declines Obi-Wan's offer to accompany him to Alderaan and learn the ways of the Force. However, he quickly changes his mind after Imperial stormtroopers murder his family and destroy his home while searching for the droids. Seeking a way off the planet, Luke and Obi-Wan travel with the droids to the city of Mos Eisley and hire the smuggler Han Solo and his Wookiee partner Chewbacca, pilots of the starship \"Millennium Falcon\".\nBefore the \"Falcon\" reaches Alderaan, the Death Star commander Grand Moff Tarkin has the planet obliterated by the station's superlaser. En route to Alderaan aboard the \"Falcon\", Obi-Wan begins Luke's training in the use of the Force, but the old Jedi is overwhelmed by emotion when the planet is destroyed and millions of people are killed. Upon arrival, the \"Falcon\" is captured by the Death Star's tractor beam. Luke and his companions avoid detection and infiltrate the station, but Vader senses Obi-Wan\u2019s presence, and begins searching for him. As Obi-Wan deactivates the tractor beam, Luke persuades Han and Chewbacca to help him rescue Leia, who is scheduled for execution after refusing to reveal the location of the rebel base. After disabling the tractor beam, Obi-Wan sacrifices himself in a lightsaber duel against Vader, which allows the rest of the group to escape. Using a tracking device placed on the \"Falcon\", the Empire locates the rebel base on the moon Yavin 4.\nAnalysis of the Death Star schematics reveals a weakness in a small exhaust port leading directly to the station's reactor. Luke joins the Rebellion's X-wing squadron in a desperate attack against the Death Star, while Han and Chewbacca leave to pay off a debt to the crime lord Jabba the Hutt. In the ensuing battle, Vader leads a squadron of TIE fighters and destroys several rebel ships, while Tarkin orders the Death Star to maneuver into position to destroy Yavin 4. Han and Chewbacca unexpectedly return in the \"Falcon\", knocking Vader's ship off course before he can shoot Luke down. Guided by the voice of Obi-Wan's spirit, Luke uses the Force to aim his torpedoes into the exhaust port, causing the Death Star to explode moments before it can fire on the rebel base. Vader regains control of his ship, sees the destruction of the Death Star, and flees into deep space. Leia awards Luke and Han medals for their heroism in a triumphant ceremony.\nCast.\nPhil Brown and Shelagh Fraser appear as Luke's Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru, respectively, and Jack Purvis portrays the Chief Jawa. Rebel leaders include Alex McCrindle as General Dodonna and Eddie Byrne as General Willard. Imperial commanders include Don Henderson as General Taggi, Richard LeParmentier as Admiral Motti, and Leslie Schofield as General Bast. Rebel pilots are played by Drewe Henley (Red Leader, mistakenly credited as Drewe Hemley), Denis Lawson (Red Two/Wedge, credited as Dennis Lawson), Garrick Hagon (Red Three/Biggs), Jack Klaff (Red Four/John \"D\"), William Hootkins (Red Six/Porkins), Angus MacInnes (Gold Leader, credited as Angus McInnis), Jeremy Sinden (Gold Two), and Graham Ashley (Gold Five). Uncredited actors include Paul Blake as the bounty hunter Greedo, Alfie Curtis as the outlaw who confronts Luke in the cantina, Shane Rimmer as a rebel technician on Yavin IV, and Peter Geddis as the rebel officer who is strangled by Darth Vader. Heavily synthesized audio recordings of John Wayne (from his earlier films) were used for the voice of Garindan, an Imperial spy.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nGeorge Lucas had the idea for a space opera prior to 1971. According to Mark Hamill, he wanted to make it before his 1973 coming-of-age film \"American Graffiti\". His original plan was to adapt the \"Flash Gordon\" space adventure comics and serials into films, having been fascinated by them since he was young. Lucas attempted to purchase the rights, but they had already been acquired by producer Dino De Laurentiis. Lucas then discovered that \"Flash Gordon\" was inspired by the \"John Carter of Mars\" book series by Edgar Rice Burroughs, the author of \"Tarzan\". Burroughs, in turn, had been influenced by \"\", a 1905 science fantasy written by Edwin Arnold. Lucas took the science fantasy concept and began developing what he would later call a \"space fantasy\".\nIn May 1971, Lucas persuaded the head of United Artists, David Picker, to take a chance on two of his film ideas: \"American Graffiti\" and the space opera. Although Lucas signed a two-picture deal, the studio ultimately declined to produce \"Graffiti\". Universal Pictures picked it up, and Lucas spent the next two years making the coming-of-age film, which was immensely successful. In January 1973, he began working on the space opera full-time. He began the process by inventing odd names for characters and places. By the time the screenplay was finalized he had discarded many of the names, but several made it into the final script and later sequels. He used his early notes to compile a two-page synopsis titled \"Journal of the Whills\", which chronicled the tale of CJ Thorpe, an apprentice \"Jedi-Bendu\", who was being trained by the legendary Mace Windy. He felt that this story was too difficult to understand, however.\nLucas began writing a 13-page treatment called \"The Star Wars\" on April 17, 1973, which had narrative parallels with Akira Kurosawa's 1958 film \"The Hidden Fortress\". He later explained that \"Star Wars\" is not a story about the future, but rather a \"fantasy\" that has more in common with the Brothers Grimm than the 1968 film \"\". He said his motivation for making the film was to give young people an \"honest, wholesome fantasy life,\" of the kind his generation had. He hoped it would offer \"the romance, the adventure, and the fun that used to be in practically every movie\".\nWhile impressed with the innocence of the story and the sophistication of Lucas's fictional world, United Artists declined to fund the project. Lucas and producer Gary Kurtz then presented the treatment to Universal Pictures, the studio that financed \"American Graffiti\". Universal agreed it could be a successful venture, but had doubts about Lucas's ability to execute his vision. Kurtz claimed the studio's rejection was primarily due to Universal head Lew Wasserman's low opinion of science fiction, and the general unpopularity of the genre at the time. Francis Ford Coppola subsequently brought the project to a division of Paramount Pictures named the Directors Company he ran with fellow directors Peter Bogdanovich and William Friedkin, but Friedkin questioned Lucas's ability to direct the film, and both Friedkin and Bogdanovich declined to finance it. Walt Disney Productions also turned down the project.\n\"Star Wars\" was accepted by Twentieth Century-Fox in June 1973. Studio president Alan Ladd Jr. did not grasp the technical side of the project, but believed in Lucas's talent. Lucas later stated that Ladd invested in him, not in the film. The Fox deal gave Lucas $150,000 () to write and direct the film. In August, \"American Graffiti\" opened to massive success, which afforded Lucas the necessary leverage to renegotiate the deal and gain control of merchandising and sequel rights.\nWriting.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt's the flotsam and jetsam from the period when I was twelve years old. All the books and films and comics that I liked when I was a child. The plot is simple\u2014good against evil\u2014and the film is designed to be all the fun things and fantasy things I remember. The word for this movie is fun.\n\u2014George Lucas, 1977\nSince commencing the writing process in January 1973, Lucas wrote four different screenplays for \"Star Wars\", searching for \"just the right ingredients, characters and storyline.\" By May 1974, he had expanded the original treatment into a full, 132-page rough draft, which included elements such as the Sith, the Death Star, and a general named Annikin Starkiller. He then changed Starkiller to an adolescent boy, and shifted the general\u2014who came from a family of dwarfs\u2014into a supporting role. Lucas envisioned the Corellian smuggler, Han Solo, as a large, green-skinned monster with gills. He based Chewbacca on his Alaskan Malamute dog, Indiana, who often acted as his \"co-pilot\" by sitting in the passenger seat of his car. The dog's name would later be given to the character Indiana Jones.\nLucas completed a second draft in January 1975 entitled \"Adventures of the Starkiller, Episode One: The Star Wars\". He had made substantial simplifications and introduced the young, farm-dwelling hero as Luke Starkiller. In this draft, Luke had several brothers. Annikin became Luke's father, a wise Jedi Knight who played a minor role at the end of the story. Early versions of the characters Han Solo and Chewbacca were present, and closely resemble those seen in the finished film. This draft introduced a mystical energy field called \"The Force,\" the concept of a Jedi turning to the dark side, and a historical Jedi who was the first to turn, and who subsequently trained the Sith. The script also included a Jedi Master with a son who trains to be a Jedi under his father's friend; this would ultimately form the basis for the finished film and, later, the original trilogy. This version was more a fairy tale quest than the action-filled adventure story of the previous draft, and ended with a text crawl that previewed the next story in the series. According to Lucas, the second draft was over 200 pages long, which led him to split up the story into several films spanning several trilogies.\nWhile writing a third draft, Lucas claims to have been influenced by comics, J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Hobbit\", Joseph Campbell's \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\", James George Frazer's \"The Golden Bough\", and Bruno Bettelheim's \"The Uses of Enchantment.\" Author Michael Kaminski has objected to Lucas's claim regarding \"The Uses of Enchantment\", arguing that it was not released until after \"Star Wars\" was filmed (J.W. Rinzler speculates that Lucas may have obtained an advance copy). Kaminski also writes that Campbell's influence on \"Star Wars\" has been exaggerated by Lucas and others, and that Lucas's second draft was \"even closer to Campbell's structure\" than the third.\nLucas has claimed he wrote a version of the screenplay that was 250\u2013300 pages long, which outlined the plot of the entire original trilogy. Realizing it was too lengthy for a single film, he decided to spread the story over three films. This division caused problems with the first episode; Lucas had to use the ending of \"Return of the Jedi\" for \"Star Wars\", which resulted in a Death Star being included in both films. In 1975, Lucas envisioned a trilogy which would end with the destruction of the Empire, and possibly a prequel about Obi-Wan as a young man. After \"Star Wars\" became tremendously successful, Lucasfilm announced that Lucas had already written twelve more Luke Skywalker stories, which, according to Kurtz, were \"separate adventures\" rather than traditional sequels.\nIn February 1975, Fox granted the film a budget of $5\u00a0million (equivalent to $ million in 2024 dollars), which was later increased to $8.25\u00a0million (equivalent to $ million). Lucas then started writing with a budget in mind, conceiving the cheap, \"used\" look of much of the film, and\u2014with Fox having just shut down its special effects department\u2014reducing the number of complex special effects shots called for by the script. The finalized third draft, dated August 1, 1975, was titled \"The Star Wars From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller\". This version had most of the elements of the final plot, with only some differences in the characters and settings. It presented Luke as an only child whose father was already dead, and who was cared for by a man named Ben Kenobi. This script would be rewritten for the fourth and final draft, dated January 1, 1976, and titled \"The Adventures of Luke Starkiller as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I: The Star Wars\". Lucas's friends Gloria Katz and Willard Huyck helped him revise the fourth draft into the final pre-production script.\nLucas finished the screenplay in March 1976, when the crew started filming. During production, he changed Luke's surname from Starkiller to Skywalker, and changed the title first to \"The Star Wars\", and then, finally, to \"Star Wars\". For the film's opening crawl, Lucas originally wrote a composition of six paragraphs with four sentences each. He showed the draft to his friend, director Brian De Palma, who called it \"gibberish\" that \"goes on forever.\" De Palma and screenwriter Jay Cocks helped edit the crawl into its final form, which contains only four sentences.\nCasting.\nLucas had a preference for casting unknown or relatively unknown actors, which led him to select Hamill and Fisher for leading roles. Hamill was cast as Luke over Robby Benson, Robert Englund, William Katt, Kurt Russell, and Charles Martin Smith, while Fisher was cast as Leia over Karen Allen, Amy Irving, Terri Nunn, Cindy Williams, and Linda Purl. Jodie Foster auditioned for the role, but turned it down because she was under contract with Disney. Koo Stark was also considered for Leia, but was instead cast as Luke's friend Camie Marstrap, a character that did not make the final cut of the film.\nLucas initially resisted casting Ford as Han, since Ford had previously worked with Lucas on \"American Graffiti\", and was therefore not unknown. Instead, the director asked Ford to assist with auditions by reading lines with other actors. However, Lucas was eventually won over by Ford, and cast him as Han over many other actors who auditioned. Other actors who reportedly were considered for the role of Han Solo include James Caan, Chevy Chase, Robert De Niro, Richard Dreyfuss, Steve Martin, Bill Murray, Jack Nicholson, Nick Nolte, Burt Reynolds, Russell, Robert Englund, Sylvester Stallone, John Travolta, Christopher Walken, Glynn Turman, and Perry King, who later played Han in the radio series. Al Pacino turned down the part because he did not understand the script.\nLucas believed that he needed an established star to play Obi-Wan. He considered Cushing for the role, but decided the actor's lean features would be better employed as the villainous Tarkin. Kurtz felt a strong character actor was required to convey the \"stability and gravitas\" of Obi-Wan. Before Guinness was cast, the Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune\u2014who starred in many Kurosawa films\u2014was considered for the role. His daughter, Mika Kitagawa, said her father \"had a lot of samurai pride\" and turned down the roles of Obi-Wan and Vader because he thought \"Star Wars\" would employ cheap special effects and would therefore \"cheapen the image of samurai\". Lucas credited Guinness with inspiring the cast and crew to work harder, which contributed significantly to the completion of filming. Ford said he admired Guinness's preparation, professionalism and kindness towards the other actors. He recalled Guinness having \"a very clear head about how to serve the story.\" On top of his salary, Guinness received 2.25% of the film's backend grosses, which made him wealthy later in life.\nDaniels said he wanted the role of C-3PO after he saw a Ralph McQuarrie concept painting of the character and was struck by the vulnerability in the droid's face. After casting Daniels for the physical performance, Lucas intended to hire another actor for the droid's voice. According to Daniels, thirty well-established actors auditioned\u2014including Dreyfuss and Mel Blanc\u2014but Daniels received the voice role after one of the actors suggested the idea to Lucas.\nBaker as R2-D2 and Mayhew as Chewbacca were cast largely due to their height. At 3 feet 8 inches (1.12 m), Baker was offered the role of the diminutive droid immediately after meeting Lucas. He turned it down multiple times, however, before finally accepting it. R2-D2's beeps and squeaks were made by sound designer Ben Burtt by imitating baby noises, recording his voice over an intercom, and finally mixing the sounds together using a synthesizer. Mayhew initially auditioned for Vader, but Prowse was cast instead. However, when Lucas and Kurtz saw Mayhew's stature, they quickly cast him as Chewbacca. Mayhew modeled his performance on the mannerisms of animals he observed in public zoos.\nProwse was originally offered the role of Chewbacca, but turned it down, as he wanted to play the villain. Prowse portrayed Vader physically, but Lucas felt his West Country English accent was inappropriate for the character, and selected James Earl Jones for Vader's voice. Lucas considered Orson Welles for the voice role, but was concerned his voice would be too familiar to audiences. Audiences and critics, however, immediately recognized Jones' voice in the film. Jones was uncredited as Vader in films until 1983, although he was credited in the 1978 television special, \"Star Wars Holiday Special\".\nDesign.\nDuring pre-production, Lucas recruited several conceptual designers: Colin Cantwell, who visualized the initial spacecraft models; Alex Tavoularis, who created storyboard sketches from early scripts; and Ralph McQuarrie, who created conceptual images of characters, costumes, props, and scenery. McQuarrie's paintings helped the studio visualize the film, which positively influenced their decision to fund the project. His artwork also set the visual tone for \"Star Wars\" and the rest of the original trilogy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe trouble with the future in most futurist movies is that it always looks new and clean and shiny... What is required for true credibility is a used future.\n\u2014George Lucas on the aesthetic of \"Star Wars\"\nLucas wanted to create props and sets (based on McQuarrie's paintings) that had never before been used in science-fiction films. He hired as production designers John Barry and Roger Christian, who were then working on the film \"Lucky Lady\" (1975). Christian remembers that Lucas did not want anything in \"Star Wars\" to stand out, and \"wanted it [to look] all real and used.\" In this \"used future\" aesthetic, all devices, ships, and buildings related to Tatooine and the rebels look aged and dirty, and the rebel ships look cobbled together in contrast to the Empire's sleeker designs. Lucas believed this aesthetic would lend credibility to the film's fictional places, and Christian was enthusiastic about this approach.\nBarry and Christian started working with Lucas before \"Star Wars\" was funded by Fox. For several months, in a studio in Kensal Rise, England, they planned the creation of props and sets with very little money. According to Christian, the \"Millennium Falcon\" set was the most difficult to build. He wanted the interior of the ship to look like a submarine, and used inexpensive airplane scrap metal to achieve the desired effect. Set construction later moved to Elstree Studios, where Barry created thirty sets. All nine sound stages at Elstree were needed to house the fabricated planets, starships, caves, control rooms, cantinas, and Death Star corridors. The rebel hangar was so massive it had to be built at nearby Shepperton Studios, which contained Europe's largest sound stage at the time.\nFilming.\nIn 1975, Lucas founded the visual effects company Industrial Light &amp; Magic (ILM) after discovering that Fox's visual effects department had been shut down. ILM began its work on \"Star Wars\" in a warehouse in Van Nuys, California. Most of the visual effects used pioneering digital motion control photography developed by John Dykstra and his team, which created the illusion of size by employing small models and slowly moving cameras. The technology is now known as the Dykstraflex system.\nVisually, Lucas wanted \"Star Wars\" to have the \"ethereal quality\" of a fairy tale, but also \"an alien look.\" He hoped to achieve \"the seeming contradiction of [the] strange graphics of fantasy combined with the feel of a documentary.\" His first choice for cinematographer was Geoffrey Unsworth, who had worked on \"2001: A Space Odyssey\". Unsworth initially accepted the job, but eventually withdrew to work on the Vincente Minnelli-directed \"A Matter of Time\" (1976). Unsworth was replaced by Gilbert Taylor, who had overseen photography for \"Dr. Strangelove\" and \"A Hard Day's Night\" (both 1964). Lucas admired Taylor's work on both films, describing them as \"eccentrically photographed pictures with a strong documentary flavor.\"\nOnce photography was under way, Lucas and Taylor had many disputes. Lucas's lighting suggestions were rejected by Taylor, who believed Lucas was overstepping his boundaries by giving specific instructions, sometimes even moving lights and cameras himself. After Fox executives complained about the soft-focus visual style of the film, Taylor changed his approach, which infuriated Lucas. Kurtz said that Lucas's inability to delegate tasks resulted from his history directing low-budget films, which required him to be involved with all aspects of the production. Taylor claimed that Lucas avoided contact with him, which motivated the cinematographer to make his own decisions about how to shoot the film.\nOriginally, Lucas envisioned Tatooine as a jungle planet, and Kurtz traveled to the Philippines to scout locations. However, the thought of spending months filming in the jungle made Lucas uncomfortable, so he made Tatooine a desert planet instead. Kurtz then researched various desert locales around the globe. He ultimately decided that Southern Tunisia, on the edge of the Sahara, would make an ideal Tatooine. Principal photography began in Chott el Djerid in March 1976. Meanwhile, a construction crew in nearby Tozeur spent eight weeks creating additional Tatooine locations. The scenes of Luke's Tatooine home were filmed at the Hotel Sidi Driss, in Matmata. Additional Tatooine scenes were shot at Death Valley in the United States.\nThe filmmakers experienced many problems in Tunisia. Production fell behind schedule in the first week due to malfunctioning props and electronic breakdowns. The radio-controlled R2-D2 models functioned poorly. The left leg of Daniels's C-3PO costume shattered, injuring his foot. At the end of his first day of filming in March, Daniels was covered in scars and scratches from the costume; this was the first and only time he wore the costume for a whole day. A rare winter rainstorm struck the country, which further disrupted filming. After two and a half weeks in Tunisia, production moved to Elstree Studios in London for interior scenes.\nKurtz described Lucas as a shy \"loner\" who does not enjoy working with a large cast and crew. According to Fisher, he gave very little direction to the actors, and when he did, it usually consisted of the words \"faster\" and \"more intense\". Laws in Britain stipulated that filming had to finish by 5:30 pm, unless Lucas was in the middle of a shot, in which case he could ask the crew to stay an extra 15 minutes. However, his requests were usually turned down. Most of the British crew considered \"Star Wars\" a children's film, and the actors sometimes did not take the project seriously. Baker later confessed that he thought the film would be a failure.\nAccording to Taylor, it was impossible to light the Elstree sets in the conventional way. He was forced to break open the walls, ceilings and floors, placing quartz lamps inside the openings he created. This lighting system gave Lucas the ability to shoot in almost any direction without extensive relighting. In total, filming in Britain took fourteen and a half weeks. While visiting an English travel agency, Lucas saw a poster depicting Tikal, Guatemala, and decided to use the location for the moon Yavin 4. The scenes of the rebel base on Yavin were filmed in the local Mayan temples. The animation of the Death Star plans shown at the base were created by computer programmer Larry Cuba, using the GRASS programming language. It is the only digital computer animation utilized in the original version of \"Star Wars\". The visual simulation of Yavin 4 orbiting its mother planet was created on the Scanimate analog computer. All the other computer monitors and targeting displays in the film featured simulated computer graphics, which were generated using pre-digital animation methods, such as hand-drawn backlit animation.\nAlthough Obi-Wan did not die in the final version of the script, Guinness disliked the character's dialogue and said he begged Lucas to kill him off. Lucas, however, claimed he added Obi-Wan's death because the character served no purpose after his duel with Vader.\nAt Fox, Alan Ladd endured scrutiny from board members over the film's complex screenplay and rising budget. After the filmmakers requested more than the original $8 million budget, Kurtz said the executives \"got a bit scared.\" According to Kurtz, the filmmaking team spent two weeks drafting a new budget. With the project behind schedule, Ladd told Lucas he had to finish production within a week or it would be shut down. The crew split into three units, led by Lucas, Kurtz, and production supervisor Robert Watts. Under the new system, they met the studio's deadline.\nThe screenplay originally featured a human Jabba the Hutt, but the character was removed due to budget and time constraints. The idea of Jabba being an alien did not arise until work began on the 1979 \"Star Wars\" re-release. Lucas would later claim he had wanted to superimpose a stop-motion creature over a human actor; he accomplished a similar effect with computer-generated imagery (CGI) in the 1997 Special Edition. According to Greedo actor Paul Blake, his character was created as a result of Lucas having to cut the Jabba scene.\nDuring production, the cast attempted to make Lucas laugh or smile, as he often appeared depressed. At one point, the project became so demanding that Lucas was diagnosed with hypertension and exhaustion and was warned to reduce his stress level. Post-production was equally stressful due to increasing pressure from the studio. Another obstacle arose when Hamill's face became visibly scarred after a car accident, which restricted the re-shoots featuring Luke.\nPost-production.\n\"Star Wars\" was originally slated for release on December 25, 1976, but production delays pushed it back to mid-1977. Editor John Jympson began cutting the film while Lucas was still filming in Tunisia; as Lucas noted, the editor was in an \"impossible position\" because Lucas had not explained any of the film's material to him. When Lucas viewed Jympson's rough cut, he felt the editor's selection of takes was questionable. He felt Jympson did not fully understand the film nor Lucas's style of filmmaking, and he continued to disapprove of Jympson's editing as time went by. Halfway through production, Lucas fired Jympson and replaced him with Paul Hirsch, Richard Chew, and his then-wife, Marcia Lucas. The new editing team felt Jympson's cut lacked excitement, and they sought to inject more dynamism into the film.\nJympson's rough cut of \"Star Wars\" (often called the \"Lost Cut\") differed significantly from the final version. Author David West Reynolds describes Jympson's version as \"more leisurely paced\", and estimates that it contained 30\u201340% different footage from the final cut. Although most of the differences relate to extended scenes or alternate takes, there were also scenes which were completely removed to accelerate the pace of the narrative. The most notable of these were a series from Tatooine, when Luke is first introduced. Set in the city of Anchorhead, the scenes depicted Luke's everyday life among his friends, and showed how their lives are affected by the space battle above the planet. These scenes also introduced Biggs Darklighter, Luke's closest friend who leaves to join the Rebellion. Hirsch said the scenes were removed because they presented too much information in the first few minutes of the film, and they created too many storylines for the audience to follow. The removal of the Anchorhead scenes also helped distinguish \"Star Wars\" from Lucas's previous film; Alan Ladd called the deleted scenes \"\"American Graffiti\" in outer space\". Lucas also wanted to shift the narrative focus to C-3PO and R2-D2 at the beginning of the film. He explained that having \"the first half hour of the film be mainly about robots was a bold idea.\"\nMeanwhile, ILM was struggling to achieve unprecedented special effects. The company had spent half its budget on four shots that Lucas deemed unacceptable. With hundreds of shots remaining, ILM was forced to finish a year's work in six months. To inspire the visual effects team, Lucas spliced together clips of aerial dogfights from old war films. These kinetic segments helped the team understand his vision for scenes in \"Star Wars\". The explosion of the Death Star was created by visual effects artist Bruce Logan and pyrotechnics expert Joe Viskocil. To simulate the effect of an explosion in the zero gravity environment of outer space, Logan pointed a high-speed camera upward at a series of miniature bombs created by Viskocil, which were composed of black powder, gasoline, titanium chips and napalm. The camera was surrounded by a sheet of plywood, with a hole cut out for the lens and a sheet of glass covering it.\nSound designer Ben Burtt created a library of sounds that Lucas referred to as an \"organic soundtrack\". Blaster sounds were created by modifying the noise of a steel cable being struck while under tension. Lightsaber sound effects were a combination of the hum of movie projector motors and interference caused by a television set on a shieldless microphone. Burtt discovered the latter accidentally while searching for a buzzing, sparking sound to add to the projector-motor hum. For Chewbacca's speech, Burtt combined the sounds of four bears, a badger, a lion, a seal, and a walrus. Burtt achieved Vader's breathing noise by breathing through the mask of a scuba regulator; this process inspired the idea of Vader being a burn victim. The film was mixed in a new six-track stereo layout developed by Dolby Laboratories called \"baby boom\" that consolidated vocals to the center channel, while the side channels were used to enhance deep bass effects.\nIn February 1977, Lucas screened an early cut of the film for Fox executives, several director friends, and Roy Thomas and Howard Chaykin of Marvel Comics, who were preparing a \"Star Wars\" comic book. The cut had a different crawl from the finished version and used Prowse's voice for Vader. It also lacked most special effects; hand-drawn arrows took the place of blaster beams, and footage of World War II dogfights replaced space battles between TIE fighters and the \"Millennium Falcon\". Several of Lucas's friends failed to understand the film, and their reactions disappointed Lucas. Marcia Lucas also admitted at her initial unhappiness with the film describing it as the \"\"At Long Last Love\" of science fiction.\" Steven Spielberg enjoyed it, however, and believed the lack of enthusiasm from others was due to the absence of finished special effects. In contrast, Ladd and the other studio executives loved the film; production executive Gareth Wigan described the experience as the \"most extraordinary day of [his] life.\" Lucas, who was accustomed to negative reactions from executives, found the experience shocking and rewarding.\nLadd reluctantly agreed to release an extra $50,000 ( dollars) in funding. The unit also completed additional studio footage for the Mos Eisley cantina sequence. \"Star Wars\" was completed less than a week before its May 25, 1977, release date. With all of the film's elements coming together just in time, Lucas described the work as not so much finished as \"abandoned\". \"Star Wars\" began production with a budget of $8 million; the total budget eventually reached $11\u00a0million (equivalent to $ and $ million, respectively, in 2024).\nSoundtrack.\nLucas initially planned to use pre-existing music for \"Star Wars\", rather than an original score. Since the film portrayed alien worlds, he believed recognizable music was needed to create a sense of familiarity. He hired John Williams as a music consultant, and showed him a collection of orchestral pieces he intended to use for the soundtrack. After Williams convinced Lucas that an original score would be preferable, Lucas tasked him with creating it. A few of the composer's finished pieces were influenced by Lucas's initial orchestral selections. The \"Main Title Theme\" was inspired by the theme from the 1942 film \"Kings Row\" (scored by Erich Wolfgang Korngold), and the \"Dune Sea of Tatooine\" was influenced by the music of 1948 film \"Bicycle Thieves\" scored by Alessandro Cicognini. Lucas later denied he ever considered using pre-existing music for the film.\nOver a period of 12 days in March 1977, Williams and the London Symphony Orchestra recorded the \"Star Wars\" score. The soundtrack was released as a double LP in 1977 by 20th Century Fox Records. That year, the label also released \"The Story of Star Wars\", an audio drama adaptation of the film utilizing some of its music, dialogue, and sound effects. In 2005, the American Film Institute chose the \"Star Wars\" soundtrack as the best film score of all time.\nCinematic and literary allusions.\nBefore creating \"Star Wars\", Lucas had hoped to make a \"Flash Gordon\" film, but was unable to obtain the rights. \"Star Wars\" features many elements ostensibly derived from \"Flash Gordon\", such as the conflict between rebels and imperial forces; the fusion of mythology and futuristic technology; the wipe transitions between scenes; and the text crawl at the beginning of the film. Lucas also reportedly drew from Joseph Campbell's book \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\" and Akira Kurosawa's 1958 film \"The Hidden Fortress\". Robey has also suggested that the Mos Eisley cantina brawl was influenced by Kurosawa's \"Yojimbo\" (1961), and that the scene in which Luke and his friends hide in the floor of the \"Millennium Falcon\" was derived from that film's sequel, \"Sanjuro\" (1962).\n\"Star Wars\" has been compared to Frank Herbert's \"Dune\" book series. Both have desert planets: \"Star Wars\" has Tatooine, while \"Dune\" has Arrakis, which is the source of a longevity spice. \"Star Wars\" makes references to spice mines and a spice freighter. Jedi mind tricks in \"Star Wars\" have been compared to \"The Voice\", a controlling ability used by the Bene Gesserit in Herbert's novels. Luke's Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru are moisture farmers; on Arrakis, dew collectors are used by Fremen to collect and recycle small amounts of water. Herbert reported that David Lynch, director of \"Dune\"'s 1984 film adaptation, \"had trouble with the fact that \"Star Wars\" used up so much of \"Dune\".\" Herbert and Lynch found \"sixteen points of identity\" between the two universes, and argued that these similarities could not be a coincidence.\nWriting for \"Starwars.com\" in 2013, Bryan Young noted many similarities between Lucas's space opera and the World War II film \"The Dam Busters\" (1955). In \"Star Wars\", rebel ships assault the Death Star by diving into a trench and attempting to fire torpedoes into a small exhaust port; in \"Dam Busters\", British bombers fly along heavily defended reservoirs and aim bouncing bombs at dams to cripple the heavy industry of Germany (also, \"Star Wars\" cinematographer Gilbert Taylor filmed the special effects sequences in \"Dam Busters\"). Lucas used clips from both \"Dam Busters\" and \"633 Squadron\" (1964), another war film with a climactic bomber run through narrow fjords, to illustrate his vision for dogfights in \"Star Wars\".\nJournalist and blogger Martin Belam pointed out similarities between the Death Star's docking bay and the docking bay on the space station in \"2001\". In 2014, Young observed a number of parallels between Lucas's space opera and Fritz Lang's 1927 film \"Metropolis\". \"Star Wars\" has also been compared to \"The Wizard of Oz\" (1939).\nMarketing.\nWhile the film was in production, a logo was commissioned from Dan Perri, a title sequence designer who had worked on \"The Exorcist\" (1973) and \"Taxi Driver\" (1976). Perri created a logotype consisting of block-capital letters filled with stars and leaning towards a vanishing point. The graphic was designed to follow the same perspective as the opening text crawl. Ultimately, Perri's logo was not used for the film's opening title sequence, although it was used widely in pre-release print advertising and on cinema marquees.\nThe logotype eventually selected for on-screen use originated in a promotional brochure that was distributed by Fox to cinema owners in 1976. The brochure was designed by Suzy Rice, a young art director at the Los Angeles advertising agency Seiniger Advertising. On a visit to ILM in Van Nuys, Rice was instructed by Lucas to produce a \"very fascist\" logo that would intimidate the viewer. Rice employed an outlined and modified Helvetica Black typeface in her initial version. After some feedback from Lucas, Rice joined the \"S\" and \"T\" of \"STAR\" and the \"R\" and \"S\" of \"WARS\". Kurtz was impressed with Rice's composition and selected it over Perri's design for the film's opening titles, after flattening the pointed tips of the letter \"W\". The \"Star Wars\" logo became one of the most recognizable designs in cinema, though Rice was not credited in the film.\nFor the film's US release, Fox commissioned a promotional poster from the advertising agency Smolen, Smith and Connolly. The agency contracted the freelance artist Tom Jung, and gave him the phrase \"good over evil\" as a starting point. His poster, known as , depicts Luke standing in a heroic pose, brandishing a shining lightsaber above his head. Leia is slightly below him, and a large image of Vader's helmet looms behind them. Some Fox executives considered this poster \"too dark\" and commissioned the Brothers Hildebrandt, a pair of well-known fantasy artists, to modify it for the UK release. When \"Star Wars\" opened in British theaters, the Hildebrandts' poster was used on cinema billboards. Fox and Lucasfilm later decided to promote the film with a less stylized and more realistic depiction of the lead characters, and commissioned a new design from Tom Chantrell. Two months after \"Star Wars\" opened, the Hildebrandts' poster was replaced by Chantrell's version in UK cinemas.\nFox gave \"Star Wars\" little marketing support beyond licensed T-shirts and posters. The film's marketing director, Charley Lippincott, had to look elsewhere for promotional opportunities. He secured deals with Marvel Comics for a comic book adaptation and with Del Rey Books for a novelization. A fan of science fiction, Lippincott used his contacts to promote the film at San Diego Comic-Con and elsewhere within the science-fiction community. \nThe film's teaser trailer was released in late 1976, with Malachi Throne as the narrator.\nRelease.\nMPAA rating.\nWhen \"Star Wars\" was submitted to the Motion Picture Association of America's rating board, the votes for the rating were evenly split between G and PG. In an unusual move, Fox requested the stricter PG rating, in part because it believed the film was too scary for young children, but also because it feared teenagers would perceive the G rating as \"uncool\". Lucasfilm marketer Charley Lippincott supported Fox's position after witnessing a five-year-old at the film's preview become upset by a scene in which Darth Vader chokes a rebel captain. Although the board initially opted for the G rating, it reneged after Fox's request and applied the PG rating.\nFirst public screening.\nOn May 1, 1977, the first public screening of \"Star Wars\" was held at Northpoint Theatre in San Francisco,&lt;ref name=\"cinematreasures/5426\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; where \"American Graffiti\" had been test-screened four years earlier.&lt;ref name=\"kcbsradio/before-anyone-else\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nPremiere and initial release.\nLucas wanted the film released in May, on the Memorial Day weekend. According to Fox executive Gareth Wigan, \"Nobody had ever opened a summer film before school was out.\" Lucas, however, hoped the school-term release would build word-of-mouth publicity among children. Fox ultimately decided on a release date of May 25, the Wednesday before the holiday weekend. Very few theaters, however, wanted to show \"Star Wars\". To encourage exhibitors to purchase the film, Fox packaged it with \"The Other Side of Midnight\", a film based on the 1973 bestselling book. If a theater wanted to show \"Midnight,\" it was required to show \"Star Wars\" as well.\nLucas's film debuted on Wednesday, May 25, 1977, in 32 theaters. Another theater was added on Thursday, and ten more began showing the film on Friday. On Wednesday, Lucas was so absorbed in work\u2014approving advertising campaigns and mixing sound for the film's wider-release version\u2014that he forgot the film was opening that day. His first glimpse of its success occurred that evening, when he and Marcia went out for dinner on Hollywood Boulevard. Across the street, crowds were lining up outside Mann's Chinese Theatre, waiting to see \"Star Wars\".\nTwo weeks after its release, Lucas's film was replaced by William Friedkin's \"Sorcerer\" at Mann's because of contractual obligations. The theater owner moved \"Star Wars\" to a less-prestigious location after quickly renovating it. After \"Sorcerer\" failed to meet expectations, Lucas's film was given a second opening at Mann's on August 3. Thousands of people attended a ceremony in which C-3PO, R2-D2 and Darth Vader placed their footprints in the theater's forecourt. By this time, \"Star Wars\" was playing in 1,096 theaters in the United States. Approximately 60 theaters played the film continuously for over a year. In May 1978, Lucasfilm distributed \"Birthday Cake\" posters to those theaters for special events on the one-year anniversary of the film's release. \"Star Wars\" premiered in the United Kingdom on December 27, 1977. News reports of the film's popularity in America caused long lines to form at the two London theaters that first offered the film; it became available in 12 large cities in January 1978, and additional London theaters in February.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOn opening day I... did a radio call-in show... this caller, was really enthusiastic and talking about the movie in really deep detail. I said, \"You know a lot about the film.\" He said, \"Yeah, yeah, I've seen it four times already.\"\n\u2014Gary Kurtz, on when he realized \"Star Wars\" had become a cultural phenomenon\nThe film immediately broke box office records. Three weeks after it opened, Fox's stock price had doubled to a record high. Prior to 1977, the studio's highest annual profit was $37 million. In 1977, it posted a profit of $79 million. Lucas had instantly become very wealthy. His friend Francis Ford Coppola sent a telegram to his hotel asking for money to finish his film \"Apocalypse Now\" (1979). Cast members became instant household names, and even technical crew members, such as model makers, were asked for autographs. When Harrison Ford visited a record store to buy an album, enthusiastic fans tore half his shirt off.\nLucas had been certain Spielberg's \"Close Encounters of the Third Kind\" would outperform his space opera at the box office. Before \"Star Wars\" opened, Lucas proposed to Spielberg that they trade 2.5% of the profit on each other's films. Spielberg accepted, believing Lucas's film would be the bigger hit. Spielberg still receives 2.5% of the profits from \"Star Wars\".\nBox office.\n\"Star Wars\" remains one of the most financially successful films of all time. It earned over $2.5 million in its first six days ($ in 2024 dollars). According to \"Variety\"'s weekly box office charts, it was number one at the US box office for its first three weeks. It was dethroned by \"The Deep\", but gradually added screens and returned to number one in its seventh week, building up to $7-million weekends as it entered wide release ($ in 2024 dollars) and remained number one for the next 15 weeks. It replaced \"Jaws\" as the highest-earning film in North America just six months into release, eventually grossing over $220 million during its initial theatrical run ($ in 2024 dollars). \"Star Wars\" entered international release towards the end of the year, and in 1978 added the worldwide record to its domestic one, earning $314.4 million in total. Its biggest international market was Japan, where it grossed $58.4 million.\nOn July 21, 1978, while still showing in 38 theaters in the US, the film expanded into a 1,744 theater national saturation windup of release and set a new U.S. weekend record of $10,202,726. The gross prior to the expansion was $221,280,994. The expansion added a further $43,774,911 to take its gross to $265,055,905. Reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612) brought its cumulative gross in the U.S. and Canada to $323 million, and extended its global earnings to $530 million. In doing so, it became the first film to gross $500 million worldwide, and remained the highest-grossing film of all time until \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" (1982) broke that record in 1983.\nThe release of the Special Edition in 1997 was the highest-grossing reissue of all-time with a gross of $138.3 million, bringing its total gross in the United States and Canada to $460,998,007, reclaiming the all-time number one spot. Internationally, the reissue grossed $117.2 million, with $26 million from the United Kingdom and $15 million from Japan. In total, the film has grossed over $775 million worldwide.\nAdjusted for inflation, it had earned over $2.5 billion worldwide at 2011 prices, which saw it ranked as the third-highest-grossing film at the time, according to \"Guinness World Records\". At the North American box office, it ranks second behind \"Gone with the Wind\" (1939) on the inflation-adjusted list.\nReception.\nCritical response.\n\"Star Wars\" received many positive reviews upon its release. Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" called the film \"an out-of-body experience\". Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" described it as \"the most elaborate... most beautiful movie serial ever made\". A.\u00a0D. Murphy of \"Variety\" called the film \"magnificent\" and said Lucas had succeeded in his attempt to create the \"biggest possible adventure fantasy\" based on the serials and action epics of his childhood. Writing for \"The Washington Post\", Gary Arnold gave the film a positive review, calling it \"a new classic in a rousing movie tradition: a space swashbuckler.\" \"Star Wars\" was not without its detractors, however. Pauline Kael of \"The New Yorker\" said \"there's no breather in the picture, no lyricism\", and no \"emotional grip\". John Simon of \"New York\" magazine also panned the film, writing, \"Strip \"Star Wars\" of its often striking images and its highfalutin scientific jargon, and you get a story, characters, and dialogue of overwhelming banality.\"\nIn the UK, Barry Norman of \"Film...\" called the movie \"family entertainment at its most sublime\", which combines \"all the best-loved themes of romantic adventure\". \"The Daily Telegraph\"'s science correspondent Adrian Berry said that \"Star Wars\" \"is the best such film since \"2001\" and in certain respects it is one of the most exciting ever made\". He described the plot as \"unpretentious and pleasantly devoid of any 'message'\".\nGene Siskel, writing for the \"Chicago Tribune\", said, \"What places it a sizable cut above the routine is its spectacular visual effects, the best since Stanley Kubrick's \"2001\".\" In his 1977 review, Robert Hatch of \"The Nation\" called the film \"an outrageously successful, what will be called a 'classic,' compilation of nonsense, largely derived but thoroughly reconditioned. I doubt that anyone will ever match it, though the imitations must already be on the drawing boards.\" In a more critical review, Jonathan Rosenbaum of the \"Chicago Reader\" stated, \"None of these characters has any depth, and they're all treated like the fanciful props and settings.\" Peter Keough of the \"Boston Phoenix\" said, \"\"Star Wars\" is a junkyard of cinematic gimcracks not unlike the Jawas' heap of purloined, discarded, barely functioning droids.\"\nIn a 1978 appearance on \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\", scientist Carl Sagan called attention to the overwhelming whiteness of the human characters in the film. Actor Raymond St. Jacques echoed Sagan's complaint, writing that \"the terrifying realization... [is] that black people (or any ethnic minority for that matter) shall not exist in the galactic space empires of the future.\" Writing in the African-American newspaper \"New Journal and Guide\", Walter Bremond claimed that due to his black garb and his being voiced by a black actor, the villainous Vader reinforces a stereotype that \"black is evil\". Bremond went on to call \"Star Wars\" \"one of the most racist movies ever produced.\"\nThe film continues to receive critical acclaim from contemporary critics. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 205 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 9.1/10. The website's consensus reads: \"A legendarily expansive and ambitious start to the sci-fi saga, George Lucas opened our eyes to the possibilities of blockbuster filmmaking and things have never been the same.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 90 out of 100, based on 24 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\". In his 1997 review of the film's 20th-anniversary release, Michael Wilmington of the \"Chicago Tribune\" gave the film four out of four stars, calling it \"[a] grandiose and violent epic with a simple and whimsical heart\". A \"San Francisco Chronicle\" staff member described the film as \"a thrilling experience\". In 2001 Matt Ford of the BBC awarded the film five out of five stars and wrote, \"\"Star Wars\" isn't the best film ever made, but it is universally loved.\" Andrew Collins of \"Empire\" magazine, reviewing the 2006 DVD release, awarded the film five out of five and said, \"\"Star Wars\"' timeless appeal lies in its easily identified, universal archetypes\u2014goodies to root for, baddies to boo, a princess to be rescued and so on\u2014and if it is most obviously dated to the 70s by the special effects, so be it.\" CinemaScore reported that audiences for the film's 1999 re-release gave the film a \"A+\" grade.\nAccolades.\n\"Star Wars\" won many awards after its release, including six Academy Awards, two BAFTA Awards, one Golden Globe Award, three Grammy Awards, one Hugo Award, and thirteen Saturn Awards. Additionally, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences gave a Special Achievement Academy Award to Ben Burtt, and granted a Scientific and Engineering Award to John Dykstra, Alvah J. Miller, and Jerry Jeffress for the development of the Dykstraflex camera system.\nIn its May 30, 1977, issue, \"Time\" named \"Star Wars\" the \"Movie of the Year\". The publication said it was a \"big early supporter\" of the vision which would become \"Star Wars\". In an article intended for the cover of the issue, \"Time\"'s Gerald Clarke wrote that \"Star Wars\" is \"a grand and glorious film that may well be the smash hit of 1977, and certainly is the best movie of the year so far. The result is a remarkable confection: a subliminal history of the movies, wrapped in a riveting tale of suspense and adventure, ornamented with some of the most ingenious special effects ever contrived for film.\" Each of the subsequent films of the \"Star Wars\" saga has appeared on the magazine's cover.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n AFI 100 Years... series\n \nAmerican Film Institute\n\"Star Wars\" was voted the second most popular film by Americans in a 2008 nationwide poll conducted by the market research firm Harris Interactive. It has also been featured in several high-profile audience polls: In 1997, it ranked as the 10th Greatest American Film on the \"Los Angeles Daily News\" Readers' Poll; in 2002, \"Star Wars\" and its sequel \"The Empire Strikes Back\" were voted the greatest films ever made in Channel 4's 100 Greatest Films poll; in 2011, it ranked as Best Sci-Fi Film on \"Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time\", a primetime special aired by ABC that ranked the best films as chosen by fans, based on results of a poll conducted by ABC and \"People\" magazine; and in 2014, the film placed 11th in a poll undertaken by \"The Hollywood Reporter\", which balloted every studio, agency, publicity firm, and production house in the Hollywood region.\nIn 2008, \"Empire\" magazine ranked \"Star Wars\" at 22nd on its list of the \"500 Greatest Movies of All Time\". In 2010, the film ranked among the \"All-Time 100\" list of the greatest films as chosen by \"Time\" film critic Richard Schickel.\nLucas's screenplay was selected by the Writers Guild of America as the 68th greatest of all time. In 1989, the United States Library of Congress named \"Star Wars\" among its first selections to the National Film Registry as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\"; at the time, it was the most recent film to be selected and it was the only film from the 1970s to be chosen. Although Lucas declined to provide the Library with a workable copy of the original film upon request (instead offering the Special Edition), a viewable scan was made of the original copyright deposit print. In 1991, \"Star Wars\" was one of the first 25 films inducted into the Producers Guild of America's Hall of Fame for setting \"an enduring standard for American entertainment.\" The soundtrack was added to the United States National Recording Registry 15 years later (in 2004). The lack of a commercially available version of the 1977 original theatrical edit of the film since early '80s VHS releases has spawned numerous restorations by disgruntled fans over the years, such as \"Harmy's Despecialized Edition\".\nIn addition to the film's multiple awards and nominations, \"Star Wars\" has also been recognized by the American Film Institute on several of its lists. The film ranks first on 100 Years of Film Scores, second on Top 10 Sci-Fi Films, 15th on 100 Years... 100 Movies (ranked 13th on the updated 10th-anniversary edition), 27th on 100 Years... 100 Thrills, and 39th on 100 Years... 100 Cheers. In addition, the quote \"May the Force be with you\" is ranked eighth on 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes, and Han Solo and Obi-Wan Kenobi are ranked as the 14th and 37th greatest heroes respectively on 100 Years... 100 Heroes &amp; Villains.\nThe February 2020 issue of \"New York Magazine\" lists \"Star Wars\" as among \"The Best Movies That Lost Best Picture at the Oscars.\"\nPost-release.\nTheatrical re-releases.\n\"Star Wars\" was re-released theatrically in 1978, 1979, 1981, and 1982. The subtitles \"Episode IV\" and \"A New Hope\" were added for the 1981 re-release. This brought the film into line with its 1980 sequel, which was titled on-screen as \"Star Wars: Episode V\u2014The Empire Strikes Back\". Lucas claims the subtitles were intended from the beginning, but were dropped for \"Star Wars\" to avoid confusing audiences. Kurtz said they considered calling the first film Episode III, IV, or V, to capture the experience of encountering a \"Flash Gordon\" serial halfway through its run. However, Michael Kaminski and Chris Taylor point out that multiple early screenplay drafts of \"Star Wars\" were subtitled \"Episode One\" and that early drafts of \"Empire\" were called \"Episode\u00a0II\".\nIn 1997, \"Star Wars\" was digitally remastered with some altered scenes for a theatrical re-release, dubbed the \"Special Edition\". In 2010, Lucas announced that all six previously released \"Star Wars\" films would be scanned and transferred to 3D for a theatrical release, but only 3D versions of the prequel trilogy were completed before the franchise was sold to Disney in 2012. In 2013, \"Star Wars\" became the first major motion picture to be dubbed into the Navajo language. In 2025, the original print of the film was screened for the first time since its initial theatrical run, when it was presented at a British Film Institute event.\nIn August 2025, \"Variety\" reported that \"Star Wars\" would be re-released in theaters on April 30, 2027, in honor of its 50th anniversary.\nSpecial Edition.\nAfter ILM began to create CGI for Steven Spielberg's 1993 film \"Jurassic Park\", Lucas decided that digital technology had caught up to his \"original vision\" for \"Star Wars\". For the film's 20th anniversary in 1997, \"Star Wars\" was digitally remastered with some altered scenes and re-released to theaters, along with \"The Empire Strikes Back\" and \"Return of the Jedi\", under the campaign title \"Star Wars\" Trilogy: Special Edition. This version of \"Star Wars\" runs 124 minutes.\nThe Special Edition contains visual shots and scenes that were unachievable in the original film due to financial, technological, and time constraints. The process of creating the new visual effects was explored in the 1996 documentary \"\", directed by \"Star Wars\" sound designer Ben Burtt. Although most changes are minor or cosmetic in nature, many fans and critics believe that Lucas degraded the film with the additions. A particularly controversial change in which the bounty hunter Greedo shoots first when confronting Han Solo has inspired T-shirts bearing the phrase \"Han shot first\".\n\"Star Wars\" required extensive recovery of misplaced footage and restoration of the whole film before Lucas's Special Edition modifications could be attempted. In addition to the negative film stock commonly used for feature films, Lucas had also used Color Reversal Internegative (CRI) film, a reversal stock subsequently discontinued by Kodak. Although it theoretically was of higher quality, CRI deteriorated faster than negative stocks. Because of this, the entire composited negative had to be disassembled, and the CRI portions cleaned separately from the negative portions. Once the cleaning was complete, the film was scanned into the computer for restoration. In many cases, entire scenes had to be reconstructed from their individual elements. Digital compositing technology allowed the restoration team to correct for problems such as misalignment of mattes and \"blue-spill\".\nIn 1989, the 1977 theatrical version of \"Star Wars\" was selected for preservation by the National Film Registry of the United States Library of Congress. 35\u00a0mm reels of the 1997 Special Edition were initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possessed a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical release. By 2015, this copy had been transferred to a 2K scan, now available to be viewed by appointment. \nHome media.\nIn the United States, France, West Germany, Italy and Japan, parts of or the whole film were released on Super 8. Clips were also released for the Movie Viewer toy projector by Kenner Products in cassettes featuring short scenes.\n\"Star Wars\" was released on Betamax, CED, LaserDisc, Video 2000, and VHS during the 1980s and 1990s by CBS/Fox Video. The final issue of the original theatrical release (pre-Special Edition) on VHS occurred in 1995, as part of a \"Last Chance to Own the Original\" campaign, and was available as part of a trilogy set or as a standalone purchase. The film was released for the first time on DVD on September 21, 2004, in a box set with \"The Empire Strikes Back\", \"Return of the Jedi\", and a bonus disc of supplementary material. The films were digitally restored and remastered, and more changes were made by Lucas (in addition to those made for the 1997 Special Edition). The DVD features a commentary track from Lucas, Fisher, Burtt and visual effects artist Dennis Muren. The bonus disc contains the 2004 documentary ', three featurettes, teaser and theatrical trailers, TV spots, image galleries, an exclusive preview of ' (2005), a playable Xbox demo of the LucasArts game (2004), and a making-of documentary about . The set was reissued in December 2005 as a three-disc limited edition without the bonus disc.\nThe trilogy was re-released on separate two-disc limited edition DVD sets from September 12 to December 31, 2006, and again in a limited edition box set on November 4, 2008; the original theatrical versions of the films were added as bonus material. The release was met with criticism because the unaltered versions were from the 1993 non-anamorphic LaserDisc masters, and were not re-transferred using modern video standards. This led to problems with colors, image quality, and digital image jarring.\nAll six \"Star Wars\" films were released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu-ray on September 16, 2011, in three different editions. \"A New Hope\" was available in both a box set of the original trilogy and with the other five films in the set \"Star Wars: The Complete Saga\", which includes nine discs and over 40 hours of special features. The original theatrical versions of the films were not included in the box set. Nor have they been released officially since then. Furthermore, new changes were made to the films, provoking mixed responses from critics and fans alike.\nOn April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, Twentieth Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six existing \"Star Wars\" films. Fox released \"A New Hope\" for digital download on April 10, 2015, while Disney released the other five films. Disney reissued \"A New Hope\" on Blu-ray, DVD, and for digital download on September 22, 2019. Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019. This version of \"A New Hope\" was also released by Disney in a 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.\nMerchandising.\nLittle \"Star Wars\" merchandise was available for several months after the film's debut, as only Kenner Products had accepted marketing director Charles Lippincott's licensing offers. Kenner responded to the sudden demand for toys by selling boxed vouchers in its \"empty box\" Christmas campaign. Television commercials told children and parents that vouchers contained in a \"Star Wars Early Bird Certificate Package\" could be redeemed for four action figures between February and June 1978. Jay West of the \"Los Angeles Times\" said that the boxes in the campaign \"became the most coveted empty box[es] in the history of retail.\" In 2012, the \"Star Wars\" action figures were inducted into the National Toy Hall of Fame.\nThe novelization of the film was published as \"\" in December 1976, six months before the film was released. The credited author was George Lucas, but the book was revealed to have been ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster. Marketing director Charles Lippincott secured the deal with Del Rey Books to publish the novelization in November 1976. By February 1977, a half million copies had been sold. Foster also wrote the sequel novel \"Splinter of the Mind's Eye\" (1978) to be adapted as a low-budget film if \"Star Wars\" was not a financial success.\nMarvel Comics also adapted the film as the first six issues of its licensed \"Star Wars\" comic book, with the first issue sold in April 1977. The comic was written by Roy Thomas and illustrated by Howard Chaykin. Like the novelization, it contained certain elements, such as the scene with Luke and Biggs, that appeared in the screenplay but not in the finished film. The series was so successful that, according to comic book writer Jim Shooter, it \"single-handedly saved Marvel\". From January to April 1997, Dark Horse Comics, which had held the comic rights to \"Star Wars\" since 1991, published a comic book adaptation of the \"Special Edition\" of the film, written by Bruce Jones with art by Eduardo Barreto and Al Williamson; 36 years later, the same company published \"The Star Wars\", an adaptation of the plot from Lucas's original rough draft screenplay, from September 2013 to May 2014.\nLucasfilm adapted the story for a children's book-and-record set. Released in 1979, the 24-page \"Star Wars\" read-along book was accompanied by a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;33+1\u20443\u00a0rpm 7-inch phonograph record. Each page of the book contained a cropped frame from the movie with an abridged and condensed version of the story. The record was produced by Buena Vista Records, and its content was copyrighted by Black Falcon, Ltd., a subsidiary of Lucasfilm \"formed to handle the merchandising for \"Star Wars\".\" \"The Story of Star Wars\" is a 1977 record album presenting an abridged version of the events depicted in \"Star Wars\", using dialogue and sound effects from the original film. The recording was produced by George Lucas and Alan Livingston, and was narrated by Roscoe Lee Browne. The script was adapted by E. Jack Kaplan and Cheryl Gard.\nAn audio CD boxed set of the \"Star Wars\" radio series was released in 1993, containing the original 1981 radio drama along with the radio adaptations of the sequels, \"The Empire Strikes Back\" and \"Return of the Jedi\".\nLegacy and influence.\nFord, who subsequently starred in the \"Indiana Jones\" series (1981\u20132023), \"Blade Runner\" (1982), and \"Witness\" (1985), told the \"Daily Mirror\" that \"Star Wars\" \"boosted\" his career. The film also spawned the \"Star Wars Holiday Special\", which debuted on CBS on November 17, 1978, and is often considered a failure; Lucas himself disowned it. The special was never aired again after its original broadcast, and it has never been officially released on home video. However, many bootleg copies exist, and it has consequently become something of an underground legend.\nIn popular culture.\n\"Star Wars\" and its subsequent film installments have been explicitly referenced and satirized across a wide range of media. \"Hardware Wars\", released in 1978, was one of the first fan films to parody \"Star Wars\". It received positive critical reaction, earned over $1\u00a0million (equivalent to $ million in 2024 dollars), and is one of Lucas's favorite \"Star Wars\" spoofs. Writing for \"The New York Times\", Frank DeCaro said, \"\"Star Wars\" littered pop culture of the late 1970s with a galaxy of space junk.\" He cited \"Quark\" (a short-lived 1977 sitcom that parodies the science fiction genre) and \"Donny &amp; Marie\" (a 1970s variety show that featured a 10-minute musical adaptation of \"Star Wars\" guest starring Daniels and Mayhew) as \"television's two most infamous examples.\" Mel Brooks's \"Spaceballs\", a satirical comic science-fiction parody, was released in 1987 to mixed reviews. Lucas permitted Brooks to make a spoof of the film under \"one incredibly big restriction: no action figures.\" In the 1990s and 2000s, animated comedy TV series \"Family Guy\", \"Robot Chicken\", and \"The Simpsons\" produced episodes satirizing the film series. A Nerdist article published in 2021 argues that \"\"Star Wars\" is the most influential film of all time\" partly on the basis that \"if all copies... suddenly vanished, we could more or less recreate the film... using other media,\" including parodies.\nMany elements of \"Star Wars\" are prominent in popular culture. Darth Vader, Han Solo, and Yoda were all named in the top twenty of the British Film Institute's \"Best Sci-Fi Characters of All-Time\" list. The expressions \"Evil empire\" and \"May the Force be with you\" have become part of the popular lexicon. A pun on the latter phrase (\"May the Fourth\") has led to May 4 being regarded by many fans as an unofficial \"Star Wars\" Day. To commemorate the film's 30th anniversary in May 2007, the United States Postal Service issued a set of 15 stamps depicting the characters of the franchise. Approximately 400 mailboxes across the country were also designed to look like R2-D2.\n\"Star Wars\" and Lucas are the subject of the 2010 documentary film \"The People vs. George Lucas\", which explores filmmaking and fandom as they pertain to the film franchise and its creator.\nCinematic influence.\nIn his book \"The Great Movies\", Roger Ebert called \"Star Wars\" \"a technical watershed\" that influenced many subsequent films. It began a new generation of special effects and high-energy motion pictures. The film was one of the first films to link genres together to invent a new, high-concept genre for filmmakers to build upon. Along with Steven Spielberg's \"Jaws\", it shifted the film industry's focus away from the more personal filmmaking of the 1970s towards fast-paced, big-budget blockbusters for younger audiences.\nFilmmakers who have been influenced by \"Star Wars\" include J. J. Abrams, James Cameron, Dean Devlin, Gareth Edwards, Roland Emmerich, David Fincher, Peter Jackson, John Lasseter, Damon Lindelof, Christopher Nolan, Ridley Scott, John Singleton, Kevin Smith, and Joss Whedon. Lucas's \"used future\" concept was employed in Scott's \"Alien\" (1979) and \"Blade Runner\" (1982); Cameron's \"Aliens\" (1986) and \"The Terminator\" (1984); and Jackson's \"The Lord of the Rings\" trilogy. Nolan cited \"Star Wars\" as an influence when making \"Inception\" (2010).\nSome critics have complained that \"Star Wars\", as well as \"Jaws\", \"ruined\" Hollywood by shifting its focus from \"sophisticated\" films such as \"The Godfather\", \"Taxi Driver\", and \"Annie Hall\" to films about spectacle and juvenile fantasy. On a 1977 episode of \"Sneak Previews\", Gene Siskel said he hoped Hollywood would continue to cater to audiences who enjoy \"serious pictures\". Peter Biskind claimed that Lucas and Spielberg \"returned the 1970s audience, grown sophisticated on a diet of European and New Hollywood films, to the simplicities of the pre-1960s Golden Age of movies... They marched backward through the looking-glass.\" In contrast, Tom Shone wrote that through \"Star Wars\" and \"Jaws\", Lucas and Spielberg did not betray cinema, but instead \"plugged it back into the grid, returning it... to its roots as a carnival sideshow, a magic act, one big special effect\", which amounted to \"a kind of rebirth.\"\nSequels, prequels, and adaptations.\n\"Star Wars\" was followed by the sequels \"The Empire Strikes Back\" (1980) and \"Return of the Jedi\" (1983), which rounded out the original film trilogy. Both were financially successful and fared well with critics. The original trilogy is considered one of the best film trilogies in history.\nA radio drama adaptation of \"Star Wars\" was broadcast on the American National Public Radio network in 1981. It was written by Brian Daley and directed by John Madden, and was produced with cooperation from George Lucas, who donated the rights to NPR. Williams's music and Burtt's sound design were retained for the show, and Hamill and Daniels reprised their roles. The narrative began with a backstory to the film, recounting Leia's acquisition of the Death Star plans. It also featured scenes not seen in the final cut of the film, such as Luke's observation of the space battle above Tatooine, a skyhopper race, and Vader's interrogation of Leia. The radio version was originally part of the official \"Star Wars\" canon, but has since been supplanted by revised canonical narratives.\nMore than twenty years after the release of \"Star Wars\", Lucas created a prequel trilogy, consisting of the films \"The Phantom Menace\" (1999), \"Attack of the Clones\" (2002), and \"Revenge of the Sith\" (2005). The trilogy chronicles the history between Obi-Wan, Qui-Gon Jinn's apprentice, and Anakin Skywalker, a slave boy who became a Jedi, and Anakin's fall to the Dark Side and transformation into Darth Vader. The prequel trilogy was financially successful, but some of the plot threads and new characters polarized critics and fans. After Lucas sold the \"Star Wars\" franchise to the Walt Disney Company in 2012, Disney developed a sequel trilogy, consisting of \"The Force Awakens\" (2015), \"The Last Jedi\" (2017), and \"The Rise of Skywalker\" (2019). Original trilogy cast members including Ford, Hamill, and Fisher reprised their roles, alongside new characters such as Rey, Finn, Kylo Ren and Poe Dameron, portrayed respectively by Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Adam Driver, and Oscar Isaac. In 2016, Disney released the standalone film \"Rogue One\", which depicts the successful rebel attempt to steal the Death Star plans. It serves as a direct prequel to \"Star Wars,\" ending where \"Star Wars\" begins. Other standalone films and television series have also been released.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52552", "revid": "10115195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52552", "title": "Axiom of power set", "text": "Concept in axiomatic set theory\nIn mathematics, the axiom of power set is one of the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms of axiomatic set theory. It guarantees for every set formula_1 the existence of a set formula_2, the power set of formula_1, consisting precisely of the subsets of formula_1. By the axiom of extensionality, the set formula_2 is unique.\nThe axiom of power set appears in most axiomatizations of set theory. It is generally considered uncontroversial, although constructive set theory prefers a weaker version to resolve concerns about predicativity.\nFormal statement.\nThe subset relation formula_6 is not a primitive notion in formal set theory and is not used in the formal language of the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms. Rather, the subset relation formula_6 is defined in terms of set membership, formula_8. Given this, in the formal language of the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms, the axiom of power set reads:\nformula_9\nwhere \"y\" is the power set of \"x\", \"z\" is any element of \"y\", \"w\" is any member of \"z\".\nIn English, this says:\nGiven any set \"x\", there is a set \"y\" such that, given any set \"z\", this set \"z\" is a member of \"y\" if and only if every element of \"z\" is also an element of \"x\".\nConsequences.\nThe power set axiom allows a simple definition of the Cartesian product of two sets formula_10 and formula_11:\nformula_12\nNotice that\nformula_13\nformula_14\nand, for example, considering a model using the Kuratowski ordered pair,\nformula_15\nand thus the Cartesian product is a set since\nformula_16\nOne may define the Cartesian product of any finite collection of sets recursively:\nformula_17\nThe existence of the Cartesian product can be proved without using the power set axiom, as in the case of the Kripke\u2013Platek set theory.\nLimitations.\nThe power set axiom does not specify what subsets of a set exist, only that there is a set containing all those that do. Not all conceivable subsets are guaranteed to exist. In particular, the power set of an infinite set would contain only \"constructible sets\" if the universe is the constructible universe. But in other models of ZF, the universe could contain sets that are not constructible.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"This article incorporates material from Axiom of power set on PlanetMath, which is licensed under the .\""}
{"id": "52553", "revid": "50324240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52553", "title": "Axiom of union", "text": "Concept in axiomatic set theory\nIn axiomatic set theory, the axiom of union is one of the axioms of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory. This axiom was introduced by Ernst Zermelo.\nInformally, the axiom states that for each set \"x\" there is a set \"y\" whose elements are precisely the elements of the elements of \"x\".\nFormal statement.\nIn the formal language of the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms, the axiom reads:\nformula_1\nor in words:\nGiven any set \"X\", there is a set \"Y\" such that, for any element \"u\", \"u\" is a member of \"Y\" if and only if there is a set \"z\" such that \"u\" is a member of \"z\" and \"z\" is a member of \"X\".\nor, more simply:\nFor any set formula_2, there is a set formula_3 which consists of just the elements of the elements of that set formula_2.\nRelation to Pairing.\nThe axiom of union allows one to unpack a set of sets and thus create a flatter set. \nTogether with the axiom of pairing, this implies that for any two sets, there is a set (called their union) that contains exactly the elements of the two sets.\nRelation to Replacement.\nThe axiom schema of replacement allows one to form many unions, such as the union of two sets.\nHowever, in its full generality, the axiom of union is independent from the rest of the ZFC-axioms: \nReplacement does not prove the existence of the union of a set of sets if the result contains an unbounded number of cardinalities.\nTogether with the axiom schema of replacement, the axiom of union implies that one can form the union of a family of sets indexed by a set.\nRelation to Separation.\nIn the context of set theories which include the axiom of separation, the axiom of union is sometimes stated in a weaker form which only produces a superset of the union of a set. For example, Kunen states the axiom as \n formula_5\nwhich is equivalent to\n formula_6\nCompared to the axiom stated at the top of this section, this variation asserts only one direction of the implication, rather than both directions.\nRelation to Intersection.\nThere is no corresponding axiom of intersection. If formula_7 is a \"nonempty\" set containing formula_8, it is possible to form the intersection formula_9 using the axiom schema of specification as\nformula_10,\nso no separate axiom of intersection is necessary. (If \"A\" is the empty set, then trying to form the intersection of \"A\" as\n{\"c\": for all \"D\" in \"A\", \"c\" is in \"D\"}\nis not permitted by the axioms. Moreover, if such a set existed, then it would contain every set in the \"universe\", but the notion of a universal set is antithetical to Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory.)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52554", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52554", "title": "DISA", "text": ""}
{"id": "52555", "revid": "16640916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52555", "title": "Defense Information Systems Agency", "text": "US Department of Defense combat support agency\nThe Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA), known as the Defense Communications Agency (DCA) until 1991, is a United States Department of Defense (DoD) combat support agency. It is composed of military, federal civilians, and contractors. DISA provides information technology (IT) and communications support to the President, Vice President, Secretary of Defense, the Department of Defense, the combatant commands, and any individual or system contributing to the defense of the United States.\nHistory.\n1960s: The Defense Communications Agency.\nDCA was established May 12, 1960, with the primary mission of operational control and management of the Defense Communications System (DCS).\nThe initial headquarters for 34 DCA members was Wake Hall, one of a complex of three buildings (which included Midway Hall and Guam Hall) on the site where the parking lot of the Robert F. Kennedy Stadium in Washington, D.C., stands today. Navy Rear Admiral William D. Irvin became the first DCA director in July. In September, Rear Admiral Irvin moved his staff to office space in Building 12 at the Naval Services Center, 701 Courthouse Road, Arlington, Va., the site of the U.S. Navy's old Radio Arlington Station.\nDCA's first major tasks were to identify the DCS elements and develop an implementation and management plan. The DCS was essentially a collection of communications systems turned over by the military departments with considerable restrictions. Key among these responsibilities was the establishment of three common-user, defense-wide networks that would be known as the Automatic Voice Network (AUTOVON), the Automatic Digital Network (AUTODIN), and the Automatic Secure Voice Communications Network (AUTOSEVOCOM). For each, DCA sought to determine its overall system configuration and prepare the technical specifications necessary for the equipment for switching centers, interconnecting transmission media, and subscriber terminals.\nWith the arrival of the space-age, DCA was designated as the \u201cstrong focal point\u201d for development, integration, and operation of the space and ground elements of a number of satellite-based communications initiatives. The most important of these would be the DCA-managed Defense Satellite Communications System (DSCS).\nDARPA began planning for a truly strategic geosynchronous communication system in 1958, assigning the Air Force Ballistic Missile Division responsibility for the booster and spacecraft and the Army Signal Corps the communications element. Initially consisting of three repeater satellite programs, in September 1959 the secretary of defense transferred responsibility for communications satellite management from DARPA to the Army. In February 1960, the three programs were combined into Project Advent, which was assigned to the Army in September that year. However, the Army would not have operational responsibility for military satellite communications, as the Defense Department was unifying the strategic communications systems of the Army, Navy, and Air Force as part of the Defense Communications System, operated by the Defense Communications Agency, which was established on 12 May 1960. Project Advent was considered to be a very ambitious program, with the first tranche of satellites launched into 5,600 mile inclined orbits by Air Force Ballistic Missile Division Atlas-Agena launch vehicles, with the second tranche launched into geostationary orbits by AFBMD Atlas-Centaurs. Given cost overruns and technological breakthroughs in smaller satellites, Project Advent was cancelled on 23 May 1962.\nThe Cuban Missile Crisis of October 1962 showed the need for direct, timely, and private communications between the leaders of the world's two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union. A duplex cable circuit (later augmented by a satellite hookup) between the two capitals known as the Moscow\u2013Washington hotline or \"Red Telephone\", became operational August 30, 1963. Program management and engineering for the \u201cHotline\u201d was assigned to DCA. The system continues intact today with direct links to more than 40 foreign leaders. Another direct result of the Cuban Missile Crisis was the creation of the Worldwide Military Command and Control System (WWMCCS) to enable national command authorities to exercise effective command and control of their widely dispersed forces.\nWhile DCA dealt with the communication crises of the Cold War, a \u201chot war\u201d was waging in Southeast Asia. America's commitment to South Vietnam led to the creation of a DCA Southeast Asia Region unit in 1964. DCA developed a plan to integrate the region's communication systems into a single modern network. The system would extend the commercial-quality communications provided by satellites and cables to the battlefield.\n1970s.\nDCA assumed responsibility for the Minimum Essential Emergency Communications Network (MEECN), a subsystem of WWMCCS, in December 1971. The MEECN was developed to assure the timely receipt of emergency action messages by worldwide U.S. nuclear forces under nuclear attack by the Soviet Union. DCA served as the MEECN system engineer and provided the broad engineering necessary to ensure a more survivable future network with compatible, interoperable, and secure subsystems.\nIn the late 1960s and early 1970s DCA, through its NMCS Technical Support Directorate, had responsibility for the technical support, planning, and system engineering for the four command centers then comprising the NMCS. These were the NMCC and the National Emergency Airborne Command Post (these funded by the USAF), the Alternate National Military Command Center (funded by the Army), and the National Emergency Command Post Afloat (funded by the Navy, and deactivated in the late 1960s). DCA performed the requirements collection and analysis, system engineering, funding estimation, subsystem project plan development, and establishment of the initial physical architecture for the expansion of the NMCC that was implemented by the Air Force in the 1970s.\nA DoD directive issued in the early 1970s appointed DCA as the system architect for all defense satellite communications. A major new DCA headquarters staff directorate, the Military Satellite Communications (MILSATCOM) System Office, was created to discharge the new role. As the system architect, DCA coordinated all defense satellite communications planning and programs to avoid duplication and ensure communications interoperability among the diverse systems serving the complete spectrum of defense needs.\n1980s.\nThe momentum of major improvements in national security telecommunications accelerated rapidly in the 1980s. Along with the unprecedented peacetime military build-up under the Reagan Administration came the proliferation of government-owned and government-leased networks and a high emphasis on interoperability among the military services. The pace of technological advancement brought with it new opportunities for system improvements.\nThe desire for interoperability in military communications did not originate in the 1980s. The need for communications systems that talked to each other within an individual military service and among the services together went back to the needs generated by the global proportions of WWII. Indeed, it was the lack of interoperability that drove the Eisenhower administration to seek one organization to pull together the services\u2019 disparate systems to speak with one voice \u2013 that organization was DCA. But interoperability still had yet to be achieved by the 1980s.\nIn April 1986, the assistant secretary of defense for command and control, communications and intelligence proposed the consolidation of DCA and the Joint Tactical Command, Control, and Communications Agency (JTC3A) in view of the \u201cclimate within DoD of streamlining and reducing overhead functions.\u201d The Joint Staff endorsed the proposal because it also provided some operational efficiency.\nIn January 1987, the secretary of defense approved the consolidation of DCA and JTC3A. A year later, DCA absorbed the Tri-Service Tactical Communications Joint Test Element and JTC3A Joint Operability Test Facility. DCA consolidated these organizations into a new organization in 1989, establishing the Joint Interoperability Test Command (JITC) at Fort Huachuca, Arizona. JITC provided the facility for DoD and private-sector interoperability compliance testing and certification.\nIn October 1989, the deputy secretary of defense established a DoD Corporate Information Management (CIM) Initiative to identify and implement management efficiencies in DoD information systems. DCA was given responsibility for implementing the CIM initiative, and its mission was expanded to include information support to the JCS and Office of the Secretary of Defense, tactical information system standards and interoperability, and White House information systems.\n1990s.\nIn 1990 and 1991, during Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm, a team of planners, engineers, and operators from DCA's Defense Network Systems Organization (DNSO) assisted in the design of a semi-fixed telecommunications system, the Southwest Asia Telecommunications (SATS) for use in support of the theater commander's operations. SATS included satellite, microwave, copper cable, and fiber optic links; Defense Data Network packet-switching nodes; Defense Switched Network (DSN) multi-function voice switches; and technical control facilities. At their peak, these systems included more than 100 satellite links.\nOn June 25, 1991, DCA underwent a major reorganization and was renamed the Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) to reflect its expanded role in implementing the DoD's CIM (Corporate Information Management) initiative and to clearly identify DISA as a combat support agency. DISA established the Center for Information Management to provide technical and program execution assistance to the assistant secretary of defense (C3I) and technical products and services to DoD and military components.\nDISA's role in DoD information management continued to expand with implementation of several Defense Management Report Decisions (DMRD ), most notably DMRD 918, in September 1992. DMRD 918 created the Defense Information Infrastructure (DII) and directed DISA to manage and consolidate the Services\u2019 and DoD's information processing centers into 16 mega-centers. During the 1990s, DISA fielded new systems to support the combatant commands. The Global Command and Control System (GCCS) and the Joint Chiefs\u2019 C4I (Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence) for the Warrior, and the Defense Message System were among the critical systems. GCCS was developed to replace WWMCCS, which had been in existence since the early 1960s.\n2000s.\nWith the new century, DISA faced even greater challenges as a DoD service provider. Preserving radio spectrum, information assurance, ensuring interoperability, and establishing secure wireless links were just some of the tasks performed by the agency. Perhaps the most significant achievement of the agency in 2001 was its immediate response in the aftermath of the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. DISA justified $300 million in supplemental funds to support the Global War on Terrorism by providing critical communications paths and command and control enhancements for warfighters.\nIn the 18 months between September 2001 and April 2003, DISA supported the exponential use and increased capacity of information systems. The Defense Switched Network (DSN) infrastructure increased 400 percent. The Secret Internet Protocol (IP) Data Service (formerly known as the SIPRNet) capacity increased 292 percent. Sensitive but Unclassified Internet Protocol (IP) Data Service (formerly known as NIPRNet) capacity increased 509 percent. The Defense Video System Global (Secure) increased 1,150 percent. Satellite bandwidth increased 800 percent. The Enhanced Mobile Satellite Service (EMSS) capacity increased 300 percent, and usage increased 3,000 percent. EMSS allowed Special Operations forces to even call in air strikes from horseback in Afghanistan by permitting instantaneous communications in areas without any infrastructure whatsoever.\nFor Operation Iraqi Freedom in 2003, DISA provided 30 times more bandwidth to a 45-percent smaller force than in Operation Desert Storm in 1991. DISA facilitated multiple enhancements to the nation's preeminent joint command-and-control system and provided a real-time battle space picture.\nAfter the previous consolidation of 194 data-processing centers in the 1990s into 16 computing mega-centers, DISA further reduced the number of mega-centers from 16 to six.\nStarting in 2003, DISA managed the six-year, $326 million effort to completely modernize presidential communications \u2014 the largest such initiative in the 61-year history of the White House Communications Agency. The \u201cPioneer Program\u201d transformed presidential communications by employing net-centric concepts to put voice, video, and data at the president's fingertips on an around-the-clock basis.\nThe Global Information Grid Bandwidth Expansion (GIG-BE) Program was a major DoD net-centric transformational initiative executed by DISA. The $877 million program was the largest DoD information technology transport structure ever built. GIG-BE created a ubiquitous \"bandwidth-available\" environment to improve national security intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance, information assurance, and command and control at locations worldwide. On Dec. 20, 2005, the GIG-BE program achieved the milestone of full operational capability at all of the almost 100 Joint Staff-approved sites.\n2010s.\nDISA's 50 years of service as the Defense Communications Agency and later the Defense Information Systems Agency was recognized May 12, 2010, during an anniversary celebration at Seven Skyline Place, Falls Church, Va. Army LTG Carroll F. Pollett, the DISA director at the time, led the celebration of the agency's storied past.\nFrom 2008 through 2010, DISA worked directly with the commander, United States Central Command (USCENTCOM), to design and implement a high-capacity, strategic communication network into an active Theater of Operations, ensuring reliable communications for intra-theater mission partners and to national leadership. Prior to this installation, the coalition forces in Afghanistan were dependent on satellite communications and tactical microwave links, which had limited bandwidth capacity and induced significant delay.\nDISA operated and defended the Global Information Grid (GIG), providing information capabilities with a reach from the White House to forces at the tactical edge. DISA supported execution of military operations while simultaneously supporting peacekeeping, humanitarian assistance, and disaster-relief missions in multiple theaters around the globe. During a 4-month period in 2011, DISA provided support to an unprecedented six simultaneous operations: Operation NEW DAWN in Iraq; Operation ENDURING FREEDOM in Afghanistan; Operation UNIFIED RESPONSE in Haiti; Operation ODYSSEY DAWN and NATO Operation UNIFIED PROTECTOR in Libya, Operation TOMODACHI in Japan; and DISA's global cyber operations in support of United States Cyber Command (USCYBERCOM).\nFrom January to July 2011, DISA relocated more than 4,500 military and civilian employees and supporting onsite contractors, 700 workstation suites with 11,000 pieces of IT equipment, and 58,000 square feet of lab equipment in accordance with the Base Realignment and Closure legislation of 2005. The relocation to Fort George G. Meade, MD., consolidated DISA headquarters elements that were housed in multiple locations in Arlington and Falls Church, Va. In April 2011, DISA held a ribbon cutting ceremony officially opening the new headquarters complex.\n2020s.\nComputer systems controlled by DISA were hacked in the summer of 2019, and was reported in February 2020, exposing the personal data of about 200,000 people including names and social security numbers.\nThe United States Army is seeking to reduce its NIPRNet footprint by 2023 and its SIPRnet footprint by 2024.\nServices.\nDISA offers the following services:\nCommand and Control.\nCommand and Control (C2) systems provide the U.S. military commander with the information to make effective decisions and provide the warfighter the capability to access the information necessary to complete their mission. The C2 portfolio contains the Global Command and Control System - Joint (GCCS-J), Multinational Information Sharing (MNIS), Joint Planning and Execution Services (JPES), and Personal Digital Assistant 184 (PDA-184).\nPDA-184.\nThe DISA PDA-184 software application implements a fully compliant MIL-STD-188-184A data controller. It provides reliable data communications over noisy, low bandwidth channels to support chat, file transfer, and email services via an easy-to-use graphical user interface. The application supports multiple bands and waveforms, including integrated waveform (IW), legacy ultra-high frequency (UHF) satellite communications (SATCOM), UHF line of sight (LOS), very high frequency (VHF), high frequency (HF), and extremely high frequency (EHF) SATCOM. PDA-184 is provided without charge to all combatant commands (CCMDs) / services / agencies (CC/S/A).\nMNIS \u2013 Applications.\nCENTRIXS.\nCENTRIXS is the Combatant Commander's network for coalition. CENTRIXS is designed to be a global, interoperable, interconnected, inexpensive, and easy-to use system to share intelligence and operations information through reliable communications connectivity, data manipulation, and automated processes. The CENTRIXS environment is a combination of network and applications services. CENTRIXS provides a secured exchange of intelligence and operational information through reliable communication networks There are 40+ CENTRIXS networks/communities of interest (COIs) providing selected centralized services including: Active Directory/DNS Roots, VoIP, WSUS and Anti-Virus Definitions, and at least 80 countries plus NATO nations participate in the various CENTRIXS networks/COIs.\nPegasus/Griffin.\nPegasus/Griffin is a multinationally-developed, managed and resourced collection of networks and services that provides information sharing among the 5-Eyes national classified (SECRET level) networks and C2 systems. Griffin enables participating nations to plan, implement and execute multinational planning and operations from the strategic to tactical headquarters level. It permits users to share SECRET REL information from their national C2 system workstations.\nCFBLNET.\nThe Combined Federated Battle Laboratories Network (CFBLNet) is a coalition RDT&amp;E (Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation) environment with Combined Communications-Electronics Board (CCEB) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and other charter nations/organizations. CFBLNet leverages existing CCEB, NATO, and other national laboratories and test beds to support a wide range of coalition ISTAR (Intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance) experimentation and interoperability testing. As a combined environment and network, members have equal say in its use and management, yet specific initiatives may be configured among any number of participants. CFBLNet members respect sovereign and intellectual property rights of activities conducted on the network. CFBLNet is primarily a fee for service activity. and system injector.\nComputing.\nDISA's computing services portfolio includes mainframe hosting, application monitoring, and server hosting and virtualization. DISA manages all the partner data, hardware components, software, and labor.\nContracting.\nDISA purchases telecommunications and information technology (IT) products and services for the U.S. military using a variety of contract vehicles.\nEnterprise Engineering.\nEnterprise Engineering refers to the Global Information Grid (a.k.a. the GIG). DISA plans, designs, constructs, and analyzes the effectiveness of the U.S. military's cyberspace and establishes the technological standards to make the GIG secure and reliable. The enterprise engineering portfolio includes the Joint Communication Simulation System (JCSS), GIG Technical Guidance for Information Technology Standards, and Interoperability Enhancement Process/iSmart (IEP/iSmart).\nEnterprise Services.\nEnterprise services provided by DISA to its mission partners fall under three categories: Applications, Infrastructure, and Identity and Access Management.\nApplications\nInfrastructure\nIdentity and Access Management\nInformation Assurance.\nDISA's Information Assurance services serve the purpose of:\nNetwork Services.\nThe Defense Information Systems Network (DISN) is a worldwide-protected telecommunications network that enables the exchange of information in an interoperable and global space, partitioned by security demands, transmission requirements, and geographic needs of targeted end-user communities.\nNowadays, DISA maintains the following network services, to support diverse telecommunication requirements for organizations focused on, but not limited to, the Department of Defense (DoD):\nData:\nVoice:\nVideo:\nMessaging:\nWireless:\nSatellite:&lt;br&gt;\nProviding access to DISN through\nSpectrum Management.\nThrough the Defense Spectrum Organization (DSO), DISA provides commanders direct operational support, including electromagnetic battlespace planning, deconfliction, and joint spectrum interference resolution. DSO services include:\nTesting.\nDISA's Joint Interoperability Test Command (JITC) provides testing and joint certification for Department of Defense net-centric systems.\nMilitary Unit Decorations.\nThe unit awards below are issued to Headquarters, Defense Information Systems Agency and subordinate units unless otherwise noted.\nMembers of military-specific units (i.e., Army, Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force) assigned or attached, even if they are under the operational control, are not eligible for the Joint Meritorious Unit Award (JMUA), but retain eligibility for unit awards from their respective military service department.\nMembers must have been permanently assigned or attached by official orders to the agency for 30 or more days during the designated award period. Service members individually assigned or attached (including temporary duty or temporary additional duty) status is determined by official orders that specify the agency as the duty unit. Some military services allow the \u201ctemporary-wear\u201d of past unit citations when assigned to the organization. The JMUA is an exception to this rule and is not authorized for temporary wear.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52556", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52556", "title": "United States Federal Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "52557", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52557", "title": "Boolean lattice", "text": ""}
{"id": "52558", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52558", "title": "W.V. Quine", "text": ""}
{"id": "52559", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52559", "title": "W Quine", "text": ""}
{"id": "52561", "revid": "205121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52561", "title": "W. V. O. Quine", "text": ""}
{"id": "52562", "revid": "205121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52562", "title": "Rosh Hashannah", "text": ""}
{"id": "52563", "revid": "50279579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52563", "title": "United States Department of Justice", "text": "U.S. federal executive department\nThe United States Department of Justice (DOJ) is an executive department of the United States federal government that oversees the domestic enforcement of federal laws and the administration of justice. It is equivalent to the justice or interior ministries of other countries. The department is headed by the U.S. attorney general, who reports directly to the president of the United States and is a member of the president's Cabinet. Pam Bondi has served as U.S. attorney general since February 4, 2025.\nThe Justice Department contains most of the United States' federal law enforcement agencies, including the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the U.S. Marshals Service, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, the Drug Enforcement Administration, and the Federal Bureau of Prisons. The department also has eight divisions of lawyers who represent the federal government in litigation: the Criminal, Civil, Antitrust, Tax, Civil Rights, Environment and Natural Resources, National Security, and Justice Management Divisions. The DOJ includes the U.S. Attorneys' offices for each of the 94 U.S. federal judicial districts.\nThe U.S. Congress created the Justice Department in 1870, during the Ulysses S. Grant administration. Its functions originally date to 1789, when Congress created the office of the Attorney General.\nHistory.\nThe office of the attorney general was established by the Judiciary Act of 1789 as a part-time job for one person, but grew with the bureaucracy. At one time, the attorney general gave legal advice to the U.S. Congress, as well as the president; however, in 1819, the attorney general began advising Congress alone to ensure a manageable workload. Until 1853, the salary of the attorney general was set by statute at less than the amount paid to other Cabinet members. Early attorneys general supplemented their salaries by running private law practices, often arguing cases before the courts as attorneys for paying litigants. The lightness of the office is exemplified by Edward Bates (1793\u20131869), attorney general under President Abraham Lincoln (1861\u20131864). Bates had only a small operation, with a staff of just six. Their main function was to generate legal opinions at the request of Lincoln and cabinet members and to handle occasional cases before the Supreme Court. However, Lincoln's cabinet was full of experienced lawyers who seldom felt the need to ask for his opinions. In addition, Bates had no authority over U.S. Attorneys across the country. The federal court system was handled by the Department of the Interior, and the Department of the Treasury handled claims. Most of the opinions turned out by Bates's office were of minor importance. Lincoln gave him no special assignments and did not seek his advice on Supreme Court appointments. Bates did have an opportunity to comment on general policy as a cabinet member with a strong political base, but he seldom spoke up.\nFollowing unsuccessful efforts in 1830 and 1846 to make attorney general a full-time job, in 1867, the U.S. House Committee on the Judiciary, led by Congressman William Lawrence, conducted an inquiry into the creation of a \"law department\" headed by the attorney general and also composed of the various department solicitors and United States attorneys. On February 19, 1868, Lawrence introduced a bill in Congress to create the Department of Justice. President Ulysses S. Grant signed the bill into law on June 22, 1870.\nThe \"Act to Establish the Department of Justice\" drastically increased the attorney general's responsibilities to include the supervision of all United States attorneys, formerly under the Department of the Interior, the prosecution of all federal crimes, and the representation of the United States in all court actions, barring the use of private attorneys by the federal government. The law also created the office of Solicitor General to supervise and conduct government litigation in the Supreme Court of the United States.\nThe organization of the department was a part of the general effort to control patronage, retrenchment in the workforce, and to improve the status of lawyers.\nGrant appointed Amos T. Akerman as attorney general and Benjamin H. Bristow as America's first solicitor general the same week that Congress created the Department of Justice. The Department's immediate function was to preserve civil rights. It set about fighting against domestic terrorist groups who had been using both violence and litigation to oppose the 13th, 14th, and 15th Amendments to the Constitution.\nBoth Akerman and Bristow used the Department of Justice to vigorously prosecute Ku Klux Klan members in the early 1870s. In the first few years of Grant's first term in office, there were 1000 indictments against Klan members, with over 550 convictions from the Department of Justice. By 1871, there were 3000 indictments and 600 convictions, with most only serving brief sentences, while the ringleaders were imprisoned for up to five years in the federal penitentiary in Albany, New York. The result was a dramatic decrease in violence in the South. Akerman gave credit to Grant and told a friend that no one was \"better\" or \"stronger\" than Grant when it came to prosecuting terrorists. George H. Williams, who succeeded Akerman in December 1871, continued to prosecute the Klan throughout 1872 until the spring of 1873, during Grant's second term in office. Williams then placed a moratorium on Klan prosecutions partially because the Justice Department, inundated by cases involving the Klan, did not have the manpower to continue prosecutions.\nWith the passage of the Interstate Commerce Act in 1887, the federal government took on some law enforcement responsibilities, and the Department of Justice was tasked with performing these.\nIn 1884, control of federal prisons was transferred to the new department, from the Department of the Interior. New facilities were built, including the penitentiary at Leavenworth in 1895, and a facility for women located in West Virginia, at Alderson was established in 1924.\nIn 1933, President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued an executive order which gave the Department of Justice responsibility for the \"functions of prosecuting in the courts of the United States claims and demands by, and offsenses [\"sic\"] against, the Government of the United States, and of defending claims and demands against the Government, and of supervising the work of United States attorneys, marshals, and clerks in connection therewith, now exercised by any agency or officer...\"\nDuring the second Trump presidency, the Department's \"independence and impartiality has shattered\". The department has been used to target Trump's political opponents. Trump reportedly demanded $230 million in compensation from the DOJ and the department ended an investigation into Tom Homan receiving $50,000 which have raised ethical concerns. As part of Republican Party efforts to disrupt voting after the 2024 United States presidential election, the DOJ sought voter roll data from over 30 states and initiated the 2025 Texas redistricting.\nHeadquarters.\nThe U.S. Department of Justice building was completed in 1935 from a design by Milton Bennett Medary. Upon Medary's death in 1929, the other partners of his Philadelphia firm Zantzinger, Borie and Medary took over the project. On a lot bordered by Constitution and Pennsylvania Avenues and Ninth and Tenth Streets, Northwest, it holds over of space.\nVarious efforts, none entirely successful, have been made to determine the original intended meaning of the Latin motto appearing on the Department of Justice seal, \"Qui Pro Domina Justitia Sequitur\". It is not even known exactly when the original version of the DOJ seal itself was adopted, or when the motto first appeared on the seal. The most authoritative opinion of the DOJ suggests that the motto refers to the Attorney General (and thus, by extension, to the Department of Justice) \"who prosecutes on behalf of justice (or the Lady Justice)\".\nThe motto's conception of the prosecutor (or government attorney) as being the servant of justice itself finds concrete expression in a similarly-ordered English-language inscription (\"THE UNITED STATES WINS ITS POINT WHENEVER JUSTICE IS DONE ITS CITIZENS IN THE COURTS\") in the above-door paneling in the ceremonial rotunda anteroom just outside the Attorney General's office in the Department of Justice Main Building in Washington, D.C. The building was renamed in honor of former Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy in 2001. It is sometimes referred to as \"Main Justice\".\nOrganization.\nDivisions.\nThe Justice Department also had a War Division during World War II. It was created in 1942 and disestablished in 1945.\nLaw enforcement agencies.\nSeveral federal law enforcement agencies are administered by the Department of Justice:\nOther offices and programs.\nIn March 2003, the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service was abolished and its functions transferred to the United States Department of Homeland Security. The Executive Office for Immigration Review and the Board of Immigration Appeals, which review decisions made by government officials under Immigration and Nationality law, remain under jurisdiction of the Department of Justice. Similarly the Office of Domestic Preparedness left the Justice Department for the Department of Homeland Security, but only for executive purposes. The Office of Domestic Preparedness is still centralized within the Department of Justice, since its personnel are still officially employed within the Department of Justice.\nIn 2003, the Department of Justice created LifeAndLiberty.gov, a website that supported the USA PATRIOT Act. It was criticized by government watchdog groups for its alleged violation of U.S. Code Title 18 Section 1913, which forbids money appropriated by Congress to be used to lobby in favor of any law, actual or proposed. The website has since been taken offline.\nOn October 5, 2021, U.S. Deputy Attorney General Lisa Monaco announced the formation of a \"Cryptocurrency Enforcement Team\" during the Aspen Cyber Summit.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52564", "revid": "44419887", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52564", "title": "Partial differential equation", "text": "Type of differential equation\nIn mathematics, a partial differential equation (PDE) is an equation which involves a multivariable function and one or more of its partial derivatives.\nThe function is often thought of as an \"unknown\" that solves the equation, similar to how x is thought of as an unknown number solving, e.g., an algebraic equation like \"x\"2 \u2212 3\"x\" + 2 = 0. However, it is usually impossible to write down explicit formulae for solutions of partial differential equations. There is correspondingly a vast amount of modern mathematical and scientific research on methods to numerically approximate solutions of certain partial differential equations using computers. Partial differential equations also occupy a large sector of pure mathematical research, in which the usual questions are, broadly speaking, on the identification of general qualitative features of solutions of various partial differential equations, such as existence, uniqueness, regularity and stability. Among the many open questions are the existence and smoothness of solutions to the Navier\u2013Stokes equations, named as one of the Millennium Prize Problems in 2000.\nPartial differential equations are ubiquitous in mathematically oriented scientific fields, such as physics and engineering. For instance, they are foundational in the modern scientific understanding of sound, heat, diffusion, electrostatics, electrodynamics, thermodynamics, fluid dynamics, elasticity, general relativity, and quantum mechanics (Schr\u00f6dinger equation, Pauli equation etc.). They also arise from many purely mathematical considerations, such as differential geometry and the calculus of variations; among other notable applications, they are the fundamental tool in the proof of the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture from geometric topology.\nPartly due to this variety of sources, there is a wide spectrum of different types of partial differential equations, where the meaning of a solution depends on the context of the problem, and methods have been developed for dealing with many of the individual equations which arise. As such, it is usually acknowledged that there is no \"universal theory\" of partial differential equations, with specialist knowledge being somewhat divided between several essentially distinct subfields.\nOrdinary differential equations can be viewed as a subclass of partial differential equations, corresponding to functions of a single variable. Stochastic partial differential equations and nonlocal equations are, as of 2020, particularly widely studied extensions of the \"PDE\" notion. More classical topics, on which there is still much active research, include elliptic and parabolic partial differential equations, fluid mechanics, Boltzmann equations, and dispersive partial differential equations.\nIntroduction.\nA function \"u\"(\"x\", \"y\", \"z\") of three variables is \"harmonic\" or \"a solution of the Laplace equation\" if it satisfies the condition\nformula_1\nSuch functions were widely studied in the 19th century due to their relevance for classical mechanics, for example the equilibrium temperature distribution of a homogeneous solid is a harmonic function. If explicitly given a function, it is usually a matter of straightforward computation to check whether or not it is harmonic. For instance\nformula_2 and formula_3\nare both harmonic while\nformula_4\nis not. It may be surprising that the two examples of harmonic functions are of such strikingly different form. This is a reflection of the fact that they are \"not\", in any immediate way, special cases of a \"general solution formula\" of the Laplace equation. This is in striking contrast to the case of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) roughly similar to the Laplace equation, with the aim of many introductory textbooks being to find algorithms leading to general solution formulas. For the Laplace equation, as for a large number of partial differential equations, such solution formulas fail to exist.\nThe nature of this failure can be seen more concretely in the case of the following PDE: for a function \"v\"(\"x\", \"y\") of two variables, consider the equation\nformula_5\nIt can be directly checked that any function v of the form \"v\"(\"x\", \"y\") = \"f\"(\"x\") + \"g\"(\"y\"), for any single-variable functions f and g whatsoever, will satisfy this condition. This is far beyond the choices available in ODE solution formulas, which typically allow the free choice of some numbers. In the study of PDEs, one generally has the free choice of functions.\nThe nature of this choice varies from PDE to PDE. To understand it for any given equation, \"existence and uniqueness theorems\" are usually important organizational principles. In many introductory textbooks, the role of existence and uniqueness theorems for ODE can be somewhat opaque; the existence half is usually unnecessary, since one can directly check any proposed solution formula, while the uniqueness half is often only present in the background in order to ensure that a proposed solution formula is as general as possible. By contrast, for PDE, existence and uniqueness theorems are often the only means by which one can navigate through the plethora of different solutions at hand. For this reason, they are also fundamental when carrying out a purely numerical simulation, as one must have an understanding of what data is to be prescribed by the user and what is to be left to the computer to calculate.\nTo discuss such existence and uniqueness theorems, it is necessary to be precise about the domain of the \"unknown function\". Otherwise, speaking only in terms such as \"a function of two variables\", it is impossible to meaningfully formulate the results. That is, the domain of the unknown function must be regarded as part of the structure of the PDE itself.\nThe following provides two classic examples of such existence and uniqueness theorems. Even though the two PDE in question are so similar, there is a striking difference in behavior: for the first PDE, one has the free prescription of a single function, while for the second PDE, one has the free prescription of two functions.\nEven more phenomena are possible. For instance, the following PDE, arising naturally in the field of differential geometry, illustrates an example where there is a simple and completely explicit solution formula, but with the free choice of only three numbers and not even one function.\nIn contrast to the earlier examples, this PDE is nonlinear, owing to the square roots and the squares. A linear PDE is one such that, if it is homogeneous, the sum of any two solutions is also a solution, and any constant multiple of any solution is also a solution.\nDefinition.\nA partial differential equation is an equation that involves an unknown function of formula_9 variables and (some of) its partial derivatives. That is, for the unknown function\nformula_10\nof variables formula_11 belonging to the open subset formula_12 of formula_13, the formula_14-order partial differential equation is defined as \nformula_15\nwhere\nformula_16\nand formula_17 is the partial derivative operator.\nNotation.\nWhen writing PDEs, it is common to denote partial derivatives using subscripts. For example:\nformula_18\nIn the general situation that u is a function of n variables, then \"u\"\"i\" denotes the first partial derivative relative to the i-th input, \"u\"\"ij\" denotes the second partial derivative relative to the i-th and j-th inputs, and so on.\nThe Greek letter \u0394 denotes the Laplace operator; if u is a function of n variables, then\nformula_19\nIn the physics literature, the Laplace operator is often denoted by \u22072; in the mathematics literature, \u22072\"u\" may also denote the Hessian matrix of u.\nClassification.\nLinear and nonlinear equations.\nA PDE is called linear if it is linear in the unknown and its derivatives. For example, for a function u of x and y, a second order linear PDE is of the form\nformula_20\nwhere \"ai\" and \"f\" are functions of the independent variables x and y only. (Often the mixed-partial derivatives \"uxy\" and \"uyx\" will be equated, but this is not required for the discussion of linearity.)\nIf the \"ai\" are constants (independent of x and y) then the PDE is called linear with constant coefficients. If \"f\" is zero everywhere then the linear PDE is homogeneous, otherwise it is inhomogeneous. (This is separate from asymptotic homogenization, which studies the effects of high-frequency oscillations in the coefficients upon solutions to PDEs.)\nNearest to linear PDEs are semi-linear PDEs, where only the highest order derivatives appear as linear terms, with coefficients that are functions of the independent variables. The lower order derivatives and the unknown function may appear arbitrarily. For example, a general second order semi-linear PDE in two variables is\nformula_21\nIn a quasilinear PDE the highest order derivatives likewise appear only as linear terms, but with coefficients possibly functions of the unknown and lower-order derivatives:\nformula_22\nMany of the fundamental PDEs in physics are quasilinear, such as the Einstein equations of general relativity and the Navier\u2013Stokes equations describing fluid motion.\nA PDE without any linearity properties is called fully nonlinear, and possesses nonlinearities on one or more of the highest-order derivatives. An example is the Monge\u2013Amp\u00e8re equation, which arises in differential geometry.\nSecond order equations.\nThe elliptic/parabolic/hyperbolic classification provides a guide to appropriate initial- and boundary conditions and to the smoothness of the solutions. Assuming \"uxy\" = \"uyx\", the general linear second-order PDE in two independent variables has the form\nformula_23\nwhere the coefficients A, B, C... may depend upon x and y. If \"A\"2 + \"B\"2 + \"C\"2 &gt; 0 over a region of the xy-plane, the PDE is second-order in that region. This form is analogous to the equation for a conic section:\nformula_24\nMore precisely, replacing \u2202\"x\" by X, and likewise for other variables (formally this is done by a Fourier transform), converts a constant-coefficient PDE into a polynomial of the same degree, with the terms of the highest degree (a homogeneous polynomial, here a quadratic form) being most significant for the classification.\nJust as one classifies conic sections and quadratic forms into parabolic, hyperbolic, and elliptic based on the discriminant \"B\"2 \u2212 4\"AC\", the same can be done for a second-order PDE at a given point. However, the discriminant in a PDE is given by \"B\"2 \u2212 \"AC\" due to the convention of the xy term being 2\"B\" rather than B; formally, the discriminant (of the associated quadratic form) is (2\"B\")2 \u2212 4\"AC\" = 4(\"B\"2 \u2212 \"AC\"), with the factor of 4 dropped for simplicity.\nIf there are n independent variables \"x\"1, \"x\"2 , \u2026, \"x\"\"n\", a general linear partial differential equation of second order has the form\nformula_29\nThe classification depends upon the signature of the eigenvalues of the coefficient matrix \"a\"\"i\",\"j\".\nThe theory of elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic equations have been studied for centuries, largely centered around or based upon the standard examples of the Laplace equation, the heat equation, and the wave equation. \nHowever, the classification only depends on linearity of the second-order terms and is therefore applicable to semi- and quasilinear PDEs as well. The basic types also extend to hybrids such as the Euler\u2013Tricomi equation; varying from elliptic to hyperbolic for different regions of the domain, as well as higher-order PDEs, but such knowledge is more specialized.\nSystems of first-order equations and characteristic surfaces.\nThe classification of partial differential equations can be extended to systems of first-order equations, where the unknown u is now a vector with m components, and the coefficient matrices A\u03bd are m by m matrices for \"\u03bd\" = 1, 2, \u2026, \"n\". The partial differential equation takes the form\nformula_30\nwhere the coefficient matrices A\u03bd and the vector B may depend upon x and u. If a hypersurface S is given in the implicit form\nformula_31\nwhere \u03c6 has a non-zero gradient, then S is a characteristic surface for the operator L at a given point if the characteristic form vanishes:\nformula_32\nThe geometric interpretation of this condition is as follows: if data for u are prescribed on the surface S, then it may be possible to determine the normal derivative of u on S from the differential equation. If the data on S and the differential equation determine the normal derivative of u on S, then S is non-characteristic. If the data on S and the differential equation \"do not\" determine the normal derivative of u on S, then the surface is characteristic, and the differential equation restricts the data on S: the differential equation is \"internal\" to S.\nAnalytical solutions.\nSeparation of variables.\nLinear PDEs can be reduced to systems of ordinary differential equations by the important technique of separation of variables. This technique rests on a feature of solutions to differential equations: if one can find any solution that solves the equation and satisfies the boundary conditions, then it is \"the\" solution (this also applies to ODEs). We assume as an ansatz that the dependence of a solution on the parameters space and time can be written as a product of terms that each depend on a single parameter, and then see if this can be made to solve the problem.\nIn the method of separation of variables, one reduces a PDE to a PDE in fewer variables, which is an ordinary differential equation if in one variable \u2013 these are in turn easier to solve.\nThis is possible for simple PDEs, which are called separable partial differential equations, and the domain is generally a rectangle (a product of intervals). Separable PDEs correspond to diagonal matrices \u2013 thinking of \"the value for fixed x\" as a coordinate, each coordinate can be understood separately.\nThis generalizes to the method of characteristics, and is also used in integral transforms.\nMethod of characteristics.\nThe characteristic surface in \"n\" = \"2\"-dimensional space is called a characteristic curve. \nIn special cases, one can find characteristic curves on which the first-order PDE reduces to an ODE \u2013 changing coordinates in the domain to straighten these curves allows separation of variables, and is called the method of characteristics.\nMore generally, applying the method to first-order PDEs in higher dimensions, one may find characteristic surfaces.\nIntegral transform.\nAn integral transform may transform the PDE to a simpler one, in particular, a separable PDE. This corresponds to diagonalizing an operator.\nAn important example of this is Fourier analysis, which diagonalizes the heat equation using the eigenbasis of sinusoidal waves.\nIf the domain is finite or periodic, an infinite sum of solutions such as a Fourier series is appropriate, but an integral of solutions such as a Fourier integral is generally required for infinite domains. The solution for a point source for the heat equation given above is an example of the use of a Fourier integral.\nChange of variables.\nOften a PDE can be reduced to a simpler form with a known solution by a suitable change of variables. For example, the Black\u2013Scholes equation\nformula_33\nis reducible to the heat equation\nformula_34\nby the change of variables\nformula_35\nFundamental solution.\nInhomogeneous equations can often be solved (for constant coefficient PDEs, always be solved) by finding the fundamental solution (the solution for a point source formula_36), then taking the convolution with the boundary conditions to get the solution.\nThis is analogous in signal processing to understanding a filter by its impulse response.\nSuperposition principle.\nThe superposition principle applies to any linear system, including linear systems of PDEs. A common visualization of this concept is the interaction of two waves in phase being combined to result in a greater amplitude, for example sin \"x\" + sin \"x\" = 2 sin \"x\". The same principle can be observed in PDEs where the solutions may be real or complex and additive. If \"u\"1 and \"u\"2 are solutions of linear PDE in some function space R, then \"u\" = \"c\"1\"u\"1 + \"c\"2\"u\"2 with any constants \"c\"1 and \"c\"2 are also a solution of that PDE in the same function space.\nMethods for non-linear equations.\nThere are no generally applicable analytical methods to solve nonlinear PDEs. Still, existence and uniqueness results (such as the Cauchy\u2013Kowalevski theorem) are often possible, as are proofs of important qualitative and quantitative properties of solutions (getting these results is a major part of analysis).\nNevertheless, some techniques can be used for several types of equations. The h-principle is the most powerful method to solve underdetermined equations. The Riquier\u2013Janet theory is an effective method for obtaining information about many analytic overdetermined systems.\nThe method of characteristics can be used in some very special cases to solve nonlinear partial differential equations.\nIn some cases, a PDE can be solved via perturbation analysis in which the solution is considered to be a correction to an equation with a known solution. Alternatives are numerical analysis techniques from simple finite difference schemes to the more mature multigrid and finite element methods. Many interesting problems in science and engineering are solved in this way using computers, sometimes high performance supercomputers.\nLie group method.\nFrom 1870 Sophus Lie's work put the theory of differential equations on a more satisfactory foundation. He showed that the integration theories of the older mathematicians can, by the introduction of what are now called Lie groups, be referred, to a common source; and that ordinary differential equations which admit the same infinitesimal transformations present comparable difficulties of integration. He also emphasized the subject of transformations of contact.\nA general approach to solving PDEs uses the symmetry property of differential equations, the continuous infinitesimal transformations of solutions to solutions (Lie theory). Continuous group theory, Lie algebras and differential geometry are used to understand the structure of linear and nonlinear partial differential equations for generating integrable equations, to find its Lax pairs, recursion operators, B\u00e4cklund transform and finally finding exact analytic solutions to the PDE.\nSymmetry methods have been recognized to study differential equations arising in mathematics, physics, engineering, and many other disciplines.\nSemi-analytical methods.\nThe Adomian decomposition method, the Lyapunov artificial small parameter method, and his homotopy perturbation method are all special cases of the more general homotopy analysis method. These are series expansion methods, and except for the Lyapunov method, are independent of small physical parameters as compared to the well known perturbation theory, thus giving these methods greater flexibility and solution generality.\nNumerical solutions.\nThe three most widely used numerical methods to solve PDEs are the finite element method (FEM), finite volume methods (FVM) and finite difference methods (FDM), as well other kind of methods called meshfree methods, which were made to solve problems where the aforementioned methods are limited. The FEM has a prominent position among these methods and especially its exceptionally efficient higher-order version hp-FEM. Other hybrid versions of FEM and Meshfree methods include the generalized finite element method (GFEM), extended finite element method (XFEM), spectral finite element method (SFEM), meshfree finite element method, discontinuous Galerkin finite element method (DGFEM), element-free Galerkin method (EFGM), interpolating element-free Galerkin method (IEFGM), etc.\nFinite element method.\nThe finite element method (FEM) (its practical application often known as finite element analysis (FEA)) is a numerical technique for approximating solutions of partial differential equations (PDE) as well as of integral equations using a finite set of functions. The solution approach is based either on eliminating the differential equation completely (steady state problems), or rendering the PDE into an approximating system of ordinary differential equations, which are then numerically integrated using standard techniques such as Euler's method, Runge\u2013Kutta, etc.\nFinite difference method.\nFinite-difference methods are numerical methods for approximating the solutions to differential equations using finite difference equations to approximate derivatives.\nFinite volume method.\nSimilar to the finite difference method or finite element method, values are calculated at discrete places on a meshed geometry. \"Finite volume\" refers to the small volume surrounding each node point on a mesh. In the finite volume method, surface integrals in a partial differential equation that contain a divergence term are converted to volume integrals, using the divergence theorem. These terms are then evaluated as fluxes at the surfaces of each finite volume. Because the flux entering a given volume is identical to that leaving the adjacent volume, these methods conserve mass by design.\nWeak solutions.\nWeak solutions are functions that satisfy the PDE, yet in other meanings than regular sense. The meaning for this term may differ with context, and one of the most commonly used definitions is based on the notion of distributions.\nAn example for the definition of a weak solution is as follows: \nConsider the boundary-value problem given by:\nformula_37 \nwhere formula_38 denotes a second-order partial differential operator in divergence form. \nWe say a formula_39 is a weak solution if\nformula_40 for every formula_41, which can be derived by a formal integral by parts.\nAn example for a weak solution is as follows:\nformula_42 is a weak solution satisfying \nformula_43 in distributional sense, as formally, formula_44\nTheoretical studies.\nIn pure mathematics, the theoretical studies of PDEs focus on the criteria for a solution to exist and the properties of a solution while finding its formula is often secondary.\nWell-posedness.\nWell-posedness refers to a common schematic package of information about a PDE. To say that a PDE is well-posed, one must have:\nThis is, by the necessity of being applicable to several different PDE, somewhat vague. The requirement of \"continuity\", in particular, is ambiguous, since there are usually many inequivalent means by which it can be rigorously defined. It is, however, somewhat unusual to study a PDE without specifying a way in which it is well-posed.\nRegularity.\nRegularity refers to the integrability and differentiability of weak solutions, which can often be represented by Sobolev spaces. \nThis problem arise due to the difficulty in searching for classical solutions. Researchers often tend to find weak solutions at first and then find out whether it is smooth enough to be qualified as a classical solution.\nResults from functional analysis are often used in this field of study.\nSee also.\nSome common PDEs\nTypes of boundary conditions\nVarious topics\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52565", "revid": "40331518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52565", "title": "Partial derivative", "text": "Derivative of a function with multiple variables\nIn mathematics, a partial derivative of a function of several variables is its derivative with respect to one of those variables, with the others held constant (as opposed to the total derivative, in which all variables are allowed to vary). Partial derivatives are used in vector calculus and differential geometry.\nThe partial derivative of a function formula_1 with respect to the variable formula_2 is variously denoted by\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_3, formula_4, formula_5, formula_6, formula_7, formula_8, or formula_9.\nIt can be thought of as the rate of change of the function in the formula_2-direction.\nSometimes, for the partial derivative of formula_11 with respect to formula_2 is denoted as formula_13 Since a partial derivative generally has the same arguments as the original function, its functional dependence is sometimes explicitly signified by the notation, such as in:\nformula_14\nThe symbol used to denote partial derivatives is \u2202. One of the first known uses of this symbol in mathematics is by Marquis de Condorcet from 1770, who used it for partial differences. The modern partial derivative notation was created by Adrien-Marie Legendre (1786), although he later abandoned it; Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi reintroduced the symbol in 1841.\nDefinition.\nLike ordinary derivatives, the partial derivative is defined as a limit. Let U be an open subset of formula_15 and formula_16 a function. The partial derivative of f at the point formula_17 with respect to the i-th variable \"x\"\"i\" is defined as\nformula_18\nWhere formula_19 is the unit vector of i-th variable \"x\"\"i\". Even if all partial derivatives formula_20 exist at a given point a, the function need not be continuous there. However, if all partial derivatives exist in a neighborhood of a and are continuous there, then f is totally differentiable in that neighborhood and the total derivative is continuous. In this case, it is said that f is a \"C\"1 function. This can be used to generalize for vector valued functions, formula_21, by carefully using a componentwise argument.\nThe partial derivative formula_22 can be seen as another function defined on U and can again be partially differentiated. If the direction of derivative is not repeated, it is called a mixed partial derivative. If all mixed second order partial derivatives are continuous at a point (or on a set), f is termed a \"C\"2 function at that point (or on that set); in this case, the partial derivatives can be exchanged by Clairaut's theorem:\nformula_23\nNotation.\nFor the following examples, let f be a function in x, y, and z.\nFirst-order partial derivatives:\nformula_24\nSecond-order partial derivatives:\nformula_25\nSecond-order mixed derivatives:\nformula_26\nHigher-order partial and mixed derivatives:\nformula_27\nWhen dealing with functions of multiple variables, some of these variables may be related to each other, thus it may be necessary to specify explicitly which variables are being held constant to avoid ambiguity. In fields such as statistical mechanics, the partial derivative of f with respect to x, holding y and z constant, is often expressed as\nformula_28\nConventionally, for clarity and simplicity of notation, the partial derivative \"function\" and the \"value\" of the function at a specific point are conflated by including the function arguments when the partial derivative symbol (Leibniz notation) is used. Thus, an expression like \nformula_29 \nis used for the function, while \nformula_30 \nmight be used for the value of the function at the point However, this convention breaks down when we want to evaluate the partial derivative at a point like In such a case, evaluation of the function must be expressed in an unwieldy manner as \nformula_31 \nor \nformula_32 \nin order to use the Leibniz notation. Thus, in these cases, it may be preferable to use the Euler differential operator notation with formula_33 as the partial derivative symbol with respect to the i-th variable. For instance, one would write formula_34 for the example described above, while the expression formula_35 represents the partial derivative \"function\" with respect to the first variable.\nFor higher order partial derivatives, the partial derivative (function) of formula_36 with respect to the j-th variable is denoted That is, so that the variables are listed in the order in which the derivatives are taken, and thus, in reverse order of how the composition of operators is usually notated. Of course, Clairaut's theorem implies that formula_37 as long as comparatively mild regularity conditions on f are satisfied.\nGradient.\nAn important example of a function of several variables is the case of a scalar-valued function formula_38 on a domain in Euclidean space formula_15 (e.g., on formula_40 or formula_41). In this case f has a partial derivative formula_42 with respect to each variable \"x\"\"j\". At the point a, these partial derivatives define the vector\nformula_43\nThis vector is called the \"gradient\" of f at a. If f is differentiable at every point in some domain, then the gradient is a vector-valued function \u2207\"f\" which takes the point a to the vector \u2207\"f\"(\"a\"). Consequently, the gradient produces a vector field.\nformula_46\nformula_50\nExample.\nSuppose that f is a function of more than one variable. For instance,\nformula_51\nThe graph of this function defines a surface in Euclidean space. To every point on this surface, there are an infinite number of tangent lines. Partial differentiation is the act of choosing one of these lines and finding its slope. Usually, the lines of most interest are those that are parallel to the xz-plane, and those that are parallel to the yz-plane (which result from holding either y or x constant, respectively).\nTo find the slope of the line tangent to the function at \"P\"(1, 1) and parallel to the xz-plane, we treat y as a constant. The graph and this plane are shown on the right. Below, we see how the function looks on the plane \"y\" = 1. By finding the derivative of the equation while assuming that y is a constant, we find that the slope of f at the point (\"x\", \"y\") is:\nformula_52\nSo at (1, 1), by substitution, the slope is 3. Therefore,\nformula_53\nat the point (1, 1). That is, the partial derivative of z with respect to x at (1, 1) is 3, as shown in the graph.\nThe function f can be reinterpreted as a family of functions of one variable indexed by the other variables:\nformula_54\nIn other words, every value of y defines a function, denoted \"fy\", which is a function of one variable x. That is,\nformula_55\nIn this section the subscript notation \"fy\" denotes a function contingent on a fixed value of y, and not a partial derivative.\nOnce a value of y is chosen, say a, then \"f\"(\"x\",\"y\") determines a function \"fa\" which traces a curve \"x\"2 + \"ax\" + \"a\"2 on the xz-plane:\nformula_56\nIn this expression, a is a constant, not a variable, so \"fa\" is a function of only one real variable, that being x. Consequently, the definition of the derivative for a function of one variable applies:\nformula_57\nThe above procedure can be performed for any choice of a. Assembling the derivatives together into a function gives a function which describes the variation of f in the x direction:\nformula_58\nThis is the partial derivative of f with respect to x. Here '\u2202' is a rounded 'd' called the \"partial derivative symbol\"; to distinguish it from the letter 'd', '\u2202' is sometimes pronounced \"partial\".\nHigher order partial derivatives.\nSecond and higher order partial derivatives are defined analogously to the higher order derivatives of univariate functions. For the function formula_59 the \"own\" second partial derivative with respect to x is simply the partial derivative of the partial derivative (both with respect to x):\nformula_60\nThe cross partial derivative with respect to x and y is obtained by taking the partial derivative of f with respect to x, and then taking the partial derivative of the result with respect to y, to obtain\nformula_61\nSchwarz's theorem states that if the second derivatives are continuous, the expression for the cross partial derivative is unaffected by which variable the partial derivative is taken with respect to first and which is taken second. That is,\nformula_62\nor equivalently formula_63\nOwn and cross partial derivatives appear in the Hessian matrix which is used in the second order conditions in optimization problems.\nThe higher order partial derivatives can be obtained by successive differentiation\nAntiderivative analogue.\nThere is a concept for partial derivatives that is analogous to antiderivatives for regular derivatives. Given a partial derivative, it allows for the partial recovery of the original function.\nConsider the example of \nformula_52\nThe so-called partial integral can be taken with respect to x (treating y as constant, in a similar manner to partial differentiation):\nformula_65\nHere, the constant of integration is no longer a constant, but instead a function of all the variables of the original function except x. The reason for this is that all the other variables are treated as constant when taking the partial derivative, so any function which does not involve x will disappear when taking the partial derivative, and we have to account for this when we take the antiderivative. The most general way to represent this is to have the constant represent an unknown function of all the other variables.\nThus the set of functions formula_66, where g is any one-argument function, represents the entire set of functions in variables \"x\", \"y\" that could have produced the x-partial derivative formula_67.\nIf all the partial derivatives of a function are known (for example, with the gradient), then the antiderivatives can be matched via the above process to reconstruct the original function up to a constant. Unlike in the single-variable case, however, not every set of functions can be the set of all (first) partial derivatives of a single function. In other words, not every vector field is conservative.\nApplications.\nGeometry.\nThe volume V of a cone depends on the cone's height h and its radius r according to the formula\nformula_68\nThe partial derivative of V with respect to r is\nformula_69\nwhich represents the rate with which a cone's volume changes if its radius is varied and its height is kept constant. The partial derivative with respect to h equals which represents the rate with which the volume changes if its height is varied and its radius is kept constant.\nBy contrast, the \"total\" derivative of V with respect to r and h are respectively\nformula_70\nThe difference between the total and partial derivative is the elimination of indirect dependencies between variables in partial derivatives.\nIf (for some arbitrary reason) the cone's proportions have to stay the same, and the height and radius are in a fixed ratio k,\nformula_71\nThis gives the total derivative with respect to r,\nformula_72\nwhich simplifies to\nformula_73\nSimilarly, the total derivative with respect to h is\nformula_74\nThe total derivative with respect to both r and h of the volume intended as scalar function of these two variables is given by the gradient vector \nformula_75\nOptimization.\nPartial derivatives appear in any calculus-based optimization problem with more than one choice variable. For example, in economics a firm may wish to maximize profit \u03c0(\"x\", \"y\") with respect to the choice of the quantities x and y of two different types of output. The first order conditions for this optimization are \u03c0\"x\" = 0 = \u03c0\"y\". Since both partial derivatives \u03c0\"x\" and \u03c0\"y\" will generally themselves be functions of both arguments x and y, these two first order conditions form a system of two equations in two unknowns.\nThermodynamics, quantum mechanics and mathematical physics.\nPartial derivatives appear in thermodynamic equations like Gibbs-Duhem equation, in quantum mechanics as in Schr\u00f6dinger wave equation, as well as in other equations from mathematical physics. The variables being held constant in partial derivatives here can be ratios of simple variables like mole fractions \"xi\" in the following example involving the Gibbs energies in a ternary mixture system:\nformula_76\nExpress mole fractions of a component as functions of other components' mole fraction and binary mole ratios:\nformula_77\nDifferential quotients can be formed at constant ratios like those above:\nformula_78\nRatios X, Y, Z of mole fractions can be written for ternary and multicomponent systems:\nformula_79\nwhich can be used for solving partial differential equations like:\nformula_80\nThis equality can be rearranged to have differential quotient of mole fractions on one side.\nImage resizing.\nPartial derivatives are key to target-aware image resizing algorithms. Widely known as seam carving, these algorithms require each pixel in an image to be assigned a numerical 'energy' to describe their dissimilarity against orthogonal adjacent pixels. The algorithm then progressively removes rows or columns with the lowest energy. The formula established to determine a pixel's energy (magnitude of gradient at a pixel) depends heavily on the constructs of partial derivatives.\nEconomics.\nPartial derivatives play a prominent role in economics, in which most functions describing economic behaviour posit that the behaviour depends on more than one variable. For example, a societal consumption function may describe the amount spent on consumer goods as depending on both income and wealth; the marginal propensity to consume is then the partial derivative of the consumption function with respect to income.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52566", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52566", "title": "John Goldsmith (linguist)", "text": "American linguist (born 1951)\nJohn Anton Goldsmith (born 1951) is an American linguist. He is the Edward Carson Waller Distinguished Service Professor at the University of Chicago, with appointments in linguistics and computer science.\nBiography.\nGoldsmith obtained his B.A. at Swarthmore College in 1972, and completed his PhD in linguistics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1976, under the linguist Morris Halle. He was on the faculty of the Department of Linguistics at Indiana University before joining the University of Chicago in 1984. He has taught at the LSA Linguistic Institutes and has held visiting appointments at many universities, such as McGill, Harvard, and UCSD. In 2007, Goldsmith was elected as a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.\nResearch.\nGoldsmith's research ranges from phonology to computational linguistics. His PhD thesis introduced autosegmental phonology; the idea that phonological phenomena is a collection of parallel tiers with individual segments, each representing certain features of speech. His more recent research focuses on unsupervised learning of linguistic structure (as demonstrated by the Linguistica project, a body of software that tries to automatically analyze the morphology of a language), as well as extending computational linguistics algorithms to bioinformatics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52567", "revid": "27633652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52567", "title": "Autosegmental phonology", "text": "Phonological theory based on connecting segments\nAutosegmental phonology is a framework of phonological analysis proposed by John Goldsmith in his PhD thesis in 1976 at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology \n(MIT).\nAs a theory of phonological representation, autosegmental phonology developed a formal account of ideas that had been sketched in earlier work by several linguists, notably Bernard Bloch (1948), Charles Hockett (1955) and J. R. Firth (1948). According to such a view, phonological representations consist of more than one linear sequence of segments; each linear sequence constitutes a separate tier. The co-registration of elements (or \"autosegments\") on one tier with those on another is represented by association lines. There is a close relationship between analysis of segments into distinctive features and an autosegmental analysis; each feature in a language appears on exactly one tier.\nThe working hypothesis of autosegmental analysis is that a large part of phonological generalizations can be interpreted as a restructuring or reorganization of the autosegments in a representation. Clear examples of the usefulness of autosegmental analysis came in early work from the detailed study of African tonal languages, as well as the study of vowel and nasal harmony systems. A few years later, John McCarthy proposed an important development by showing that the derivation of words from consonantal roots in Arabic could be analyzed autosegmentally.\nIn the first decade of the development of the theory, G. N. Clements developed a number of influential aspects of the theory involving harmonic processes, especially vowel harmony and nasal harmony, and John McCarthy generalized the theory to deal with the conjugational system of classical Arabic, on the basis of an autosegmental account of vowel and consonant slots on a central timing tier (see also nonconcatenative morphology).\nStructure of autosegmental rules.\nThe autosegmental formalism departs from the depiction of segments as matrices of features in order to show segments as connected groups of individual features. Segments are depicted through vertical listings of features connected by lines. These sets can also underspecify in order to indicate a class rather than a single segment. Environments can be shown by placing other connected sets of features around that which is the focus of the rule. Feature changes are shown by striking through the lines that connect a feature that is lost to the rest of the segment and drawing dotted lines to features that are gained.\nDistinctive features.\nRather than classify segments using the categories given in the International Phonetic Alphabet, the autosegmental formalism makes use of distinctive features, which provide greater granularity and make identification of natural classes easier. A segment is identified by a +/\u2212 dichotomy of a series of binary features, some of which are subfeatures of unary features (place of articulation, in particular, is identified by unary features indicating the active articulator, and binary subfeatures that distinguish further). For example, [p], the voiceless bilabial stop, is indicated [\u2212sonorant, \u2212continuant, \u2212voice, labial], and the set of voiced coronal stops can be indicated [\u2212sonorant, \u2212continuant, +voice, coronal].\nFeature dependencies.\nFor unary features to be fully specified, it is necessary to include binary subfeatures that correspond to them. In the autosegmental formalism, this is depicted by placing the binary subfeature at a horizontal offset from the unary feature and connecting them with a line. The next top-level feature in the segment would then be connected to the unary feature as well as opposed to the tone.\nFunctional groupings.\nThere are situations in which the rule applies not to a particular value of a feature, but to whatever value the feature has. In these situations, it is necessary to include the presence of the feature, but not to specify its value. This can be done by including a placeholder feature composed of ellipses, with an indication of the type of feature. For example, a generic place feature can be indicated [...]P.\nTiers.\nThe autosegmental formalism deals with several separate linear sequences; because of this, a phonological representation is depicted on several distinct tiers. Each of these tiers shows a different language feature.\nSegmental tier.\nThe autosegmental tier (also \"skeletal tier\") contains the features that define the segments articulated in the phonological representation. The descriptions given in the previous section deal with the segmental tier. In the segmental tier, features are assigned to segments.\nTiming tier.\nThe timing tier contains timing units that define the lengths of segments in the phonological representation. These timing units are commonly depicted as X's, and are assigned to segments.\nStress tier.\nThe stress tier contains the features that show the distribution of stress in the phonological representation. The features in the stress tier are [+/\u2013 stress] and [+/\u2013 main], and they are assigned to the stress-bearing units of the language (syllables or moras).\nTone tier.\nThe tone tier contains the features that show the distribution of tones in the phonological representation. The features in the tone tier are [+/\u2013 high pitch] and [+/\u2013 low pitch], and they are assigned to the tone-bearing units of the language (syllables or moras).\nWell-Formedness Condition.\nAs a theory of the dynamic of phonological representations, autosegmental phonology includes a Well-formedness Condition on association lines (each element on one tier that \"may\" be associated to an element on another tier \"must\" be associated to such an element, and association lines do not cross) plus an instruction as to what to do in case of a violation of the Well-formedness Condition: add or delete the minimum number of association lines in order to maximally satisfy it. Many of the most interesting predictions of the autosegmental model derive from the automatic effects of the Well-formedness Condition and their independence of language-particular rules.\nExamples.\nPlace assimilation in nasals.\nThe autosegmental formalism can be especially useful in describing assimilation rules. Using it for such rules makes the relationship between the result of the rule and the environment obvious. It also makes it possible to concisely describe rules that apply to different environments in different ways.\nThe phenomenon whereby /\u026an/ goes to [\u026an] in such words as &lt;intractable&gt; and &lt;indestructible&gt;, [\u026a\u014b] in such words as &lt;ingrate&gt; and &lt;incapacitate&gt;, and [\u026am] in such words as &lt;impossible&gt; and &lt;implausible&gt; can be represented in the autosegmental formalism. The rule is that a coronal nasal will assimilate to the place of the following consonant. The nasal is depicted by [+nasal] connected to a [coronal]P, and the consonant is depicted to the nasal's right as [...]P. No more specification is necessary because place is the only feature of the following segment that factors into the rule. The assimilation is shown by striking through the line to [coronal]P on the left and drawing a dotted line to the [...]P on the right."}
{"id": "52568", "revid": "123229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52568", "title": "Agent", "text": "Agent may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52569", "revid": "43625938", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52569", "title": "Lamp (electrical component)", "text": ""}
{"id": "52570", "revid": "50712308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52570", "title": "Igbo language", "text": "Niger\u2013Congo language of the Igbo people, mainly spoken in Nigeria\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nIgbo ( , ; Standard Igbo: \"\u00c1s\u1ee5\u0300s\u1ee5\u0301 \u00ccgb\u00f2\" ) is the principal native language cluster of the Igbo people, an ethnicity in the Southeastern part of Nigeria.\nIgbo languages are spoken by a total of 31 million people. The number of Igboid languages depends on how one classifies a language versus a dialect, so there could be around 35 different Igbo languages. The core Igbo cluster, or Igbo proper, is generally thought to be one language but there is limited mutual intelligibility between the different groupings (north, west, south and east). A standard literary language termed 'Igbo izugbe' (meaning \"general igbo\") was generically developed and later adopted around 1972, with its core foundation based on the Orlu (Isu dialects), Anambra (Awka dialects) and Umuahia (Ohuhu dialects), omitting the nasalization and aspiration of those varieties.\nHistory.\nThe first book to publish Igbo terms was \"History of the Mission of the Evangelical Brothers in the Caribbean\" (), published in 1777. Shortly afterwards in 1789, \"The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano\" was published in London, England, written by Olaudah Equiano, who was a former slave, featuring 79 Igbo words. The narrative also illustrated various aspects of Igbo life in detail, based on Equiano's experiences in his hometown of Essaka. Following the British Niger Expeditions of 1854 and 1857, Samuel Ajayi Crowther, published an Igbo primer coded by a young Igbo missionary named Simon Jonas, who travelled with him to Aboh in 1857.\nThe language was standardized in church usage by the Union Igbo Bible (1913).\nCentral Igbo is based on the dialects of two members of the Ezinifite group of Igbo in Central Owerri Province between the towns of Owerri and Umuahia in Eastern Nigeria. From its proposal as a literary form in 1939 by Ida C. Ward, it was gradually accepted by missionaries, writers, and publishers across the region.\nStandard Igbo aims to cross-pollinate Central Igbo with words from other Igbo dialects, with the adoption of loan words.\nChinua Achebe passionately denounced language standardization efforts, beginning with Union Igbo through to Central and finally Standard Igbo, in a 1999 lecture sponsored by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese in Owerri.\nHistorically, the Igbo language was spoken by a large number of enslaved people trafficked to the Americas from the bight of biafra, during the Atlantic Slave Trade.\nDistribution.\nIgbo (and its dialects) is the dominant language in the following Nigerian states:\nPhonology.\nVowels.\nIgbo is a tonal language. Tone varies by dialect but in most dialects there seem to be three register tones and three contour tones. The language's tone system was given by John Goldsmith as an example of autosegmental phenomena that go beyond the linear model of phonology laid out in \"The Sound Pattern of English\". Igbo words may differ only in tone. An example is \"\u00e1kw\u00e1\" \"cry\", \"\u00e0kw\u00e0\" \"bed\", \"\u00e0kw\u00e1\" \"egg\", and \"\u00e1kw\u00e0\" \"cloth\". As tone is not normally written, these all appear as \u27e8akwa\u27e9 in print.\nIn many cases, the two (or sometimes three) tones commonly used in Igbo dictionaries fail to represent how words actually sound in the spoken language . This indicates that Igbo may have many more tones than previously recognised. For example, the imperative form of the word \"bia\" \"come\" has a different tone to that used in statement \"O bia\" \"he came\". That imperative tone is also used in the second syllable of \"abuo\" \"two\". Another distinct tone appears in the second syllable of \"asaa\" \"seven\" and another in the second syllable of \"aguu\" \"hunger\".\nThe language features vowel harmony with two sets of oral vowels distinguished by pharyngeal cavity size described in terms of retracted tongue root (RTR). These vowels also occupy different places in vowel space: (the last commonly transcribed , in keeping with neighboring languages). For simplicity, phonemic transcriptions typically choose only one of these parameters to be distinctive, either RTR as in the chart on the right and Igbo orthography (that is, as ), or vowel space as in the alphabetic chart below (that is, as ). There are also nasal vowels.\nAdjacent vowels usually undergo assimilation during speech. The sound of a preceding vowel, usually at the end of one word, merges in a rapid transition to the sound of the following vowel, particularly at the start of another word, giving the second vowel greater prominence in speech. Usually the first vowel (in the first word) is only slightly identifiable to listeners, usually undergoing centralisation. /k\u00e0 \u00f3 m\u00e9sj\u00e1/, for example, becomes /k\u00f2\u00f3 m\u00e9sj\u00e1/ \"goodbye\". An exception to this assimilation may be with words ending in /a/ such as /n\u00e0/ in /n\u00e0 \u00e0l\u00e0/, \"on the ground\", which could be completely assimilated leaving /n/ in rapid speech, as in \"n\u00e0l\u00e0\" or \"n'\u00e0l\u00e0\". In other dialects however, the instance of /a/ such as in \"n\u00e0\" in /\u1ecd\u0301 n\u00e0 \u00e8r\u00ed \u0144r\u00ed/, \"he/she/it is eating\", results in a long vowel, /\u1ecd\u0301 n\u00e8\u00e8r\u00ed \u0144r\u00ed/.\nTone.\nThe Igbo language is tonal in nature. This means that the meaning of a word can be altered depending on the tone used when pronouncing it. Igbo has two main tones: high and low. The high tone is usually marked with an acute accent (\u00b4) and the low tone is marked with a grave accent (`).\nFor example, the word \u27e8akwa\u27e9 can mean \"cry, egg, cloth, sew\" depending on the tone used. If pronounced with a high tone on the first and last syllable it means \"cry\". But if pronounced with a low tone on the first syllable and high on the last syllable, it means \"egg\u201d. If it is pronounced with low tone on both syllables, then it will mean \u201ccloth\u201d or \u201csew\u201d.\nAnother example is the word \"eze\u201d which means \"king\" or \"teeth\". In either case the first syllable is pronounced with a high tone. If the second syllable is pronounced with a low tone, it means \"king\". But if pronounced with a middle tone, it means \"teeth\".\nThe use of tonal inflection in Igbo language is very important because it helps to differentiate between words that would otherwise sound the same. It can be challenging for English speakers to learn how to use the tones properly, but with practice, it can be mastered.\nConsonants.\nIgbo does not have a contrast among voiced occlusives (between voiced stops and nasals): stops precede oral vowels, and nasals precede nasal vowels. Only a limited number of other consonants occur before nasal vowels, including .\nIn some dialects, such as Enu-Onitsha Igbo, the doubly articulated and are realized as a voiced/devoiced labial\u2013velar implosive. The approximant is realized as an alveolar tap between vowels as in \"\u00e1r\u00e1\". The Enu-Onitsha Igbo dialect is very much similar to Enuani spoken among the Igbo-Anioma people in Delta State.\nTo illustrate the effect of phonological analysis, the following inventory of a typical Central dialect is taken from Clark (1990). Nasality has been analyzed as a feature of consonants, rather than vowels, avoiding the problem of why so few consonants occur before nasal vowels; has also been analyzed as .\nSyllables are of the form (C)V (optional consonant, vowel) or N (a syllabic nasal). CV is the most common syllable type. Every syllable bears a tone. Consonant clusters do not occur. The semivowels and can occur between consonant and vowel in some syllables. The semi-vowel in is analyzed as an underlying vowel \"\u1ecb\", so that \"-b\u1ecba\" is the phonemic form of \"bj\u00e1\" 'come'. On the other hand, \"w\" in is analyzed as an instance of labialization; so the phonemic form of the verb \"-gw\u00e1\" \"tell\" is .\nGrammar.\nIgbo is an isolating language that exhibits very little fusion. The language is predominantly suffixing in a hierarchical manner, such that the ordering of suffixes is governed semantically rather than by fixed position classes. The language has very little inflectional morphology but much derivational and extensional morphology. Most derivation takes place with verbal roots.\nExtensional suffixes, a term used in the Igbo literature, refer to morphology that has some but not all characteristics of derivation. The words created by these suffixes always belong to the same lexical category as the root from which they are created, and the suffixes' effects are principally semantic. On these grounds, Emenanjo (2015) asserts that the suffixes called extensional are bound lexical compounding elements; they cannot occur independently, though many are related to other free morphemes from which they may have originally been derived.\nIn addition to affixation, Igbo exhibits both partial and full reduplication to form gerunds from verbs. The partial form copies on the initial consonant and inserts a high front vowel, while the full form copies the first consonant and vowel. Both types are then prefixed with \"o-\". For example, \"-go\" 'buy' partially reduplicates to form \"\u00f2gigo\" 'buying,' and \"-bu\" 'carry' fully reduplicates to form \"\u00f2bubu\" 'carrying'. Some other noun and verb forms also exhibit reduplication, but because the reduplicated forms are semantically unpredictable, reduplication in their case is not synchronically productive, and they are better described as separate lexical items.\nIgbo pronouns do not index gender, and the same pronouns are used for male, female and inanimate beings. So the sentence, can mean \"he, she or it is beautiful\".\nWord classes.\nLexical categories in Igbo include nouns, pronouns, numerals, verbs, adjectives, conjunctions, and a single preposition. The meaning of , the single preposition, is flexible and must be ascertained from the context. Examples from Emenanjo (2015) illustrate the range of meaning:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIgbo has an extremely limited number of adjectives in a closed class. Emenanjo (1978, 2015) counts just eight, which occur in pairs of opposites: 'big', 'small'; 'dark', 'light'; 'new', 'old'; 'good'; 'bad'. Adjectival meaning is otherwise conveyed through the use of stative verbs or abstract nouns.\nVerbs, by far the most prominent category in Igbo, host most of the language's morphology and appear to be the most basic category; many processes can derive new words from verbs, but few can derive verbs from words of other classes.\nGrammatical relations.\nIgbo does not mark overt case distinctions on nominal constituents and conveys grammatical relations only through word order. The typical Igbo sentence displays subject-verb-object (SVO) ordering, where the subject is understood as the sole argument of an intransitive verb or the agent-like (external) argument of a transitive verb. Igbo thus exhibits accusative alignment.\nIt has been proposed, with reservations, that some Igbo verbs display ergativity on some level, as in the following two examples:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn (4), the verb has a single argument, \"nnukwu mm\u012bri\", which appears in subject position, and in the transitive sentence (5), that same argument appears in the object position, even though the two are semantically identical. On this basis, authors such as Emenanjuo (2015) have posited that this argument is an absolutive and that Igbo therefore contains some degree of ergativity.\nHowever, others disagree, arguing that the relevant category is not alignment but underlying argument structure; under this hypothesis, (4) and (5) differ only in the application of a transformation and can be accounted for entirely by the unaccusative hypothesis and the Extended Projection Principle; the nominal argument is generated in object position, and either it is raised to the subject position, as in (4), or the subject position is filled with a pleonastic pronoun, as in (5).\nRelative clauses.\nIgbo relative clauses are externally headed and follow the head noun. They do not employ overt relative markers or resumptive pronouns, instead leaving a gap in the position of the relativized noun. Subjects and objects can be relativized. Examples include (relative clauses bracketed):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVoice and valence.\nIgbo lacks the common valence-decreasing operation of passivization, a fact which has led multiple scholars to claim that \"voice is not a relevant category in Igbo.\" The language does, however, possess some valence-increasing operations that could be construed as voice under a broader definition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIgbo also possess an applicative construction, which takes the suffix \"-rV\", where \"V\" copies the previous vowel, and the applicative argument follows the verb directly. The applicative suffix is identical in form with the past tense suffix, with which it should not be confused. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVerb serialization.\nIgbo permits verb serialization, which is used extensively to compensate for its paucity of prepositions. Among the meaning types commonly expressed in serial verb constructions are instruments, datives, accompaniment, purpose, and manner. (13) and (14) below illustrate instrumental and dative verb series, respectively:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWriting system.\nThe Igbo people invented Nsibidi ideograms, which spread to their neighbors such as Ekoi people, and Ejegham people for basic written communication. Nsibidi is an ancient system of graphic communication indigenous to peoples in southeastern Nigeria and southwestern Cameroon in the Cross River region. It is also used by neighboring Ekoi, Ejegham, Efik, and Ibibio peoples. They have been used since at least the 16th century, under the Aro Confederacy, but died out publicly after they became popular amongst secret societies such as the Ekpe, who used them as a secret form of communication. Nsibidi, however, is not a full writing system, because it cannot transcribe the Igbo language specifically. In 1960, a rural land owner and dibia named Nwagu Aneke developed a syllabary for the Umuleri dialect of Igbo, the script, named after him as the Nwagu Aneke script, was used to write hundreds of diary entries until Aneke's death in 1991. The Nwagu Aneke Project is working on translating Nwagu's commentary and diary.\nHistory of Igbo orthography.\nBefore the existence of any official system of orthography for the Igbo language, travelers and writers documented Igbo sounds by utilizing the orthracyologies of their own languages in transcribing them, though they encountered difficulty representing particular sounds, such as implosives, labialized velars, syllabic nasals, and non-expanded vowels. In the 1850s, German philologist Karl Richard Lepsius published the Standard Alphabet, which was universal to all languages of the world, and became the first Igbo orthography. It contained 34 letters and included digraphs and diacritical marks to transcribe sounds distinct to African languages. The Lepsius Standard Alphabet contained the following letters:\nThe Lepsius orthography was replaced by the Practical Orthography of African Languages (Africa Orthography) in 1929 by the colonial government in Nigeria. The new orthography, created by the International Institute of African Languages and Cultures (IIALC), had 36 letters and disposed of diacritic marks. Numerous controversial issues with the new orthography eventually led to its replacement in the early 1960s. The Africa Orthography contained the following letters:\n\u1eccnw\u1ee5.\nThe current \u1eccnw\u1ee5 alphabet, a compromise between the older Lepsius alphabet and a newer alphabet advocated by the International Institute of African Languages and Cultures (IIALC), is presented in the following table, with the International Phonetic Alphabet equivalents for the characters:\nThe graphemes \u27e8gb\u27e9 and \u27e8kp\u27e9 are described both as coarticulated and and as implosives, so both values are included in the table.\n\u27e8m\u27e9 and \u27e8n\u27e9 each represent two phonemes: a nasal consonant and a syllabic nasal.\nTones are sometimes indicated in writing, and sometimes not. When tone is indicated, low tones are shown with a grave accent over the vowel, for example \u27e8a\u27e9 \u2192 \u27e8\u00e0\u27e9, and high tones with an acute accent over the vowel, for example \u27e8a\u27e9 \u2192 \u27e8\u00e1\u27e9.\nOther orthographies.\nA variety of issues have made agreement on a standardized orthography for the Igbo language difficult. In 1976, the Igbo Standardization Committee criticized the official orthography in light of the difficulty notating diacritic marks using typewriters and computers; difficulty in accurately representing tone with tone-marking conventions, as they are subject to change in different environments; and the inability to capture various sounds particular to certain Igbo dialects. The Committee produced a modified version of the \u1eccnw\u1ee5 orthography, called the New Standard Orthography, which substituted \u27e8\u00f6\u27e9 and \u27e8\u00fc\u27e9 for \u27e8\u1ecd\u27e9 and \u27e8\u1ee5\u27e9, \u27e8c\u27e9 for \u27e8ch\u27e9, and \u27e8\u00f1\u27e9 for \u27e8\u1e45\u27e9. The New Standard Orthography has not been widely adopted, although it was used, for example, in the 1998 \"Igbo English Dictionary\" by Michael Echeruo.\nMore recent calls for reform have been based in part on the rogue use of alphabetic symbols, tonal notations, and spelling conventions that deviate from the standard orthography.\nThere are also some modern movements to restore the use of and modernize nsibidi as a writing system, which mostly focus on Igbo as it is the most populous language that used to use nsibidi.\nNdebe Script.\nIn 2009, a Nigerian software engineer and artist named Lotanna Igwe-Odunze developed a native script named Ndebe script. It was further redesigned and relaunched in 2020 as a standalone writing system completely independent of Nsibidi. The script gained notable attention after a write-up from Nigerian linguist Kola Tubosun on its \"straightforward\" and \"logical\" approach to indicating tonal and dialectal variety compared to Latin.\nProverbs.\nProverbs and idiomatic expressions (ilu and akpalaokwu in Igbo, respectively) are highly valued by the Igbo people and proficiency in the language means knowing how to intersperse speech with a good dose of proverbs. Chinua Achebe (in \"Things Fall Apart\") describes proverbs as \"the palm oil with which words are eaten\". Proverbs are widely used in the traditional society to describe, in very few words, what could have otherwise required a thousand words. Proverbs may also become euphemistic means of making certain expressions in the Igbo society, thus the Igbo have come to typically rely on this as avenues of certain expressions.\nUsage in the diaspora.\nAs a consequence of the Atlantic slave trade, the Igbo language was spread by enslaved Igbo people throughout slave colonies in the Americas. Examples can be found in Jamaican Patois: the pronoun , used for 'you (plural)', is taken from Igbo, \"Red eboe\" refers to a fair-skinned black person because of the reported account of a fair or yellowish skin tone among the Igbo. \"Soso\" meaning \"only\" comes from Igbo. See List of Jamaican Patois words of African origin for more examples.\nThe word \"Bim\", a name for Barbados, was commonly used by enslaved Barbadians (Bajans). This word is said to derive from the Igbo language, derived from \"bi mu\" (or either \"bem\", \"Ndi bem\", \"Nwanyi ibem\" or \"Nwoke ibem\") (), but it may have other origins (see: Barbados etymology).\nIn Cuba, the Igbo language (along with the Efik language) continues to be used, albeit in a creolized form, in ceremonies of the Abaku\u00e1 society, equivalent or derived from the Ekpe society in modern Nigeria.\nIn modern times, Igbo people in the diaspora are putting resources in place to make the study of the language accessible.\nPresent state.\nThere are some discussions as to whether the Igbo language is in danger of extinction, advanced in part by a 2006 UNESCO report that predicted the Igbo language will become extinct within 50 years. Professor of African and African Diaspora Literatures at University of Massachusetts, Chukwuma Azuonye, emphasizes indicators for the endangerment of the Igbo language based on criteria that includes the declining population of monolingual elderly speakers; reduced competence and performance among Igbo speakers, especially children; the deterioration of idioms, proverbs, and other rhetorical elements of the Igbo language that convey the cultural aesthetic; and code-switching, code-mixing, and language shift.\nExternal and internal factors have been proposed as causes for the decline of the Igbo language and its usage. Preference for the English language in post-colonial Nigeria has usurped the Igbo language's role and function in society, as English is perceived by Igbo speakers as the language of status and opportunity. This perception may be a contributor to the negative attitude towards the Igbo language by its speakers across the spectrum of socio-economic classes. Igbo children's reduced competence and performance has been attributed in part to the lack of exposure in the home environment, which impacts intergenerational transmission of the language. English is the official language in Nigeria and is utilized in government administration, educational institutions, and commerce. Aside from its role in numerous facets of daily life in Nigeria, globalization exerts pressure to utilize English as a universal standard language in support of economic and technological advancement. A 2005 study by Igboanusi and Peter demonstrated the preferential attitude towards English over the Igbo language amongst Igbo people in the communication, entertainment, and media domains. English was preferred by Igbo speakers at 56.5% for oral communication, 91.5% for written communication, 55.5\u201359.5% in entertainment, and 73.5\u201383.5% for media.\nThe effect of English on Igbo languages amongst bilingual Igbo speakers can be seen by the incorporation of English loanwords into Igbo and code-switching between the two languages. English loanwords, which are usually nouns, have been found to retain English semantics, but typically follow phonological and morphological structures of Igbo. Lexical items conform to the vowel harmony intrinsic to Igbo phonological structures. For example, loanwords with syllable-final consonants may be assimilated by the addition of a vowel after the consonant, and vowels are inserted in between consonant clusters, which have not been found to occur in Igbo. This can be seen in the word \"sukulu\", which is a loanword derived from the English word school that has followed the aforementioned pattern of modification when it was assimilated into the Igbo language. Code-switching, which involves the insertion of longer English syntactic units into Igbo utterances, may consist of phrases or entire sentences, principally nouns and verbs, that may or may not follow Igbo syntactic patterns. Igbo affixes to English verbs determine tense and aspectual markers, such as the Igbo suffix -i affixed to the English word 'check', expressed as the word \"check-i\".\nThe standardized Igbo language is composed of fragmented features from numerous Igbo dialects and is not technically a spoken language, but it is used in communicational, educational, and academic contexts. This unification is perceived by Chukwuma Azuonye as undermining the survival of Igbo by erasing diversity between dialects. Each individual dialect possesses unique untranslatable idioms and rhetorical devices that represent Igbo cultural nuances that can be lost as dialects disappear or deteriorate. Newly coined terms may fail to conform to a dialect's lexical formation in assimilating loan words.\nProverbs are an essential component of the Igbo language that convey cultural wisdom and contextual significance to linguistic expression. Everyday usage of Igbo proverbs has declined in recent generations of speakers, which threatens loss in intergenerational transmission. A recent study of the Ogwashi dialect of Igbo demonstrated a steep decline in youth's knowledge and use of proverbs compared to elder speakers. In this study, youths employed simplified or incomplete proverbial expressions, lacked a diverse proverbial repertoire, and were deficient in their understanding of proper contextual usages as compared to elders who demonstrated competence to enhance linguistic expression with a diverse vocabulary of proverbs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;section begin=\"list-of-glossing-abbreviations\"/&gt;\nPREF:prefix\nSUFF:suffix\n&lt;section end=\"list-of-glossing-abbreviations\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "52571", "revid": "50592077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52571", "title": "Halogen lamp", "text": "Incandescent lamp variety\nA halogen lamp (also called tungsten halogen, quartz-halogen, and quartz iodine lamp) is an incandescent lamp consisting of a tungsten filament sealed in a compact transparent envelope that is filled with a mixture of an inert gas and a small amount of a halogen, such as iodine or bromine. The combination of the halogen gas and the tungsten filament produces a halogen-cycle chemical reaction, which redeposits evaporated tungsten on the filament, increasing its life and maintaining the clarity of the envelope. This allows the filament to operate at a higher temperature than a standard incandescent lamp of similar power and operating life; this also produces light with higher luminous efficacy and color temperature. The small size of halogen lamps permits their use in compact optical systems for projectors and illumination. The small glass envelope may be enclosed in a much larger outer glass bulb, which has a lower temperature, protects the inner bulb from contamination, and makes the bulb mechanically more similar to a conventional lamp.\nStandard and halogen incandescent bulbs are much less efficient than LED and compact fluorescent lamps, and therefore have been or are being phased out in many places.\nHistory.\nA carbon filament lamp using chlorine to prevent darkening of the envelope was patented by Edward Scribner of the US Electric Lighting Co. in 1882, and chlorine-filled \"NoVak\" lamps were marketed in 1892.\nThe use of iodine was proposed in a 1933 patent which also described the cyclic redeposition of tungsten back onto the filament. In 1959, General Electric patented a practical lamp using iodine.\nPhase-out.\nIn 2009, the EU and other European countries began a phase-out of inefficient bulbs. The production and importation of directional mains-voltage halogen bulbs was banned on 1 September 2016, and non-directional halogen bulbs followed on 1 September 2018. Australia banned some halogen light bulbs above 10W from September 2021 in favour of eco-halogen bulbs, later than the planned date of September 2020 to keep the policy in line with the European Union. In June 2021, the UK government also announced plans to end the sale of halogen light bulbs from September, as part of the UK's wider efforts to tackle climate change.\nHalogen cycle.\nIn ordinary incandescent lamps, evaporated tungsten mostly deposits onto the inner surface of the bulb, causing the bulb to blacken and the filament to grow increasingly weak until it eventually breaks. The presence of the halogen, however, sets up a reversible chemical reaction cycle with this evaporated tungsten. The halogen cycle keeps the bulb clean and causes the light output to remain almost constant throughout the bulb's life. At moderate temperatures, the halogen reacts with the evaporating tungsten, the halide formed being moved around in the inert gas filling. At some point, however, it will reach higher temperature regions within the bulb where it then dissociates, releasing tungsten back onto the filament and freeing the halogen to repeat the process. However, the overall bulb envelope temperature must be significantly higher than in conventional incandescent lamps for this reaction to succeed: it is only at temperatures of above on the inside of the glass envelope that the halogen vapor can combine with the tungsten and return it to the filament rather than the tungsten becoming deposited on the glass. A 300-watt tubular halogen bulb operated at full power quickly reaches a temperature of about , while a 500-watt regular incandescent bulb operates at only and a 75-watt regular incandescent at only .\nThe bulb must be made of fused silica (quartz) or a high-melting-point glass (such as aluminosilicate glass). Since quartz is very strong, the gas pressure can be higher which reduces the rate of evaporation of the filament, permitting it to run a higher temperature (and so luminous efficacy) for the same average life. The tungsten released in hotter regions does not generally redeposit where it came from, so the hotter parts of the filament eventually thin out and fail.\nQuartz iodine lamps, using elemental iodine, were the first commercial halogen lamps launched by GE in 1959. Quite soon, bromine was found to have advantages, but was not used in elemental form. Certain hydrocarbon bromine compounds gave good results. Regeneration of the filament is also possible with fluorine, but its chemical reactivity is so great that other parts of the lamp are attacked. The halogen is normally mixed with a noble gas, often krypton or xenon. The first lamps used only tungsten for filament supports, but some designs use molybdenum \u2013 an example being the molybdenum shield in the H4 twin filament headlight for the European Asymmetric Passing Beam.\nFor a fixed power and life, the luminous efficacy of all incandescent lamps is greatest at a particular design voltage. Halogen lamps made for 12 to 24 volt operation have good light outputs, and the very compact filaments are particularly beneficial for optical control (see picture). The ranges\nof multifaceted reflector \"MR\" lamps of 20\u201350 watts were originally conceived for the projection of 8 mm film, but are now widely used for display lighting and in the home. More recently, wider beam versions have become available, designed for direct use on supply voltages of 120 or 230 V.\nEffect of voltage on performance.\nTungsten halogen lamps behave similarly to other incandescent lamps when run on a different voltage. However, the light output is reported as proportional toformula_1, and the luminous efficacy is proportional toformula_2. The normal relationship regarding the lifetime is that it is proportional toformula_3. For example, a bulb operated at 5% higher than its design voltage would produce about 15% more light, and the luminous efficacy would be about 6.5% higher, but would be expected to have only half the rated life.\nHalogen lamps are manufactured with enough halogen to match the rate of tungsten evaporation at their design voltage. Increasing the applied voltage increases the rate of evaporation, so at some point, there may be insufficient halogen, and the lamp goes black. Over-voltage operation is not generally recommended. With a reduced voltage, the evaporation is lower, and there may be too much halogen, which can lead to abnormal failure. At much lower voltages, the bulb temperature may be too low to support the halogen cycle, but by this time, the evaporation rate is too low for the bulb to blacken significantly. If the bulbs do blacken, it is recommended to run the lamps at the rated voltage to restart the cycle. There are many situations where halogen lamps are dimmed successfully. However, lamp life may not be extended as much as predicted. The life span of dimming depends on lamp construction, the halogen additive used, and whether dimming is normally expected for this type.\nSpectrum.\nLike all incandescent light bulbs, a halogen lamp produces a continuous spectrum of light, from near ultraviolet to deep into the infrared. Since the lamp filament can operate at a higher temperature than a non-halogen lamp, the spectrum is shifted toward blue, producing light with a higher effective color temperature and higher power efficiency. \nHigh-temperature filaments emit some energy in the UV region. Small amounts of other elements can be mixed into the quartz, so that the \"doped\" quartz (or selective optical coating) blocks harmful UV radiation. Hard glass blocks UV and has been used extensively for the bulbs of car headlights. Alternatively, the halogen lamp can be mounted inside an outer bulb, similar to an ordinary incandescent lamp, which also reduces the risks from the high bulb temperature. Undoped quartz halogen lamps are used in some scientific, medical, and dental instruments as a UV-B source.\nSafety.\nHalogen lamps must run at much higher temperatures than regular incandescent lamps for proper operation. Their small size helps to concentrate the heat on a smaller envelope surface, closer to the filament than a non-halogen incandescent. Because of the very high temperatures, halogen lamps can pose fire and burn hazards. In Australia, numerous house fires each year are attributed to ceiling-mounted halogen downlights. The Western Australia Department of Fire and Emergency Services recommends that homeowners consider instead using cooler-running compact fluorescent lamps or light-emitting diode lamps. Halogen Torch\u00e8re floor lamps have been banned in some places, such as dormitories, because of the large number of fires they have caused. They were held responsible by the US Consumer Product Safety Commission for 100 fires and 10 deaths between 1992 and 1997. Halogen bulbs operate at high temperatures, and the tall height of the lamps can bring them near flammable materials, such as curtains. Some safety codes require halogen bulbs to be protected by a grid or grille, especially for high-power (1\u20132\u00a0kW) bulbs used in theatre, or by the glass and metal housing of the fixture, to prevent ignition of draperies or flammable objects in contact with the lamp.\nTo reduce unintentional ultraviolet (UV) exposure and to contain hot bulb fragments in the event of explosive bulb failure, general-purpose lamps usually have a UV-absorbing glass filter over or around the bulb. Alternatively, lamp bulbs may be doped or coated to filter out the UV radiation. With adequate filtering, a halogen lamp exposes users to less UV than a standard incandescent lamp producing the same effective level of illumination without filtering.\nAny surface contamination, notably the oil from human fingertips or any uneven coating of dust or other substance, can damage the quartz envelope when it is heated. Contaminants, because they absorb more light and heat than the glass does, will create a hot spot on the bulb surface when the lamp is turned on. This extreme, localized heat causes the quartz to change from its vitreous form into a weaker, crystalline form that leaks gas. This weakening may also cause the bulb to form a bubble, weakening it and leading to its explosion and glass shrapnel.\nThe small glass envelope may be enclosed in a much larger outer glass bulb, which provides several advantages if a small size is not required:\nForm factors.\nHalogen lamps are available in a series of different shapes and sizes, and are designated according to a coding system that specifies the diameter of the bulb as well as whether or not the bulb has a built-in infrared-transparent dichroic reflector. Many such lamps have designations that begin with the letter \"T\" to indicate that they are \"tubular\", followed by a number indicating the diameter of the tube in eighths of an inch: a T3 bulb, then is a tubular halogen bulb that is in diameter. The designation \"MR\" means \"Multifaceted Reflector\", with the number following this still corresponding to eighths of an inch in diameter of the overall bulb. If a lamp has a \"G\" code, this will mean the lamp is a bipin shape and the number following the G will indicate the distance in millimeters between the pins, usually either 4, 6.35 or 10; if the G is followed by a letter \"Y\", then the lamp's pins are thicker than normal\u2014 thus, a G6.35 has pins that are 1\u00a0mm in diameter but a GY6.35 has pins that are 1.3\u00a0mm in diameter. If there is a \"C\" code, this represents the number of coils in the filament. The length (sometimes also referred to as \"height\") of any two-ended cylindrical bulb must be specified separately from its form factor code, usually in millimeters, as must the lamp's voltage and wattage\u2014 hence, T3 120 V 150 W 118\u00a0mm means a double-ended tube-shaped bulb with a diameter of that operates at 120\u00a0V and is 150 W and that is also 118\u00a0mm long.\nAn R7S is a double-ended, Recessed Single Contact (RSC) linear halogen lamp, usually measuring a length of either 118\u00a0mm or 78\u00a0mm. Some less common lengths are 189\u00a0mm, 254\u00a0mm and 331\u00a0mm. These lamps have a T3 shape on an RSC/R7S base. These can also be known as J-type and T-type lamps.\nApplications.\nHalogen headlamps are used in many automobiles. Halogen floodlights for outdoor lighting systems, as well as for watercraft, are also manufactured for commercial and recreational use. They are now also used in desktop lamps.\nTungsten-halogen lamps are frequently used as a near-infrared light source in Infrared spectroscopy.\nHalogen lamps were used on the Times Square Ball from 1999 to 2006. However, from 2007 onward, the halogen lamps were replaced with LEDs, due to the much longer lifespan, about ten times longer for LEDs over incandescent. The 'New Year' numerals that light up when the Times Square Ball reaches the base used halogen lighting for the last time for the 2009 ball drop.\nHeating.\nHalogen lamps are the heating elements in halogen ovens, infrared heaters and ceramic cooktops.\nLow-wattage halogen lamp arrays are widely used by monitor lizard keepers. Two or three small halogen lamps can produce all the heat needed in an enclosure and are recognized by the animals as sources of heat, preventing curious individuals from attempting to touch them. Halogen lamps' thick glass lenses are safe to use inside high-humidity reptile enclosures.\nBanks of powerful tubular halogen lamps were used to simulate the heat of re-entry of space vehicles.\nGeneral lighting.\nFixed-mount lamps are used in indoor and outdoor flood lighting, although improvements in LED systems are displacing halogen lamps. Round spotlights with built-in multifaceted reflector lamps are widely used in residential and commercial lighting. Tubular halogen lamps provide a large quantity of light from a small source and so can be used to produce powerful flood lamps for architectural lighting effects, or for lighting large areas outdoors.\nLow-voltage lamps use the GU5.3 and similar bi-pin bases, whereas mains voltage lamps use the same caps as normal mains tungsten filament lamps, or a special GU10/GZ10 base. The GU10/GZ10 bases are shaped to prevent dichroic reflector lamps from being used in luminaires intended for aluminised reflector lamps, which could cause overheating of the fitting. Higher efficiency LED versions of all of these lamps are now available.\nTubular lamps with electrical contacts at both ends are now commonly used in standalone lighting and household fixtures. These come in various lengths and power ratings (50\u2013300\u00a0W). More powerful lamps are used as portable work lights, with bulbs rated 250 or 500 watts.\nStage lighting.\nTungsten halogen lamps are used in the majority of theatrical and studio (film and television) fixtures, including Ellipsoidal reflector spotlights, Fresnels, and PAR Cans.\nSpecialized.\nProjection lamps are used in motion-picture and slide projectors for homes and small offices or school use. The compact size of the halogen lamp permits a reasonable size for portable projectors, although heat-absorbing filters must be placed between the lamp and the film to prevent melting. Halogen lamps are sometimes used for inspection lights and microscope stage illuminators. Halogen lamps were used for early flat-screen LCD backlighting, but other types of lamps, such as CCFL and now LED, are used.\nHalogen lamps are used as the heating element in the fuser of many types of laser printers. The long tubular lamp heats the fuser roller from the inside, and the heat melts the toner onto the paper.\nDisposal.\nHalogen lamps do not contain any mercury. General Electric says that its quartz halogen lamps would not be classified as hazardous waste.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52572", "revid": "32010320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52572", "title": "The Sound Pattern of English", "text": "Book by Noam Chomsky and Morris Halle\nThe Sound Pattern of English (frequently referred to as SPE) is a 1968 work on phonology by Noam Chomsky and Morris Halle. In spite of its title, it presents not only a view of the phonology of English, but also discussions of a large variety of phonological phenomena of many other languages. The index lists about 100 such languages. It has been very influential in both the field of phonology and the analysis of the English language. Chomsky and Halle present a view of phonology as a linguistic subsystem, separate from other components of the grammar, that transforms an underlying phonemic sequence according to rules and produces as its output the phonetic form that is uttered by a speaker. The theory fits with the rest of Chomsky's early theories of language in the sense that it is transformational; as such it serves as a landmark in Chomsky's theories by adding a clearly articulated theory of phonology to his previous work which focused on syntax.\nOverview.\n\"The Sound Pattern of English\" has had substantial influence on subsequent work. Derivatives of the theory have made modifications by changing the inventory of segmental features, considering some to be absent rather than having a positive or negative value, or adding complexity to the linear, segmental structure assumed by Chomsky and Halle. Its treatment of phonology as rules that operate on features, as well as its particular feature scheme, survive in various altered forms in many current theories of phonology. Some major successor theories include autosegmental phonology, lexical phonology and optimality theory.\nChomsky and Halle represent speech sounds as bundles of plus-or-minus valued features (e.g. vocalic, high, back, anterior, nasal, etc.) The phonological component of each lexical entry is considered to be a linear sequence of these feature bundles. A number of context-sensitive rules transform the underlying form of a sequence of words into the final phonetic form that is uttered by the speaker. These rules are allowed access to the tree structure that the syntax is said to output. This access allows rules that apply, for example, only at the end of a word, or only at the end of a noun phrase.\nThe influence of SPE has led to rules of the form given in SPE, A\u2192B / [precontext _ postcontext], often being called \"SPE-style rules\" or \"SPE-type rules\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52573", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52573", "title": "Metrisable space", "text": ""}
{"id": "52575", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52575", "title": "Uncountably", "text": ""}
{"id": "52576", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52576", "title": "Metrisable", "text": ""}
{"id": "52577", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52577", "title": "Metrizable", "text": ""}
{"id": "52579", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52579", "title": "Inner product", "text": ""}
{"id": "52580", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52580", "title": "Real line", "text": ""}
{"id": "52581", "revid": "50984350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52581", "title": "The Smiths", "text": "English rock band (1982\u20131987)\nThe Smiths were an English rock band formed in Manchester in 1982, composed of Morrissey (vocals), Johnny Marr (guitar), Andy Rourke (bass) and Mike Joyce (drums). Morrissey and Marr formed the band's songwriting partnership. The Smiths are regarded as one of the most important acts to emerge from 1980s British independent music.\nThe Smiths signed to the independent label Rough Trade Records in 1983 and released their debut album, \"The Smiths\", in 1984. Their focus on a guitar, bass and drum sound, fusing 1960s rock and post-punk, was a rejection of the synth-pop sound predominant at the time. Several of the band's singles reached the top 20 of the UK singles chart, and all their studio albums reached the top five of the UK Albums Chart, including the number-one album \"Meat Is Murder\" (1985). The band achieved mainstream success in Europe with \"The Queen Is Dead\" (1986) and \"Strangeways, Here We Come\" (1987), which both entered the top 20 of the European Albums Chart. \nIn 1986, the Smiths briefly expanded to a five-piece with the addition of guitarist Craig Gannon, but internal tensions eventually led to their breakup the following year. The split was followed by heavily publicized lawsuits over royalties, and the band members have consistently rejected numerous offers to reunite in the years since. Rourke died in 2023.\nHistory.\n1982: Formation and early performances.\nIn May 1982, Johnny Marr and his friend Steve Pomfret went to the home of Steven Morrissey in Stretford to invite him to form a band. Marr and Morrissey had met at a Patti Smith gig at Manchester's Apollo Theatre on 31 August 1978, when Marr was 14 and Morrissey was 19. They bonded through their love of poetry and literature. A fan of the New York Dolls, Marr had been impressed that Morrissey had written a book on the band and was inspired to turn up on his doorstep following the example of Jerry Leiber, who had formed his working partnership with Mike Stoller after turning up at Stoller's door. According to Morrissey: \"We got on absolutely famously. We were very similar in drive.\" The two found that they were fans of many of the same bands. When Marr looked through Morrissey's singles collection, he found the Monochrome Set, a band they both admired. The next day, Morrissey phoned Marr to confirm that he would be interested in forming a band with him.\nA few days later, Morrissey and Marr held their first rehearsal in Marr's rented attic room in Bowdon. Morrissey provided the lyrics for \"Don't Blow Your Own Horn\", the first song that they worked on; however, they decided against retaining the song, with Marr commenting that \"neither of us liked it very much\". The next song that they worked on was \"The Hand That Rocks the Cradle\", which again was based on lyrics produced by Morrissey. Marr based the tempo on the Patti Smith song \"Kimberly\", and they recorded it on Marr's TEAC four-track cassette recorder. The third track that the duo worked on was \"Suffer Little Children\". Alongside these original compositions, Morrissey suggested that the band produce a cover of \"I Want a Boy for My Birthday\", a song by the 1960s American girl group the Cookies; although he had never heard of the song before, Marr agreed, enjoying the subversive element of having a male vocalist sing it, and the song was recorded on his TEAC machine.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"It's still really clear. It was a sunny day, about one o'clock. There was no advance phone call or anything. I just knocked and he opened the door. As soon as the door opened, Pommy [Pomfret] took two very firm steps back. Which is one of the things that got me to talk so fast, it was just plain exuberance.\"\n\u2014 Marr, on arriving at Morrissey's door\nBy late 1982, Morrissey had chosen the band name the Smiths. He said later that \"it was the most ordinary name and I thought it was time that the ordinary folk of the world showed their faces\". Around the time of the band's formation, Morrissey decided that he would be publicly known only by his surname, with Marr referring to him as \"Mozzer\" or \"Moz\". In 1983, he forbade those around him from using the name \"Steven\", which he despised.\nAfter remaining with the band for several rehearsals, Pomfret departed acrimoniously. He was replaced by the bass player Dale Hibbert, who worked at Manchester's Decibel Studios, where Marr had met him while recording Freak Party's demo. Through Hibbert, the Smiths recorded their first demo at Decibel one night in August 1982. Aided by drummer Simon Wolstencroft, whom Marr had worked with in Freak Party, the band recorded both \"The Hand That Rocks the Cradle\" and \"Suffer Little Children\". Wolstencroft was not interested in joining the band, so following auditions Mike Joyce joined; he later revealed that he was under the influence of magic mushrooms during his audition. Meanwhile, Morrissey took the demo recording to Factory Records, but Factory's Tony Wilson was not interested.\nIn October 1982, the Smiths gave their first public performance as a support act for Blue Rondo \u00e0 la Turk during a student music and fashion show, \"An Evening of Pure Pleasure\", at Manchester's Ritz. During the performance, they played both their own compositions and \"I Want a Boy for My Birthday\". Morrissey had organised the gig's aesthetic; the band came onstage to Klaus Nomi's version of Henry Purcell's \"The Cold Song\" playing through the venue's sound system before his friend James Maker stepped onstage to introduce the band. Maker remained onstage during the performance, relating that \"I was given a pair of maracas \u2013 an optional extra \u2013 and carte blanche. There were no instructions \u2013 I think it was generally accepted I would \"improvise\"... I was there to drink red wine, make extraneous hand gestures and keep well within the tight, chalked circle that Morrissey had drawn around me.\" Hibbert was allegedly unhappy with what he perceived as the band's \"gay\" aesthetic; in turn, Morrissey and Marr were unhappy with his bass playing, so he was replaced by Marr's old schoolfriend Andy Rourke. Hibbert denies that he objected to the band being perceived as gay, and said he was not sure why he was asked to leave.\nIn December 1982, the Smiths recorded their second demo, at the Drone Studios in Chorlton-cum-Hardy; the tracks recorded were \"What Difference Does It Make?\", \"Handsome Devil\" and \"Miserable Lie\". This was used as their audition tape for the record company EMI, who turned the band down. The band continued to practice, this time at the upstairs of the Portland Street Crazy Face Clothing company, a space secured by their new manager Joe Moss. By Christmas, they had written four new songs: \"These Things Take Time\", \"What Do You See in Him?\", \"Jeane\" and \"A Matter of Opinion\", the last of which they soon scrapped. Their next gig was Manchester's Manhattan in late January 1983, and although Maker would again appear as a go-go dancer, this was the last time that he did so. In early February, they performed their third gig, at the Ha\u00e7ienda.\n1983\u20131984: Rough Trade, \"Hand in Glove\", and debut album.\nMarr and Rourke visited London to hand a cassette of their recordings to Geoff Travis of the independent record label Rough Trade Records. Travis agreed to cut their song \"Hand in Glove\" as a single. For the cover, Morrissey insisted on a homoerotic photograph by Jim French which he had found in Margaret Walters' \"The Nude Male\". The single was released in May 1983, and sold well for the next 18 months, but did not chart in the UK Top 40. Among the audience at the Smiths' second London concert, at the University of London Union, was John Walters, the producer of John Peel's BBC Radio 1 show: he invited the band to record a session for the programme. Peel said: \"You couldn't immediately tell what records they'd been listening to. That's fairly unusual, very rare indeed... It was that aspect of the Smiths that I found most impressive.\" Following this radio exposure, the Smiths gained their first interviews, in the music magazines \"NME\" and \"Sounds\".\nTravis travelled to Manchester to meet the band at their Crazy Face rehearsal space and sign a record contract with Rough Trade. Morrissey and Marr signed it on behalf of the band, and there was no discussion of how earnings would be divided. Travis brought in Troy Tate of the Teardrop Explodes, and under his supervision the band recorded their debut album, at the Elephant Studios in Wapping, East London. Rough Trade were unhappy with the album and Tate's production, insisting the band rerecord it with a new producer, John Porter. The singles \"This Charming Man\" and \"What Difference Does It Make?\" reached numbers 25 and 12 respectively on the UK singles chart. Aided by praise from the music press and a series of studio sessions for Peel and David Jensen at BBC Radio 1, the Smiths began to build a dedicated fanbase. The Smiths generated controversy when Garry Bushell of \"The Sun\" alleged their B-side \"Handsome Devil\" was an endorsement of paedophilia. The band denied this, with Morrissey stating the song \"has nothing to do with children, and certainly nothing to do with child-molesting\".\nIn February 1984, the Smiths released their debut album, \"The Smiths\", which reached number two on the UK Albums Chart. \"Reel Around the Fountain\" and \"The Hand That Rocks the Cradle\" met with controversy, with some tabloid newspapers alleging the songs were suggestive of paedophilia, a claim strongly denied by the group. In March 1984, the Smiths performed on Channel 4 music programme \"The Tube\". The album was followed the same year by the non-album singles \"Heaven Knows I'm Miserable Now\" and \"William, It Was Really Nothing\", which featured \"How Soon Is Now?\" on its B-side. Securing the band's first top ten placing, \"Heaven Knows I'm Miserable Now\" was also significant for marking the beginning of engineer and producer Stephen Street's long-term working relationship with the band.\nMore controversy followed when \"Suffer Little Children\", the B-side to \"Heaven Knows I'm Miserable Now\", touched on the theme of the Moors murders. This caused an uproar after the grandfather of one of the murdered children heard the song on a pub jukebox and felt the band was trying to commercialise the murders. After meeting with Morrissey, he accepted that the song was a sincere exploration of the impact of the murders. Morrissey subsequently established a friendship with Ann West, the mother of victim Lesley Ann Downey, who is mentioned by name in the song.\nThe year ended with the release of the compilation album \"Hatful of Hollow\", a collection of singles, B-sides and tracks recorded throughout the previous year for the Peel and Jensen radio shows.\n1985\u20131986: \"Meat Is Murder\" and \"The Queen Is Dead\".\nEarly in 1985, the Smiths released their second studio album, \"Meat Is Murder\". It was more strident and political than its predecessor, including the pro-vegetarian title track (Morrissey forbade the rest of the group from being photographed eating meat), the light-hearted republicanism of \"Nowhere Fast\", and the anti-corporal punishment \"The Headmaster Ritual\" and \"Barbarism Begins at Home\". The band had also grown more diverse musically, with Marr adding rockabilly riffs to \"Rusholme Ruffians\" and Rourke playing a funk bass solo on \"Barbarism Begins at Home\". The album was preceded by the re-release of the B-side \"How Soon Is Now?\" as a single, and although that song was not on the original LP, it has been added to subsequent releases. \"Meat Is Murder\" was the band's only album (barring compilations) to reach number one on the UK charts.\nMorrissey brought a political stance to many of his interviews, courting further controversy. Among his targets were the Thatcher government, the British monarchy and the famine relief project Band Aid. Morrissey famously quipped of the last, \"One can have great concern for the people of Ethiopia, but it's another thing to inflict daily torture on the people of England\" (\"torture\" being a reference to the music that resulted from the project). The subsequent single-only release \"Shakespeare's Sister\" reached number 26 on the UK singles chart, although the only single taken from the album, \"That Joke Isn't Funny Anymore\", was less successful, barely making the top 50. In 1985, the Smiths completed lengthy tours of the UK and the US.\nThe Smiths' third studio album, \"The Queen Is Dead\", was released in June 1986, following its singles \"The Boy with the Thorn in His Side\" and \"Bigmouth Strikes Again\". Marr used an E-mu Emulator synthesizer on tracks such as \"There Is a Light That Never Goes Out\" and \"The Boy with the Thorn in His Side\" to create the sound of a string section. \"The Queen Is Dead\" reached number two on the UK charts.\nA legal dispute with Rough Trade had delayed the album by almost seven months (it had been completed in November 1985), and Marr was beginning to feel the stress of the band's exhausting touring and recording schedule. He later told \"NME\", \"'Worse for wear' wasn't the half of it: I was extremely ill. By the time the tour actually finished it was all getting a little bit\u00a0... dangerous. I was just drinking more than I could handle.\" Rourke was fired from the band in early 1986 due to his use of heroin. He allegedly received notice of his dismissal via a Post-it note stuck to the windscreen of his car. It read, \"Andy \u2013 you have left the Smiths. Goodbye and good luck, Morrissey.\" Morrissey denied this.\nCraig Gannon, formerly a member of Scottish new wave band Aztec Camera, was scouted by Marr to replace Rourke on bass for the upcoming tour, but having never played bass, Gannon instead sat in for a few rehearsals as a rhythm guitarist alongside a session musician. Rourke was reinstated two weeks later, while Gannon stayed in the band as rhythm guitarist, making them a five-piece. During this time, they recorded the singles \"Panic\" and \"Ask\" (the latter with Kirsty MacColl on backing vocals) which reached numbers 11 and 14 respectively on the UK singles chart, and toured the UK.\nAn arrest on drug possession charges almost led to Rourke being replaced by Guy Pratt for the band's North American tour later that year. Rourke's work visa came through just before departure. While the shows were successful, heavy drinking and drug use by crew and band members other than Morrissey took a toll on the group, along with ineffective management and lingering disputes with Rough Trade (whom the band was seriously considering leaving for EMI) and their American label Sire Records (who Morrissey felt did not do enough to promote the Smiths). After a date in St. Petersburg, Florida, he and Marr cancelled the remaining four shows, including a grand finale at New York City's Radio City Music Hall. After the following UK tour ended in October 1986, relations between Marr and Gannon broke down. According to Gannon he was simply not called back for further rehearsals. A few weeks later Gannon's friend and future Smiths guitarist Ivor Perry informed him that according to Travis he was no longer in the Smiths. During his time with the Smiths, Gannon played on seven studio tracks (\"Panic\" and \"Ask\", their B-sides \"The Draize Train\" and \"Golden Lights\", as well as \"Half a Person\" and \"London\", both of which were released as B-sides the following year, and \"You Just Haven't Earned It Yet, Baby\", which first appeared on the compilation album \"The World Won't Listen\" also the following year). On 12 December 1986 the band performed their last concert, an anti-apartheid benefit at Brixton Academy, London.\nAs they had been severed from the contract with Rough Trade records, the band sought a new deal with a major label. Marr told \"NME\" in early 1987, \"Every single label came to see us. It was small-talk, bribes, the whole number. I really enjoyed it.\" The band signed with EMI, which drew criticism from their fanbase and elements of the music press.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The Smiths brought realism to their romance, and tempered their angst with the lightest of touches. The times were personified in their frontman: rejecting all taints of rock n' roll machismo, he played up the social awkwardness of the misfit and the outsider, his gently haunting vocals whooping suddenly upward into a falsetto, clothed in outsize women's shirts, sporting National Health specs or a huge Johnny Ray-style hearing aid. This charming young man was, in the vernacular of the time, the very antithesis of a 'rockist' \u2013 always knowingly closer to the gentle ironicist Alan Bennett, or self-lacerating diarist Kenneth Williams, than a licentious Mick Jagger or a drugged-out Jim Morrison.\"\n\u2014 Paul A. Woods, 2007\n1987: \"Strangeways, Here We Come\" and breakup.\nIn January 1987, the band released \"Shoplifters of the World Unite\", which reached number 12 on the UK singles chart. It was followed the next month by a second compilation album, \"The World Won't Listen\". The title was Morrissey's comment on his frustration with the band's lack of mainstream recognition; it reached number two on the charts. This was followed by the single \"Sheila Take a Bow\"; it was the Smith's second UK top-10 hit, and the last before their split. Another compilation album, \"Louder Than Bombs\", was released in the US in March 1987, with a UK release following two months later. The Smiths' fourth studio album, \"Strangeways, Here We Come,\" opened with a piano introduction, as Marr wanted to divert from the band's typical sound. Marr also played keyboards on the other tracks. The first song, \"A Rush and a Push and the Land Is Ours\", features no guitar.\nTensions emerged within the band. Marr was exhausted and took a break in June 1987, which he felt was negatively perceived by his bandmates. In July, he left the group because he erroneously believed an \"NME\" article titled \"Smiths to Split\" was planted by Morrissey. The article, written by Danny Kelly, alleged that Morrissey disliked Marr working with other musicians and that Marr and Morrissey's personal relationship had reached a breaking point. Marr contacted \"NME\" to explain that he had not left the band due to personal tensions but because he wanted wider musical scope. The former Easterhouse guitarist Ivor Perry was brought in to replace Marr. The band recorded material with him which was never completed, including an early version of \"Bengali in Platforms\", later released on Morrissey's debut solo album, \"Viva Hate\" (1988). Perry was uncomfortable, saying \"it was like they wanted another Johnny Marr\"; according to Perry, the sessions ended with Morrissey running out of the studio.\nBy the time \"Strangeways, Here We Come\" was released in September, the Smiths had split. The breakup has been primarily attributed to Morrissey's irritation with Marr's work with other artists and Marr's frustration with Morrissey's musical inflexibility. Marr particularly hated Morrissey's obsession with covering 1960s pop artists such as Twinkle and Cilla Black, saying in 1992: \"That was the last straw, really. I didn't form a group to perform Cilla Black songs.\" In a 1989 interview, Morrissey cited the lack of a managerial figure and business problems as reasons for the split.\n\"Strangeways, Here We Come\" reached number two in the UK in October 1987, and was the Smiths' most successful album in the US, reaching number 55 on the \"Billboard\" 200. Morrissey and Marr name it as their favourite Smiths album. Two further singles from \"Strangeways\" were released with live, session and demo tracks as B-sides. The following year, the live album \"Rank\", recorded in 1986 when Craig Gannon was still in the band, reached number 2 in the UK and entered in the European 100 Albums chart at number 9.\n1989: Royalties dispute.\nMorrissey and Marr each took 40% of the Smiths' recording and performance royalties, allowing 10% each to Joyce and Rourke. Joyce's barrister later argued in court that Joyce and Rourke were treated as session musicians, \"as readily replaceable as the parts in a lawnmower\". In March 1989, Joyce and Rourke started legal proceedings against Morrissey and Marr. They argued that they were equal partners in the Smiths and were each entitled to a 25 per cent share of the band's profits on all activities other than songwriting and publishing. Rourke, who was in debt, settled quickly for a lump sum of \u00a383,000 () and 10 per cent of royalties, renouncing all further claims.\nJoyce continued with the action, which reached the High Court of Justice (Chancery Division) in December 1996. Morrissey and Marr had accepted the previous year that Joyce and Rourke were partners, but whether Joyce was entitled to a quarter of profits \"arising out of the activities (other than songwriting or publishing)\" of the Smiths remained contentious. Joyce's barrister, Nigel Davis, said that Joyce did not realise he was receiving only 10% of the profits until after the band split.\nMorrissey and Marr \u2013 who were represented separately at the trial \u2013 insisted that the royalty split had been explained to Rourke and Joyce, though they were no longer sure when. Additionally, this agreement was only discussed verbally and it was never legally written on paper, something Marr came to regret. He said in 2004 that although he had no regrets in breaking up the Smiths, he wished the band had signed legal documents \"from the word go\" to avoid the later financial disagreements. As Marr's counsel, Robert Englehart, said, \"Some 13 years on it is extremely difficult to pinpoint the moment when the 40:40:10:10 profit split came into being\u00a0... But Morrissey and Marr acted throughout on the basis that they would be getting 40 percent each of the net profits from the Smiths' earnings.\"\nAfter a seven-day hearing, Judge Weeks found in favour of Joyce, ordering that he receive around \u00a31\u00a0million in back-royalties and 25 per cent henceforth. The judge also gave character assessments; Joyce and Rourke (who gave evidence in Joyce's support) impressed him as straightforward and honest, whereas Morrissey \"appeared devious, truculent and unreliable where his own interests were at stake\" and Marr was \"willing to embroider his evidence to a point where he became less credible\". The judge also said that Marr was \"probably the more intelligent of the four\", and that Rourke and Joyce were \"unintellectual\". Morrissey said in an interview eight months later:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The court case was a potted history of the life of the Smiths. Mike [Joyce], talking constantly and saying nothing. Andy [Rourke], unable to remember his own name. Johnny [Marr], trying to please everyone and consequently pleasing no one. And Morrissey under the scorching spotlight in the dock being drilled. \"How dare you be successful?\" \"How dare you move on?\" To me, the Smiths were a beautiful thing and Johnny left it, and Mike has destroyed it.\nAsked some time before the trial whether he thought Rourke and Joyce had been short-changed, Morrissey responded: \"They were lucky. If they'd had another singer they'd never have got further than Salford Shopping Centre.\" Morrissey's counsel, Ian Mill, conceded that Morrissey's attitude \"betrayed a degree of arrogance\". Morrissey appealed against the verdict; the appeal was heard by the Court of Appeal (Civil Division) in November 1998 and dismissed. Inspired by Joyce's success, Rourke sought legal advice on his own options. He was declared bankrupt in 1999.\nIn November 2005, Joyce told Marc Riley on BBC Radio 6 Music that financial hardship had reduced him to selling rare Smiths recordings on eBay. By way of illustration, Riley played part of an unfinished instrumental known as the \"Click Track\" (or \"Cowbell Track\"). Morrissey responded with a statement three days later revealing that Joyce had received \u00a3215,000 each from Marr and Morrissey in 1997, along with Marr's final backpayment of \u00a3260,000 in 2001. Morrissey failed to make his final payment because, he said, he was overseas in 2001 and did not receive the paperwork. Joyce obtained a default judgement against Morrissey, revised his outstanding claim to \u00a3688,000 and secured orders garnishing much of his income. This was a source of grievance to Morrissey, who estimated that Joyce had cost him at least \u00a31,515,000 in recovered royalties and legal fees up to 30 November 2005.\nSolo careers.\nFollowing the group's split, Morrissey began work on a solo recording, collaborating with producer Stephen Street and fellow Mancunian Vini Reilly, guitarist for the Durutti Column. The resulting album, \"Viva Hate\" (a reference to the end of the Smiths), was released in March 1988, reaching number one in the UK charts. In the following years, he invited several singers for backing vocals on several songs such as Suggs of Madness on \"Piccadilly Palare\" and \"Sing Your Life\", and Chrissie Hynde of the Pretenders on \"My Love Life\". He recorded a duet with Siouxsie Sioux of Siouxsie and the Banshees, \"Interlude\" which was released under the banner of both artists. He also collaborated with arranger Ennio Morricone on \"Dear God Please Help Me\". At the beginning of the 90s, he enjoyed a new popularity in North America, following his first tour as Morrissey. Morrissey continues to perform and record as a solo artist and had released 13 studio albums as of 2020.\nMarr returned in 1989 with New Order's Bernard Sumner and Pet Shop Boys' Neil Tennant in the supergroup Electronic. Electronic released three albums over the next decade. Marr was also a member of the The, recording two albums with them between 1989 and 1993. He has worked as a session musician and writing collaborator with artists including the Pretenders, Bryan Ferry, Pet Shop Boys, Billy Bragg, Black Grape, Talking Heads, Modest Mouse, Crowded House, and Beck.\nIn 2000, he started another band, Johnny Marr + the Healers, which released only one album, \"Boomslang\" (2003), to moderate success, then split up shortly afterwards. He later worked as a guest musician on the Oasis album \"Heathen Chemistry\" (2002). In 2006, he began work with Modest Mouse's Isaac Brock on songs that eventually featured on the band's 2007 release, \"We Were Dead Before the Ship Even Sank\". Modest Mouse subsequently announced that Marr was a fully fledged member and the reformed line-up toured extensively in 2006\u201307. In January 2008, it was reported that Marr had taken part in a week-long songwriting session at Moolah Rouge recording studio in Stockport with Wakefield indie group the Cribs. Marr's association with the band lasted three years and included an appearance on its fourth album, \"Ignore the Ignorant\" (2009). His departure was announced in April 2011. He recorded three solo albums, \"The Messenger\" (2013), \"Playland\" (2014) and \"Call the Comet\" (2018). In addition to his activities as a musician and songwriter, Marr produced Marion's second album, \"The Program\" (1998) and Haven's debut album, \"Between the Senses\" (2002).\nAndy Rourke and Mike Joyce continued to work together. They toured with Sin\u00e9ad O'Connor in the first half of 1988; Rourke also appeared on her 1990 album \"I Do Not Want What I Haven't Got\". Still in 1988, they were recruited (with Craig Gannon) to the Adult Net, but left the band soon afterwards. In 1988 and 1989, they recorded singles with Morrissey. In 1998, they toured and recorded with Aziz Ibrahim (the Stone Roses). In 2001 they formed Specter with Jason Specter and others. The band played in the United Kingdom and the United States, but did not prosper. In the same year they recorded demos with Paul Arthurs (Oasis), Aziz Ibrahim and Rowetta Idah (Happy Mondays) under the name Moondog One, but the project went no further. Towards the end of 2001, they played together in the veteran Manchester band Jeep. In 2005, they played with Vinny Peculiar, recording the single \"Two Fat Lovers\" (Joyce also appeared on the 2006 album \"The Fall and Rise of Vinny Peculiar\"). In 2007 they released the documentary DVD \"Inside the Smiths\", a memoir of their time with the band, notable for the absence of Marr, Morrissey and their music.\nJoyce recorded with Suede (1990); toured and recorded with Buzzcocks (1990\u201391); toured with Julian Cope (1992); toured with John Lydon and Public Image Ltd (1992); recorded with P.P. Arnold (1995); toured and recorded with Pete Wylie (1996\u201398); toured with Vinny Peculiar and Paul Arthurs (2007); and toured with Autokat (2008\u201309). He presented the \"Alternative Therapy\" radio show on Revolution 96.2 FM until the station changed format in 2008, later reviving it on Manchester Radio Online and Tin Can Media. He hosts \"The Coalition Chart Show\" on East Village Radio, which streams from New York.\nRourke played and recorded with the Pretenders (featuring on \"Last of the Independents\", 1994); Badly Drawn Boy (with whom he played for two years); Proud Mary (featuring on \"Love and Light\", 2004); and Ian Brown (featuring on \"The World Is Yours\", 2007). In 2007, he formed Freebass with fellow bassists Peter Hook (New Order and Joy Division) and Mani (the Stone Roses and Primal Scream). Rourke co-founded the Manchester v Cancer concert series, later known as Versus Cancer, to raise money for cancer research. He concentrated on his radio career, beginning with a Saturday-evening show on XFM Manchester. He was a regular on East Village Radio, where his colleagues include Joyce. Rourke relocated to New York in early 2009. There, he formed Jetlag, a \"DJ and audio production outfit\", with Ol\u00e9 Koretsky. In April 2014, the Cranberries vocalist Dolores O'Riordan joined the group and they changed their name to D.A.R.K.\nReunion speculation.\nMarr and Morrissey have repeatedly said that they will not reunite the band. In 2006, Morrissey declared, \"I would rather eat my own testicles than reform the Smiths, and that's saying something for a vegetarian.\" When asked why in another interview the same year, he responded, \"I feel as if I've worked very hard since the demise of the Smiths and the others haven't, so why hand them attention that they haven't earned? We are not friends, we don't see each other. Why on earth would we be on a stage together?\" In a February 2009 interview on BBC Radio 2, he said, \"People always ask me about reunions and I can't imagine why\u00a0[...] the past seems like a distant place, and I'm pleased with that.\" In 2002, Joyce said he was not interested in reforming as he felt the Smiths had run its course.\nIn November 2004, VH1 screened a \"Backstage Pass Special\" episode of \"Bands Reunited\" showing host Aamer Haleem trying and failing to corner Morrissey before a show at the Apollo Theater. In March 2006, Morrissey said he had declined a $5\u00a0million offer to reunite the band to perform at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, saying, \"Money doesn't come into it ... It was a fantastic journey. And then it ended. I didn't feel we should have ended. I wanted to continue. [Marr] wanted to end it. And that was that.\"\nIn August 2007, it was widely reported that Morrissey had declined an offer of $75\u00a0million from a \"consortium of promoters\" to reunite with Marr for a fifty-date world tour under the Smiths' name in 2008 and 2009. \"NME\" gave Morrissey as its source for the story. \"Rolling Stone\" cited his publicist. The offer was also reported at true-to-you.net, an unofficial fan site tacitly supported by Morrissey. It was later described as a hoax, although it is unclear who was hoaxing whom. In October, Marr said on BBC Radio 5 Live: \"Stranger things have happened so, you know, who knows? ... It's no biggie. Maybe we will in 10 or 15 years' time when we all need to for whatever reasons, but right now Morrissey is doing his thing and I'm doing mine.\"\nIn 2008, Marr resumed contact with Morrissey and Rourke while remastering the band's catalogue. That September, Morrissey and Marr met in Manchester and discussed the possibility of reforming the band. The two kept in contact over the next four days and decided to exclude Joyce from any prospective reunion and to wait until after Marr completed his commitments to the Cribs. Communication between the two abruptly ended while Marr was touring in Mexico with the Cribs and the topic of a reunion was never brought up again. Marr said that he did not hear from Morrissey again until a brief email correspondence in December 2010. In June 2009, Marr told an interviewer on London's XFM, \"I think we were offered $50 million for three\u00a0... possibly five shows.\" He said that the chances of a reunion were \"nothing to do with money\" and that the reasons were \"really abstract\".\nIn January 2006, Marr and the Healers played at Rourke's Manchester v Cancer benefit concert, where Marr performed \"How Soon Is Now?\" with Rourke. Marr and Rourke also performed \"How Soon Is Now?\" at the Lollapallooza Brazil festival in 2014. Rourke died of pancreatic cancer on 19 May 2023, aged 59.\nIn August 2024, Morrissey claimed that he and Marr had received a \"lucrative offer\" to tour as the Smiths in 2025, and alleged that while he accepted, Marr did not respond to the offer. Marr replied to a social media post by a fan that he and Morrissey could follow Oasis and tour by posting a picture of Reform UK leader Nigel Farage: this was interpreted as a dismissal of a reunion, with Marr having previously criticised Morrissey's and Farage's political opinions. Weeks later, Marr stated he declined the offer. Marr went onto refute other claims by Morrissey, such as alleging that Marr had filed for 100% ownership of the Smiths' intellectual property and trademarks without consulting Morrissey, in order to tour under the Smiths' name with another singer. Marr claimed that, upon discovering that the band did not own the trademark, and in an effort to protect the trademark from a third party attempt in 2018 to use the band's name, Marr registered the trademark solely under his name after a failure to receive a response from Morrissey: this was despite also agreeing to share ownership of the name with Morrissey.\nMusical style.\nThe Smiths's music has been described as indie pop, indie rock, jangle pop, post-punk and alternative rock. According to Steve Jelbert of \"The Independent\", \"Whole eras and genres collide in their music: Sixties soul and rock, funk, glam, rockabilly, African high life and plenty of studio electrickery.\" Morrissey and Marr dictated the musical direction of the Smiths. Marr said in 1990 that it \"was a 50/50 thing between Morrissey and me. We were completely in sync about which way we should go for each record\". The Smiths' \"non-rhythm-and-blues, whiter-than-white fusion of 1960s rock and post-punk was a repudiation of contemporary dance pop\", and the band purposely rejected synthesisers and dance music. From their second album \"Meat Is Murder\", Marr embellished their songs with keyboards.\nMarr's jangly guitar-playing was influenced by James Honeyman-Scott of the Pretenders, and Bert Jansch of Pentangle. Marr often used a capo to tune his guitar up a full step to F-sharp to accommodate Morrissey's vocal range and also used open tunings. Citing producer Phil Spector as an influence, Marr said, \"I like the idea of records, even those with plenty of space, that sound 'symphonic'. I like the idea of all the players merging into one atmosphere\". Marr's other favourite guitarists are James Williamson of the Stooges, Rory Gallagher, Pete Townshend of the Who, Jimi Hendrix, Marc Bolan of T. Rex, Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones, and John McGeoch of Magazine and Siouxsie and the Banshees. In a 2007 interview for the BBC, Marr said that his goal was to \"pare down\" his style and avoid rock guitar clich\u00e9s. Marr used \"arpeggiated chords, open-string licks and unusual progressions\" and his style \"combined the chime of '60s jangle-pop bands with the pared-down musicality of players like Nile Rodgers and Keith Richards.\" Marr also used an overdrive pedal in \"London\".\nMorrissey's role was to create vocal melodies and lyrics. Morrissey's songwriting was influenced by punk rock and post-punk bands such as New York Dolls, the Cramps, the Specials and the Cult, along with 1960s girl groups and singers such as Dusty Springfield, Sandie Shaw, Marianne Faithfull and Timi Yuro. Morrissey's lyrics, while superficially depressing, were often full of mordant humour; John Peel remarked that the Smiths were one of the few bands capable of making him laugh out loud. Influenced by his childhood interest in the social realism of 1960s \"kitchen sink\" television plays, Morrissey wrote about ordinary people and their experiences with despair, rejection and death. While \"songs such as 'Still Ill' sealed his role as spokesman for disaffected youth\", Morrissey's \"manic-depressive rants\" and his \"'woe-is-me' posture inspired some hostile critics to dismiss the Smiths as 'miserabilists.'\" Julian Stringer characterised the Smiths as \"one of Britain's most overtly political groups\", while in his study of their work, Andrew Warnes termed them \"the most anti-capitalist of bands\".\nImagery.\nThe group's cover artwork had a distinctive visual style and often featured images of film and pop stars, usually in duotone. Design was by Morrissey and Rough Trade art coordinator Jo Slee. The covers of singles rarely featured any text other than the band name and the band itself did not appear on the cover of any UK release. (Morrissey did, however, appear on an alternative cover for \"What Difference Does It Make?\", mimicking the pose of the original subject, actor Terence Stamp, after the latter objected to his picture being used.) The choice of cover subjects reflected Morrissey's interest in film stars (Stamp, Alain Delon, Jean Marais, Warhol prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Joe Dallesandro, James Dean); figures from sixties British popular culture (Viv Nicholson, Pat Phoenix, Yootha Joyce, Shelagh Delaney); and anonymous images from old films and magazines.\nThe Smiths dressed mainly in ordinary clothes\u00a0\u2013 jeans and plain shirts\u00a0\u2013 in keeping with the back-to-basics, guitar-and-drums style of the music. This contrasted with the exotic high-fashion image cultivated by New Romantic pop groups such as Spandau Ballet and Duran Duran and highlighted in magazines such as \"The Face\" and \"i-D\". In 1986, when the Smiths performed on the British music programme \"The Old Grey Whistle Test\", Morrissey wore a fake hearing-aid to support a hearing-impaired fan who was ashamed of using one, and also frequently wore thick-rimmed NHS-style glasses. Morrissey also would often wave gladiolus flowers onstage.\nAs frontman of the Smiths, Morrissey subverted many of the norms that were associated with pop and rock music. The band's aesthetic simplicity was a reaction to the excess personified by the New Romantics, and while Morrissey adopted an androgynous appearance like the New Romantics or earlier glam rockers, his was far more subtle and understated. According to one commentator, \"he was bookish; he wore NHS spectacles and a hearing aid on stage; he was celibate. Worst of all, he was sincere\", with his music being \"so intoxicatingly melancholic, so dangerously thoughtful, so seductively funny that it lured its listeners... into a relationship with him and his music instead of the world.\"\nLegacy.\nThe Smiths have been widely influential. Ian Youngs of BBC News described them as \"the band that inspired deeper devotion than any British group since the Beatles\". Marr's guitar playing \"was a huge building block for more Manchester legends that followed the Smiths\", including the Stone Roses, whose guitarist John Squire said Marr was an influence. The Oasis songwriter and guitarist Noel Gallagher also cited the Smiths as an influence, especially Marr, saying that \"when the Jam split, the Smiths started, and I totally went for them\". The Smiths were an early influence on Radiohead and inspired their 2001 single \"Knives Out\". In 2001, Marr said Radiohead were the act that had \"come closest to the genuine influence of the Smiths\".\nAlex Turner of the English rock band Arctic Monkeys cited the Smiths as an influence on the band's album \"Suck It and See\". The Canadian artist the Weeknd listed the Smiths as an inspiration during the making of his third studio album, \"Starboy.\" The American singer-songwriter Jeff Buckley was a fan of the Smiths and Morrissey. He covered Smiths songs such as \"I Know it's Over\" and \"The Boy with the Thorn in His Side\". In 2010, Morrissey named Buckley's 1994 album \"Grace\" as his 12th-favourite album.\nIn \"Q\", Simon Goddard argued in 2007 that the Smiths were \"the one truly vital voice of the '80s\" and \"the most influential British guitar group of the decade\". He continued: \"As the first indie outsiders to achieve mainstream success on their own terms (their second album proper, 1985's \"Meat Is Murder\", made Number 1 in the UK), they elevated rock's standard four-piece formula to new heights of magic and poetry. Their legacy can be traced down through the Stone Roses, Oasis and the Libertines to today's crop of artful young guitar bands.\"\nIn \"Uncut,\" Simon Reynolds wrote: \"Once upon a time, a band from the North came with a sound so fresh and vigorous it took the nation by storm. The sound was rock, but crucially it was pop, too: concise, punchy, melodic, shiny without being 'plastic'. The singer was a true original, delivering a blend of sensitivity and strength, defiance and tenderness, via a regionally inflected voice. The young man's lips spilled forth words that were realistic without being dour, full of sly humour and beautifully observed detail. Most recognised their debut album as a landmark, an instant classic.\"\nThe \"Britpop movement pre-empted by the Stone Roses and spearheaded by groups like Oasis, Suede and Blur drew heavily from Morrissey's portrayal of and nostalgia for a bleak urban England of the past.\" Blur formed as a result of seeing the Smiths on \"The South Bank Show\" in 1987. Yet even while leading bands from the Britpop movement were influenced by the Smiths, they were at odds with the \"basic anti-establishment philosophies of Morrissey and the Smiths\", since Britpop \"was an entirely commercial construct\". Mark Simpson suggested that \"the whole point of Britpop was to airbrush Morrissey out of the picture\u00a0... Morrissey had to become an 'unperson' so that the Nineties and its centrally-planned and coordinated pop economy could happen.\"\n\"Teezo Touchdown\" included them in a Counter Culture playlist on Spotify. \"Rolling Stone\" included four Smiths albums on its 2012 list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\", and included \"William, It Was Really Nothing\" and \"How Soon Is Now?\" on its 2004 list of the \"500 Greatest Songs of All Time\". Morrissey is included in its 2010 list of the greatest singers. In 2014 and 2015, the Smiths were nominated for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.\nIn 2021 and 2023, the band Blossoms and the singer Rick Astley performed several concerts of Smiths covers, including a performance at 2023 Glastonbury Festival. \"The Guardian\" gave the performances positive reviews, suggesting they offered fans a way to enjoy the Smiths without the \"moral queasiness\" of Morrissey, who had become a controversial figure in the preceding years. Morrissey thanked Blossoms and Astley on his website, but Marr said the performances were \"funny and horrible at the same time\".\nMembers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52583", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52583", "title": "441", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 441 (CDXLI) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Seleucus without colleague (or, less frequently, year 1194 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 441 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52584", "revid": "1268325916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52584", "title": "941", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 941 (CMXLI) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52585", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52585", "title": "Thespis", "text": "6th century BCE Greek actor\nThespis (; ; fl. 6th century BC) was an Ancient Greek poet. He was born in the ancient city of Icarius (present-day Dionysos, Greece). According to certain Ancient Greek sources and especially Aristotle, he was the first human to appear on stage as an actor playing a character in a play (instead of speaking as himself). In other sources, he is said to have introduced the first principal actor in addition to the chorus. He is often called the \"Inventor of Tragedy\". His name is the origin of the word \"\", meaning actor.\nThespis was a singer of dithyrambs (songs about stories from mythology with choric refrains). He is credited with introducing a new style in which one singer or actor performed the words of individual characters in the stories, distinguishing between the characters with the aid of different masks.\nThis new style was called tragedy, and Thespis was the most popular exponent of it. Eventually, in 534 BC competitions to find the best tragedy were instituted at the City Dionysia in Athens, and Thespis won the first documented competition. Capitalising on his success, Thespis also invented theatrical touring; he would tour various cities while carrying his costumes, masks and other props in a horse-drawn wagon.\nAlleged works.\nTitles of some plays have been attributed to Thespis. But most modern scholars, following the suggestion of Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, consider them to be forgeries, some forged by the philosopher Heraclides Ponticus, others produced rather later, in the Common Era:\nFragments (probably spurious) in A. Nauck, \"Tragicorum graecorum fragmenta\" (1887).\nLegacy.\nIt is implied that Thespis invented acting in the Western world, and that prior to his performances, no one had ever assumed the resemblance of another person for the purpose of storytelling. In fact, Thespis is the first known actor in \"written\" plays. He may thus have had a substantial role in changing the way stories were told and inventing theatre as we know it today. In homage to Thespis, actors in the English-speaking part of the world have been referred to as \"thespians\".\nThespis was the title character in an 1871 comic opera by W.S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan, the first collaboration between the two men, although the musical score has mostly been lost. The story involves Thespis and his troupe of actors temporarily replacing the gods of Olympus, while the latter come down to earth to \"mingle\" with humanity. The actors do a bad job of it, and the gods return angrily to resume their rightful roles.\nA branch of the National Theatre of Greece expressly instituted in 1939 to tour the country is named \"The Wagon of Thespis\" (Greek: \u0386\u03c1\u03bc\u03b1 \u0398\u03ad\u03c3\u03c0\u03b9\u03b4\u03bf\u03c2, \"\u00c1rma Th\u00e9spidos\") in his honour.\nThe https://, which is part of Brimar Entertainment Limited, is named after the actor Thespis and founded by actor Neil Alan Bell. The company logo is a depiction of Thespis, his horse and cart.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52586", "revid": "47023628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52586", "title": "940", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 940 (CMXL) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52587", "revid": "29237824", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52587", "title": "944", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 944 (CMXLIV) was a leap year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52588", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52588", "title": "56 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 56 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. In the Roman Republic, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lentulus and Philippus (or, less frequently, year 698 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 56 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nBritain.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52589", "revid": "45650170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52589", "title": "57 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 57 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. Contemporaneously, in the Roman Republic, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lentulus and Metellus (or, less frequently, year 697 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 57\u00a0BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52590", "revid": "40727880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52590", "title": "The Population Bomb", "text": "1968 book predicting worldwide famine\nThe Population Bomb is a 1968 book co-authored by former Stanford University professor Paul R. Ehrlich and former Stanford senior researcher in conservation biology Anne H. Ehrlich. From the opening page, it predicted worldwide famines due to overpopulation, as well as other major societal upheavals, and advocated immediate action to limit population growth. Fears of a \"population explosion\" existed in the mid-20th century baby boom years, but the book and its authors brought the idea to an even wider audience. \nThe book has been criticized since its publication for an alarmist tone, and over the subsequent decades, for inaccurate assertions and failed predictions. For instance, regional famines have occurred since the publication of the book, but not world famines. The Ehrlichs themselves still stand by the book despite the flaws identified by its critics, with Paul stating in 2009 that \"perhaps the most serious flaw in \"The Bomb\" was that it was much too optimistic about the future,\" despite having predicted catastrophic global famines that never came to pass. They believe that it achieved their goals because \"it alerted people to the importance of environmental issues and brought human numbers into the debate on the human future.\"\nGeneral description of the book.\n\"The Population Bomb\" was written at the suggestion of David Brower, the executive director of the environmentalist Sierra Club, and Ian Ballantine of Ballantine Books following various public appearances Ehrlich had made regarding population issues and their relation to the environment. Although the Ehrlichs collaborated on the book, the publisher insisted that a single author be credited, and also asked to change their preferred title: \"Population, Resources, and Environment.\" The title \"Population Bomb\" was taken (with permission) from General William H. Draper, founder of the Population Crisis Committee and a widely spread pamphlet \"The Population Bomb is Everyone's Baby\" issued in 1954 by the Hugh Moore Fund. The Ehrlichs regret the choice of title, which they admit was a perfect choice from a marketing perspective, but think that \"it led Paul to be miscategorized as solely focused on human numbers, despite our interest in all the factors affecting the human trajectory.\"\nEarly editions of \"The Population Bomb\" began with the statement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The battle to feed all of humanity is over. In the 1970s hundreds of millions of people will starve to death in spite of any crash programs embarked upon now. At this late date nothing can prevent a substantial increase in the world death rate...\"\nMuch of the book is spent describing the state of the environment and the food security situation, which is described as increasingly dire. The Ehrlichs argue that as the existing population was not being fed adequately, and as it was growing rapidly, it was unreasonable to expect sufficient improvements in food production to feed everyone. They further argued that the growing population placed escalating strains on all aspects of the natural world. \"What needs to be done?\" they wrote, \"We must rapidly bring the world population under control, reducing the growth rate to zero or making it negative. Conscious regulation of human numbers must be achieved. Simultaneously we must, at least temporarily, greatly increase our food production.\"\nPossible solutions.\nPaul and Anne Ehrlich described a number of \"ideas on how these goals \"might\" be reached.\" They believed that the United States should take a leading role in population control, both because it was already consuming much more than the rest of the world, and therefore had a moral duty to reduce its impact, and because the US would have to lead international efforts due to its prominence in the world, in order to avoid charges of hypocrisy or racism it would have to take the lead in population reduction efforts. The Ehrlichs float the idea of adding \"temporary sterilants\" to the water supply or staple foods. However, they reject the idea as unpractical due to \"criminal inadequacy of biomedical research in this area.\" They suggest a tax scheme in which additional children would add to a family's tax burden at increasing rates for more children, as well as luxury taxes on childcare goods. They suggest incentives for men who agree to permanent sterilization before they have two children, as well as a variety of other monetary incentives. They propose a powerful Department of Population and Environment which \"should be set up with the power to take whatever steps are necessary to establish a reasonable population size in the United States and to put an end to the steady deterioration of our environment.\" The department should support research into population control, such as better contraceptives, mass sterilizing agents, and prenatal sex discernment (because families often continue to have children until a male is born. The Ehrlichs suggested that if they could choose a male child this would reduce the birthrate). Legislation should be enacted guaranteeing the right to an abortion, and sex education should be expanded.\nAfter explaining the domestic policies the US should pursue, they discuss foreign policy. They advocate a system of \"triage,\" such as that suggested by William and Paul Paddock in \"Famine 1975!\". Under this system countries would be divided into categories based on their abilities to feed themselves going forward. Countries with sufficient programmes in place to limit population growth, and the ability to become self-sufficient in the future would continue to receive food aid. Countries, for example India, which were \"so far behind in the population-food game that there is no hope that our food aid will see them through to self-sufficiency\" would have their food aid eliminated. The Ehrlichs argued that this was the only realistic strategy in the long-term. Ehrlich applauds the Paddocks' \"courage and foresight\" in proposing such a solution. The Ehrlichs further discusses the need to set up public education programs and agricultural development schemes in developing countries. They argue that the scheme would likely have to be implemented outside the framework of the United Nations due to the necessity selecting the targeted regions and countries, and suggests that within countries certain regions should be prioritized to the extent that cooperative separatist movements should be encouraged if they are an improvement over the existing authority. He mentions his support for government mandated sterilization of Indian males with three or more children.\nIn the rest of the book the Ehrlichs discuss things which readers can do to help. This is focused primarily on changing public opinion to create pressure on politicians to enact the policies they suggest, which they believed were not politically possible in 1968. At the end of the book they discuss the possibility that his forecasts may be wrong, which they felt they must acknowledge as scientists. However, they believe that regardless of coming catastrophes, his prescriptions would only benefit humanity, and would be the right course of action in any case.\nThe book sold over two million copies, raised the general awareness of population and environmental issues, and influenced 1960s and 1970s public policy. For the 14 years prior the book's appearance, the world population had been growing at accelerating rates, but immediately after the book's publication, the world population growth rate coincidentally began a continuing downward trend, from its 1968 peak of 2.09% to 1.09% in 2018.\nContext.\nIn 1948, two widely read books were published that would inspire a \"neo-Malthusian\" debate on population and the environment: Fairfield Osborn\u2019s \"Our Plundered Planet\" and William Vogt\u2019s \"Road to Survival\". These inspired works such as \"The Population Bomb is Everyone's Baby\" pamphlet by Hugh Everett Moore in 1954, as well as some of the original societies concerned with population and environmental matters. In 1961 Marriner Eccles, former chairman of the board of the Federal Reserve System, did describe the explosive rate of growth of the world's population as the \"most vitally important problem facing the world today,\" which may well prove to be \"more explosive than the atomic or hydrogen bomb.\" D.B. Luten has said that although the book is often seen as a seminal work in the field, \"The Population Bomb\" is actually best understood as \"climaxing and in a sense terminating the debate of the 1950s and 1960s.\u201d Ehrlich has said that he traced his own Malthusian beliefs to a lecture he heard Vogt give when he was attending university in the early 1950s. For Ehrlich, these writers provided \u201ca global framework for things he had observed as a young naturalist.\"\nCriticisms.\nRestatement of Malthusian theory.\nThe \"Population Bomb\" has been characterized by critics as primarily a repetition of the Malthusian catastrophe argument that population growth will outpace agricultural growth unless controlled. Ehrlich observed that since about 1930 the population of the world had doubled within a single generation, from 2 billion to nearly 4 billion, and was on track to do so again. He assumed that available resources on the other hand, and in particular food, were nearly at their limits. Some critics compare Ehrlich unfavorably to Malthus, saying that although Thomas Malthus did not make a firm prediction of imminent catastrophe, Ehrlich warned of a potential massive disaster within the next decade or two. In addition, critics state that unlike Malthus, Ehrlich did not see any means of avoiding the disaster entirely (although some mitigation was possible), and proposed solutions that were much more radical than those discussed by Malthus, such as starving whole countries that refused to implement population control measures.\nEhrlich was certainly not unique in his neo-Malthusian predictions, and there was a widespread belief in the 1960s and 70s that increasingly catastrophic famines were on their way.\nPredictions.\nThe Ehrlichs made a number of specific predictions that did not come to pass, for which they have received criticism. They have acknowledged that some predictions were incorrect. However, they maintain that their general argument remains intact, that their predictions were merely illustrative, that their and others' warnings caused preventive action, or that many of their predictions may yet come true &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. Still other commentators have criticized the Ehrlichs' perceived inability to acknowledge mistakes, evasiveness, and refusal to alter their arguments in the face of contrary evidence. In 2015 Ehrlich told Retro Report, \"I do not think my language was too apocalyptic in \"The Population Bomb.\" My language would be even more apocalyptic today.\" \nIn \"The Population Bomb\"'s opening lines the authors state that nothing can prevent famines in which hundreds of millions of people will die during the 1970s (amended to 1970s and 1980s in later editions), and that there would be \"a substantial increase in the world death rate.\" Although many lives could be saved through dramatic action, it was already too late to prevent a substantial increase in the global death rate. However, in reality the global death rate has continued to decline substantially since then, from 13/1000 in 1965\u201374 to 10/1000 from 1985\u20131990. Meanwhile, the population of the world has more than doubled, while calories consumed/person have increased 24%. The UN does not keep official death-by-hunger statistics so it is hard to measure whether the \"hundreds of millions of deaths\" number is correct. Ehrlich himself suggested in 2009 that between 200-300 million had died of hunger since 1968. However, that is measured over 40 years rather than the ten to twenty foreseen in the book, so it can be seen as significantly fewer than predicted.\nFamine has not been eliminated, but its root cause has been political instability, not global food shortage. The Indian economist and Nobel Memorial Prize winner, Amartya Sen, has argued that nations with democracy and a free press have virtually never suffered from extended famines. And while a 2010 UN report stated that 925 million of the world's population of nearly seven billion people were in a constant state of hunger, it also notes that the percentage of the world's population who qualify as \"undernourished\" has fallen by more than half, from 33 percent to about 16 percent, since the Ehrlichs published \"The Population Bomb.\"\nThe Ehrlichs write: \"I don't see how India could possibly feed two hundred million more people by 1980.\" This view was widely held at the time, as another statement of his, later in the book: \"I have yet to meet anyone familiar with the situation who thinks that India will be self-sufficient in food by 1971.\" In the book's 1971 edition, the latter prediction was removed, as the food situation in India suddenly improved &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs of 2010, India had almost 1.2 billion people, having nearly tripled its population from around 400 million in 1960, with a total fertility rate in 2008 of 2.6. While the absolute numbers of malnourished children in India is high, the rates of malnutrition and poverty in India have declined from approximately 90% at the time of India's independence (1947), to less than 40% in 2010 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. Ehrlich's prediction about famines did not come to pass, although food security is still an issue in India. However, most epidemiologists, public health physicians and demographers identify corruption as the chief cause of malnutrition, not \"overpopulation\". As economist and philosopher Amartya Sen noted, India frequently had famines during British colonial rule. However, since India became a democracy, there have been no recorded famines.\nJournalist Dan Gardner has criticized Ehrlich both for his overconfident predictions and his refusal to acknowledge his errors. \"In two lengthy interviews, Ehrlich admitted making not a single major error in the popular works he published in the late 1960s and early 1970s \u2026 the only flat-out mistake Ehrlich acknowledges is missing the destruction of the rain forests, which happens to be a point that supports and strengthens his world view\u2014and is therefore, in cognitive dissonance terms, not a mistake at all. Beyond that, he was by his account, off a little here and there, but only because the information he got from others was wrong. Basically, he was right across the board.\"\nJonathan Last called it \"one of the most spectacularly foolish books ever published\".\nPersistence of trends.\nEconomist Julian Simon and medical statistician Hans Rosling pointed out that the failed prediction of 70s famines were based exclusively on the assumption that exponential population growth will continue indefinitely and no technological or social progress will be made. In \"The Ultimate Resource\" Simon argued that resources, such as metals, which Ehrlichs extensively discuss in their books as examples of non-sustainable resources, are valued exclusively for the function they provide, and technological progress frequently replaces these: for example, copper was largely replaced by fiber optic in communications, and carbon fiber replaced a wide range of alloys and steel in construction &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. Simon also argued that technological progress tends to happen in large steps rather than linear growth, as happened with the Green Revolution.\nHans Rosling in his book \"Factfulness\" demonstrated that fertility rate has significantly decreased worldwide and, more importantly, high fertility is a natural response to high mortality in low-income countries and once they enter higher income group, fertility drops quickly. According to environmentalist Stewart Brand, himself a student and friend of Ehrlich, the assumption made by the latter and by authors of \"The Limits to Growth\" has been \"proven wrong since 1963\" when the demographic trends worldwide have visibly changed.\nShowmanship.\nOne frequent criticism of \"The Population Bomb\" is that it focused on spectacle and exaggeration at the expense of accuracy. Pierre Desrochers and Christine Hoffbauer remark that \"at the time of writing \"The Population Bomb\", Paul and Anne Ehrlich should have been more cautious and revised their tone and rhetoric, in light of the undeniable and already apparent errors and shortcomings of Osborn and Vogt\u2019s analyses.\" Charles Rubin has written that it was precisely because Ehrlich was largely unoriginal and wrote in a clear emotionally gripping style that it became so popular. He quotes a review from \"Natural History\" noting that Ehrlich does not try to \"convince intellectually by mind dulling statistics,\" but rather roars \"like an Old Testament Prophet.\" Gardner says, \"as much as the events and culture of the era, Paul Ehrlich's style explain the enormous audience he attracted.\" Indeed, an appearance on \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\" helped to propel the success of the book, as well as Ehrlich's celebrity. Desrochers and Hoffbauer go on to conclude that it seems hard to deny that using an alarmist tone and emotional appeal were the main lessons that the present generation of environmentalists learned from Ehrlich's success.\nSocial and political coercion.\nOn the political left the book received criticism that it was focusing on \"the wrong problem\", and that the real issue was one of distribution of resources rather than of overpopulation. Marxists worried that Paul and Anne Ehrlich's work could be used to justify genocide and imperial control, as well as oppression of minorities and disadvantaged groups or even a return to eugenics. \nEco-socialist Barry Commoner argued that the Ehrlichs were too focused on overpopulation as the source of environmental problems, and that their proposed solutions were politically unacceptable because of the coercion that they implied, and because the cost would fall disproportionately on the poor. He argued that technological, and above all social development would lead to a natural decrease in both population growth and environmental damage. Commoner engaged in a fierce debate with Ehrlich at an environmental United Nations convention in Stockholm:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A feud about how to deal with overpopulation surfaced in Stockholm, between Ehrlich and his nemesis, Barry Commoner, whose popular book, The Closing Circle (1971), directly criticized Ehrlich\u2019s population-bomb thesis. Both were on panels in Stockholm, with Commoner slyly planting invidious questions aimed at Ehrlich among various Third World participants in the conference, and Ehrlich yelling back. Commoner\u2019s argument was that population policies weren\u2019t needed, because what was called \u201cthe demographic transition\u201d would take care of everything\u2014all you had to do was help poor people get less poor, and they would have fewer children. Ehrlich insisted that the situation was way too serious for that approach, and it wouldn\u2019t work anyway: You needed harsh government programs to drive down the birthrate. The alternative was overwhelming famines and massive damage to the environment.\u2014\u200a\nEhrlich's response.\nIn a 2004 \"Grist Magazine\" interview, Ehrlich acknowledged some specific predictions he had made, in the years around the time \"The Population Bomb\" was published, that had \"not\" come to pass. However, as to a number of his fundamental ideas and assertions he maintained that facts and science proved them correct.\nIn answer to the question: \"Were your predictions in \"The Population Bomb\" right?\", Ehrlich responded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Anne and I have always followed UN population projections as modified by the Population Reference Bureau -- so we never made \"predictions,\" even though idiots think we have. When I wrote \"The Population Bomb\" in 1968, there were 3.5 billion people. Since then we've added another 2.8 billion -- many more than the total population (2 billion) when I was born in 1932. If that's not a population explosion, what is? My basic claims (and those of the many scientific colleagues who reviewed my work) were that population growth was a major problem. Fifty-eight academies of science said that same thing in 1994, as did the world scientists' warning to humanity in the same year. My view has become depressingly mainline!\nIn another retrospective article published in 2009, Ehrlich said, in response to criticism that many of his predictions had not come to pass:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the biggest tactical error in \"The Bomb\" was the use of scenarios, stories designed to help one think about the future. Although we clearly stated that they were not predictions and that \u201cwe can be sure that none of them will come true as stated,\u2019 (p. 72)\u2014their failure to occur is often cited as a failure of prediction. In honesty, the scenarios were way off, especially in their timing (we underestimated the resilience of the world system). But they did deal with future issues that people in 1968 should have been thinking about \u2013 famines, plagues, water shortages, armed international interventions by the United States, and nuclear winter (e.g., Ehrlich et al. 1983, Toon et al. 2007)\u2014all events that have occurred or now still threatenIn a 2018 interview with \"The Guardian\", Ehrlich, while still proud of \"The Population Bomb\" for starting a worldwide debate on the issues of population, acknowledged weaknesses of the book including not placing enough emphasis on climate change, overconsumption and inequality, and countering accusations of racism. He argues \"too many rich people in the world is a major threat to the human future, and cultural and genetic diversity are great human resources.\" He advocated for an \"unprecedented redistribution of wealth\" in order to mitigate the problem of overconsumption of resources by the world's wealthy, but said \"the rich who now run the global system\u00a0\u2014 that hold the annual 'world destroyer' meetings in Davos\u00a0\u2014 are unlikely to let it happen.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52591", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52591", "title": "58 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 58 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Piso and Gabinius (or, less frequently, year 696 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 58 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52592", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52592", "title": "George Sand", "text": "French novelist and memoirist (1804\u20131876)\nAmantine Lucile Aurore Dupin de Francueil (; 1\u00a0July 1804\u00a0\u2013 8\u00a0June 1876), best known by her pen name George Sand (), was a French novelist, memoirist and journalist. Being more renowned than either Victor Hugo or Honor\u00e9 de Balzac in Britain in the 1830s and 1840s, Sand is recognised as one of the most notable writers of the European Romantic era. She has more than 50 volumes of various works to her credit, including tales, plays and political texts, alongside her 70 novels.\nLike her great-grandmother, Louise Dupin, whom she admired, George Sand advocated for women's rights and passion, criticized the institution of marriage, and fought against the prejudices of a conservative society. She was considered scandalous because of her turbulent love life, her adoption of masculine clothing, and her masculine pseudonym.\nPersonal life.\nChildhood.\nAmantine Lucile Aurore Dupin, the future George Sand, was born on 1 July 1804 on rue Meslay in Paris to Maurice Dupin de Francueil and Sophie-Victoire Delaborde. She was the paternal great-granddaughter of the Marshal of France Maurice de Saxe (1696\u20131750), and on her mother's side, her grandfather was Antoine Delaborde, master paumier and master birder. For much of her childhood, she was raised by her grandmother Marie-Aurore de Saxe, Madame Dupin de Francueil, at her grandmother's house in the village of Nohant, in the French province of Berry. Sand inherited the house in 1821 when her grandmother died, and used the setting in many of her novels.\nGender presentation.\nSand was one of many notable 19th-century women who chose to wear male attire in public. In 1800, the police chief of Paris issued an order requiring women to apply for a \u201ctransvestite pass\u201d in order to wear male clothing. Some women applied for health, occupational, or recreational reasons (e.g., horseback riding), although many women chose to wear trousers and other traditional male attire in public without receiving a permit. Sand obtained said permit in 1831, justifying it as being less expensive and far sturdier than the typical dress of a noblewoman at the time. In addition to being comfortable, Sand's male attire enabled her to circulate more freely in Paris than most of her female contemporaries and gave her increased access to venues that barred women, even those of her social standing. Also scandalous was Sand's smoking tobacco in public; neither peerage nor gentry had yet sanctioned the free indulgence by women of such a habit, especially in public, although Franz Liszt's paramour Marie d'Agoult affected this as well, smoking large cigars.\nWhile some contemporaries were critical of her comportment, many people accepted her behaviour\u2014until they became shocked with the subversive tone of her novels. Those who found her writing admirable were not bothered by her ambiguous or rebellious public behaviour.\nIn 1831, at the age of 27, she chose her pseudonym George Sand. \"Sand\" was derived from the name of her lover and fellow writer Jules Sandeau, as the pair had previously co-authored a novel under the pseudonym J. Sand. She added George to complete the name and distinguish it from Sandeau's, removing the final \"s\" from the usual French spelling of the name to heighten its ambiguity as a pseudonym.\nVictor Hugo commented, \"George Sand cannot determine whether she is male or female. I entertain a high regard for all my colleagues, but it is not my place to decide whether she is my sister or my brother.\"\nGender appears to be likewise ambiguous in Sand's own perspective. Sometimes when writing first person memoirs or essays (including letters and journals), Sand's language \"speaks to modern explorations of gender ambiguity\" in the consistent use of a first-person \"male persona\" used to describe Sand's own experiences and identity in masculine terms. However, when writing an autobiography of the author's youth, the person described is a girl/woman whose descriptions aligns with her legal designation as \"la demoiselle Aurora.\"\nSand's friends and peers likewise alternate between using masculine or female adjectives and pronouns depending on the situation. For instance, in reviewing the collected letters of Sand's lover Chopin, one finds her consistently addressed as either \"Mme Sand\" or more familiarly as \"George\". Either way, she is referred to with feminine pronouns, and positioned as the \"Lady of the House\" when referring to their domestic life together. However, when speaking of Sand as a public rather than a private figure, even those who clearly knew (or even referenced) the writer's sex also tended to apply masculine terms when speaking of their role as an author. For instance Jules Janin describes Sand as the \"king\" of novelists (ie: \"le roi des romanciers modernes\") rather than as the \"queen\". Likewise, Flaubert refers to Sand as being a dear master of their shared art (ie: \"Ch\u00e8re Maitre\"), using a masculine title to denote the masculine professional role, but a grammatically feminine adjective that acknowledges their legal or grammatical sex.\nNotable relationships.\nIn 1822, at the age of eighteen, Sand married (Fran\u00e7ois) Casimir Dudevant, an out-of-wedlock son of Baron Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Dudevant. She and Dudevant had two children: Maurice and Solange (1828\u20131899). In 1825, she had an intense but perhaps platonic affair with the young lawyer Aur\u00e9lien de S\u00e8ze. In early 1831, she left her husband and entered upon a four- or five-year period of \"romantic rebellion\". In 1835, she was legally separated from Dudevant and took custody of their children.\nSand had romantic affairs with the novelist Jules Sandeau (1831), the Polish-Russian Prince Norbert Przanowski (February 1832 \u2013 Summer 1833) the writer Prosper M\u00e9rim\u00e9e, the dramatist Alfred de Musset (summer 1833 \u2013 March 1835), Louis-Chrysostome Michel, the actor Pierre-Fran\u00e7ois Bocage, the writer Charles Didier, the novelist F\u00e9licien Mallefille, the politician Louis Blanc, and the composer Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin (1837\u20131847). Later in her life, she corresponded with Gustave Flaubert, and despite their differences in temperament and aesthetic preference, they eventually became close friends.\nSand was also close friends with the actress Marie Dorval. Whether they were physically involved or not has been debated, yet never verified. The two met in January 1833, after Sand wrote Dorval a letter of appreciation following one of her performances. Sand wrote about Dorval, including many passages where she is described as smitten with Dorval. Only those who know how differently we were made can realize how utterly I was in thrall to her...God had given her the power to express what she felt...She was beautiful, and she was simple. She had never been taught anything, but there was nothing she did not know by instinct. I can find no words with which to describe how cold and incomplete my own nature is. I can express nothing. There must be a sort of paralysis in my brain which prevents what I feel from ever finding a form through which it can achieve communication...When she appeared upon the stage, with her drooping figure, her listless gait, her sad and penetrating glance...I can say only that it was as though I were looking at an embodied spirit. \nTheater critic Gustave Planche reportedly warned Sand to stay away from Dorval. Likewise, Count Alfred de Vigny, Dorval's lover from 1831 to 1838, warned the actress to stay away from Sand, whom he referred to as \"that damned lesbian\". In 1840, Dorval played the lead in a play written by Sand, titled \"Cosima\", and the two women collaborated on the script. However, the play was not well-received, and was cancelled after only seven showings. Sand and Dorval remained close friends for the remainder of Dorval's lifetime.\nChopin.\nSand spent the winter of 1838\u20131839 with Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin in Mallorca at the (formerly abandoned) Carthusian monastery of Valldemossa. The trip to Mallorca was described in her \"Un hiver \u00e0 Majorque\" (\"A Winter in Majorca\"), first published in 1841. Chopin was already ill with incipient tuberculosis at the beginning of their relationship, and spending a cold and wet winter in Mallorca where they could not get proper lodgings exacerbated his symptoms.\nSand and Chopin also spent many long summers at Sand's country manor in Nohant from 1839 to 1846, skipping only 1840. There, Chopin wrote many of his most famous works, including the Fantaisie in F minor, Op. 49, Piano Sonata No. 3, Op. 58, and the Ballade No. 3 Op. 47.\nIn her novel \"Lucrezia Floriani\", Sand is said to have used Chopin as a model for a sickly Eastern European prince named Karol. He is cared for by a middle-aged actress past her prime, Lucrezia, who suffers greatly through her affection for Karol. Though Sand claimed not to have made a cartoon out of Chopin, the book's publication and widespread readership may have exacerbated their later antipathy towards each other. After Chopin's death, Sand burned much of their correspondence, leaving only four surviving letters between the two. Three of the letters were published in the \"Classiques Garnier\" series in 1968.\nAnother breach was caused by Chopin's attitude toward Sand's daughter, Solange. Chopin continued to be cordial to Solange after she and her husband Auguste Cl\u00e9singer fell out with Sand over money. Sand took Chopin's support of Solange to be extremely disloyal, and confirmation that Chopin had always \"loved\" Solange.\nSand's son Maurice disliked Chopin. Maurice wanted to establish himself as the \"man of the estate\" and did not wish to have Chopin as a rival. Maurice removed two sentences from a letter Sand wrote to Chopin when he published it because he felt that Sand was too affectionate toward Chopin and Solange.\nChopin and Sand separated two years before his death for a variety of reasons. Chopin was never asked back to Nohant; in 1848, he returned to Paris from a tour of the United Kingdom, to die at the Place Vend\u00f4me in 1849. George Sand was notably absent from his funeral.\nIn December 1849, Maurice invited the engraver Alexandre Manceau to celebrate Christmas in Nohant. George Sand fell passionately in love with Manceau, he became her lover, companion and secretary and they stayed together for fifteen years until his death.\nLast years and death.\nGeorge Sand had no choice but to write for the theater because of financial difficulties. In Nohant, she even exercised the functions of village doctor, having studied anatomy and herbal remedies with a Doctor Deschartres. But she was not confined to Nohant, and travelled in France, and in particular with her great friend Charles Robin-Duvernet at the Ch\u00e2teau du Petit Coudray, or abroad. In 1864, Sand took residence in Palaiseau together with her beloved Manceau for a couple of months, where she tended him in his decline.\nSand died at Nohant, near Ch\u00e2teauroux, in France's Indre \"d\u00e9partement\" on 8 June 1876, at the age of 71. She was buried in the private graveyard behind the chapel at Nohant-Vic. In 2003, plans that her remains be moved to the Panth\u00e9on in Paris resulted in controversy.\nCareer and politics.\nSand's first literary efforts were collaborations with the writer Jules Sandeau. They published several stories together, signing them Jules Sand. Sand's first published novel \"Rose et Blanche\" (1831) was written in collaboration with Sandeau. She subsequently adopted, for her first independent novel, \"Indiana\" (1832), the pen name that made her famous \u2013 George Sand.\nBy the age of 27, Sand was Europe's most popular writer of either gender, more popular than both Victor Hugo and Honor\u00e9 de Balzac in England in the 1830s and 1840s, and she remained immensely popular as a writer throughout her lifetime and long after her death. Early in her career, her work was in high demand; by 1836, the first of several compendia of her writings was published in 24 volumes. In total, four separate editions of her \"Complete Works\" were published during her lifetime. In 1880, her children sold the rights to her literary estate for 125,000 Francs (equivalent to 36\u00a0kg worth of gold, or 1.3 million dollars in 2015 USD).\nDrawing from her childhood experiences of the countryside, Sand wrote the pastoral novels \"La Mare au Diable\" (1846), \"Fran\u00e7ois le Champi\" (1847\u20131848), \"La Petite Fadette\" (1849), and \"Les Beaux Messieurs de Bois-Dor\u00e9\" (1857). \"A Winter in Majorca\" described the period that she and Chopin spent on that island from 1838 to 1839. Her other novels include \"Indiana\" (1832), \"L\u00e9lia\" (1833), \"Mauprat\" (1837), \"Le Compagnon du Tour de France\" (1840), \"Consuelo\" (1842\u20131843), and \"Le Meunier d'Angibault\" (1845).\nTheatre pieces and autobiographical pieces include \"Histoire de ma vie\" (1855), \"Elle et Lui\" (1859, about her affair with Musset), \"Journal Intime\" (posthumously published in 1926), and \"Correspondence\". Sand often performed her theatrical works in her small private theatre at the Nohant estate.\nPolitical views.\nSand also wrote literary criticism and political texts. In her early life, she sided with the poor and working class as well as championing women's rights. When the 1848 Revolution began, she was an ardent republican. Sand started her own newspaper, published in a workers' co-operative.\nPolitically, she became very active after 1841 and the leaders of the day often consulted with her and took her advice. She was a member of the provisional government of 1848, issuing a series of fiery manifestos. While many Republicans were imprisoned or went to exile after Louis-Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte's coup d'\u00e9tat of December 1851, she remained in France, maintained an ambiguous relationship with the new regime, and negotiated pardons and reduced sentences for her friends.\nSand was known for her implication and writings during the Paris Commune of 1871, where she took a position for the Versailles assembly against the communards, urging them to take violent action against the rebels. She was appalled by the violence of the Paris Commune, writing, \"The horrible adventure continues. They ransom, they threaten, they arrest, they judge. They have taken over all the city halls, all the public establishments, they're pillaging the munitions and the food supplies.\"\nCriticism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeorge Sand was an idea. She has a unique place in our age.Others are great men ... she was a great woman.\nVictor Hugo\n , \"Les fun\u00e9railles de George Sand\"\nSand's writing was immensely popular during her lifetime and she was highly respected by the literary and cultural elite in France. Victor Hugo, in the eulogy he gave at her funeral, said \"the lyre was within her.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In this country whose law is to complete the French Revolution and begin that of the equality of the sexes, being a part of the equality of men, a great woman was needed. It was necessary to prove that a woman could have all the manly gifts without losing any of her angelic qualities, be strong without ceasing to be tender ... George Sand proved it.\u2014\u200a\nEug\u00e8ne Delacroix was a close friend and respected her literary gifts. Flaubert was an unabashed admirer. Honor\u00e9 de Balzac, who knew Sand personally, once said that if someone thought she wrote badly, it was because their own standards of criticism were inadequate. He also noted that her treatment of imagery in her works showed that her writing had an exceptional subtlety, having the ability to \"virtually put the image in the word.\" Alfred de Vigny referred to her as \"Sappho\".\nNot all of her contemporaries admired her or her writing: poet Charles Baudelaire was one contemporary critic of George Sand: \"She is stupid, heavy and garrulous. Her ideas on morals have the same depth of judgment and delicacy of feeling as those of janitresses and kept women ... The fact that there are men who could become enamoured of this slut is indeed a proof of the abasement of the men of this generation.\"\nInfluences on literature.\nFyodor Dostoevsky \"read widely in the numerous novels of George Sand\" and translated her \"La derni\u00e8re Aldini\" in 1844, only to learn that it had already been published in Russian. In his mature period, he expressed an ambiguous attitude towards her. For instance, in his novella \"Notes from Underground\", the narrator refers to sentiments he expresses as, \"I launch off at that point into European, inexplicably lofty subtleties \u00e0 la George Sand\".\nThe English poet Elizabeth Barrett Browning (1806\u201361) wrote two poems: \"To George Sand: A Desire\" (1853) and \"To George Sand: A Recognition\". The American poet Walt Whitman cited Sand's novel \"Consuelo\" as a personal favorite, and the sequel to this novel, \"La Comtesse de Rudolstadt\", contains at least a couple of passages that appear to have had a very direct influence on him.\nIn addition to her influences on English and Russian literature, Sand's writing and political views informed numerous 19th century authors in Spain and Latin America, including Gertrudis G\u00f3mez de Avellaneda, the Cuban-born writer who also published and lived in Spain. Critics have noted structural and thematic similarities between George Sand's \"Indiana\", published in 1832, and G\u00f3mez de Avellaneda's anti-slavery novel \"Sab\", published in 1841.\nIn the first episode of the \"Overture\" to \"Swann's Way\"\u2014the first novel in Marcel Proust's \"In Search of Lost Time\" sequence\u2014a young, distraught Marcel is calmed by his mother as she reads from \"Fran\u00e7ois le Champi\", a novel which (it is explained) was part of a gift from his grandmother, which also included \"La Mare au Diable\", \"La Petite Fadette\", and \"Les Ma\u00eetres Sonneurs\". As with many episodes involving art in \"\u00c0 la recherche du temps perdu\", this reminiscence includes commentary on the work.\nSand is also referred to in Virginia Woolf's book-length essay \"A Room of One's Own\" along with George Eliot and Charlotte Bront\u00eb as \"all victims of inner strife as their writings prove, sought ineffectively to veil themselves by using the name of a man.\"\nFrequent literary references to George Sand appear in \"\" (1990) by A. S. Byatt and in the play \"Voyage\", the first part of Tom Stoppard's \"The Coast of Utopia\" trilogy (2002). George Sand makes an appearance in Isabel Allende's \"Zorro\", going still by her given name, as a young girl in love with Diego de la Vega (Zorro).\nChopin, Sand and her children are the main characters of the theater play by Polish writer Jaros\u0142aw Iwaszkiewicz \"A Summer in Nohant\", which premiered in 1930. The play, presenting the final stage of the writer-composer's relationship, was adapted five times by Polish Television: in 1963 (with Antonina Gordon-G\u00f3recka as Sand and Gustaw Holoubek as Chopin), in 1972 (with Halina Miko\u0142ajska and Leszek Herdegen), in 1980 (with Anna Polony and Micha\u0142 Pawlicki), in 1999 (with Joanna Szczepkowska, who portrayed Solange in the 1980 version and Piotr Skiba) and in 2021 (with Katarzyna Herman and Marek Kossakowski). Chopin, Sand, and her children are also featured in the 2022 novel \u201cBriefly, A Delicious Life\u201d by Nell Stevens, where they appear as main characters.\nIn film.\nGeorge Sand is portrayed by Merle Oberon in \"A Song to Remember\", by Patricia Morison in \"Song Without End\", by Rosemary Harris in \"Notorious Woman\", by Judy Davis in James Lapine's 1991 British-American film \"Impromptu\"; and by Juliette Binoche in the 1999 French film \"Children of the Century (Les Enfants du si\u00e8cle)\". Also in \"George Who?\" (French: \"George qui?\"), a 1973 French biographical film directed by Mich\u00e8le Rosier and starring Anne Wiazemsky as George Sand, Alain Libolt and Denis Gunsbourg. In the 2002 Polish film ' directed by Jerzy Antczak, George Sand is portrayed by Danuta Stenka. In the French film \"Flashback\" directed by Caroline Vigneaux, George Sand is portrayed by Suzanne Cl\u00e9ment. George Sand is also portrayed by Nine D'Urso in the 2025 TV series '. The show portrays an intimate relationship between D'Urso and Barbara Pravi (who plays Marie Dorval).\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nGeneral and cited sources.\nIn French:"}
{"id": "52593", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52593", "title": "Addis Ababa", "text": "Capital and largest city of Ethiopia\nAddis Ababa ( ; , lit.\u2009'new flower'; , lit.\u2009'fountain of hot mineral water') is the capital city of Ethiopia, as well as the regional state of Oromia. With an estimated population of 2,739,551 inhabitants as of the 2007 census, it is the largest city in the country and the eleventh-largest in Africa. At an elevation of , it is the fourth highest capital city in the world and the highest capital in Africa. Addis Ababa is a highly developed and important cultural, artistic, financial and administrative center of Ethiopia. \nThe founding history of Addis Ababa dates back to the late 19th century by Menelik II, Negus of Shewa, in 1886 after finding Mount Entoto unpleasant two years prior. At the time, the city was a resort town; its large mineral spring abundance attracted nobilities of the empire and led them to establish permanent settlement. It also attracted many members of the working classes \u2013 including artisans and merchants \u2013 and foreign visitors. Menelik II then formed his imperial palace in 1887. Addis Ababa became the empire's capital in 1889, and subsequently international embassies were opened. Urban development began with the 20th century, without any prior planning.\nAddis Ababa saw a wide-scale economic boom in 1926 and 1927, and an increase in the number of buildings owned by the middle class, including stone houses filled with imported European furniture. The middle class also imported newly manufactured automobiles and expanded banking institutions. During the Italian occupation, urbanization and modernization steadily increased through a masterplan; it was hoped Addis Ababa would be a more \"colonial\" city and continued on after the occupation. Subsequent master plans were designed by French and British consultants from the 1940s onwards, focusing on monuments, civic structures, satellite cities and the inner-city. Similarly, the later Italo-Ethiopian masterplan (also projected in 1986) concerned only urban structure and accommodation services, but was later adapted by the 2003 masterplan.\nAddis Ababa is a federally-chartered city in accordance with the Addis Ababa City Government Charter Proclamation No. 87/1997 in the FDRE Constitution. Called \"the political capital of Africa\" due to its historical, diplomatic, and political significance for the continent, Addis Ababa serves as the headquarters of major international organizations, such as the African Union and the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa.\nThe city lies a few kilometres west of the East African Rift, which splits Ethiopia into two, between the Nubian plate and the Somali plate. The city is surrounded by the Special Zone of Oromia, and is populated by people from different regions of Ethiopia. It is home to Addis Ababa University. The city has a high human development index, and is known for its vibrant culture, strong fashion scene, high civic and political involvement of younger people, a thriving arts scene, and for being the heart of a country with one of the fastest economic growth rates in the world.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nA study based on DNA evidence from almost 1,000 people around the world suggests that early humans first traveled out of Africa via a place close to Addis Ababa, spreading from the region to the rest of the planet some time around 100,000 years ago. The research indicated that genetic diversity decreases steadily the further one's ancestors travelled from Addis Ababa.\nMiddle Ages.\nMount Entoto, a high tableland to the north of current Addis Ababa, is one of a handful of sites put forward as a possible location for a medieval imperial capital known as Barara. This permanent fortified city was established during the early to mid-15th century and it served as the main residence of several successive emperors up to the early 16th-century reign of Libne Dengel. The city was depicted standing between Mount Zuqualla and Menegasha on a map drawn by the Italian cartographer Fra Mauro in around 1450, and it was razed and plundered by Ahmed Gragn while the imperial army was trapped on the south of the Awash River in 1529, an event witnessed and documented two years later by the Yemeni writer Arab-Faqih. The suggestion that Barara was located on Mount Entoto is supported by the very recent discovery of a large medieval town overlooking Addis Ababa located between rock-hewn Washa Mikael and the more modern church of Entoto Maryam, founded in the late 19th century. Dubbed the Pentagon, the 30-hectare site incorporates a castle with 12 towers, along with 520 meters of stone walls measuring up to 5-meter high. Described a \"metropolis\", Barara is estimated to have a population exceeding 160,000 people, comparable to the largest European towns in 1500 CE, Paris and Naples.\nFoundation.\nFounding.\nIn 1886, settlement began in the valley south of the mountain in a place called Finfinne, a name which refers to the presence of hot springs. The site was chosen by Empress Taytu Betul. Initially, she built a house for herself near the \"Filwuha\" hot mineral springs, where she and members of the Shewan Royal Court liked to take mineral baths. Empress Taytu persuaded Emperor Menelik II to move the capital from cold and windy Entoto to the plains below and named the new city Addis Ababa. By the next year large plots of land (Amharic: \u1230\u1348\u122d , \"sefer\") had been allocated to the major nobility, other important personages and some churches. The local Oromo tribes had their lands confiscated and many were displaced. The city was originally founded as a \"katama\" (royal camp), with the sefer laid out mirroring an army on the march. The lands of Fitawrari Habte Giyorgis were furthest to the west, while the Imperial Palace of Menelik was in the centre, bracketed on each side by the leaders of the left (Qe\u00f1azmach) and right (Grazmach) wings of the army. The rear or area to the east of the palace was allocated to a Dejazmach or another prominent noble. Many of these original lands can still be traced back to the original military grants. Each sefer continued to be settled by each noble's retainers and slaves, usually brought from the lands he controlled. Among those ethnic groups, the Amhara, the Oromo, the Gurage, the Dorze and the Tigrayans would come in the largest numbers. The town grew by leaps and bounds. Not only for nobles, but also the site attracted numerous working classes including artisans, merchants, and foreign visitors.\nEarly residential dwelling was typically made of circular huts; walls were constructed with mud (Amharic: \u132d\u1243, \"cheka\") and straw plastered on a wooden frame and thatched roofs. Addis Ababa's growth rate began with early rapid urbanization without preplanned intention. This was the time where nobilities embarked on concentrated permanent settlement, and altered by social patterns; i.e. each neighborhoods (\"sefer\") was located on higher grounds, noncontiguous from adjacent settlements. The early social milieu contributed the contemporary admixture of a classic neighborhood. One of Emperor Menelik's contributions that are still visible today is the planting of numerous eucalyptus trees along the city streets.\nMoreover, the city held strong social organization patterns prior to the Italian invasion. According to Richard Pankhurst (1968), the city's accelerated population growth was due to factors of provisional governors and their troops, the 1892 famine, and eventually the Battle of Adwa. Another includes the 1907 land act, municipal administration in 1909, and a railway and modernized transportation system boom beginning in the 20th century, culminating in continual growth. Additional supplements, for example the laying of Ethio-Djibouti Railways and topographical factors further led the city's boundary to expand southward.\n20th century.\nPre-Italian occupation (1916\u20131935).\nGebrehiwot Baykedagn took major administrative division post, and Addis Ababa\u2013Djibouti railways in 1916, which also connects Addis Ababa with French Somaliland port of Djibouti. Ras Tafari Mekonnen, later became Emperor Haile Selassie I was the most powerful figure in the city following his appointment in 1917. He transformed the city by recognizing the importance of modernization and urbanization, and he distributed wealth to support emerging class. From this point, Ras Tafari gained a legitimate power as regency council in 1918.\nBy 1926 and 1927, a large-scale economic revolution occurred, a surplus of coffee production began growing as a result of capital accumulation. Profiting from this wealth, the bourgeoisie benefited the city by constructing new, stone-fitted houses with imported European furniture and an importation of the latest automobiles, and expansion of banks across the locales. The total register of automobiles were 76 in 1926 and went to 578 in 1930. The first popular road transportation opened between Addis Ababa and Djibouti, about northward in the direction of Dessie. Initially intended to connect Italian occupied Assab with Addis Ababa in the Italo-Ethiopian Treaty of 1928, the road was considered for motor vehicle travel. The highway was important to the French railway of Djibouti and freight rate was very high with a lack of competition, and increase of cargo between Ethiopia and Assab.\nIn 1930, the Emperor was crowned and proceeded with new technologies and building infrastructure. Among them, he installed power lines and telephones, and erected several monuments (such as Meyazia 27 Square).\nItalian occupation (1936\u20131941).\nFollowing all the major engagements of their invasion, the Italian troops from the colony of Eritrea entered Addis Ababa on 5 May 1936. Along with Dire Dawa, the city had been spared the aerial bombardment (including the use of chemical weapons such as mustard gas) practiced elsewhere in Ethiopia. This also allowed its railway to Djibouti to remain intact. After the occupation, the city served as the Duke of Aosta's capital for unified Italian East Africa until 1941, when it was abandoned in favor of Amba Alagi and other redoubts during the Second World War's East African Campaign. According to Soviet estimates, 15,000 Ethiopians casualties were victims of chemical weapons, especially by sulfur mustard.\nThe Italian ambition regarding Addis Ababa was to create a beautified colonial capital city along with a new master plan launched by seven architects such as Marcello Piacentini, Alessandro Bianchi, Enrico Del Debbio, Giuseppe Vaccaro, Le Corbusier, Ignazio Guidi and Cesare Valle. Despite contradictory and different ideas for each other, the plan was intended to focus on the general architectural plan of the city. Two preparations were approved from the master plan: the Le Corbusier and Guidi and Valle. During an invitation to Mussolini, the French Swiss architect Le Corbusier illustrated the master plan in a guideline sketch involving a traversing route monumental structure by a grand boulevard across the city from north to south, as he extracted from his 1930\u20131933 Radiant City concept. His two counterparts, Guildi and Valle prepared the master plan in summer 1936 likely emphasizing fascist ideology with monumental structure and no native Ethiopian participation in designing sector. Two parallel axis were drawn in European character connecting Arada/Giyorgis with the railway station to the south end five kilometers long and varied width spanning from 40 to 90 meters.\nOn 5 May 1941, the city was liberated by Major Orde Wingate and Emperor Haile Selassie for Ethiopian Gideon Force and Ethiopian resistance in time to permit Emperor Haile Selassie's return on 5 May 1941, five years to the day after he had left.\nPost-Italian occupation (1941\u20131974).\nIn the aftermath, Addis Ababa suffered from economic stagnation and rapid population growth, the inner-city affected by urban morphology initiated by Italian occupation and the peripheral area were in urban sprawl. In 1946, Haile Selassie invited famous British master planner Sir Patrick Abercrombie with goals of modelling and beautifying the city to become the capital for Africa. By this organizing model, Abercrombie launched the master plan with neighborhood units surrounded by green parkways, and he was encouraged to draw ring roads characterized by radial shapes to channel traffic pathway from the central area.\nHis careful master plan of a major traffic route was completed by segregating neighborhood units, as he extracted from his 1943 London traffic problem. In 1959, the British consultant team named Bolton Hennessy and Partners commissioned an improvement of Abercrombie's 1954\u20131956 satellite towns. From the place, they did not incorporated outer area like Mekenissa and West of the old Air Port in the proposal, while Rapi, Gefersa, Kaliti and Kotebe proposed as outlet of Jimma, Ambo and Dessie respectively (the four regional highways). The Hennessy and Partners illustration would be physically larger to current size of Addis Ababa with surrounded satellite towns. In 1965, the French Mission for Urban Studies and Habitat led by Luis De Marien launched another master plan responsible to create monumental axis through Addis Ababa City Hall with an extension across Gofa Mazoria in the southern part of the city. Marien's difference to the previous Italian master plan was the use of single monumental axis while they used the double one.\nHaile Selassie also helped to form the Organisation of African Unity in 1963, which was later dissolved in 2002 and replaced by the African Union (AU), which is also headquartered in the city, airports and industrial parks. The United Nations Economic Commission for Africa founded in 1958, also has its headquarters in Addis Ababa. Addis Ababa was also the site of the Council of the Oriental Orthodox Churches in 1965. Pankhurst (1962) noted in a survey of total land of 212 square kilometers, 58% owned by 1,768, owing to 10,000 square meters, and 12% were given to church whereas other small areas were still acquired in the name of posthumous nobilities such as \"Dejazemach\" Wube Haile Mariam, \"Fitawrari\" Aba Koran, and a bridge named \"Fitawrari Habtegiorgis\" after Habte Giyorgis Dinagde. According to the 1965 master plan, the city covered an area of 21,000 hectares and would increase to 51,000 hectares by 1984 master plan.\nIn 1965, the first student march took place in response to the feudal imperial government of Haile Selassie, in which they chanted \"Land for the Tiller\", culminating in a Marxist\u2013Leninist movement in Ethiopia. In addition, the 1973 oil crisis heavily impacted the city. 1,500 peasants in Addis Ababa marched to plead for food to be returned by police, and intellectual from Addis Ababa University forced the government to take a measure against the spreading famine, a report which Haile Selassie government denounced as \"fabrication\". Haile Selassie responded later \"rich and poor have always existed and will, Why? Because there are those that work...and those that prefer to do nothing...Each individual is responsible for his misfortunes, his fate.\" Students around the city gathered to protest in February 1974; eventually Haile Selassie was successfully deposed from office in 1974 by a group of police officers. Later, the group named themselves Derg, officially \"Provisional Military Administrative Council\" (PMAC). The city had only 10 woredas.\nThe Derg administration (1974\u20131991).\nAfter the Derg came to power, roughly two-third of housing stock transferred to rental housing. The population growth declined from 6.5% to 3.7%. In 1975, the Derg nationalized \"extra\" rental structures built by private stockholders. As a result, the \"Proclamationon No. 47/1975\" issued weakened buildings with small amount of living was administered by \"kebele\" units, while rental houses with large quality fell under Agency for Rental Housing Administration (ARHA). If those rental properties value less than 100 birr (US$48.31), they would be put under kebele administration. The administrative divisions showed an increase of woredas to 25 and 284 kebeles.\nHungarian architect C.K. Polonyi was the first person to embark the city's master plan during the Derg period with assistance of the Ministry of Urban Development and Housing. He used two formula concentrating an integration Addis Ababa with suburbs of rural areas and developing inner-city. Polonyi also worked to redesign Meskel Square, which was renamed Abiyot Square by the time, implemented immediately after the name change.\nIn 1986, the Italo-Ethiopian master plan was set up by 45 Ethiopian professional along with 75 Italian experts with 207 sectorial reports documented as references. The plan dealt with a balanced urban system and services in urban area such as water supply. Akaki incorporated to Addis Ababa to supply industrial and freight terminal services. The bureaucratic rule of the Derg postponed the master plan for eight years until 1994, which caused failure of basic issues in public service and unplanned development.\nFederal Democratic Republic (since 1991).\nOn 28 May 1991, the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF), a coalition party in course of overthrowing the Derg, seized Addis Ababa. They entered Menelik II Avenue and ordered a curfew for 24 hours. According to a witness, residents of Addis Ababa were ignorant and not terrified by the event, as the military told them everything was safe. The military went to central locations of the city (such as Hilton Hotel) and displayed banners \"Peace, Solidarity, Friendship\". At 5:30 am, they took control of the presidential palace and large-scale tanks were seen entering the area. \nA new constitution was adapted in 1994 and enacted a year later; while all cities in Ethiopia accountable rule by regional authority, Addis Ababa (Proclamation No 87/1997) and Dire Dawa (Proclamation No 416/2004) remained chartered cities, with mandates for self-governing and developmental centers. The \"Proclamation No. 112/1995\" legitimized privatization of many government buildings, with a few exceptions, and the kebele buildings remained in tenure. The kebele dwelling and their largely unplanned settings continued to incorporated core areas of Addis Ababa.\n21st century.\nFrom the end of 1998, new project was launched by Addis Ababa City Administration naming Office for Revision of Addis Ababa Master Plan (ORAAMP), covering from 1999 to 2003. The plan goal was to meet the standard of market economy with favorable political system resembles the revised 1986 master plan in terms of urban area.\n2014 Addis Ababa Master Plan.\nA controversial plan to expand the boundaries of Addis Ababa, by 1.1 million hectares into the Oromia special zone in April 2014, sparked the Oromo protests on 25 April 2014 against expansion of the boundaries of Addis Ababa. The government responded by shooting at and beating peaceful protesters. This escalated to full blown strikes and street protests on 12 November 2015 by university students in Ginchi town, located 80\u00a0km southwest of Addis Ababa city, encircled by Oromia Region. The controversial master plan was cancelled on 12 January 2016. By that time, 140 protesters were killed.\nRecent history.\nUnited Nations Population Projections estimated the population of metro area of Addis Ababa to be 5,228,000 in 2022, a 4.43% increase from 2021. During Abiy Ahmed's premiership, Addis Ababa and its vicinities underwent Beautifying Sheger. This project is aimed to enhance the green coverage and beauty of the city. In 2018, Abiy initiated a project called \"Riverside\" planned to expand riverbanks for , from the Entoto Mountains to the Akaki River. In October 2022, the government launched Sheger City, an urban development model that contains 12 sub-cities, 36 districts and 40 rural kebeles with its seat located in Saris area in Addis Ababa. The project objective was to feed other satellite cities into Addis Ababa and contribute economic development within enclave. Several human rights groups as well as politicians criticized the process to build Sheger City due to inciting mass house demotions that belonged to non-Oromo ethnic group, regional disparity by violating the constitutional rights of Oromo people.\nRelation with Oromia Regional State.\nAddis Ababa is located in the heart of the Oromia state and the major ecosystem services to the city provided by Oromia state. The city was abandoned by the Oromo since the late 19th century due to its conquest by Menelik. Oromos were physically removed from the vicinity of the city during the Haile Selassie and Derg eras. Article 49(5) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia states:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The special interest of the State of Oromia in Addis Ababa, regarding the provision of social services or the utilization of natural resources and other similar matters, as well as joint administrative matters arising from the location of Addis Ababa within the State of Oromia, shall be respected. Particulars shall be determined by law.\" In 2000, Oromia's capital was moved from Addis Ababa to Adama. Because this move sparked considerable controversy and protests among Oromo students, the Oromo Peoples' Democratic Organization (OPDO), part of the ruling EPRDF coalition, on 10 June 2005, officially announced plans to move the regional capital back to Addis Ababa. Due to the historical and natural connection between the city and the Oromo people, the Oromia Government has asserted its ownership of Addis Ababa. Both the current mayor of Addis Ababa, Adanech Abebe, and the former mayor, Takele Uma Banti are from the former ruling party of Oromia.\nGeography.\nAddis Ababa lies at an elevation of and is a grassland biome, located at . The city lies at the foot of Mount Entoto and forms part of the watershed for the Awash. From its lowest point, around Bole International Airport, at above sea level in the southern periphery, Addis Ababa rises to over in the Entoto Mountains to the north.\nSubdivision.\nThe city is divided into 10 boroughs, called subcities (, kifle ketema), and 99 wards (, kebele). The 10 subcities are:\nClimate.\nAddis Ababa has a subtropical highland climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cwb\") with precipitation varying considerably by the month. The city has a complex mix of alpine climate zones, with temperature differences of up to , depending on elevation and prevailing wind patterns. The high elevation moderates temperatures year-round, and the city's position near the Equator means that temperatures are very constant from month to month. As such the climate would be maritime if its elevation was not taken into account, as no month is above in mean temperatures.\nMid-November to January is a season for occasional rain. The highland climate regions are characterised by dry winters, and this is the dry season in Addis Ababa. During this season the daily maximum temperatures are usually not more than , And the night-time minumum temperatures will range from 5\u00b0C to 10\u00b0C and can drop to freezing. The short rainy season is from February to May. During this period, the difference between the daytime maximum temperatures and the nighttime minimum temperatures is not as great as during other times of the year, with minimum temperatures in the range of . At this time of the year, the city experiences warm temperatures and pleasant rainfall. The long wet season is from June to mid-September; it is the coldest time of the year. This period coincides with summer, but the temperatures are much lower than at other times of year because of the frequent rain and hail and the abundance of cloud cover and fewer hours of sunshine. This time of the year is characterised by dark, chilly and wet days and nights. The autumn which follows is a transitional period between the wet and dry seasons.\nThe highest temperature on record was 26 February 2019, while the lowest temperature on record was , recorded on multiple occasions.\nDemographics.\nAs of the 2007 population census conducted by the Ethiopian national statistics authorities, Addis Ababa has a total population of 2,739,551 urban and rural inhabitants. For the capital city 662,728 households were counted living in 628,984 housing units, which results in an average of 5.3 persons to a household. Although all Ethiopian ethnic groups are represented in Addis Ababa because it is the capital of the country, the largest groups include the Amhara (47.05%), Oromo (19.51%), Gurage (16.34%), Tigrayan (6.18%), Silt'e (2.94%), and Gamo (1.68%). Languages spoken as mother tongues include Amharic (70.99%), Afaan Oromo (10.72%), Gurage (8.37%), Tigrinya (3.60%), Silt'e (1.82%) and Gamo (1.03%). The religion with the most believers in Addis Ababa is Ethiopian Orthodox with 43% of the population, while 33% are Muslim, 20% Protestant, and 0.48% Catholic. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the previous census, conducted in 1994, the city's population was reported to be 2,112,737, of whom 1,023,452 were men and 1,089,285 were women. At that time, not all of the population were urban inhabitants; only 2,084,588 or 98.7% were. For the entire administrative council there were 404,783 households in 376,568 housing units, with an average of 5.2 persons per household. The major ethnic groups included the Amhara (48.27%), Oromo (19.24%), Gurage (13.54%; 9.40% Sebat Bet, and 4.14% Sodo), Tigrayan 7.65%, Silt'e 3.98%, and foreigners from Eritrea 1.34%. Languages spoken included Amharic (72.64%), Afaan Oromo (10.01%), Gurage (6.45%), Tigrinya (5.41%), and Silt'e 2.29%. In 1994 the predominant religion was also Ethiopian Orthodox with 82.0% of the population, while 12.67% were Muslim, 3.87% Protestant, and 0.78% Catholic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStandard of living.\nAccording to the 2007 national census, 98.64% of the housing units of Addis Ababa had access to safe drinking water, while 14.9% had flush toilets, 70.7% pit toilets (both ventilated and unventilated), and 14.3% had no toilet facilities. In 2014, there were 63 public toilets in the city, with plans to build more. Values for other reported common indicators of the standard of living for Addis Ababa as of 2005[ [update]] include the following: 0.1% of the inhabitants fall into the lowest wealth quintile; adult literacy for men is 93.6% and for women 79.95%, the highest in the nation for both sexes; and the civic infant mortality rate is 45 infant deaths per 1,000 live births, which is less than the nationwide average of 77; at least half of these deaths occurred in the infants' first month of life.\nOutdoor and indoor air and surface and groundwater urban and environmental pollution is largely unregulated in Abbis Ababa. Wastewater is untreated and most is discharged into rivers. At 2017 the increase in air pollution due to anthropogenic emissions was found to have increased by around 62% since the 1970s, indicated by a 34% loss in visibility. A 2021 study found annual mean PM2.5 concentrations of 10 \u00b5g/m3A, 1.7 times higher than the WHO-recommended 24-hour guideline, to which chronic respiratory disease and an annual total of 502 deaths (4.44%) were attributable.\nThe city is partially powered by water turbines at the Koka Reservoir.\nEconomy.\nThe economic activities in Addis Ababa are diverse. According to official statistics from the federal government, some 119,197 people in the city are engaged in trade and commerce; 113,977 in manufacturing and industry; 80,391 homemakers of a different variety; 71,186 in civil administration; 50,538 in transport and communication; 42,514 in education, health and social services; 32,685 in hotel and catering services; and 16,602 in agriculture. In addition to the residents of rural parts of Addis Ababa, the city dwellers also participate in animal husbandry and the cultivation of gardens. of land is irrigated annually, on which 129,880 quintals of vegetables are cultivated. It is a relatively clean and safe city, with the most common crimes being pickpocketing, scams and minor burglary. The city has recently been in a construction boom with tall buildings rising in many places. Various luxury services have also become available and the construction of shopping malls has recently increased. According to Tia Goldenberg of \"IOL\", area spa professionals said that some people have labelled the city, \"the spa capital of Africa.\"\nThe Ethiopian Airlines has its headquarters on the grounds of Addis Ababa Bole International Airport in Addis Ababa.\nDevelopment.\nThe city hosts the We Are the Future centre, a child care centre that provides children with a higher standard of living. The centre is managed under the direction of the mayor's office, and the international NGO Glocal Forum serves as the fundraiser and program planner and coordinator for the WAF child centre in each city. Each WAF city is linked to several peer cities and public and private partners to create a unique international coalition.\nLaunched in 2004, the program is the result of a strategic partnership between the Glocal Forum, the Quincy Jones Listen Up Foundation, and Mr Hani Masri, with the support of the World Bank, UN agencies and major companies.\nTourism.\nTourism is a growing industry within Addis Ababa and Ethiopia as a whole. In July 2015, the European Council on Tourism and Trade named Ethiopia the best nation for inbound tourism. The COVID-19 pandemic and Tigray War caused a decrease in tourism.\nZoo.\nAddis Ababa Zoo kept 15 lions in 2011. Their hair samples were used in a genetic analysis, which revealed that they were genetically diverse. It was therefore proposed to include them in a captive breeding programme.\nLaw and government.\nGovernment.\nUnder the Ethiopian Constitution of 1995, the city of Addis Ababa is one of the two federal cities that are accountable to the Federal Government of Ethiopia. The other city with the same status is Dire Dawa in the east of the country and both are federal cities. Earlier, following the establishment of the federal structure in 1991 under the Transitional Charter of Ethiopia, the City Government of Addis Ababa was one of the then-new 14 regional governments. However, that structure was changed by the federal constitution in 1995 and as a result, Addis Ababa does not have statehood status.\nThe administration of Addis Ababa city consists of the Mayor, who leads the executive branch, and the City Council, which enacts city regulations. However, as part of the Federal Government, the federal legislature enacts laws that are binding in Addis Ababa. Members of the City Council are directly elected by the residents of the city and the council, in turn, elects the Mayor among its members. The term of office for elected officials is five years. However, the Federal Government, when it deems necessary, can dissolve the City Council and the entire administration and replace it with a temporary administration until elections take place next. Residents of Addis Ababa are represented in the federal legislature, the House of Peoples' Representatives. However, the city is not represented in the House of Federation, which is the federal upper house constituted by the representatives of the member states. The executive branch under the Mayor comprises the City Manager and various branches of civil service offices.\nAdanech Abebe is serving as the mayor of Addis Ababa since 2020, preceded by Takele Uma Banti. She is the first woman to hold mayorship since its creation in 1910. Before Takele, the Federal Government appointed Berhane Deressa to lead the temporary caretaker administration that served from 9 May 2006 to 30 October 2008 following the 2005 election crisis. In the 2005 national election, the ruling EPRDF party suffered a major defeat in Addis Ababa. However, the opposition who won in Addis Ababa did not take part in the government both on the regional and federal levels. This situation forced the EPRDF-led Federal Government to assign a temporary administration until a new election was carried out. As a result, Berhane Deressa, an independent citizen, was appointed.\nFormer mayors of Addis Ababa include Arkebe Oqubay (2003\u201306), Zewde Teklu (1985\u201389), Alemu Abebe (1977\u201385) and Zewde Gebrehiwot (1960\u201369).\nCrime.\nAddis Ababa is considered to be extremely safe in comparison to the other cities in the region. However, there are a number of crimes within the city including theft, scams, mugging, robbery and others. Rural-urban migration and unemployment has been preliminary factors affecting the city by elevating crime rate.\nThe Addis Ababa Federal Police is the main department of the Federal Police established in 2003.\nPlaces of worship.\nAmong the places of worship, there are predominantly Christian churches and temples: Seventh-day Adventist Church, Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church, Ethiopian Evangelical Church Mekane Yesus (Lutheran World Federation), Ethiopian Kale Heywet Church, Ethiopian Catholic Archeparchy of Addis Ababa (Catholic Church), Ethiopian Full Gospel Believers' Church and also Muslim mosques.\nIn most churches, Emperor Haile Selassie employed political propagandic panel that demonstrate his imperial power, cult of personality and ultranationalist views. Saint George's Cathedral has central of subjects involving incident of Second Italo-Ethiopian War that he struggled for independence. This church named after an Ark (tabot) carried during Battle of Adwa. It was once ruined by Fascist Italian government in 1937 but was immediately reconstructed after liberation of Ethiopia in 1941. The church, located at the northern end of Churchill Road\u2014is unique octagonal architecture\u2014has a museum of imperial weaponry including swords and tridents and giant helmets made from the manes of lions which was used during the Italian invasion. Holy Trinity Cathedral also sits in the city serving as the headquarters of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church. As the largest and highest cathedral in the country, Holy Trinity Cathedral was founded in commemoration of victory against the Italian invasion, and second most important place after the Church of Our Lady Mary of Zion in Axum. Before reign of Emperor Menelik II, the church was monastery. The church served burial of major prominent people in Ethiopia, also tombs of imperial family such as Haile Selassie and his wife Menen Asfaw, the third patriarch Abuna Tekle Haymanot and Abune Paulos. Former Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi also interred to this church. Other include British Ethiopianist and suffragette Sylvia Pankhurst also entombed here. The Ba'etta Mariam Orthodox Church embodies Menelik Palace and Mausoleum and the biggest church around the place with smaller churches stand in front of it. It is frequently visited church. The other nearby church is Gebbi Gabriel which has unique decorated cross at the dome of the church and at its entrance.\nAmong mosques, the most notable is the Grand Anwar Mosque, which was located in Merkato, at the heart of the city. It was built in 1922 by the order of Italian government. Nur Mosque counted as an oldest Islamic temple recently rebuilt with Islamic architecture characterized by the use of domes, towers and piers.\nArchitecture.\nA financial district is under construction in Addis Ababa.\nFormer mayor Kuma Demeksa embarked on a quest to improve investment for the buildings in the city. Addis Ababa is the headquarters of the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa and the African Union.\nNotable taller architecture in Addis Ababa includes the CBE headquarters, NIB international bank, Zemen bank, Hibret bank, Huda Tower, Nani Tower, Bank Misr Building, as well as the approved Angola World Trade Center Tower, Abyssinia Bank Tower, Mexico Square Tower, and the $200m AU Conference Center and Office Complex.\nNotable buildings include St George's Cathedral (founded in 1896 and also home to a museum), Holy Trinity Cathedral (once the largest Ethiopian Orthodox Cathedral and the location of Sylvia Pankhurst's tomb) as well as the burial place of Emperor Haile Selassie and the Imperial family, and those who fought the Italian invasion during World War II.\nIn the Merkato district, which is the largest open market in Africa, is the Grand Anwar Mosque, the biggest mosque in Ethiopia built during the Italian occupation. A few meters to the southwest of the Anwar Mosque is the Raguel Church built after the liberation by Empress Menen. The proximity of the mosque and the church has symbolized the long peaceful relations between Christianity and Islam in Ethiopia. The Roman Catholic Cathedral of the Holy Family is also in the Merkato district. Near Bole International Airport is the new Medhane Alem (Savior of the World) Orthodox Cathedral, which is the second-largest in Africa.\nThe Entoto Mountains start among the northern suburbs. Suburbs of the city include Shiro Meda and Entoto in the north, Urael and Bole (home to Bole International Airport) in the east, Nifas Silk in the south-east, Mekanisa in the south, and Keraniyo and Kolfe in the west. Kolfe was mentioned in Nelson Mandela's Autobiography \"A Long Walk to Freedom\", as the place he got military training.\nAddis Ababa has a distinct architectural style. Unlike many African cities, Addis Ababa was not built as a colonial settlement. This means that the city has not a European style of architecture. This changed with the Italian invasion of Ethiopia in 1936. The Piazza district in the city centre is the most evident indicator of Italian influence. The buildings are very much Italian in style and there are many Italian restaurants, as well as small cafes, and European-style shopping centres.\nParks include the Africa Park, which is situated along Menelik II Avenue and Unity Park at the Palace.\nOther features of the city include the large Mercato market, the Jan Meda racecourse, Bihere Tsige Recreation Centre and a railway line to Djibouti.\nThe city is home to the Ethiopian National Library, the Ethiopian Ethnological Museum (and former Guenete Leul Palace), the Addis Ababa Museum, the Ethiopian Natural History Museum, the Ethiopian Railway Museum and National Postal Museum.\nThere is also Menelik's old Imperial palace which remains the official seat of government, and the National Palace formerly known as the Jubilee Palace (built to mark Emperor Haile Selassie's Silver Jubilee in 1955) which is the residence of the President of Ethiopia. Jubilee Palace was also modeled after Buckingham Palace in the United Kingdom. Africa Hall is located across Menelik II avenue from this Palace and is where the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa is headquartered as well as most UN offices in Ethiopia. It is also the site of the founding of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU), which eventually became the African Union (AU). The African Union is now housed in a new headquarters built on the site of the demolished Akaki Prison, on land donated by Ethiopia for this purpose in the southwestern part of the city. The Hager Fikir Theatre, the oldest theatre in Ethiopia, is located in the Piazza district. Near Holy Trinity Cathedral is the art deco Parliament building, built during the reign of Emperor Haile Selassie, with its clock tower. It continues to serve as the seat of Parliament today. Across from the Parliament is the Shengo Hall, built by the Derg regime of Mengistu Haile Mariam as its new parliament hall. The Shengo Hall was the world's largest pre-fabricated building, which was constructed in Finland before being assembled in Addis Ababa. It is used for large meetings and conventions. Itegue Taitu Hotel, built-in 1898 (Ethiopian Calendar) in the middle of the city (Piazza), was the first hotel in Ethiopia.\nMeskel Square is one of the noted squares in the city, serving as the site for the annual Meskel at the end of September annually when thousands gather in celebration.\nThe fossilized skeleton and a plaster replica of the early hominid Lucy (known in Ethiopia as \"Dinkinesh\") is preserved at the National Museum of Ethiopia.\nCulture.\nAddis Ababa is a melting pot of different communities throughout the country's regions, along with Dire Dawa. In Addis Ababa, cultural assimilation is ubiquitous and widely known.\nArts and museums.\nThe National Museum of Ethiopia hosts many artifacts and artistic treasures in Ethiopia. It is also home of archaeological exhibition. The partial specimen of Australopithecus afarensis, and its successor Selam are noteworthy among viewed galleries in the museum. The museum also has wide-range ceremonial costumes of Solomonic dynasty, which was initiated in 1936. Arts include mostly works of Afewerk Tekle, one of the most renowned gallery, and the depiction of meeting between Solomon and Queen of Sheba.\nTheatres and cinemas.\nAddis Ababa is home of many theatres, including the long run Hager Fikir Theatre, which served many prominent figures performance. In addition, the Ethiopian National Theatre is also located in the city's hub. It was founded by Emperor Haile Selassie in 1955, who eponymously renamed it. Historically, the Amhara culture dominated the country's art scene; rituals connected to priesthood based on Coptic church, most often using improvised art such as \"shinsheba\" and \"qene\".\nTekle Hawariat introduced modern European dramas based on \"La Fontaine\"'s fable around 1916. Mattewos Bekele and Iyoel Yohannes became famous playwright, and Makonnen Endalkachew's \"David and Orion\" and \"King David III\" was renowned by that time. In the Derg era, propagandic communist pieces often conceded and several new theatres were opened until the successive government under EPRDF altered new form of cultural life with continuation of development.\nNotable modern cinemas including:\nScience and technology.\nThere are variety of scientific and research institutes in Addis Ababa. The Addis Ababa Science and Technology University has a goal of to bring \"Ethiopia economically and industrialized state\". The university was founded in 2011 under Directive of the Council of Ministers No. 216/2011. The city is home of various scientific organizations notably the Science and Technology Information Center. Addis Ababa has a science museum built by MadaTech's exhibition crew. The national museum is 250 square feet with 30 interactive images of scientific objects. The museum was launched by Jewish-American businessman Mark Gelfand, who spent his money more than in MadaTech and sought resurrection of science museum in all over of the world. Some prominent facilities of scientific and technology include the Ethiopian Biotechnology Institute, while the National Intelligence and Security Service also headquartered in Addis Ababa responsible for upholding national security of the country.\nMedia.\nAddis Ababa has the largest mass media concentration in the country. Radio stations generally state-owned with 50 community licensed by the Ethiopian Broadcasting Authority, with four licensing opts for 29 local languages. The Ethiopian Broadcasting Corporation is a public broadcaster which has its headquarters in Addis Ababa. Private television commenced with the launch of EBS TV in 2008, and many private channels grew in the beginning of 2016. For example, Kana TV, Fana TV, LTV and JTV Ethiopia. As of October 2016, the Ethiopian Broadcasting Agency licensed with Fana Broadcasting Corporate, Walta Information Center and Arki Broadcasting Service and Ed Stelar Training as commercial FM stations. There were reached eight analogue and nine television stations in Ethiopia. Nine stations were available in Addis Ababa and were public owned.\nSport.\nAddis Ababa serves major sporting events, notably the Jan Meda International Cross Country. It hosts four races, with senior and junior (under-20) for both sexes. The city is known for annual 10\u00a0km road event called the Great Ethiopian Run, created by athlete Haile Gebrselassie, Peter Middlebrook and Abi Masefield in late October 2000. Yet, course records were broken by Deriba Merga (28:18.61 in 2006) and Yalemzerf Yehualaw (31:55 in 2019) of both men and women respectively.\nAddis Ababa is home to Addis Ababa Stadium, Abebe Bikila Stadium, named after Shambel Abebe Bikila, and Nyala Stadium. The 2008 African Championships in Athletics were held in Addis Ababa.\nEducation.\nEmperor Menelik II introduced modern secular education to Addis Ababa in the early 20th century, a significant shift from the centuries-old education system dominated by the Ethiopian Orthodox Church. In 1906, he opened the first public school in the city. While Menelik faced disapproval from the some who were accustomed to traditional educational practices, the Emperor encouraged the expansion of educational institutions and even went as far as preparing legislation to make school attendance compulsory for boys over 12 years old.\nAddis Ababa University was founded in 1950 and was originally named \"University College of Addis Ababa\", then renamed in 1962 for the former Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie I who had donated his Genete Leul Palace to be the university's main campus in the previous year. It is the home of the Institute of Ethiopian Studies and the Ethnological Museum. The city also has numerous public universities and private colleges including Addis Ababa Science and Technology University, Ethiopian Civil Service University, Admas University College, St. Mary's University, Unity University, Kotebe Metropolitan University and Rift Valley University.\nIn May 2002, a businesswoman named Zemi Yenus created a school for children with autism in the city, called the Joy Center. Within two years, it was moved to a larger building.\nIn 2022 the new Abrehot Library was completed on former parkland opposite the Parliament Building, becoming the largest library in Ethiopia.\nResearch indicates that the increase in Addis Ababa's private education sector is a result of the demand for quality education. In 2002/2003, privately owned schools accounted for 98%, 78%, 53%, 41%, and 67% of preschool, primary, secondary, technical and vocational, and college institutions, respectively, compared to a survey from 1994. However, adequate school enrollment is often problematic, as parents frequently prefer to enroll their children in private schools rather than government-run institutions. Private primary schools tend to be more successful in terms of resourcing, business and financial management, and educational protocols, as they often have less bureaucratic administrations.\nTransport.\nPublic transport is through public buses from three different companies (Anbessa City Bus Service Enterprise, Sheger, Alliance), light rail or blue and white taxis. The taxis are usually minibuses that can seat at most twelve people, which follow somewhat pre-defined routes. The minibus taxis are typically operated by two people, the driver and a \"weyala\" who collects fares and calls out the taxi's destination. Sedan taxis work like normal taxis and are driven to the desired destination on demand. In recent years, new taxi companies have appeared, which use other designs, including one large company using yellow sedan taxis and a few ride-hailing companies (Ride taxi, Feres, etc.) have become widely accessible in the city.\nRoad.\nThe construction of the Addis Ababa Ring Road was initiated in 1998 to implement the city master plan and enhance peripheral development. The Ring Road was divided into three major phases that connect all the five main gates in and out of Addis Ababa with all other regions (Jimma, Bishoftu, Dessie, Gojjam and Ambo). For this project, China Road and Bridge Corporation (CRBC) was the partner of Addis Ababa City Roads Authority (AACRA). The Ring Road has greatly helped to decongest and alleviate city traffic.\nIntercity bus service is provided by the Lion City Bus Services.\nAir.\nThe city is served by Addis Ababa Bole International Airport, where a new terminal opened in 2003.\nRailway.\nAddis Ababa originally had a railway connection with Djibouti City, with a picturesque French-style railway station, but this route has been abandoned. The new Addis Ababa-Djibouti Railway started operation in September 2016, running parallel to the route of the original railway line.\nLight rail.\nAddis Ababa opened its light rail system to the public on 20 September 2015. The system is the first of its kind in sub-Saharan Africa.\nThe Ethiopian Railway Corporation reached a funding agreement worth millions of dollars with the Export and Import Bank of China in September 2010 and the light rail project was completed in January 2015. The route is a network with two lines; the operational line running from the centre to the south of the city. Upon completion, the east\u2013west line will run from Ayat to the Torhailoch ring-road, and from Menelik Square to Merkato Bus Station, Meskel Square and Akaki.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nAddis Ababa is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52594", "revid": "6941696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52594", "title": "60 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 60 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Metellus Celer and Afranius (or, less frequently, year 694 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 60 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52595", "revid": "46977059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52595", "title": "61 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 61 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Calpurnianus and Messalla (or, less frequently, year 693 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 61 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52596", "revid": "30292728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52596", "title": "62 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 62 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Silanus and Murena (or, less frequently, year 692 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 62 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nCommagene.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52597", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52597", "title": "Kach movement", "text": ""}
{"id": "52598", "revid": "36188177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52598", "title": "63 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 63 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cicero and Hybrida (or, less frequently, year 691 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 63 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nPontus.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52599", "revid": "50207493", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52599", "title": "Monoculture", "text": "Farms producing only one crop at a time\nIn agriculture, monoculture is the practice of growing one crop species in a field at a time. Monocultures increase ease and efficiency in planting, managing, and harvesting crops short-term, often with the help of machinery. However, monocultures are more susceptible to diseases or pest outbreaks long-term due to localized reductions in biodiversity and nutrient depletion. Crop diversity can be added both in time, as with a crop rotation or sequence, or in space, with a polyculture or intercropping.\nMonocultures appear in contexts outside of agriculture and food production. Grass lawns are a common form of residential monocultures. Several monocultures, including single-species forest plantations, have become increasingly abundant throughout the tropics following market globalization, impacting local communities.\nGenetic monocultures refer to crops that have little to no genetic variation. This is achieved using cultivars, made through processes of propagation and selective breeding, and can make populations susceptible to disease.\nAgroecological practices, silvo-pastoral systems, and mixed-species plantations are common alternatives to monoculture that help preserve biodiversity while maintaining productivity.\nAgriculture.\nAgricultural monocultures refer to the practice of planting one crop species in a field. Monoculture is widely used in intensive farming and in organic farming. In crop monocultures, each plant in a field has the same standardized planting, maintenance, and harvesting requirements resulting in greater yields and lower costs. When a crop is matched to its well-managed environment, a monoculture can produce higher yields than a polyculture. Modern practices such as monoculture planting and the use of synthesized fertilizers have reduced the amount of additional land needed to produce food, called land sparing. \nNote that the distinction between monoculture and polyculture is not the same as between monocropping and intercropping. The first two describe diversity in \"space\", as does intercropping. Monocropping and crop rotation describe diversity over \"time\".\nEnvironmental impacts.\nMonocultures of perennials, such as African palm oil, sugarcane, tea and pines, can change soil chemistry leading to soil acidification, degradation, and soil-borne diseases, ultimately having a negative impact on agricultural productivity and sustainability. The use of unregulated irrigation practices on popular monocultures, such as soy, can also lead to erosion and water loss. As soil health declines, use of synthetic fertilizers on monocultural fields increases, often having negative implications on human health via chemical run-off.\nIn addition to soil depletion, monocultures can cause significant reductions in biodiversity due to unavailability of resources, native species displacement, and loss of genetic variation. Following large-scale oil palm plantations in Latin America, research has revealed extensive declines in mammal, bird, amphibian, and pollinator diversity, particularly in Colombia and Brazil.\nDue to insufficient biodiversity and population balance, monocultures are associated with higher rates of disease and pest outbreaks. In response, pesticides are widely applied to agricultural fields, further harming insect and pollinator diversity and human health. Increasing rotations of crop monocultures or using alternatives agricultural practices can help mitigate the risk of disease and attack.\nSocial impacts.\nEnvironmental consequences of monocultural farming have notable social impacts, commonly concentrated to the reduction of small-scale farmers and pesticide-related health issues. Monoculture is contradictive to several primitive, more sustainable farming practices utilized by small-scale farmers. Following pest outbreaks, over 600 million liters of pesticides are sprayed annually, contaminating nearby small-scale farming and causing communal health decline. Research has revealed increased prevalence of pesticide-related disorders, diseases, and cancers affecting the human neurological, gastrointestinal, skin, and respiratory systems.\nAgro-extractivism.\nAgro-extractivism is a form of extractivism in which foreign territorial, political, and economical dominance over agriculture is motivated by the large-scale production and exportation of agricultural commodities, often in the form of monocultures.\nSeveral monocultures in the Global South, such as sugar and coffee, were first planted in the 1800s following European colonization. These plantations used slave labor, setting a precedent for agriculture being a field dominated by foreign entities in the rest of Latin America and the Caribbean. This social framework has shaped the oppression of Black people and smaller-scale farmers in the face of present-day land acquisition for monocultural use.\nThe large-scale establishment of monocultures in the tropics has led to hindrance of local small-scale farms and indigenous land rights in the forms of reduced food sovereignty, food security, land and water access, and hunting. Land privatization and pressure for monocultural expansion by larger companies takes different forms: silent evictions, violence, and reverse leasing arrangements. Introduction to global trade makes small-scale farmers vulnerable to international demand, prices, and variations in climate affecting crop production. Farmers who make contracts or take out loans with large corporations can face debt and loss of land if they fail to meet certain crop yields or profit.\nMonocultures are an aspect of agro-extractivism on account of high percentages of the produced crop being exported for processing and marketing by large transnational corporations, often in developed countries. For instance, following the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), agave production increased three-fold in Mexico from 1995 to 2019 due to foreign consumption, specifically by the United States. Pararguay sees similar demands with soy crops, exporting the majority of production without nutrients returning to native soil. More than 46 million hectares of soy has been planted across South America while over half a million hectares of land are being deforested annually to make land for cultivation. Some international companies relevant in the field of agro-extractivist monocultures are Syngenta and Bayer (biotech), Los Grobo, CRESUD, El Tejar, and Maggi (landowners), and Cargill, ADM, and Bunge (grain and seed providers).\nForestry.\nIn forestry, monoculture refers to plantations of one species of tree. In many areas of the world, forest monocultures are planted as an efficient way to produce and harvest timber. Because timber harvest from monoculture forests is often an export-driven industry, these plantations can be a form of extractivism. Following deforestation, monoculture afforestation has become increasingly popular due to the necessity for ecosystem services, such as mitigating the effects of climate change via carbon sequestration and gas regulation. Eucalyptus, pines, and acacias are examples of popular monocultures being utilized in the tropics and the Global South following rainforest deforestation.\nEnvironmental impacts.\nWhile forest monocultures are efficient ways of producing timber, studies show single-species forests reduce biodiversity, causing declines in forest productivity and native tree, animal, and insect populations over time. The loss of biodiversity in forest monocultures is associated with lower forest resistance to pathogens, attack by insects, and adverse environmental conditions, such as an acceleration of pedolysis.\nSocial impacts.\nMonoculture plantations have been shown to have substantial social impacts on local communities. Forest monocultures have motivated migrations across Latin America due to localized water cycle interference, declining soil health, and changes in resource availability. While industrial agriculture can increase employment opportunities, studies show forest plantations often have limited employment opportunities, with most workers coming from outside of the community. Profits made from monoculture plantations historically follow a \"boom and bust\" trend, temporarily benefitting the community in increased income, revenue, and quality of life until resources are exhausted, with profits rarely distributed back into the deforested land.\nEnvironmental changes caused by monoculture forests are particularly felt among indigenous communities given their reliance and connection to the land while additionally becoming subject to land privatization. These lands are frequently acquired through land grabbing and dispossession by large companies in global trade, ultimately reducing rural land, cutting off access to locals, and changing agricultural and community dynamics.\nResidential monoculture.\nLawn monoculture in the United States was historically influenced by English gardens and manor-house landscapes, but its inception into the American landscape is fairly recent. Aesthetics drove the evolution of the residential green areas, with turfgrass becoming a popular addition to many American homes. Turfgrass is a nonnative species and requires high levels of maintenance. At the local level, governments and organizations, such as Homeowner Associations, have pressured the maintenance of lawn aesthetics and influenced real estate value. Disagreements in residential maintenance of weeds and lawns have resulted in civil cases or direct aggression against neighbors.\nHigh levels of maintenance required for turfgrass created a growing demand for chemical management, i.e. pesticides, herbicides, insecticides. A 1999 study showed that in a sample of urban streams, at least one type of pesticide was found in 99% of the streams. A major risk associated with lawn pesticide use is the exposure to chemicals within the home through the air, clothing, and furniture, which can be more detrimental to children than to the average adult.\nGenetic monocultures.\nWhile often referring to the production of the same crop species in a field (space), monoculture can also refer to the planting of a single cultivar across a larger regional area, such that there are numerous plants in the area with an identical genetic makeup to each other. When all plants in a region are genetically similar, a disease to which they have no resistance can destroy entire populations of crops. As of 2009[ [update]] the wheat leaf rust fungus caused much concern internationally, having already severely affected wheat crops in Uganda and Kenya, and having started to spread in Asia as well. Given the very genetically similar strains of much of the world's wheat crops following the Green Revolution, the impacts of such diseases threaten agricultural production worldwide.\nHistoric examples of genetic monocultures.\nGreat Famine of Ireland.\nIn Ireland, exclusive use of one variety of potato, the \"lumper\", led to the Great Famine of 1845\u20131849. Lumpers provided inexpensive food to feed the Irish masses. Potatoes were propagated vegetatively with little to no genetic variation. When \"Phytophthora infestans\" arrived in Ireland from the Americas in 1845, the lumper had no resistance to the disease, leading to the nearly complete failure of the potato crop across Ireland.\nBananas.\nUntil the 1950s, the Gros Michel cultivar of banana represented almost all bananas consumed in the United States because of their taste, small seeds, and efficiency to produce. Their small seeds, while more appealing than the large ones in other Asian cultivars, were not suitable for planting, meaning all new banana plants had to be grown from the cut suckers of another plant. As a result of this asexual form of planting, all bananas grown had identical genetic makeups and which gave them no traits for resistance to \"Fusarium wilt\", a fungal disease that spread quickly throughout the Caribbean where they were being grown.\nBy the beginning of the 1960s, growers had to switch to growing the Cavendish banana, a cultivar grown in a similar way. This cultivar is under similar disease stress since all the bananas are clones of each other and could easily succumb as the Gros Michel did.\nCattle.\nGenetic monoculture can also refer to a single breed of farm animal being raised in large-scale concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs). Many livestock production systems rely on just a small number of highly specialized breeds. Focusing heavily on a single trait (output) may come at the expense of other desirable traits\u00a0\u2013 such as fertility, resistance to disease, vigor, and mothering instincts. In the early 1990s, a few Holstein calves were observed to grow poorly and died in the first 6 months of life. They were all found to be homozygous for a mutation in the gene that caused bovine leukocyte adhesion deficiency. This mutation was found at a high frequency in Holstein populations worldwide. (15% among bulls in the US, 10% in Germany, and 16% in Japan.) Researchers studying the pedigrees of affected and carrier animals tracked the source of the mutation to a single bull that was widely used in livestock production. In 1990 there were approximately 4 million Holstein cattle in the US, making the affected population around 600,000 animals.\nBenefits of genetic diversity.\nIncreasing genetic diversity through the introduction of organisms with varying genes can make agricultural and livestock systems more sustainable. By utilizing crops with varying genetic traits for disease and pest resistance, chances of disease outbreak decrease due to the likelihood of neighboring plants having strain-resistant genes. This can aid in increasing crop productivity while decreasing pesticide usage.\nAlternatives to monoculture.\nAlternatives to monoculture include the consultation of agroecology, silvo-pastoral systems, and mixed-species plantations.\nAgroecology.\nAgroecology consults the entire food system, considering how agricultural inputs and outputs affect social, environmental, and economic systems. Despite the recent dominance of GMO monoculture crop rotations of soy, corn, and cotton across the deforested Amazon, many Afrodescendant-run farms in Brazil continue to use traditional practices of agroecology that have the capacity to sustain the local community, environment, and economy. Ecosystem-specific ecological damage done by monocultural practices and byproducts, including the use of biocides and soil degradation, can be irreparable. However, the increasing modern prevalence of regenerative farming reinstates crop rotation and natural nutrient cycling to repair biodiversity and improve soil productivity.\nSilvopasture.\nSilvopasture is a traditional practice that incorporates the use of various trees and forage in pastures to increase land and livestock productivity. Incorporating other plants in pastures, such as tree legumes, has been shown to enhance pollinator activity, benefitting local biodiversity and food security. Silvopastoral systems provide greater pasture species richness and grazing feed, increasing economic and environmental outcomes on various size scales.\nMixed-species plantations.\nIn several studies, well-managed mixed-species plantations have been shown to produce greater economic outcomes than monocultures with regard to timber sales. Mixed-species forests are also associated with greater carbon sequestration and biodiversity, presenting a possible mitigation tactic against the climate crisis and current global carbon levels. However, mixed-species plantations are less common under the misconception of being more expensive and harder to manage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52604", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52604", "title": "Christanity", "text": ""}
{"id": "52605", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52605", "title": "Port Talbot", "text": "Town and community in Wales\nPort Talbot (, UK also ) is a town and community in the county borough of Neath Port Talbot, Wales, situated on the east side of Swansea Bay, approximately from Swansea. The Port Talbot Steelworks covers a large area of land which dominates the south east of the town. It is the largest steelworks in the United Kingdom, and one of the largest in the world, but has been under threat of closure since the 1980s. The population was 31,550 in 2021, comprising about a fifth of the 141,931 population of Neath Port Talbot.\nHistory.\nModern Port Talbot is a town formed from the merging of multiple villages, including Baglan, Margam, and Aberafan. The name 'Port Talbot' first appears in 1837 as the name of the new docks built on the south-east side of the river Afan by the Talbot family. Over time it came to be applied to the whole of the emerging conurbation.\nThe earliest evidence of humans in the Port Talbot area has been found on the side of Mynydd Margam where Bronze Age farming ditches can be found from 4,000 BC. There were Iron Age hill forts on Mynydd Dinas, Mynydd Margam, Mynydd Emroch and other nearby hills. Mynydd Hawdref contains remains of an ancient Iron Age village. The Margam deer herd dates from Norman times but deer in the area were mentioned during Roman occupation.\nFfynnon Pedr is a holy well which flows from the hillside through a stone culvert in Margam. This may have been a water supply for Margam Abbey, to the east.\nThe Cross of Brancuf an early Christian Sculptured Stone which stands in the church of St Catharine at Baglan. It is an intricately sculptured cross-slab with a Latin cross and an inscription recalling Brancuf. Originally it stood in the old St Baglan's church but that fell into ruin in the late 19th century and the slab was removed to St Catharine's. St Baglan (Bagelan), son of King Ithael Hoel of Brittany, was a 6th-century hermit and follower of St Illtud. He founded the first church at the town that now takes his name. In the vestry of St Catharine's church sits a cross-slab dating from the 8th\u201310th century CE. It is intricately decorated with a Celtic-style cross formed out of knotwork (cord-plait knotwork) and interlacing; the ends of each arm are probably of a Latin design. Also, there is a Latin inscription: FECIT BRANCUF or perhaps BRANCU which when translated reads 'was made by Brancuf'. However, the person known as Brancuf is unknown.\nThe English antiquarian John Leland made an extensive journey through Wales c.1536\u201339 of which he recorded an itinerary. He passed through Aberafan, which he describes as a \"poor village\" surrounded by barren ground, though he also describes the area as heavily wooded, not much of which remains today. He mentions the use of the river mouth as a port. His portrayal of Aberafan as a small, struggling village suggests that the port was not in great use, especially as traffic to and from Margam Abbey would have ceased following its dissolution in 1536.\nThe area of the parish of Margam lying on the west bank of the lower Afan became industrialised following the establishment of a copperworks in 1770. The Afan was diverted and a dock was opened in 1839 named for the Talbot family, local landowners who were related to the pioneer photographer, William Henry Fox Talbot. The Talbots were patrons of Margam Abbey, and also built Margam Castle. Christopher Rice Mansel Talbot (1803\u20131890), a Liberal Member of Parliament (MP) for Glamorgan from 1830 until his death, saw the potential of his property as a site for an extensive ironworks, which opened in early 1831.\nThe remains of a Chain Home Low early warning radar station are situated in Margam Country Park, dating from World War II (c.\u20091941\u20131943). Designed to guard against enemy surface craft and submarines in the Bristol Channel, the station comprises three squarish concrete buildings with flat roofs, set on the Margam ridge facing south-east and overlooking the Channel. The most north-westerly building retains the framework of a steel gantry, the base for a rectangular radar transmitter/receiver array, known as a 'bedstead array' from its wires and framework, and is believed to be a unique survivor within the British Isles.\nIn 1970 a new deep-water harbour was opened by Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip. This harbour was capable of discharging iron ore vessels of 100,000 deadweight tonnage (DWT), a tenfold improvement on the old dock. By the early 21st century, due to further modification and dredging, the harbour is capable of harbouring vessels of over 170,000 DWT.\nGovernance.\nThe borough of Port Talbot was created in November 1921, incorporating Margam, Cwmafan and Aberafan. It was therefore 85 years after the phrase 'Port Talbot' was first used that it became officially recognised as the town's name.\nPort Talbot was part of the historic county of Glamorgan. The 1974 county council re-organisation split Glamorgan into three new counties, and Port Talbot became one of the four districts of West Glamorgan.\nFollowing the demise of West Glamorgan County Council in 1996, Port Talbot borough council was merged with Neath and part of Lliw Valley Districts to create the new unitary authority of Neath Port Talbot County Borough. The Civic Centre is located in Port Talbot, and the town is represented by three of the 64 councillors that make up the county council.\nThe centre of the town is covered by the Port Talbot ward for local council elections.\nPhysical geography.\nPort Talbot occupies an area of low lying coastal plain between Swansea Bay to the west (within the Bristol Channel) and the hills and valleys of Margam Moors (which are part of the wider South Wales valleys) to the south. The town is built along the eastern rim of Swansea Bay in a narrow strip of coastal plain surrounding the River Afan estuary. Swansea is visible on the opposite side of the bay. The local beach is known as Aberafan Sands and is situated along the edge of the bay between the River Afan and the River Neath. The other beach in Port Talbot is Margam Sands, popularly known as \"Morfa Beach\". The north-western edge of the town is marked by the River Neath. A landmark in the town is the Port Talbot Steelworks.\nHuman geography.\nWith heavy industry and an urban motorway, Port Talbot was reported as having the worst air pollution in Wales in 2005 with a PM10 particulate level of 30\u03bcg/m3 (micrograms per cubic metre). By 2018 the air quality had improved to meet the WHO's recommended limit of 10\u03bcg/m3.\nAccording to the Office for National Statistics the Neath Port Talbot population had increased by 1.8 percent, from around 139,800 in 2011 to 142,300 in 2021. This was higher than the overall increase for Wales (1.4 percent), where the population grew by 44,000 to 3,107,500. In 2021 Neath Port Talbot ranked ninth for total population out of 22 local authority areas in Wales. This amounts to a fall of one place in a decade. As of 2021 Neath Port Talbot was the 11th least densely populated of Wales' 22 local authority areas. There had been an increase of 15.5 percent in people aged 65 years and over, a decrease of 2.3 percent in people aged 15 to 64 years, and an increase of 2.5 percent in children aged under 15 years.\nUnemployment.\nOf Port Talbot's population in 2000, 63 percent were between the ages of 15 and 64. Male unemployment in 2000 was around 9 percent. Female unemployment was around 6 percent in 2000.\nSocial deprivation.\nIn 2010, 26.2 percent of children and young persons (under the age of 20) in Neath Port Talbot county borough were living in relative poverty, higher than the 22.2 percent Welsh average.\nAccording to the Office for National Statistics, between April 2012 to March 2013 25,400 residents, that is 7.8 percent, between the ages of 16 and 64 were economically inactive. 60,100 residents, that is 70.3 percent, between the ages of 16 and 64 were economically active.\nGeology.\nPort Talbot has a variety of bedrock and drift types.\nBedrock geology.\nSouth East of Port Talbot is dominated by Pennant sandstone which forms this high relief area including Mynydd Margam, Mynydd Dinas and the other mountains. The pennant sandstone is made up of two formations which are the Rhondda Member and Brithdir Member. The sandstone formed in Carboniferous swamps 300 million years ago. Pennant sandstone is a micacous sandstone which has a brown colouration with areas of red staining where iron from pyrite in coal has weathered creating a rust colouration.\nLower land areas are predominantly Pennant sandstone within the South Wales Coal Measures Group.\nDrift geology.\nThere is a variety of drift deposits in Port Talbot. Sandfields area of Port Talbot is built upon blown sand and tidal flat deposits. These were deposited by the wind via aeolian processes and the water by fluvial processes. Velindre area of Port Talbot is built upon an alluvial fan deposit. This deposit formed during the last glacial period 14,000 years ago. Baglan Road in Port Talbot is built upon glacial till from the Devensian period. Till, also known as boulder clay, is a mix of unconsolidated sediment with a range of grain sizes. This forms as the fronts of glaciers rapidly deposit material due to melting. Cwmafan in Port Talbot is built upon alluvial and glaciofluvial deposits, formed from glacial meltwater. Baglan Moors, Fairfield and Port Talbot town centre are built upon tidal flat deposits (tides were higher 12,000 years ago allowing sandy deposits to accumulate).\nEconomic geology.\nCoal seams within the Pennant sandstone run north west-south-east and east\u2013west. The coal seams arise from the South Wales Middle Coal Measures Formation, South Wales Upper Coal Measures Formation, South Wales Lower Coal Measures Formation, Rhondda Member and Brithdir Member. Pennant sandstone is an excellent construction rock and road stone.\nStructural geology.\nFaults have an orientation of North West-South East, east\u2013west and north\u2013south. All are normal faults which form extension processes. There are also many marine fossils bands.\nBio-stratigraphy/palaeontology.\nMarine fossils found in Port Talbot region include species of bivalves, gastropods and brachiopods. Terrestrial fossils include fern tree branches, trunks, leaves and roots. Traces of organism footprints can also be found.\nEngineering geology.\nThe drift geology average thickness is between . Several landslips occur in the highlands including many bole holes historically made for the construction of the M4 motorway, steelworks and coal mines.\nHydro-geology.\nRivers in the region are fault guided meaning that they flow is highly influenced by a structural weakness called a fault. Several natural springs occur in the highland regions with a neutral to slightly acidic ph values. Natural groundwater levels varies from below the Taibach area of Port Talbot to over . Rivers in the region including the River Afan (Aberafan), River Neath (Baglan Bay), Ffrwdwyllt (Taibach), Arnallt Brook (Taibach), Baglan Brook (Baglan), River Kenfig (Morfa Beach) and other rivers are fast flowing and are highly influenced by their mouths (end of the rivers, tidal region). A spout can be found in Baglan Park in the Baglan region of Port Talbot. Many open and uncovered reservoirs exist in the region. Water has been channelled into ditches in industrial areas of Port Talbot.\nEducation.\nThere are four comprehensive schools situated within the Port Talbot area:\nGlan Afan Comprehensive School and Sandfields Comprehensive School closed in 2016.\nA campus of Neath Port Talbot College is located in the Margam area. The Margam campus was previously called Afan College.\nThe University of South Wales has a campus at Baglan Energy Park called the \"Hydrogen Centre\", which includes a Renewable Hydrogen Research and Development Centre.\nArts and culture.\nPort Talbot has been called \"fertile ground for movie stars\" with former residents including Anthony Hopkins, Richard Burton and Ronald Lewis. \nSouth Wales Miners' Museum.\nThe South Wales Miners' Museum is located in Cynonville, Cymmer.\nMargam Stones Museum.\nThe nearby Margam Stones Museum has early Christian inscribed stones and Celtic crosses, including four from the area now under the Steelworks. A Roman milestone, an 8th-century pillar, and two Celtic crosses from the 10th century were all rescued from the steelworks site by the Talbot family and taken to Margam, where they are now in the museum, in the care of Cadw.\nThe Baked Bean Museum of Excellence.\nThe Baked Bean Museum of Excellence is a private museum in Port Talbot.\nBanksy mural.\nIn December 2018 the artist Banksy confirmed that he produced a mural painted on the corner of a garage close to Port Talbot steelworks. On one side it depicts a boy playing in what appears to be snowfall, but the other side shows the snowfall is ash falling from a bin fire. In May 2019, the mural was moved to a gallery in the town's Ty'r Orsaf building.\n\"The Passion\".\nIn April 2011, actor Michael Sheen led a 72-hour National Theatre Wales production of a modern retelling of The Passion. The play began at 5:30\u00a0am on Good Friday with a seafront scene, inspired by John the Baptist's baptism of Jesus, which was watched by hundreds who had heard about it by word of mouth.\nBy the time the first main part of the play was performed on Aberafan Beach at 3:00\u00a0pm, organisers estimated up to 6,000 people had gathered to watch.\nOn Saturday, there were sequences in Llewellyn Street, the Castle Street underpass, Aberafan Shopping Centre, the Seaside Social and Labour Club in Sandfields and nearby Abbeyville Court.\nOn Easter Sunday, the production returned to Aberafan Beach as part of the finale. A trial was performed on Civic Square before a procession from Station Road, with the final scene, \"the cross\", at Aberafan seafront. By the time the procession had reached the seafront close to where it had begun 72 hours earlier, organisers estimate over 13,000 people had come to watch on the small roundabout.\nIn April 2012, Michael Sheen returned to attend the world premiere of the feature-length film \"The Gospel of Us\" based on The Passion. The premiere was held at the Apollo Cinema (now the Reel Cinema) on the Aberafan seafront close to where The Passion took place. Tickets for the premiere sold out weeks before the showing; all six screens showed the film simultaneously. The film was also shown daily from Easter Sunday to the following Thursday prior to its UK-wide release the next day.\nMedia.\nPort Talbot is served by several Independent Local Radio stations: Hits Radio South Wales, its sister station Greatest Hits Radio South Wales, Swansea Bay Radio, Heart South Wales and Nation Radio Wales. Radio Phoenix also operates a 24-hour hospital radio service for the patients and staff of Neath Port Talbot Hospital in Baglan Moors.\nIn 2005 the area was granted its first radio station when Afan FM, the inspiration of a group of local young people, was awarded a five-year licence by Ofcom to serve Port Talbot and Neath. Afan FM broadcast from the AquaDome leisure complex on Aberafan Seafront. Following a December 2009 fire at the AquaDome, Afan FM moved to Aberafan House, adjacent to the town's shopping centre. Afan FM closed in December 2011 was shut down following an unexpected tax bill.\nThe town has been served by several newspapers. The \"Port Talbot Guardian\" was a weekly paper published by Media Wales, part of the Trinity Mirror group, but ceased publication in October 2009. The Swansea-based daily \"South Wales Evening Post\" and the weekly \"Courier and Tribune\" are distributed in the town and are published by Media Wales, part of the Reach plc group.\nThe Welsh-language song competition \"C\u00e2n i Gymru\" is usually filmed in Port Talbot. TV programmes such as \"Doctor Who\" and \"The Sarah Jane Adventures\" have filmed in the town.\nThe 2017 crime drama television series \"Bang\" is set in Port Talbot.\nTerry Gilliam has recounted how he was inspired to create the movie \"Brazil\" after hearing a transistor radio play the song \"Aquarela do Brasil\" on the beach at Port Talbot.\nTransport.\nRailway.\nPort Talbot is served by the South Wales Main Line at Port Talbot Parkway railway station. Great Western Railway and Transport for Wales serve the station with services westbound to Neath and Swansea and West Wales Line and eastbound to Bridgend, Cardiff Central and London Paddington. Trains also run via Hereford and Shrewsbury to Crewe and Manchester Piccadilly.\nThe new \u00a35.6 million Integrated Transport hub was completed in 2017, linking Port Talbot Parkway with new bus and taxi links. This also included extensive upgrades to the railway station and surrounding area.\nBus.\nPort Talbot bus station, located adjacent to the Aberafan Centre in the centre of the town is the main bus transport hub, it is a National Express stop. Local bus services are provided by First Cymru and South Wales Transport. The bus station's layout is very distinctive for the fact that buses must perform a 270\u00b0 clockwise turn to exit the station. A Sustrans cycle route has recently been constructed at this bus station as part of the connect2 scheme connecting the Afan Valley with Aberafan beach. A second bus station opened in the town in 2017, at Port Talbot Parkway railway station.\nM4 motorway.\nThe M4 motorway passes through the town from southeast to northwest, crossing a central area on a concrete viaduct, junctions 38 to 41 serve Port Talbot, with junctions 40 and 41 being in the commercial heart of the town. This busy urban stretch of the M4, with tight bends, two-lane carriageways, short narrow slip roads and concrete walls on both sides, was the first length of motorway in Wales when it opened to traffic in 1966. The road has a speed limit of enforced with automatic number-plate recognition speed cameras in both directions. The stretch through Port Talbot town centre is a particular traffic congestion blackspot and there have been calls to close the slip roads at junctions 40 and 41 to improve traffic flow. However some commuters oppose this plan since it would add more time to their journey. A new dual carriageway relief road, the Port Talbot Peripheral Distribution Road (PDR), was completed in 2013. It serves as a distributor road through Port Talbot to the southwest of the M4, beginning at M4 Junction 38 and ending near Junction 41.\nPort Talbot docks.\nThe Port Talbot Docks complex consist of an inner set of floating docks and an outer tidal basin. Construction of the tidal basin began in 1964 and the whole basin covers about . The tidal basin is capable of handling ships of up to 170,000 DWT and is used mostly for the import of iron ore and coal for use by nearby Port Talbot Steelworks. The inner floating docks were constructed in 1898 and were closed in 1959. They were re-opened in 1998 for commercial shipping and in March 2007 for the import of some steel products and are capable of handling ships of up to 8,000 dwt. There have been proposals for the development of an intermodal freight terminal at the port.\nEconomy.\nOn 20 November 2007, the Department for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform (BERR) granted consent for the world's largest biomass power station to be built at Port Talbot. This is expected to provide enough electricity (from wood from environmentally-managed forests, mostly in North America) to supply half the homes in Wales with electricity.\nPotential future development currently centres around the peripheral distributor road to the south (the dual carriageway road in the Margam and Taibach areas was finished in 2013), Baglan Industrial Park and Baglan Energy Park to the west, Port Talbot Docks to the southwest, Margam Country Park to the east and the Afan Valley to the north. In March 2009 Neath Port Talbot County Borough Council announced a regeneration project for Port Talbot town centre and docks, with a master plan for new homes, offices, light industry, retail developments and improvements to the railway station.\nIn January 2021, permission was granted for a new \u00a3200m adventure resort to open in the Afan Valley. The resort will include ski slopes, zip wires, tree top high-wire courses, Bear Grylls Survival Academy, an aqua adventure park, an equestrian centre, mountain biking, BMX and skate parks, a luxury spa, central plaza with shops and restaurants, 100-bed hotel and 500 luxury lodges.\nIn May 2022, the Welsh Government announced that a free port known as the Celtic Freeport was to be established in Port Talbot and in Milford Haven. This would focus on various low carbon technologies and aim to attract inward investment.\nYouth organisations.\nPort Talbot is home to a number of youth organisations. They are operated by Neath Port Talbot County Borough Council, the Ministry of Defence and a range of other charitable organisations.\nCadet organisations.\nThe 499 (Port Talbot) Squadron Air Training Corps, Sea Cadets, Port Talbot Detachment and Dyfed and Glamorgan Army Cadet Force operate in Port Talbot.\nSea rescue.\nPort Talbot coastguard celebrated its centenary in 2008. The crew are the mud rescue team for the Swansea Bay area and are one of the seven rescue teams in the Gower Sector. Port Talbot inshore lifeboat is operated by the Royal National Lifeboat Institution and operates in the docks, at Aberafan Beach and in the navigable sections of the local rivers.\nSport.\nRugby.\nThe town is part of the Ospreys rugby union region, by which it is represented at the top level of the sport. Other teams include:\nFootball.\nCymru South teams are Trefelin B.G.C., Afan Lido F.C. and Goytre United, all based in the town.\nPort Talbot Town, who were relegated from the Cymru South, joined Baglan Dragons F.C. who were promoted to the Ardal Leagues.\nOther teams in the town include Afan United, Tata Steel United, Margam FC and Cwmafan FC.\nPort Talbot Half Marathon.\nThe Port Talbot half marathon is an annual event attracting hundreds of runners. The event takes place around the Glyncorrwg ponds and Afan valley area. \nOther sports.\nMargam Forest to the northeast of the Port Talbot is used as a venue for a stage of the annual Wales Rally GB. In the past, the rally route has traversed Margam Country Park.\nAfan Forest Park to the north of the town has a number of dedicated mountain biking trails including the 'Penhydd', 'Y W\u00e2l', 'Skyline', 'White's Level' and 'W\u00b2'.\nThe Aberavon beach is popular for surfing and kite surfing. A local life-saving club operates during the summer months.\nSpecial environmental protected sites.\nPort Talbot has several protected sites, including Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) and a Ramsar wetland site.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52606", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52606", "title": "River Afan", "text": "The River Afan () is a river in Wales whose valley formed the territory of the medieval Lords of Afan. The Afan Valley encompasses the upper reaches of the river. The valley is traversed by the A4107 road. Settlements in the area include Cwmafan, Pontrhydyfen and Cymmer. The town of Aberavon, whose name in Welsh \"Aberafan\" means 'mouth of the Afan', grew up on the banks of the river and was later subsumed by the town of Port Talbot.\nEtymology.\nMultiple hypotheses exist regarding the origin of the river's name. One suggestion is that it is from \"A-Ban\" meaning \"from the heights\" due to its comparatively quick descent from hills to the sea. (Compare to the 'Ban' in \"Bannau Brycheiniog\", the Brecon Beacons). However, such a name would be very unusual for a river. It is not parallelled elsewhere, and does not fit in with the pattern of Welsh stream and river nomenclature in general. A. D. Mills believes the river derives ultimately from a personal name.\nCourse.\nThe Afan rises on the northern slopes of Mynydd Llangeinwyr to the east of Blaengwynfi, and flows in a generally south-westerly direction roughly parallel to the River Neath with which it shares its western watershed.\nThe river passes the Afan Argoed Country Park in its middle reaches. It converges with the river Pelenna at Pontrhydyfen. From here it turns southward towards Port Talbot.\nTo aid the construction of the docks at Port Talbot, the river was impounded and a diversion channel built that now forms the lower reaches of this river. There are two weirs in this final tidal reach of the Afan; Greenpark Weir at the upstream tidal limit, which has been reconstructed in 2017 and provides headwaters for the dock feeder channel that approximately follows the river's original route, and Newbridge Weir, which is the most downstream weir, presents a barrier to fish passage and is in a poor state of repair.\nA motte and bailey castle stood on the banks of the river as it passed through Aberavon during the medieval period. No remains are now visible above ground, but the site of the castle is commemorated in local street names.\nGeography.\nTo the east the Afan borders the River Kenfig and then the River Llynfi, a tributary of the River Ogmore. The Afan shares a watershed with the Rhondda Fawr, a tributary of the River Taff.\nIndustrial past.\nFor much of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century, the River Afan was severely polluted by the coal and iron industries. With the decline in the coal mining industry, the quality of the river improved in the 1960s and 1970s so that some salmon and sea trout started to return to the river to spawn. A number of weirs on the river had to be made passable to allow fish to ascend the river. This required the creation of fish passes on some weirs such as on the Dock feeder weir and the demolition of others such as at Corlannau weir.\nTributaries.\nRiver Corrwg.\nThe Corrwg is one of the Afan's principal tributaries. Its length is approximately 11\u00a0km, and its source lies above the village of Glyncorrwg, in the hills south of Glyn-neath. It has a major tributary, Afon Corrwg Fechan, as well as numerous tributary streams. Several waterfalls exist along the river's course. Although the water is clear today, discharge from the many collieries along its lower reaches led to significant pollution. Minor discharge sometimes leaks from the Glyncorrwg colliery, although its effects do not have a noticeably detrimental effect on the river.\nRiver Pelenna.\nThe Pelenna, a major tributary that meets the Afan at Pontrhydyfen, suffered more severely from pollution than the main river because of the sulphur-rich coal that was produced by the mines in that area. As a result, the abandoned coal mines continued to discharge acid mine drainage rich in iron and highly acidic. This turned much of the river orange down to the confluence of the Pelena with the main river Afan. The orange colour could often be seen as far down stream as Pontrhydyfen. There were a number of collieries contributing to the pollution although the major source was the Whitworth Colliery. At the height of coal extraction in the valley, there were several deep pits and numerous levels. This pollution is now much mitigated\nfollowing extensive work promoted by the Environment Agency in the creation of engineered reed beds to treat the mine drainage.\nNant Ffrwdwyllt.\nNant Ffrwdwyllt was a small tributary of the Afan, just under 8\u00a0km and joining the Afan close to the sea. It was diverted in the 18th century into the ironworks at what was to become Port Talbot, to provide a source of water. It remains diverted, flowing into Port Talbot Docks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52608", "revid": "19158033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52608", "title": "Sigismund III Vasa", "text": "Ruler of Poland-Lithuania (1587\u20131632), King of Sweden (1592\u20131599)\nSigismund III Vasa (, ; 20 June 1566 \u2013 30 April 1632\n) was King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania from 1587 to 1632 and, as Sigismund, King of Sweden from 1592 to 1599. He was the first Polish sovereign from the House of Vasa. Religiously zealous, he imposed Catholicism across the vast realm, and his crusades against neighbouring states marked Poland's largest territorial expansion. As an enlightened despot, he presided over an era of prosperity and achievement, further distinguished by the transfer of the country's capital from Krak\u00f3w to Warsaw.\nSigismund was the son of King John III of Sweden and his first wife, Catherine Jagiellon, daughter of King Sigismund\u00a0I of Poland. Elected monarch of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1587, he sought to unify Poland and Sweden under one Catholic kingdom, and when he succeeded his deceased father in 1592 the Polish\u2013Swedish union was created. Opposition in Protestant Sweden caused a war against Sigismund headed by Sigismund's uncle Charles IX, who deposed him in 1599.\nSigismund attempted to hold absolute power in all his dominions and frequently undermined parliament. He suppressed internal opposition, strengthened Catholic influence and granted privileges to the Jesuits, whom he employed as advisors and spies during the Counter-Reformation. He actively interfered in the affairs of neighbouring countries; his successful invasion of Russia during the Time of Troubles resulted in the seizure of Smolensk and occupation of Moscow, resulting in Poland's historical greatest territorial extent. Sigismund's army also defeated the Ottoman forces in southeastern Europe, which hastened the downfall of Sultan Osman II. However, the Polish\u2013Swedish conflict had a less favourable outcome. After a series of skirmishes ending in a truce, King Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden launched a campaign against the Commonwealth and annexed parts of Polish Livonia.\nSigismund to this day remains a controversial figure in Poland. He is one of the country's most recognisable monarchs. His long reign partially coincided with the Polish Golden Age, the apex in the prestige, power and economic influence of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. On the other hand, it was also during his rule that the seeds of decline surfaced. Considerable contributions to the arts and architecture as well as military victories were tarnished by intrigues and religious persecutions. He was commemorated in Warsaw by Sigismund's Column, one of the city's chief landmarks and the first secular monument in the form of a column in modern history. It was commissioned after Sigismund's death by his son and successor, W\u0142adys\u0142aw IV.\nEarly life.\nBorn on 20 June 1566 at Gripsholm Castle, Sigismund was the second child and only son of Catherine Jagiellon and Grand Duke John, who was a son of King Gustav\u00a0I of Sweden. The couple was being held prisoner at Gripsholm since 1563 when John staged a failed rebellion against his deranged brother Eric XIV of Sweden. Although Protestant Christians were growing political wing in Poland at the time, Sigismund was raised as a Catholic. His mother Catherine was the daughter of Polish king Sigismund the Old and Bona Sforza of Milan, all of whom where practicing Catholics. Sigismund's older sister Isabella died aged two in 1566. His younger sister Anna was a Lutheran, but the close relationship between the two siblings remained unchanged until her death in 1625.\nIn October 1567, Sigismund and his parents were released from prison at the request of his uncle Charles. In January 1569, Eric XIV was deposed and Sigismund's father ascended the throne of Sweden as John III. He maintained good relations with his father despite John's second marriage to Gunilla Bielke, a Protestant noble lady of lower status and Catherine's former maid of honour. In 1589, Sigismund's half-brother John, the future Duke of \u00d6sterg\u00f6tland, was born.\nAs a child, Sigismund was tutored in both Polish and Swedish, thus making him bilingual. He was also proficient in German, Italian, and Latin. Catherine ensured that her son was educated in the spirit of Catholicism and Polish patriotism; the young prince was made aware of his blood connection to the Jagiellonian dynasty which ruled Poland in its finest period for two hundred years. Although Sigismund in his youth enjoyed reading and learning, observers did not acknowledge his intelligence. He was handsome, rather tall, and of slim build, but timid and an introvert who became heavily influenced by the teachings of the church. Nevertheless, Sigismund was undoubtedly multitalented and artistically inclined.\nAccession.\nIn 1587, Sigismund stood for election to the Polish throne after the death of Stephen B\u00e1thory. His candidacy was secured by Queen Dowager Anna and several elite magnates who considered him a native candidate as a descendant of the Jagiellons, though the election was openly questioned and opposed by the nobles politically associated with the Zborowski family. With the blessing of primate Stanis\u0142aw Karnkowski and strong support from other people of influence he was duly elected ruler of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth on 19 August 1587. His official name and title became \"by the grace of God, king of Poland, grand duke of Lithuania, ruler of Ruthenia, Prussia, Masovia, Samogitia, Livonia and also hereditary king of the Swedes, Goths and Wends\"; the latter titles being a reference to the fact that he was already the Crown Prince of Sweden, and thus would lawfully succeed to the throne of Sweden upon the death of his father.\nThe outcome of the election was strongly contested by factions of the Polish nobility that backed the candidacy of Archduke Maximilian III of Austria, who launched a military expedition. When the news reached Sigismund in Sweden, he crossed the Baltic and landed in Poland on 7 October, immediately agreeing to grant royal privileges to the Sejm (parliament) in the hope of calming the opposition and settling the disputed election. He was proclaimed king by Treasurer Jan Dulski on behalf of Crown Marshal Andrzej Opali\u0144ski, and after arriving in the Royal Capital City of Krak\u00f3w he was crowned on 27 December at Wawel Cathedral.\nSigismund's position was solidified when Jan Zamoyski defeated Maximilian at the Battle of Byczyna and took him prisoner. At the request of Pope Sixtus V, the Archduke was then released and in turn surrendered his claim to Poland in 1589. He was also successful in maintaining peace with his powerful southern neighbour by marrying Archduchess Anne of Habsburg in 1592. Simultaneously, he secured an alliance with Catholic Austria against Protestant foes.\nWhen his father died, Sigismund was granted permission by the Polish Diet to claim the Swedish crown, which he had inherited from his father. The Swedes, who previously declared John III a Catholic conspirator and traitor, became lenient when the new monarch pledged to respect Lutheranism as the country's new state religion. Sigismund was crowned at Uppsala on 19 February 1594, but his promise to uphold the Protestant faith in Sweden began on shaky ground, as demonstrated by the presence of a papal nuncio in the royal procession. Tensions grew following his coronation. Sigismund remained a devout Catholic and left the country abruptly, which made the Swedes sceptical of their new ruler. After returning to Poland, he appointed his uncle, Duke Charles, to rule as his regent. Sigismund's ultimate intention was to reinstate Catholicism in Sweden, by force if necessary. The Jesuits often acted as agents refuting Protestantism and promoting Catholicism in the country.\nOpposition.\nThe hostility between Chancellor Jan Zamoyski and Sigismund began as soon as he arrived in Poland from Sweden to claim the crown. Zamoyski, a patriotic brawler, along with other magnates were critical of the young king's liking for the Habsburg culture, certain habits and impassive cold character. According to historian and writer Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz, Zamoyski was said to have exclaimed \"what a mute have you brought to us\" upon meeting the king in October 1587. The Chancellor was initially supportive of Sigismund's candidacy due to his maternal lineage. During the first parliament sitting, the so-called Pacification Sejm, in March 1589, Zamoyski proposed extensive reforms of the electoral system; notably, he presented the idea that only a member of a local native dynasty should be eligible to the Polish throne in the future, entailing the permanent exclusion of any Habsburg candidates.\nSigismund saw a potential ally in Austria; he sought to establish a Catholic league that would actively engage in the Counter-Reformation. Zamoyski openly condemned Sigismund for associating with the Habsburgs, particularly Archduke Ernest, and speculated that Ernest was to be the potential successor if Sigismund abdicated and returned to Sweden. The anti-Austrian sentiment was only explicable as a circuitous attempt to traverse the Habsburg hegemony and influence in Central Europe, which Zamoyski perceived as a major threat. However, the parliament immediately rejected the proposal and ruled in favour of Austria, thus also accepting a marriage between Sigismund and Anne of Habsburg. Furthermore, the reestablishment of peaceful relations with Austria was dictated by the Treaty of Bytom and B\u0119dzin from March 1589 which was negotiated by Ippolito Aldobrandini, future Pope Clement VIII.\nAt the subsequent Sejm session, assembled in March 1590, Zamoyski persuaded the gathered deputies and representatives to exclude Archduke Maximilian from future candidacy to the throne, describing the possibility of Austrian intrigues and the looming threat of the Turkish Empire. His opponents, headed by Primate Karnkowski, formed an informal confederation immediately after the Sejm rose to protest the decrees. All of the decrees of the first Sejm were rescinded by a second Sejm which sat at the end of the same year: the Hetmanship was suspended, the party of Maximilian was amnestied, the Zborowskis were rehabilitated, and Zamoyski's counterparts were removed from the royal court. Tensions between Sweden and Poland grew further over the ownership of Estonia following the dissolution of the Livonian Order; Zamoyski held Sigismund accountable for the dispute.\nSigismund's leniency towards the Habsburgs also alienated some clerics; the Austrians wanted to prevent Andrew B\u00e1thory from seizing the bishopric of Krak\u00f3w and succeeded in doing so by diplomatic coaxing or coercion. The new papal nuncio, Annibale di Capua, a staunch Habsburg supporter, eventually convinced Sigismund to nominate Jerzy Radziwi\u0142\u0142 after Piotr Myszkowski died on 5 April 1591. Capua stressed that Andrew had not been an ordained priest and was not legally capable to become bishop. The decision strained the once friendly relations between Poland and Transylvania.\nPeace settlement.\nAs outlined by Oskar Halecki, the king's friends were largely recruited from the higher clergy and the Jesuits, who violated the 1573 Warsaw Confederation guaranteeing religious freedoms in Poland and Lithuania. As persecution loomed, political dissidents grouped and formed factions which called for adherence to the laws of the Confederation. Zamoyski joined the dissidents, and, when Sigismund failed to prevent mob violence directed against non-Catholics in Vilnius and Krak\u00f3w in 1591, he summoned several conventions that \"demanded the guarantees of security\". Sigismund yielded to their demands, however, he forbade any future conventions which could destabilize the state. The prohibition did not have a lasting effect, and gatherings of dissidents continued in the following year.\nThe opposition hoped to thwart the match with Archduchess Anne of Habsburg, whose state entry into Krak\u00f3w at the end of May was greatly celebrated. Sigismund disregarded any protest in regards to the marriage. Consequently, on 1 June 1592 Zamoyski formed another confederation at J\u0119drzej\u00f3w (Latin: Andreiow) attended by the most eminent and distinguished magnates, among them Miko\u0142aj Zebrzydowski and Stanis\u0142aw \u017b\u00f3\u0142kiewski. At Andreiow, he allegedly exposed proof concerning a plot that would place Archduke Ernest on the throne if Sigismund was to abdicate. Zamoyski's claim caused an uproar.\nOn 7 September, Sigismund summoned the \"Warsaw Inquisition Sejm\" (\"sejm inkwizycyjny\") to inquire into the so-called \"Austrian cabals\". Zamoyski's strong argument against that of the monarch was so persuasive that elderly Karnkowski sided with the Chancellor and his supporters, who abstained from kissing the King's hand upon arrival as the custom required. Alleged letters and private correspondence between Sigismund and Ernest with the royal signature was presented as evidence. The King rebuked these accusations; his aides attributed the falsified signature to the court scribe, who was subsequently imprisoned at Dzia\u0142dowo (Soldau), tortured, but pleaded not guilty. The opposition extended their demands and asked for the immediate removal of all foreign dignitaries from the court, including mercenaries, which was not fully enforced.\nThe Sejm had no definite outcome; most of the gathered nobles and diplomats dispersed as further incrimination of the sovereign proved futile and detrimental to the stability of the state. There is little evidence or written works from the period concerning the terms under which the Sejm functioned or how it concluded. Niemcewicz largely attributed the victory to Sigismund \u2013 the measures of the Counter-Reformation strengthened and within a year many of the convention's attendees died; acquiescent nobles favourable to the king were appointed as their successors, thus making his position less vulnerable. The rivalry between Sigismund and Zamoyski continued until the latter's death in 1605.\nWar in Sweden.\nTensions.\nThe Uppsala Resolution of 1594 dictated the rights and securities of Protestants in Sweden; it promised to uphold the Lutheran faith in the country, forbade non-Lutherans from being appointed to office or participating in the educational system and prevented Sigismund from freely raising taxes for war. However, the resolution was undermined whenever possible. With military backing, Sigismund installed his own commanders in Swedish castles and made them responsible directly to him. He established the office of regional governor (\"st\u00e5th\u00e5llare\") and appointed Charles' lifelong enemy, Klaus Fleming, as the overlord of Finland. The governors served notice that they would abstain from persecuting Catholicism in their administered territories. Erik Brahe, a Catholic, became the governor of Sweden's capital city, Stockholm, in defiance of the 1594 charter which sparked widespread anger.\nOn 4 August 1594, Sigismund decreed that the Swedish parliament (\"Riksdag\") had no right to function without royal consent. Despite this, Charles summoned a parliament at S\u00f6derk\u00f6ping in autumn of 1595, at which he declared himself regent and head of government, who would govern Sweden reciprocally with the Privy Council during the King's absence from the realm. The Finnish nobility led by Fleming rejected this resolution and so did Sigismund's emissary who ordered him, in the name of the king, to resign. Fleming sympathised with Sigismund and considered Charles a rebel. In response, Charles instigated a brief revolt against Fleming among the peasants under Jaakko Ilkka in the province of Ostrobothnia, known today as the Cudgel War.\nAs outlined by historian Gary Dean Peterson, Fleming might have quelled the rebellion but it was Charles who took advantage of the brutality of Fleming's men and started a successful propaganda war. The prospects of Polish and Catholic domination over Sweden became uncertain when Klaus Fleming died on 13 April 1597. He was succeeded by Arvid St\u00e5larm the Younger, who did not accede to Swedish demands and awaited Charles' intervention in Finland. Meanwhile, the nobility dispersed; Erik Gustafsson Stenbock, Arvid Gustafsson Stenbock, Erik Sparre, Erik Brahe and Sten Ban\u00e9r fled to entreat Sigismund to return and counter Charles.\nCivil war.\nIn 1597, a civil war erupted and Duke Charles was able to assume control over a large share of the powerful castles in Sweden, and in this manner achieved control over almost all the realm. However, Finland remained loyal to Sigismund and resisted. In September 1597, he sailed for the Finnish coast and seized \u00c5bo Castle from Fleming's widow, Ebba Stenbock, by the end of the month. Charles's troops were not prepared nor strong enough to conquer or hold Finland in its entirety \u2013 they sailed back to Stockholm in October and St\u00e5larm retook \u00c5bo the same year.\nAs noted by envoys, several high-ranking noblemen fighting for Sigismund's cause were instantaneously sent to the scaffold. Further tensions and escalation of violence as well as Charles's unpredictable stance persuaded Sigismund to intervene. Christian IV of Denmark agreed to cooperate but would not join the armed conflict. The major seaports of Danzig (Gda\u0144sk), L\u00fcbeck and Rostock were pressured to sever trade with Sweden. Polish privateers began to violently attack Swedish vessels in the Baltic. By February 1598 Sigismund assembled an army consisting of approximately 5,000 men. On 23 July 1598 the army left Danzig (Gda\u0144sk) with eighty transports, several warships and exiled members of the Swedish parliament. Eight days later they landed in Kalmar, which surrendered without a fight.\nAfter the fall of Kalmar, Charles found himself with major trouble on his hands; the Polish Crown army attracted Swedish followers, and Stockholm, lacking military defence, was easily taken with the help of the nobility and officers of G\u00f6taland. The cavalry of Uppland soon joined the royalists, and new forces were mobilised in Finland and Estonia. Charles' troops were greater in numbers, but mostly comprised poorly trained militias and peasants from the friendly provinces.\nSigismund advanced his troops towards St\u00e5ngebro in Link\u00f6ping where his sister Anna Vasa resided. On 8 September Charles executed a premature attack on St\u00e5ngebro which was quickly repelled; his force was surrounded in the night and massacred by the Poles. Severed heads on lances and spikes startled Sigismund who ordered an end to the violence. The supposed truce did not come into effect, and, on the morning of 25 September, the armies clashed once more in a major engagement at the Battle of St\u00e5ngebro. The prevailing fog was instrumental at hiding troop movement; the Swedish rebels used the opportunity to take the bridges on the river St\u00e5ng\u00e5n when Sigismund's men were falsely led into a truce and retreated to their camp. Their attempt to regroup and form a second defensive line proved futile and Charles emerged victorious as the Polish army was also cut off from supplies by superior Swedish warships.\nAftermath and deposition.\nThe peace agreement was sealed with a dinner at Link\u00f6ping Castle on 28 September. Both sides agreed to lay down arms and send the troops back to their home provinces, except for the King's personal guard. Charles' appointments were to be recognized and a parliament was to be called to settle any disputes. The King, who was under pressure, fearing for his life without his army and having realised that he had lost the political battle, fled with his sister during the coming days to Poland. At the same time as the peace treaty was being signed in Link\u00f6ping, conflicts were taking place in Dalarna. There, a pro-Sigismund bailiff, Jacob N\u00e4f, had tried to raise up the Dalecarlians against Duke Charles. Chaos ensued, N\u00e4f was executed, and the Dalecarlians set out on a campaign in 1598, burning and killing down to Brunnb\u00e4ck ferry. In V\u00e4sterg\u00f6tland, Carl Carlsson Gyllenhielm, illegitimate son of Duke Charles, defeated the rebellion. A number of Swedes who had sided with Sigismund, including his council supporters, were handed over to Charles as part of the peace settlement. They were later killed in the Link\u00f6ping Bloodbath of 1600.\nSigismund was officially deposed from the throne of Sweden by a Riksdag held in Stockholm on 24 July 1599. He was given six (or twelve depending on source) months to send his son, Prince Ladislaus (W\u0142adys\u0142aw) Vasa, to Sweden as his successor, under the condition that the boy would be brought up in the Protestant faith. In February 1600, Duke Charles summoned the Estates of the Realm to Link\u00f6ping. Since Sigismund had not provided a reply, the Estates elected Duke Charles as King apparent, however he would not become Charles IX until his coronation four years later. During the winter and spring of 1600, Charles also occupied the Swedish part of Estonia, as the castle commanders had shown sympathies towards Sigismund.\nPolish affairs.\nClash with England (1597).\nIn the 1590s, the interests of the English and the Ottoman Turks coincided in opposing the Spanish; on the other hand, Sigismund had clashed with the Turks in Poland's southeast. In the Low Countries of northwestern Europe, Protestant forces sent by Elizabeth\u00a0I fought the Catholic armies of Spain's Philip II Habsburg, preventing Spain from capturing territory on the south side of the English Channel. England's naval power also prevented Spain from completely dominating the Mediterranean, to the benefit of the Turks. During this time, England purchased a great deal of grain and timber from Poland to supply its navy, necessitating good relations with Poland. Edward Barton, Elizabeth's ambassador to the Ottoman Empire, had warned them that England would have to respond if the Ottomans invaded Poland.\nIn July 1597, the Queen's Privy Council instructed Henry Billingsley, Lord Mayor of London, to arrange housing for a Polish diplomat and report back to the council. On 23 July, Pawe\u0142 Dzia\u0142y\u0144ski arrived in London and was accommodated at the house of Sir John Spencer. On 25 July, Dzia\u0142y\u0144ski was granted an audience with Elizabeth and her court at the palace in Greenwich. As described by Robert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury, the ambassador out of Poland at first seemed to be \"a gentleman of excellent fashion, wit, discourse, language, and person.\" He presented his credentials, kissed the Queen's hand, then walked to the centre of the chamber and, as outlined by Cecil, \"began his oration aloud in Latin, with such a gallant countenance as in my life I never beheld.\"\nDzia\u0142y\u0144ski informed Elizabeth that Sigismund was outraged that her vessels were capturing the ships of Polish and Hanseatic merchants trading with the Spanish, and indicated that Sigismund was prepared to commence hostilities over the matter unless Elizabeth immediately rescinded this policy and returned captured ships and cargo.\nElizabeth rose \"lionlike\" and rebuked Dzia\u0142y\u0144ski, comparing his speech to a declaration of war and manners to that of \"a herald than an ambassador.\" She reminded him that England was instrumental in halting the Turkish advances and added \"I can hardly believe that if the King [Sigismund] himself were present he would have used such language.\" Sigismund emerged successful in securing (non-military, non-food) trade with the Spanish Crown, though the relations between the two nations became strained.\nZebrzydowski rebellion (1606).\nSigismund's attempt to grasp unlimited authority resulted in the Zebrzydowski rebellion, an armed insurrection formed in 1606 by Hetman Miko\u0142aj Zebrzydowski, Jan Szcz\u0119sny Herburt, Stanis\u0142aw Stadnicki, Aleksander J\u00f3zef Lisowski and Prince Janusz Radziwi\u0142\u0142 in St\u0119\u017cyca and Lublin. It was primarily caused by the growing dissatisfaction with the monarch among the Polish szlachta and wealthy magnates. The rebels disapproved of Sigismund's efforts to weaken the diplomatic and political capabilities of the nobility and to introduce an absolute monarchy.\nThe participants of the rebellion formed a war council and outlined their demands in 67 articles. They demanded the dethronement of Sigismund for breaching the Henrician Articles and stipulated the expulsion of Jesuits from the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. The Sejm was to be granted the authority of appointing state officials instead of the King, local officials were to be elected and the rights of Protestants expanded. The 1607 Parliament rejected these conditions. Meanwhile, the nobles mobilised in the village of Guz\u00f3w. In 1607 the Polish Royal Army, led by Hetman Jan Karol Chodkiewicz, was sent to pacify the rebels. A full-scale battle ensued on 5 July, with 200 casualties, which resulted in the victory of the Royalist forces.\nThe rebellious nobles formally surrendered to the King at the 1609 meeting of the parliament, which became known as the Pacification Sejm. In return for their surrender the rebels were granted leniency. Many royal supporters, including Hetman Chodkiewicz, had exacted amnesty for the rebels. Despite the failure to overthrow Sigismund, the rebellion firmly established the rights and privileges of nobles in the Polish political system, confirmed the inviolability of the royal elections and religious tolerance.\nSigismund's invasion of Russia (1609\u20131618).\nSigismund's major goals were achieving stability of government, combating Protestantism, and expanding Poland's territory. While the Russians were embroiled in a civil war known as the Time of Troubles, stoked by some Polish nobles through the Dimitriads, Sigismund saw an opportunity to invade Russia and take power. Sweden also became involved, but never made a firm alliance with any one side.\nBackground.\nThe death of Feodor\u00a0I of Russia in 1598 caused internal instability and a succession crisis upon the extinction of the Rurik dynasty. Further setbacks that contributed to the escalation of violence was the famine of 1601\u20131603 which killed two million Russians, around a third of the population. The new Tsar, Boris Godunov, proved to be an ineffective ruler and died after suffering a brain haemorrhage in April 1605. He left one son, Feodor II, who succeeded him and ruled for only a few months, until he and Godunov's widow were murdered under mysterious circumstances in June 1605, possibly on Sigismund's orders. Simultaneously, various impostors and pretenders to the Russian throne appeared claiming to be Dmitry Ivanovich, the youngest son of Ivan the Terrible who in fact died in 1591. After the fall of Sigismund's candidates \u2013 False Dmitry\u00a0I and his Polish wife Marina Mniszech (nicknamed \"Marinka the Witch\" by the Russians) \u2013 Vasili Ivanovich Shuysky was crowned as Vasili IV.\nThe death of False Dmitry and widespread chaos proved reason for Poland to prepare an invasion. Prior raids between 1605 and 1609 were conducted by Polish nobles or adventurers along with hired cossacks and foreign mercenaries. Sigismund's primary intention was to destroy the Russian state and impose Catholicism with the use of force or terror if necessary. Lew Sapieha, Grand Chancellor of Lithuania, sought neutrality by proposing to Boris Godunov an \"eternal\" peace treaty between Russia and Poland\u2013Lithuania, but the idea did not gain support and was declined.\nCampaign.\nThe Commonwealth army under the command of Hetman Stanis\u0142aw \u017b\u00f3\u0142kiewski crossed the border and on 29 September 1609 laid siege to Smolensk. On 4 July 1610, at the Battle of Klushino, the outnumbered Polish force achieved a decisive victory over the combined Russian and Swedish force, mostly due to the tactical competence of the Polish winged hussars. The battle was a major blow to the Russians; Tsar Vasili IV was subsequently ousted by the Seven Boyars and \u017b\u00f3\u0142kiewski entered Moscow beginning the two-year tyrannical occupation of the Kremlin. The Seven Boyars proclaimed Polish prince Ladislaus, Sigismund's son, as the new Tsar of Russia. In June 1611 Smolensk fell to the Poles; the deposed Vasili Shuysky was transported in a caged wagon to Warsaw, where he paid tribute to Sigismund and the Senate at the Royal Castle on 29 October 1611. He eventually died in captivity at Gostynin; he was most likely poisoned as his brother died soon after. The Polish army also committed countless atrocities while stationing in Moscow.\nIn 1611, Kuzma Minin and Dmitry Pozharsky formed a new army to launch an uprising against the Polish occupiers. The Poles eventually withdrew from Moscow in September 1612 after pillaging and burning the city. When news reached Sigismund he hurried with a relief force, but was unable to commence an attack. The war continued with little military action until 1618 when the Truce of Deulino was signed, which granted Poland new territories, including the city of Smolensk. The agreement marked the greatest geographical expansion of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth until the loss of Livonia in 1629. However, Russia was able to retain independence and Michael Romanov was crowned Tsar in 1613. This established the Romanov dynasty which ruled Russia until the February Revolution in 1917. Sigismund's personal ambition of ruling the vast lands in the east as well as converting its populace to Catholicism ended in a fiasco. According to Alexander Gillespie, approximately five million Russians died between 1598 and 1613, the result of continuous conflict, civil war, instigated famine and Sigismund's politics.\nThirty Years' War (1618\u20131648).\nSigismund sought to join the Catholic side of the Thirty Years' War, but was denied by the Polish parliament. British historian Robert Nisbet Bain wrote that his plan was to invade and possibly occupy Transylvania, then an Ottoman ally and therefore considered dangerous to the Habsburg monarchy and Poland. The R\u00e1k\u00f3czis and Gabriel Bethlen were sympathetic with the Sultan and would counterattack if the opportunity arose.\nBain further highlighted that the chief pillars of military strength in Poland, including Stanis\u0142aw \u017b\u00f3\u0142kiewski, warmly approved of the King's policy in this respect, but it proved to be impracticable. The parliament's non-interventionist stance went so far that it refused to grant any subsidies for the Swedish Wars. The indecision and political opposition weakened the alliance between the Habsburg states and the Commonwealth. Polish mercenaries did, however, join the Holy Roman Empire in combat at the Battle of Humenn\u00e9 against Transylvania.\nPolish\u2013Ottoman War (1620\u20131621).\nThe Principality of Moldavia was a Polish fief since the Middle Ages and Sigismund aimed at securing that despite the growing threat from the south. With the Ottoman influence on the rise, the Sultan aimed at expanding the Ottoman Empire westward. The Ottoman\u2013Habsburg wars, which lasted almost two centuries, were also a sign of the Sultan's desire to rule mainland Europe. Voivode Gaspar Graziani, ruler of Moldavia, decided to switch sides in favour of Poland and rebelled against the Turks. In turn, Sigismund sent an army to aid Graziani, a move which sparked the Polish\u2013Ottoman War.\nIn 1620 the Polish forces were defeated at Cecora and Hetman \u017b\u00f3\u0142kiewski perished during the battle. In 1621 a strong army of Ottomans, led by Osman II, advanced from Edirne towards the Polish frontier. Approximately 160,000 men besieged the Khotyn Fortress in September 1621, but were defeated at the Battle of Khotyn by a Polish garrison counting no more than 50,000 soldiers. During the siege Hetman Jan Karol Chodkiewicz died of exhaustion and illness in the camp.\nThe Treaty of Khotyn was signed on 9 October 1621 which resulted in no territorial gain or loss, but Sigismund was to relinquish his claims on Moldavia and the Ottoman Empire was prevented from marching into Poland. Sultan Osman himself was not fully satisfied with the war's outcome and blamed the defiant janissaries. His wish and plans to modernize the army, which was blamed for the defeat, were however opposed by the traditionalist janissary units. That opposition resulted in the 1622 rebellion in which Osman II was deposed and strangled.\nPolish\u2013Swedish War (1626\u20131629).\nFollowing a series of conflicts between Poland and Sweden in 1600\u20131611, 1617\u20131618, and 1621\u20131625, all of which ended in a stalemate, Gustavus Adolphus invaded in 1626 to gain control over Livonia and relinquish Sigismund's claim to the Swedish crown. Sigismund, already in advanced age, continued his long-term ambition to seize Sweden, which gave Gustavus Adolphus a reasonable casus belli and justification for war. Though the Polish army achieved major victories in the previous battles against Sweden, particularly at Kircholm in 1605, the very end proved to be catastrophic.\nThe first skirmish took place in January 1626 near Wallhof, in present-day Latvia, where the Swedish army of 4,900 men ambushed a Polish force of 2,000 men commanded by Jan Stanis\u0142aw Sapieha, son of Lew Sapieha. Polish casualties were estimated at between 500 and 1,000 dead, wounded and captured. According to historians, the Polish-Lithuanian commander later suffered a nervous breakdown.\nIn May 1626 the Swedes entered Polish Ducal Prussia. Escorted by a fleet, a second Swedish army disembarked in July near the town of Pi\u0142awa (Pillau). The landings were a complete surprise to the Commonwealth's defences, and despite a relatively small Swedish force, Gustavus Adolphus quickly captured the coastal towns and cities, almost without a fight. Many of these were inhabited by Protestants who resisted the staunchly Catholic Sigismund and Polish domination of their lands; some towns opened their gates to the Protestant Swedish forces whom they portrayed as liberators. However, fortified Gda\u0144sk (Danzig), which maintained its own standing army and a sizeable fleet, refused to surrender. Simultaneously, Sigismund received little to no support from his vassal George William of Brandenburg-Prussia, who, as a Calvinist, pledged neutrality in the conflict. J\u0119drzej Moraczewski described George's neutral stance to salvage his dukedom as \"comical\".\nThe Poles attempted to divert the Swedes from Gda\u0144sk by deploying an army to fight at Gniew. The fighting continued for several days until 1 October, when Sigismund ordered the withdrawal of his troops, and called on reinforcements from around the country. The battle, despite a tactical victory for Sweden, was a strategic blow to Gustavus, who was subsequently unable to besiege Gda\u0144sk. At Dirschau, in the summer of 1627, Gustavus Adolphus was seriously wounded and the Prussian campaign came to a halt. The wound forced the king to stay in bed until autumn, and his right arm was weakened with some fingers partially paralyzed. As the major trade ports on the coast of the Baltic Sea were blocked by Swedish vessels, Sigismund sent a small squadron of ten ships under Arend Dickmann to engage the Swedes at the Battle of Oliva. It was the largest naval battle fought by the Polish royal navy, which successfully defeated the enemy fleet and broke the Swedish blockade.\nAlthough Poland emerged victorious in the final battle at Trzciana, Sigismund's exhausted camp accepted a peace offer. The Truce of Altmark signed on 26 September 1629 (16 September O.S.) granted Sweden the control of Livonia, though Prussia, Latgale and Dyneburg remained under Polish governance.\nAssassination attempt.\nAn unsuccessful attempt on the life of the King was made on 15 November 1620. It occurred on Sunday morning when the monarch and his entourage was to attend mass at St. John's Church in Warsaw.\nSigismund was to arrive by crossing the alley or passage that linked the Royal Castle with the temple. As the royal procession drew closer to the churchdoor, hidden in a nearby portal was petty nobleman Micha\u0142 Piekarski, armed with a war axe. When the monarch reached the final steps, Piekarski leaped out and threw himself on the King, stabbing him twice, firstly in the back and then in the cheek, and striking him in the arm. However, he was not able to deliver a fatal blow due to the intervention of royal guardsmen as well as Court Marshal \u0141ukasz Opali\u0144ski, who shielded the King. Concurrently, Prince Ladislaus wounded the assassin on the head with a sabre. Other accounts state that no guards were present; the cortege had a casual character and the assassin was most likely overpowered by the attendees.\nParishioners gathered around the pale and lifeless King, who collapsed to the ground after the incident. The guards and other attendants, among them Marcin Szyszkowski, were able to revive him and after a medical examination the wounds were found to be non-life-threatening. Chaos erupted when false rumours spread that the King had been murdered as his clothes were stained in blood. Initially, the townsfolk believed that the city was being attacked; the confusion arose when an Italian priest's cry \"traditore!\" (traitor) was misinterpreted as \"Tatar\".\nThe assassin was widely regarded as a mentally unstable melancholic, unrestrained in deeds. Piekarski's most probable cause for the assassination was fame and recognition; the successful assassination of Henry IV in Paris (1610) by Fran\u00e7ois Ravaillac served as motivation for his actions. For the appropriate moment Piekarski waited patiently ten years. At his trial, he did not deny the crime he committed and heavily insulted the monarch, whilst blaming himself for the failed regicide. Piekarski was executed in a similar manner as Ravaillac on 27 November 1620 in Warsaw; he was publicly humiliated, tortured, and his body torn apart by horses. The dismembered remains were subsequently burned and their ashes scattered by a cannon.\nReligion.\nThe reign of Sigismund marked the beginning of religious persecution during the Counter-Reformation and the downfall of Protestantism in Poland\u2013Lithuania. His hate towards Evangelicals coupled with the advice of Jesuit priests led to repressions and the eventual demise of the Polish Brethren decades later; their expulsion from Poland in 1658 contributed to the spread of Unitarianism across the globe. The Polish Reformed Church, once a thriving institution and community, began to fall. Akin actions were undertaken against other minorities in the country. Sigismund's contempt for Eastern Orthodoxy was equally strong; it was his initiative that the native Ruthenian peoples inhabiting the eastern lands of the Commonwealth be forcibly converted to Catholicism, which laid the foundation for the modern Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church. However, in Sweden the policies had an adverse effect; the Reformation in Northern Europe continued and anti-Catholic sentiment strengthened.\nThe discrimination further extended to Jews and Muslims (Tatars), whose rights were already restricted. The Warsaw Confederation of 1573 granted religious freedoms unlike elsewhere in Europe, but the degree to which those freedoms were guaranteed often varied. In 1588, Sigismund decreed that the \"Israelites\" and Tatars are forbidden by law to hold public office or assume political roles. Daily contact with Christians was to be limited and any attempts made at converting Christians to Judaism or Islam was punishable by death. Insubordinates were burned at the stake, or, in the case of Muslim men who married Christian women, beheaded. Circumcision of Christian children by Jews was made a capital offence. However, trade practices continued to thrive and Poland remained a safe haven for refugees fleeing oppression in other parts of the continent, chiefly during the Thirty Years' War.\nReligious nepotism under Sigismund and in the years following his death was undoubtedly apparent \u2013 three of his sons, John Casimir, John Albert and Charles Ferdinand, were ordained as priests and held notable posts. Charles was appointed the bishop of Wroc\u0142aw in 1625 and bishop of P\u0142ock in 1640. John Albert became bishop of Warmia at the age of nine in 1621 and cardinal-bishop of Krak\u00f3w at the age of twenty in 1632. John Casimir, prior to his election to the throne, was made a cardinal at the behest of Pope Innocent X.\nDeath.\nTowards the end of his reign, Sigismund withdrew altogether from politics and devoted himself exclusively to family matters and his interests in performing arts. Little is known about the King's wellbeing at the time suggesting that he was in good health. However, in his last days he became bedridden due to gout and joint pain, an affliction which was likely inherited from his grandfather Sigismund the Old. His uncle, Sigismund II Augustus, also suffered from long-term arthritis.\nShortly after the unexpected death of his second wife, Constance, Sigismund fell dangerously ill and experienced mental problems, notably he was struck with severe depression. In November 1631, bishop Achacy Grochowski travelled to Warsaw and wrote \"the monarch is of sound mind, his heart and stomach [abdomen] are healthy\". Already in advanced age for the period, on Saint Catherine's Day (25 November) he appeared \"cheerful, with a ruddy face, and in good spirit hoped to leave bed\". Nevertheless, the gouty arthritis progressed and medics applied red-hot iron to the painful swelling with no effect. The king sensed that death was near and ordered an immediate assembly of nobles, which convened on 1 April. The so-called 'extraordinary parliament' (\"sejm ekstraordynaryjny\") secured the candidacy and election of his son, Ladislaus, to the throne. On Easter Sunday he participated in final prayers, whilst being supported by his sons to prevent him from collapsing.\nAt eight in the morning on 25 April, Kasper Doenhoff, a courtier in charge of opening curtains in the royal bedchamber and greeting the monarch, did not hear a response. Unable to see at a distance he approached Sigismund whose face was paralyzed from a stroke. Hours later he briefly recovered his speech and murmured \"there is no cure against the will [power] of death\". The paralysis worsened and on 27 April Urszula Meyerin acted as spokeswoman, speaking on behalf of the mumbling king. Prince Ladislaus arrived on the same day. On 28 April, Sigismund's bed was surrounded by his courtiers and the Jesuit priests, who performed exorcism-like prayers. It was his wish that the court be witness to his demise, as interpreted in the words \"vanitas vanitatis\", Latin for 'all is vanity'.\nAfter days of suffering, Sigismund died at Warsaw's Royal Castle at approximately 2:45 am (02:45) on 30 April 1632. His close aide Albrycht S. Radziwill wrote \"the autopsy on the same day in the afternoon determined that the king's internal organs were healthy. He could have lived another twenty years\". His embalmed body was placed in an elaborate tin coffin decorated with soldiers, battle scenes and musical motifs, a masterpiece of 17th-century tin-making. The coffin was interred inside the royal crypt at Wawel Cathedral in Krak\u00f3w on 4 February 1633.\nLegacy.\nSigismund's death came at a time of great divisions and constant quarrels. His rule of nearly 45 years is perceived by some as controversial \u2013 it was distinguished by considerable developments in architecture, the arts and culture coupled with conspiracies, religious antipathy and the endless conflict with Sweden. Szymon Starowolski positioned Sigismund's legacy above that of his predecessors. Others were less flattering. The decision to appoint Jesuit priests as ministers on matters which did not necessarily concern religion caused ubiquitous disapproval. Spiteful foes convinced of the damage he inflicted on the nation wrote with contempt \"this man, whose knowledge exceeded in goldsmithing but not politics, lived far too long\". Members of opposing camps were relieved and enthusiastic to see his progressive son, Ladislaus, take the throne. Nonetheless, the nobility and magnates from all political spheres obeyed tradition by wearing black outfits for the duration of the interregnum as a sign of mourning. The strict compliance to the practice is said to have stunned foreign dignitaries. There is no doubt that Sigismund was one of Poland's most capable and recognisable sovereigns.\nSigismund's reign arguably marked an end to the Polish Golden Age and the dawn of the Silver Age. He presided over the transition from cultural Renaissance to the Baroque, and witnessed the first stages of a nationwide literary reform. Notably, it was under his rule that Polish began to supersede Latin in academic thought and artistic expression. Some ground-breaking achievements were made, for example, the publication of Jakub Wujek's Polish translation of the Holy Bible in 1599, which remained in use until the mid-20th century. The period also saw the rise of societal satire, parody and extensive political commentaries which reflected the country's faults in hope of improvement, such as the \"Eight sermons before the Sejm\" by Piotr Skarga. However, these works were considered controversial and dangerous to publish, particularly after the failed 1606 rebellion. J\u00f3zef Szujski notes that the literature became \"infested with pleonasms, pasquinades and moral sermon\". Consequently, regional councils imposed censorship and suppression of speech. Renowned academician Joannes Broscius (Jan Bro\u017cek) wrote a satirical lampoon \"Gratis\" directed against the Jesuit priests, which was confiscated and burnt publicly in 1625. Exposed printers and distributors were tied to a pillory and flogged or beaten mercilessly.\nFranciszek Siarczy\u0144ski spoke of a cultural revolution that took place at the time and shaped Poland's society for the centuries to come. The simplicity and austerity of older Polish customs faded and were replaced in favour of those from Italy or Germany. Fabrics and garments diversified, thus becoming more striking; Siarczy\u0144ski writes \"clothing, once wool, adorned our sides, now silk, velvet, moire, gold and silver lining. Even a commoner frowns on sheepskin coats. Our coaches and carriages turned ostentatious. We no more venture to our neighbours and camp without the splendour\". Jerzy Maternicki outlined that Sigismund was instrumental in developing mining in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth.\nThe memory of Sigismund III is still vivid in Warsaw, which he expanded and made the capital of Poland in 1596. W\u0142adys\u0142aw IV Vasa ordered the construction of a monument dedicated to his father in the heart of the city as a reminder of the 'Sigismundian' legacy. The engineers drew inspiration from the memorials of Ancient Rome, notably the Column of Phocas. The new 22-meter Corinthian column was crowned with a bronze statue of the king wearing armour, holding a cross and a sword. W\u0142adys\u0142aw personally unveiled Sigismund's Column on 24 November 1644 as the first secular column in Europe's modern history.\nSigismund and his sons left a collection of tangible memorabilia, including commemorative coins (numismatics), reliquaries, silverware, tableware, jewellery and precious personal belongings marked with royal monograms or crests.\nPersonal life.\nScholars frequently noted Sigismund's extreme piety, with some calling him a fanatic even during his lifetime. Adherents, however, subtly described it as absolute devotion to religion and Catholic observance, which especially drew praise from papal legates and foreign clerics who visited the court. According to Giovanni Paolo Mucante and cardinal Enrico Caetani who were sent by Pope Clement VIII, \"Sigismund's behaviour was comparable to that of a priest. He fervently attends mass daily, then hears choral music, sermons and orations. He fasts, and practices sexual abstinence on Wednesdays and Fridays, two days before and after confession. This large kingdom would have no schismatics, Calvinists or Lutherans if it depended on him\". Historian Pawe\u0142 Fabisz writes that when James of England and Scotland sent a book with anti-papal connotations, Sigismund deemed the gift \"vile\" and threw it into the fireplace.\nThroughout the entire reign Sigismund maintained high etiquette and courtliness. Mucante emphasized his frugality and calm nature. Nevertheless, he hosted balls and held masquerades during which he would entertain guests and play the harpsichord. The king was a skilled dancer and performed Polish folk dances as well as Italian dances like the saltarello and passamezzo. Upon the marriage to his first wife, Anne of Austria, on 25 November 1592 he ordered a themed masquerade on Krak\u00f3w's Main Market Square and, to the disbelief of his subjects, danced for the public. Sigismund was also known to be physically active in his youth and enjoyed occasional hunting, ice skating and frequently played football; he is widely credited for introducing and popularising the sport in Poland. Members of the royal court disapproved of such activities which were perceived as improper and not worthy of a monarch, particularly the sports.\nSigismund's personal approach to internal affairs was unpredictable; he was said to have been somewhat temperamental and impetuous at times. Joachim Lelewel compared his character to that of the despotic Philip II of Spain, but unlike Philip who overtly ordered persecution of non-Catholics, Sigismund was more discreet. A determined and stubborn man who sought to strengthen his authority, he was reluctant to participate in pointless conferences. As recalled by his close aide Albrycht Radziwi\u0142\u0142, at one meeting the king decided to sketch an owl in his notepad rather than note important advice.\nSigismund held high regard for the arts and early Baroque architecture; he willingly sponsored foreign masters and engineers who came to Poland at his invitation. He actively took part in the designing of fa\u00e7ades and structural elements as well as Eucharistic objects such as chalices, crucifixes, candelabra and even book covers. During a visit to the Lw\u00f3w Bernardine Church in 1621 he reprimanded the chief planners for making the temple seem disproportionate. Sigismund was a gifted painter and craftsman; only a few of his works survive, among them parts of Saint Adalbert's silver reliquary at the Cathedral in Gniezno. He was also fascinated by alchemy and ancient methods of turning metals into gold; it is said he experimented with the alchemist and philosopher Michael Sendivogius.\nMarriages and children.\nOn 31 May 1592 Sigismund married his first wife Anne of Austria (1573\u20131598), daughter of Archduke Charles II of Austria and his wife Maria Anna of Bavaria. She was well received in Poland, despite being a Habsburg. Certain leading magnates were initially opposed to the marriage, however the opinion shifted in her favour due to personal characteristics; she was known to be attentive, sharp-minded, humble, pious and kind, though of poor health. The couple led a happy but introverted life. Anne was particularly hostile towards the Swedes; her attitude was shaped by an unsuccessful visit to Sweden in 1593 where she was said to have been mistreated. She complained of the cold and general misery in Sweden, and fell ill there in October 1593. The continuous stress arising from the unpredictable behaviour of Charles Vasa (future King Charles IX and adversary of Sigismund) also contributed to her distaste. According to an account, she gave birth in Stockholm to a baby girl named Catherine who died soon after and was secretly buried upon their return to Poland. Her health rapidly deteriorated with successive pregnancies over the next four years. She died from a puerperal fever at childbirth along with the baby boy on 10 February 1598 in Warsaw. Following her death, Sigismund was in deep mourning; he expressed sorrow in private letters to his mother-in-law Maria Anna of Bavaria, and isolated himself from subjects. Anne and Sigismund had five known children during their marriage:\nSigismund was expected to marry Anna of Tyrol in 1603, however Emperor Rudolf II did not give his consent. Instead, on 11 December 1605 he wedded Constance of Austria (1588\u20131631), Anne's younger sister. The match was condemned by nobles and clerics who previously opposed Anne and the Habsburg alliance; the match was savagely described as \"incestuous\". The death of Jan Zamoyski, leader of the opposition, in June 1605 allowed for the marriage to take place without incidents. Some threatened to abandon the royal court, notably Piotr Skarga. The marriage further fuelled the anger of Sigismund's most vocal adversaries, Nicholas Zebrzydowski. The wedding ceremony and Constance's entrance into Krak\u00f3w was so ostentatious it was recorded in the form of a large gouache roll painting known as \"rolka sztokholmska\", now housed in Sweden. Like her sister, Constance was well-educated and religious; she attended mass two to four times a day. She was also a good mother, who particularly cared for her stepson, Ladislaus, even in his twenties. On the other hand, Constance approved of her husband's struggle for absolute power; she maintained considerable influence over Sigismund and the senators. To the general public she appeared cold, strait-laced, intolerant and even antisemitic; in 1626, she forbade the Jews to settle in the town of \u017bywiec which she privately owned and administered. Under her patronage, Austro-German culture as well as Spanish fashion flourished at the court. Constance died on 10 July 1631 from a heat stroke she suffered after attending mass on the Feast of Corpus Christi weeks earlier. They had seven children:\nUrszula Meyerin.\nThe nature of the relationship between Sigismund and one of his trusted courtiers, Urszula Meyerin, has been continually questioned by Polish historians. Born in Munich as Ursula Gienger, she came to Poland with the cort\u00e8ge of future queen Anne in 1592. The king was said to have been infatuated with Urszula, who was known to be attractive and pious. Upon her arrival, she became involved in the affairs of state and was appointed chamberlain (\"ochmistrzyni\" in Polish) at the Queen's court. To emphasize her political role and importance, she adopted the Old German equivalent to the title of chamberlain, \"Meyerin\", as her sobriquet and official name. She devotedly assisted in raising the children and, with time, acted as their tutor.\nMeyerin's position as grey eminence and influence on the royal couple made her immensely unpopular among the nobility. Consequently, she was compared to the Spanish Duke of Lerma, who ruled in the king's stead, and contemptuously described as \"the king's mistress\", \"ravenous gold-digger\", \"minister in a skirt\" or \"Jesuit's bigotry\". Sigismund's secretary Jan Szcz\u0119sny Herburt in his memoirs called her \"an obscene favourite\". However, it is unknown whether the relations between the two were physical.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nInline citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "52612", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52612", "title": "Ancona", "text": "City and seaport in Marche, Italy\nAncona (, ; ) is a city and a seaport in the Marches region of central Italy, with a population of around 101,997 as of 2015[ [update]]. Ancona is the capital of the homonymous province and of the region. The city is located northeast of Rome, on the Adriatic Sea, between the slopes of the two extremities of the promontory of Monte Conero, Monte Astagno and Monte Guasco. The hilly nature around Ancona is a strong contrast to the flatter coastline in areas further north.\nAncona is one of the main ports on the Adriatic Sea, especially for passenger traffic, and is the main economic and demographic centre of the region.\nHistory.\nGreek colony.\nBefore the Greek colonization, the territory was occupied by separated communities of the Picentes tribes.\nAncona took a more urban shape by Greek settlers from Syracuse in about 387 BC, who gave it its name: \"Ank\u1e53n\", then Ancona. This toponym stems from the Ancient Greek word (\"ank\u1e53n\"), meaning \"elbow\" or \"bend\"; the harbour to the east of the town was originally protected only by the promontory on the north, shaped like an elbow. Greek merchants established a Tyrian purple dye factory here.\nThe acropolis, with the temple of Aphrodite, was located on the top of the Guasco hill, on the site where the Ancona Cathedral stands today. Another temple, dedicated to Diomedes, stood on the seashore, at the end of the city's promontory. Diomedes was considered the mythical \"oikistes\" of the colony.\nAnk\u00f3n had its own coinage with the punning device of the bent arm holding a myrtle sprig and the Gemini constellation, reference to the Dioscuri, protectors of sailors. On the reverse was the head of Aphrodite, goddess of good navigation.\nAncona is still called the \"Doric city\" and the inhabitants are referred to as \"Dorici\", because it was a colony of Syracuse, which in turn was a colony founded by the Dorians of Corinth.\nRoman \"municipium\".\nIn Roman times Ank\u00f3n continued the use of the Greek language and kept its own coinage for about a century.\nWhen it became a Roman town is uncertain. It was a naval station in the Illyrian War of 178 BC. Julius Caesar took possession of it immediately after crossing the Rubicon.\nIts harbour was of considerable importance in imperial times, as the nearest to Dalmatia, and was enlarged by Trajan, who constructed the north quay with his architect Apollodorus of Damascus. At the beginning of it stands the marble triumphal arch, the Arch of Trajan with a single archway, and without bas-reliefs, erected in his honour in 115 by the Senate and Roman people., to honor the emperor who had made \"the entrance to Italy safer\" (\"tutiorem accessum Italiae\"), as can be read in the inscription on the arch.\nAncona and the Arch of Trajan are depicted in Trajan's Column, with the imperial fleet departing for the Second Dacian War and Trajan haranguing his soldiers.\nByzantine city.\nAncona was attacked successively by the Goths and Lombards between the 3rd and 5th centuries, but recovered its strength and importance. It was one of the cities of the Pentapolis of the Exarchate of Ravenna, a lordship of the Byzantine Empire, in the 7th and 8th centuries. In 840, Saracen raiders sacked and burned the city. After Charlemagne's conquest of northern Italy, it became the capital of the Marca di Ancona, whence the name of the modern region derives.\nMaritime Republic of Ancona.\nAfter 1000, Ancona became increasingly independent, eventually turning into an important maritime republic (together with Gaeta and Ragusa, it is one of those not appearing on the Italian naval flag), often clashing against the nearby power of Venice. An oligarchic republic, Ancona was ruled by six Elders, elected by the three \"terzieri\" into which the city was divided: S. Pietro, Porto and Capodimonte. It had a coin of its own, the agontano, and a series of laws known as \"Statuti del mare e del Terzenale\" and \"Statuti della Dogana\". Ancona was usually allied with the Republic of Ragusa and the Byzantine Empire.\nIn 1137, 1167 and 1174 it was strong enough to push back the forces of the Holy Roman Empire. Anconitan ships took part in the Crusades, and their navigators included Cyriac of Ancona. In the struggle between the Popes and the Holy Roman Emperors that troubled Northern and central Italy from the 12th century onwards, Ancona sided with the Popes (Guelphs).\nUnlike other cities of northern Italy, Ancona never became a signoria. The sole exception was the rule of the Malatesta, who took the city in 1348, taking advantage of the black death and of a fire that had destroyed many of the city's important buildings. The Malatesta were ousted in 1383. In 1532, Ancona definitively lost its freedom and became part of the Papal States, under Pope Clement VII. The symbol of the new papal authority was the massive Citadel.\nIn the Papal States.\nPope Pius IV commanded the execution and burning of Converso merchants in Ancona for returning to Judaism. Later, Ancona, along with Rome and Avignon in southern France, was one of the three cities in the Papal States where Jews were permitted to remain after Pope Pius V ordered their banishment in 1569. They lived in the ghetto that had been established in Ancona in 1555.\nIn 1733, Pope Clement XII extended the quay, and an inferior imitation of Trajan's arch was set up; he also erected the Lazzaretto of Ancona at the south end of the harbour, Luigi Vanvitelli being the architect-in-chief. The southern quay was built in 1880, and the harbour was protected by forts on the heights. From 1797 onwards, when the French took it, it frequently appears in history as an important fortress.\nIn 1832 French Expedition to Ancona occupied the city, remaining until 1838 when they and the Austrians in Bologna mutually agreed to withdraw.\nThe Greek community of Ancona.\nAncona, as well as Venice, became a very important destination for merchants from the Ottoman Empire during the 16th century. The Greeks formed the largest of the communities of foreign merchants. They were refugees from former Byzantine or Venetian territories that were occupied by the Ottomans in the late 15th and 16th centuries. The first Greek community was established in Ancona early in the 16th century.\nContemporary history.\nAncona entered the Kingdom of Italy when Christophe L\u00e9on Louis Juchault de Lamorici\u00e8re surrendered here on 29 September 1860 following a brief siege, eleven days after his defeat at Castelfidardo.\nOn 23 May 1915, Italy entered World War I and joined the Entente Powers. In 1915, following Italy's entry, the battleship division of the Austro-Hungarian Navy carried out extensive bombardments causing great damage to all installations and killing several dozen people. Ancona was one of the most important Italian ports on the Adriatic Sea during the Great War.\nDuring World War II, the city was taken by the Polish 2nd Corps against Nazi German forces, as Free Polish forces were serving as part of the British Army. Poles were tasked with capture of the city on 16 June 1944 and accomplished the task a month later on 18 July 1944 in what is known as the battle of Ancona. The attack was part of an Allied operation to gain access to a seaport closer to the Gothic Line in order to shorten their lines of communication for the advance into northern Italy.\nJewish history.\nJews according to documents began living in Ancona in 967 AD, even though there is evidence they lived there even before. It has been claimed that in 1270, a Jewish resident of Ancona, Jacob of Ancona, travelled to China, four years before Marco Polo, and documented his impressions in a book called \"The City of Lights\". From 1300 and on, the Jewish community of Ancona grew steadily, most due to the city importance and it being a center of trade with the Levant. In that year, Jewish poet Immanuel the Roman tried to lower high taxation taken from the Jewish community of the city. Over the next 200 years, Jews from Germany, Spain, Sicily and Portugal immigrated to Ancona, due to persecutions in their homeland and thanks to the pro-Jewish attitude taken towards Ancona Jews due to their importance in the trade and banking business, making Ancona a trade center.\nIn 1555, pope Paul IV forced the Crypto-Jewish community of the city to convert to Christianity, as part of his Papal Bull of 1555. While some did, others refused to do so and thus were hanged and then burnt in the town square. In response, Jewish merchants boycotted Ancona for a short while. The boycott was led by Dona Gracia Mendes Nasi.\nThough emancipated by Napoleon I for several years, in 1843 Pope Gregory XVI revived an old decree, forbidding Jews from living outside the ghetto, wearing identification sign on their clothes and other religious and financial restrictions. Public opinion did not approve of these restrictions, and they were cancelled a short while after.\nThe Jews of Ancona received full emancipation in 1848 with the election of Pope Pius IX. In 1938, 1177 lived in Ancona; 53 Jews were sent away to Germany, 15 of them survived and returned to the town after World War II. The majority of the Jewish community stayed in town or emigrated due to high ransoms paid to the fascist regime. In 2004, about 200 Jews lived in Ancona.\nTwo synagogues and two cemeteries still exist in the city. The ancient Monte-Cardeto cemetery is one of the biggest Jewish cemeteries in Europe and tombstones are dated to 1552 and on. It can still be visited and it resides within the .\nGeography.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Ancona is humid subtropical (Cfa in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification) and the city lies on the border between mediterranean and more continental regions. Precipitations are regular throughout the year. Winters are cool (January mean temp. ), with frequent rain and fog. Temperatures can reach or even lower values outside the city centre during the most intense cold waves. Snow is not unusual with air masses coming from Northern Europe or from the Balkans and Russia, and can be heavy at times (also due to the \"Adriatic Sea effect\"), especially in the hills surrounding the city centre. Summers are usually warm and humid (July mean temp. ). Highs sometimes can reach values around , especially if the wind is blowing from the south or from the west (f\u00f6hn effect off the Apennine Mountains). Thunderstorms are quite common, particularly in August and September, and can be intense with occasional flash floods, damaging winds and even large hail. Spring and autumn are both seasons with changeable weather, but generally mild. Extremes in temperature have been (in 1967) and (in 1968) / (in 1983).\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2007, there were 101,480 people residing in Ancona (the greater area has a population more than four times its size), located in the province of Ancona, Marches, of whom 47.6% were male and 52.4% were female. Minors (children ages 18 and younger) totalled 15.54 percent of the population compared to pensioners who number 24.06 percent. This compares with the Italian average of 18.06 percent (minors) and 19.94 percent (pensioners). The average age of Ancona residents is 48, compared to the Italian average of 42. In the five years between 2002 and 2007, the population of Ancona grew by 1.48 percent, while Italy as a whole grew by 3.56 percent. The current birth rate of Ancona is 8.14 births per 1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births.\nAs of 2006[ [update]], 92.77% of the population was Italian. The largest immigrant group came from other European nations (particularly those from Albania, Romania and Ukraine): 3.14%, followed by the Americas: 0.93%, East Asia: 0.83%, and North Africa: 0.80%.\nMain sights.\nAncona Cathedral.\nAncona Cathedral, dedicated to Judas Cyriacus, was consecrated at the beginning of the 11th century and completed in 1189. Some writers suppose that the original church was in the form of a basilica and belonged to the 7th century. An early restoration was completed in 1234. It is a fine Romanesque building in grey stone, built in the form of a Greek cross, and other elements of Byzantine art. It has a dodecagonal dome over the centre slightly altered by Margaritone d'Arezzo in 1270. The fa\u00e7ade has a Gothic portal, ascribed to Giorgio da Como (1228), which was intended to have a lateral arch on each side. The interior, which has a crypt under each transept, in the main preserves its original character. It has ten columns which are attributed to the temple of Venus. The church was restored in the 1980s.\nArch of Trajan.\nThe Arch of Trajan is a marble structure high, but only wide, standing on a high platform approached by a wide flight of steps, and is one of the finest surviving Roman monuments in the Marches. It was built in the year 114/115 as an entrance to the causeway atop the harbour wall and is named in honour of Trajan, the emperor who made the harbour. Most of its original bronze ornaments have disappeared. The archway is flanked by pairs of fluted Corinthian columns on pedestals. A pediment bears inscriptions. The format is that of the Arch of Titus in Rome, but made taller, so that the bronze figures surmounting it, of Trajan, his wife Plotina and sister Marciana, would figure as a landmark for ships approaching Rome's greatest Adriatic port.\nOther sights.\nThere are also several buildings by Giorgio da Sebenico, combining Gothic and Renaissance elements: the \"Palazzo Benincasa\", the \"Loggia dei Mercanti\", the Franciscan church of \"San Francesco alle Scale\" and \"Sant'Agostino\", Augustinian church with statues portraying St. Monica, St. Nicola da Tolentino, St. Simplicianus and Blessed Agostino Trionfi; in the 18th century it was enlarged by Luigi Vanvitelli and turned into a palace after 1860.\nThe National Archaeological Museum of the Marche Region is housed in the Palazzo Ferretti, built in the late Renaissance by Pellegrino Tibaldi; it preserves frescoes by Federico Zuccari. The Museum is divided into several sections:\nThe Municipal Art Gallery (Pinacoteca Civica Francesco Podesti) is housed in the Palazzo Bosdari, reconstructed between 1558 and 1561 by Pellegrino Tibaldi. Works in the gallery include:\nOther artists present include Francesco Podesti, Ciro Ferri and Arcangelo di Cola. Modern artists featured are Anselmo Bucci, Massimo Campigli, Bruno Cassinari, Enzo Cucchi, Carlo Levi, Aligi Sassu, Orfeo Tamburi and others.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransportation.\nShipping.\nThe Port has regular ferry links to the following cities with the following operators:\nAirport.\nAncona is served by Ancona Airport (IATA: AOI, ICAO: LIPY), in Falconara Marittima and named after Raffaello Sanzio.\nEuropean Coastal Airlines, a former seaplane operator from Croatia, established trans-Adriatic flights between Croatia and Italy in November 2015, and offered four weekly flights from Ancona Falconara Airport to Split (59 minutes) and Rijeka (49 minutes).\nRailways.\nThe Ancona railway station is the main railway station of the city and is served by regional and long-distance trains. The other stations are Ancona Marittima, Ancona Torrette, Ancona Stadio, Palombina and Varano.\nRoads.\nThe A14 motorway serves the city with the exits \"Ancona Nord\" (\"An. North\") and \"Ancona Sud\" (\"An. South\").\nUrban public transportation.\nThe Ancona trolleybus system has been in operation since 1949. Ancona is also served by an urban and suburban bus network operated by Conerobus.\nTwin towns \u2014 sister cities.\nAncona is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52613", "revid": "16719315", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52613", "title": "London boroughs", "text": "Administrative subdivisions of Greater London\nThe London boroughs are the current 32 local authority districts that together with the City of London make up the administrative area of Greater London, England; each is governed by a London borough council. The present London boroughs were all created at the same time as Greater London on 1 April 1965 by the London Government Act 1963 (c. 33) and are a type of local government district. Twelve were designated as Inner London boroughs and twenty as Outer London boroughs. The City of London, the historic centre, is a separate ceremonial county and local government district that functions quite differently from a London borough. However, the two counties together comprise the administrative area of Greater London as well as the London Region, all of which is also governed by the Greater London Authority, under the Mayor of London.\nThe London boroughs have populations of between 150,000 and 400,000. Inner London boroughs tend to be smaller, in both population and area, and more densely populated than Outer London boroughs. The London boroughs were created by combining groups of former local government units. A review undertaken between 1987 and 1992 led to a number of relatively small alterations in borough boundaries. London borough councils provide the majority of local government services (schools, waste management, social services, libraries), in contrast to the strategic Greater London Authority, which has limited authority over all of Greater London.\nThe councils were first elected in 1964, and acted as shadow authorities until 1 April 1965. Each borough is divided into electoral wards, subject to periodic review, for the purpose of electing councillors. Council elections take place every four years, with the most recent elections in 2022, and the next elections due in 2026. The political make-up of London borough councils is dominated by the Conservative, Labour and Liberal Democrat parties. Twenty-eight councils follow the leader and cabinet model of executive governance, while five have directly elected mayors (Croydon, Hackney, Lewisham, Newham, and Tower Hamlets). The City of London is instead governed by the City of London Corporation (and the Inner and Middle Temples, which are not governed by the City of London Corporation).\nList.\nThere are four boroughs that do not have \"London Borough\" in their official names: the City of Westminster, and the Royal Boroughs of Kingston upon Thames, Kensington and Chelsea, and Greenwich.\nHistory.\nCreation.\nFrom the mid-1930s, the Greater London area comprised four types of local government authorities. There were county boroughs, municipal boroughs, urban districts and metropolitan boroughs. The large county boroughs provided all local government services and held the powers usually invested in county councils. The municipal borough and urban district authorities had fewer powers. The situation was made more complex because county councils could delegate functions such as elementary education and library provision to the municipal borough and district councils, and this was implemented piecemeal. Reform of London local government sought to regularise this arrangement.\nThe Royal Commission on Local Government in Greater London was established in 1957 and the report was published on 19 October 1960. It proposed 52 \"Greater London Boroughs\" with a population range of 100,000 to 250,000. This was made up of a mixture of whole existing units, mergers of two or three areas, and two boroughs formed as the result of a split. In December 1961 the government proposed that there would be 34 boroughs rather than 52, and detailed their boundaries. The proposed number was further reduced to 32 in 1962.\nOn 1 April 1965, the 32 London boroughs and Greater London were created by the \"London Government Act 1963\". Twelve boroughs in the former County of London area were designated Inner London boroughs and the 20 others were designated Outer London boroughs. Outer London borough councils were local education authorities, but Inner London borough councils were so designated primarily to continue the existence of an Inner London Education Authority, praised by official Opposition and government who further noted that unusually the former County of London's many small local authorities had no history of providing education. The City of London continued to be administered by the City of London Corporation, and the Inner and Middle Temples continued to govern their own areas.\nElections were held on 7 May 1964, with the new councils acting as shadow authorities before coming into their powers the following year.\nFormer authorities.\nThe boroughs were created as follows. Some relatively minor changes have been made to the boundaries of boroughs since 1965, and two have changed their names.\nGreater London Council.\nBetween 1965 and 1986 the boroughs were part of a two-tier system of government and shared power with the Greater London Council (GLC). The split of powers and functions meant that the Greater London Council was responsible for \"wide area\" services such as fire, ambulance, flood prevention, and refuse disposal; with the London borough councils responsible for \"personal\" services such as social care, libraries, cemeteries and refuse collection. Several London borough councils and the GLC were involved in the rate-capping rebellion of 1985. On 1 April 1986 the GLC was abolished and the borough councils gained responsibility for some services that had been provided by the Greater London Council, such as waste disposal. The Inner London Education Authority continued to exist as an authority. In 1990 it was abolished and the Inner London borough councils also became local education authorities.\nName and boundary changes.\nThe Local Government Act 1972 provided a mechanism for the name of a London borough and its council to be changed. This was used by the London Borough of Hammersmith (changed to Hammersmith and Fulham) on 1 April 1979 and the London Borough of Barking (changed to Barking and Dagenham) on 1 January 1980. Borough names formed by combining two locality names had been discouraged when the boroughs were created.\nThe London boroughs were created by combining whole existing units of local government and it was realised that this might provide arbitrary boundaries in some places. The London Government Act 1963 provided a mechanism for communities on the edge of Greater London to petition for transfer from London boroughs to a neighbouring county district. This was used in 1969 in the transfers of Knockholt in Bromley to Kent, and of Farleigh and Hooley in Croydon to Surrey. The Act also provided for transfers between London boroughs and neighbouring counties where there was consensus for the change between all the relevant local authorities. This provision was used to exchange two islands on the River Thames between Richmond upon Thames and Surrey. (See List of Greater London boundary changes.)\nThe Local Government Boundary Commission for England was established by the Local Government Act 1972 to review periodically the boundaries of Greater London and the London boroughs. The first review of boundaries commenced on 1 April 1987 and reported in 1992. Following the review a series of relatively minor adjustments were made to borough boundaries, for example uniting the whole of the Becontree estate in Barking and Dagenham. The commission noted that many of its recommendations were strongly opposed and were not implemented. The boundary of the City of London with adjacent boroughs was adjusted to remove some anomalies.\nThe London boroughs were incorporated using the provisions of the Municipal Corporations Act 1882. In the London boroughs the legal entity is not the council, as elsewhere in the country, but the inhabitants incorporated as a legal entity by royal charter (a process abolished elsewhere in England and Wales under the Local Government Act 1972). Thus, a London authority's official legal title is \"The Mayor and Burgesses of the London Borough of X\" (or \"The Lord Mayor and Citizens of the City of Westminster\").\nGreater London Authority.\nIn 2000 the Greater London Authority was created, comprising the Mayor of London and the London Assembly. As a strategic authority, it absorbed only limited powers, such as major highways and planning strategy, from the borough councils.\nLondon borough councils.\nThe London boroughs are administered by London borough councils (sometimes abbreviated LBCs), which are elected every four years. They are the principal local authorities in London and are responsible for running most local services, such as schools, social services, waste collection and roads. Some London-wide services are run by the Greater London Authority, and some services and lobbying of government are pooled within London Councils. Some councils group together for services such as waste collection and disposal. The boroughs are local government districts and have similar functions to metropolitan boroughs. Each borough council is a local education authority.\nShared services.\nShared services are borough council services shared between two or more boroughs. Shared services were previously resisted due to councils guarding their authority. However, as the need for budget cuts in the late 2000s became apparent some councils have sought service mergers. Westminster and Hammersmith &amp; Fulham were due to merge their education services, including school admissions and transport, by 2011. In October 2010, Hammersmith &amp; Fulham, Kensington &amp; Chelsea and Westminster announced plans to merge all their services to create a \"super-council\". Each would retain its own political identity, leadership and councillors but staff and budgets would be combined for cost savings. Lambeth and Southwark likewise expressed an interest in sharing services.\nThe management thinker and inventor of the Vanguard Method, Professor John Seddon, claims that shared service projects based on attempts to achieve economies of scale are a mix of a) the plausibly obvious and b) a little hard data, brought together to produce two broad assertions, for which there is little hard factual evidence. He argues that shared service projects fail (and often end up costing more than they hoped to save) because they cause a disruption to the service flow by moving the work to a central location, creating waste in hand-offs, rework and duplication, lengthening the time it takes to deliver a service and consequently creating failure demand (demand caused by a failure to do something or do something right for a customer). Seddon referred directly to the so-called tri-borough shared services in an article in 2012.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52615", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52615", "title": "Public holidays", "text": ""}
{"id": "52616", "revid": "51024957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52616", "title": "Delaware River", "text": "Major river on the East Coast of the United States\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Delaware River is a major river in the Mid-Atlantic region of the United States and is the longest free-flowing (undammed) river in the Eastern United States. From the meeting of its branches in Hancock, New York, the river flows for along the borders of New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware, before emptying into Delaware Bay.\nThe river has been recognized by the National Wildlife Federation as one of the country's Great Waters and has been called the \"Lifeblood of the Northeast\" by American Rivers. Its watershed drains an area of and provides drinking water for 17\u00a0million people, including half of New York City via the Delaware Aqueduct.\nThe Delaware River has two branches that rise in the Catskill Mountains of New York: the West Branch at Mount Jefferson in Jefferson, Schoharie County, and the East Branch at Grand Gorge, Delaware County. The branches merge to form the main Delaware River at Hancock, New York. Flowing south, the river remains relatively undeveloped, with protected as the Upper, Middle, and Lower Delaware National Scenic Rivers. At Trenton, New Jersey, the Delaware becomes tidal, navigable, and more industrial. This section forms the backbone of the Delaware Valley metropolitan area, serving the port cities of Philadelphia, Camden, New Jersey, and Wilmington, Delaware. The river flows into Delaware Bay at Liston Point, upstream of the bay's outlet to the Atlantic Ocean, between Cape May and Cape Henlopen.\nBefore the arrival of European settlers, the river was the homeland of the Lenape native people. They called the river L\u00ebnapei Sipu or Lenapewihittuk, meaning Lenape River, and Kithanne, meaning the largest river in this part of the country.\nIn 1609, the river was visited by a Dutch East India Company expedition led by Henry Hudson, an English navigator hired to find a western route to Cathay (China). His encounters set the stage for Dutch colonization of North America in the 17th century. Early Dutch and Swedish settlements were established along the lower section of the river and Delaware Bay. Both colonial powers called the river the \"South River\" (Zuidrivier), distinguishing it from the \"North River\u2014\"today\u2019s Hudson River. After the English expelled the Dutch and took control of the New Netherland colony in 1664, the river was renamed \"Delaware\" after Sir Thomas West, 3rd Baron De La Warr, an English nobleman and the Virginia colony's first royal governor, who defended the colony during the First Anglo-Powhatan War. George Washington's crossing of the Delaware River in 1776 led victory in the Battle of Trenton, a pivotal moment in the American Revolution.\nName.\nThe Delaware River is named in honor of Thomas West, 3rd Baron De La Warr (1577\u20131618), an English nobleman and the Virginia colony's first royal governor, who defended the colony during the First Anglo-Powhatan War. Lord de la Warr waged a punitive campaign to subdue the Powhatan after they had killed the colony's council president, John Ratcliffe, and attacked the colony's fledgling settlements. Lord de la Warr arrived with 150 soldiers in time to prevent the colony's original settlers at Jamestown from giving up and returning to England and is credited with saving the Virginia colony. The name of the barony (later an earldom) is pronounced as in the current spelling form \"Delaware\" ( ) and is thought to derive from French \"de la Guerre\".\nIt has often been reported that the river and bay received the name \"Delaware\" after English forces under Richard Nicolls expelled the Dutch and took control of the New Netherland colony in 1664. However, the river and bay were known by the name \"Delaware\" as early as 1641. The state of Delaware was originally part of the William Penn's Pennsylvania colony. In 1682, the Duke of York granted Penn's request for access to the sea and leased him the territory along the western shore of Delaware Bay, which became known as the \"Lower Counties on the Delaware\". In 1704, the Lower Counties were given political autonomy to form a separate provincial assembly, but they shared Pennsylvania's provincial governor until the two colonies separated on June 15, 1776, and they remained separate as states after the establishment of the United States.\nThe name \"Delaware\" also came to be used as a collective name for the Lenape, a Native American people who inhabited an area of the basins of the Susquehanna River, Delaware River, and lower Hudson River in the northeastern United States at the time of European settlement, as well as for their language. As a result of disruption following the French and Indian War, American Revolutionary War, and the later Indian removals from the eastern United States, the name \"Delaware\" has been spread with the Lenape's diaspora to municipalities, counties and other geographical features in the American Midwest and Canada. The Lenape refer to this river as the L\u00ebnapei Sipu, Lenapewihittuck, or Kithanna.\nLength.\nThe length of the main stem of the Delaware River from the confluence of its branches to the head of Delaware Bay at Liston Point is . However, the river's tidal estuary widens gradually, and there is no clear hydrological dividing point between the river and the bay. Liston Point is considered the head of Delaware Bay only by legal agreement between New Jersey and Delaware, as marked by a pair of survey monuments. As such, some observers may include the entire length of Delaware Bay from Liston Point to the Atlantic Ocean in the length of the river, giving the Delaware River an overall length of .\nAt either length the main stem of the Delaware River is the longest free-flowing river in the Eastern United States. \"Free-flowing\" means the river is not impounded by dams and its course is not significantly altered or diverted. Idaho's Salmon River is the longest free-flowing river in the contiguous United States, at .\nThere are two wing dams on the river, one between Lambertville and New Hope and one between Lumberville and Raven Rock. The wing dams affect the accumulation of sediment but do not cross the entire width of the river. Many tributaries of the Delaware River are dammed or diverted, including its two upper branches. Cannonsville Reservoir impounds the West Branch and Pepacton Reservoir impounds the East Branch, controlling the release of water in to the main stem Delaware River.\nWatershed.\nThe Delaware River's drainage basin has an area of and encompasses 42 counties and 838 municipalities in five U.S. states: New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Delaware. This total area constitutes approximately 0.4% of the land mass in the United States. In 2001, the watershed was 18% agricultural land, 14% developed land, and 68% forested land.\nThere are 216 tributary streams and creeks comprising an estimated 14,057 miles of streams and creeks, in the watershed. While the watershed is home to 4.17\u00a0million people according to the 2000 Federal Census, these bodies of water provide drinking water to 17\u00a0million people\u2014roughly 6% of the population of the United States. The waters of the Delaware River's basin are used to sustain \"fishing, transportation, power, cooling, recreation, and other industrial and residential purposes.\" It is the 33rd largest river in the United States in terms of flow, but is among the nation's most heavily used rivers in daily freight tonnage. The average annual flow rate of the Delaware is 11,700 cubic feet per second at Trenton, New Jersey. With no dams or impediments on the river's main stem, the Delaware is one of the few remaining large free-flowing rivers in the United States.\nCourse.\nWest Branch of the Delaware.\nThe West Branch of the Delaware River, also called the Mohawk Branch, spans approximately from the northern Catskill Mountains to its confluence with the Delaware River's East Branch at Hancock, New York. The last forms part of the boundary between New York and Pennsylvania.\nThe West Branch rises in Schoharie County, New York at above sea level, near Mount Jefferson, and flows tortuously through the plateau in a deep trough. The branch flows generally southwest, entering Delaware County and flowing through the towns of Stamford and Delhi. In southwestern Delaware County it flows in an increasingly winding course through the mountains, generally southwest. At Stilesville the West Branch was impounded in the 1960s to form the Cannonsville Reservoir, the westernmost of the reservoirs in the New York City water system. It is the most recently constructed New York City reservoir and began serving the city in 1964. Draining a large watershed of , the reservoir's capacity is . This water flows over halfway through the reservoir to enter the West Delaware Tunnel in Tompkins, New York. Then it flows through the aqueduct into the Rondout Reservoir, where the water enters the Delaware Aqueduct, that contributes to roughly 50% of the city's drinking water supply. At Deposit, on the border between Broome and Delaware counties, it turns sharply to the southeast and is paralleled by New York State Route\u00a017. It joins the East Branch at above sea level at Hancock to form the Delaware.\nEast Branch of the Delaware.\nSimilarly, the East Branch begins from a small pond south of Grand Gorge in the town of Roxbury in Delaware County, flowing southwest toward its impoundment by New York City to create the Pepacton Reservoir, the largest reservoir in the New York City water supply system. Its tributaries are the Beaver Kill River and the Willowemoc Creek which enter into the river before the West Branch meets the East Branch. The confluence of the two branches is just south of Hancock.\nThe East Branch and West Branch of the Delaware River parallel each other, both flowing in a southwesterly direction.\nUpper Delaware Valley.\nFrom Hancock, New York, the Delaware flows between the northern Poconos in Pennsylvania, and the lowered shale beds north of the Catskills. The river flows down a broad Appalachian valley, passing Hawk's Nest overlook on the Upper Delaware Scenic Byway. The river flows southeast for 78 miles through rural regions along the New York-Pennsylvania border to Port Jervis and Shawangunk Ridge.\nThe Minisink.\nAt Port Jervis, New York, it enters the Port Jervis trough. At this point, the Walpack Ridge deflects the Delaware into the Minisink Valley, where it follows the southwest strike of the eroded Marcellus Formation beds along the Pennsylvania\u2013New Jersey state line for to the end of the ridge at Walpack Bend in the Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area.\nThe Minisink is a buried valley where the Delaware flows in a bed of glacial till that buried the eroded bedrock during the last glacial period. It then skirts the Kittatinny ridge, which it crosses at the Delaware Water Gap, between nearly vertical walls of sandstone, quartzite, and conglomerate, and then passes through a quiet and charming country of farm and forest, diversified with plateaus and escarpments, until it crosses the Appalachian plain and enters the hills again at Easton, Pennsylvania. From this point it is flanked at intervals by fine hills, and in places by cliffs, of which the finest are the Nockamixon Cliffs, long and above high.\nThe Appalachian Trail, which traverses the ridge of Kittatinny Mountain in New Jersey, and Blue Mountain in Pennsylvania, crosses the Delaware River at the Delaware Water Gap near Columbia, New Jersey.\nCentral Delaware Valley.\nIn Easton, Pennsylvania, the Lehigh River joins the Delaware. At Trenton, the Delaware crosses the Atlantic Seaboard Fall Line with a drop of .\nLower Delaware and Tidewater.\nBelow Trenton, the Delaware flows between Philadelphia and New Jersey as it transitions into a broad, sluggish inlet of the sea, with many marshes along its side, widening steadily into its great estuary, Delaware Bay.\nThe Delaware River constitutes the boundary between Delaware and New Jersey. The Delaware\u2013New Jersey border is actually at the easternmost river shoreline within the Twelve-Mile Circle of New Castle, rather than at mid-river, mid-channel or thalweg, so small portions of land lying west of the shoreline, but on the New Jersey side of the river, are pene-exclaves under the jurisdiction of Delaware. The rest of the borders follow a mid-channel approach.\nHistory.\nAt the time of the arrival of the Europeans in the early 17th century, the area near the Delaware River was inhabited by the Native American Lenape people, who called the Delaware River \"L\u00ebnapei Sipu\", meaning \"Lenape river\", or \"Lenape Wihittuck\", which means \"the rapid stream of the Lenape\". The Delaware River played a key factor in the economic and social development of the Mid-Atlantic region. \nIn the 17th century, the river provided the conduit for colonial settlement by the Dutch (New Netherland) and the Swedish (New Sweden). Beginning in 1664, the region became an English possession as settlement by Quakers established the colonies of Pennsylvania (including present-day Delaware) and West Jersey. In the eighteenth century, cities like Philadelphia, Camden (then Cooper's Ferry), Trenton, Wilmington and New Castle were established upon the Delaware and their continued commercial success into the present day has been dependent on access to the river for trade and power. The river provided the path for the settlement of northeastern Pennsylvania's Lehigh Valley, and northwestern New Jersey by German Palatine immigrants\u2014a population that became key in the agricultural development of the region.\nSwedish Colonization (1638\u20131655).\nIn 1638, Swedish settlers, led by Peter Menuet, established New Sweden along the Delaware River. This settlement marked one of the earliest European establishments in the region, with Fort Christina (located near modern-day Wilmington, Delaware) becoming a key trading post and symbol of Swedish colonial ambition. The Swedes engaged in peaceful land negotiations with the local Lenape people and developed a thriving colony. New Sweden became a center for trade and cultural exchange between the Swedish settlers, Native Americans, and neighboring Dutch colonies. Although the Dutch would later assert dominance over the region in 1655, New Sweden laid the groundwork for European settlement along the Delaware River. The fort and surrounding settlements played a crucial role in the early European rivalry for control of North America's resources and territory. This era of Swedish colonization is an important part of the Delaware River's history, adding to its diverse cultural legacy.\nAmerican Revolutionary War.\nThe strategic Delaware River was the scene of several important campaigns during the American Revolutionary War. Perhaps the most famous event was George Washington's crossing of the Delaware River with the Continental Army on the night of December\u00a025\u201326, 1776, leading to a successful surprise attack and victory against the Hessian troops occupying Trenton, New Jersey, on the morning of December 26.\nDuring the Philadelphia Campaign control of the Delaware River was urgently needed by the British, allowing their naval fleet to supply troops occupying Philadelphia. To this end, the Battle of Red Bank and the Siege of Fort Mifflin were fought on and along the shores of the Delaware by the American and British navies, commanded by Commodore John Hazelwood and Admiral Francis Reynolds respectively. See of that campaign.\nCanals.\nThe magnitude of the commerce of Philadelphia has made the improvements of the river below that port of great importance. Small improvements were attempted by Pennsylvania as early as 1771. Commerce was once important on the upper river, primarily prior to railway competition of 1857.\nDelaware Water Gap National Recreation Area.\nThe Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area came about as a result of the failure of a controversial plan to build a dam on the Delaware River at Tocks Island, just north of the Delaware Water Gap to control water levels for flood control and hydroelectric power generation. The dam would have created a lake in the center of present park for use as a reservoir. Starting in 1960, the present-day area of the Recreation Area was acquired for the Army Corps of Engineers through eminent domain. Between 3,000 and 5,000 dwellings were demolished, including historical sites, and about 15,000 people were displaced by the project.\nBecause of massive environmental opposition, dwindling funds, and an unacceptable geological assessment of the dam's safety, the government transferred the property to the National Park Service in 1978. The National Park Service found itself as the caretaker of the previously endangered territory, and with the help of the federal government and surrounding communities, developed recreational facilities and worked to preserve the remaining historical structures.\nThe nearby Shawnee Inn, was identified in the 1990s as the only resort along the banks of the Delaware River.\nAmerican Rivers, an environmental advocacy group, named the Delaware River as the River of the Year for 2020, citing 75 years of progress in reducing pollution and restoring wildlife.\nCommerce.\nWine regions.\nIn 1984, the U.S. Department of the Treasury authorized the creation of a wine region or \"American Viticultural Area\" called the Central Delaware Valley AVA located in southeastern Pennsylvania and New Jersey. The wine appellation includes surrounding the Delaware River north of Philadelphia and Trenton, New Jersey. In Pennsylvania, it consists of the territory along the Delaware River in Bucks County; in New Jersey, the AVA spans along the river in Hunterdon County and Mercer County from Titusville, New Jersey, just north of Trenton, northward to Musconetcong Mountain. As of 2013, there are no New Jersey wineries in the Central Delaware Valley AVA.\nShipping.\nIn the Project of 1885, the U.S. government systematically undertook the formation of a deep federal navigation shipping channel wide from Philadelphia to into Delaware Bay. The River and Harbor Act of 1899 provided for a channel wide from Philadelphia to the deep water of the bay.\nSince 1941, the Delaware River Main Channel was maintained at a depth of . Since 2013 there has been a push to deepen the 102.5-mile stretch from Philadelphia and Camden to the mouth of the Delaware Bay to 45 feet.\nThe Delaware River port complex refers to the ports and energy facilities along the river in the tri-state PA-NJ-DE Delaware Valley region. They include the Port of Salem, the Port of Wilmington, the Port of Chester, the Port of Paulsboro, the Port of Philadelphia and the Port of Camden. Combined they create one of the largest shipping areas of the United States. In 2015, the ports of Philadelphia, Camden, and Wilmington handled 100\u00a0million tons of cargo from 2,243 ship arrivals, and supported 135,000 direct or indirect jobs. The biggest category of imports was fruit, carried by 490 ships, followed by petroleum, and containers, with 410 and 381 ships, respectively. The biggest category of exports was of shipping was containers, with 470 ships. In 2016, 2,427 ships arrived at Delaware River port facilities. Fruit ships were counted at 577, petroleum at 474, and containerized cargo at 431.\nAt one time it was a center for petroleum and chemical products and included facilities such as the Delaware City Refinery, the Dupont Chambers Works, Oceanport Terminal at Claymont, the Marcus Hook Refinery, the Trainer Refinery, the Paulsboro Asphalt Refinery, Paulsboro Refinery, Eagle Point Refinery, and Sunoco Fort Mifflin. As of 2011, crude oil was the largest single commodity transported on the Delaware River, accounting for half of all annual cargo tonnage.\nCrossings.\nThe Delaware River is a major barrier to travel between New Jersey and Pennsylvania. Most of the larger bridges are tolled only westbound, and are owned by the Delaware River and Bay Authority, Delaware River Port Authority, Burlington County Bridge Commission or Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission.\nEnvironmental issues.\nNew York City water supply.\nAfter New York City built 15 reservoirs to supply water to the city's growing population, it was unable to obtain permission to build an additional five reservoirs along the Delaware River's tributaries. As a result, in 1928 the city proposed to draw water from the Delaware River, putting them in direct conflict with villages and towns across the river in Pennsylvania which were already using the Delaware for their water supply. Additionally, the Government of New Jersey raised concerns that New York's water diversions might hinder New Jersey's future development of dams and hydropower; that the water quality of the river would be impacted, due to reduced flows of fresh water; and that its riparian rights would be diminished. New Jersey filed suit against New York State and New York City, with the Government of Pennsylvania intervening in the case to protect its interests. In 1931 the U.S. Supreme Court decided that New York could draw water from the Delaware tributaries, subject to the laws of Congress and regulation by the US Army Corps of Engineers. New York City was allowed to draw of water a day from the Delaware and its upstream tributaries, going on to build three large reservoirs and the Delaware Aqueduct they feed.\nPollution.\nThe Delaware River has been attached to areas of high pollution. The Delaware River in 2012 was named the 5th most polluted river in the United States, explained by PennEnvironment and Environment New Jersey. The activist groups claim that there is about 7\u201310\u00a0million pounds of toxic chemicals flowing through the waterways due to dumping by DuPont Chambers Works. PennEnvironment also claims that the pollutants in the river can cause birth defects, infertility among women, and have been linked to cancer.\nIn 2015, the EPA saw the Delaware River as a concern for mass pollution especially in the Greater Philadelphia and Chester, Pennsylvania area. The EPA was involved after accusations that the river met standards made illegal by the Clean Water Act. In complying with the Clean Water Act, the EPA involved the Delaware County Regional Water Authority (DELCORA) where they set up a plan to spend around $200\u00a0million to help rid the waterway of about 740\u00a0million gallons of sewage and pollution. DELCORA was also fined about $1.4\u00a0million for allowing the Delaware River to have so much pollution residing in the river in the first place and for not complying with the Clean Water Act.\nPart of the Clean Water Act explains how conditions of the river should be stable enough for human fishing and swimming. Even though the river has had success with the cleanup of pollution, the Delaware River still does not meet that standard of swimmable or fishable conditions in the Philadelphia/Chester region.\nIn March 2023, a pipe rupture at a Trinseo chemical plant in Bristol, Pennsylvania, released over 8,000 gallons of latex finishing material into the Otter Creek tributary, leading to a water advisory in Philadelphia.\nFlooding.\nWith the failure of the dam project to come to fruition, the lack of flood control on the river left it vulnerable, and it has experienced a number of serious flooding events as the result of snow melt or rain run-off from heavy rainstorms. Record flooding occurred in August 1955, in the aftermath of the passing of the remnants of two separate hurricanes over the area within less than a week: first Hurricane Connie and then Hurricane Diane, which was, and still is, the wettest tropical cyclone to have hit the northeastern United States. The river gauge at Riegelsville, Pennsylvania recorded an all-time record crest of on August 19, 1955.\nMore recently, moderate to severe flooding has occurred along the river. The same gauge at Riegelsville recorded a peak of on September 23, 2004, on April 4, 2005, and on June 28, 2006, all considerably higher than the flood stage of .\nSince the upper Delaware basin has few population centers along its banks, flooding in this area mainly affects natural unpopulated flood plains. Residents in the middle part of the Delaware basin experience flooding, including three major floods in the three years (2004\u20132006) that have severely damaged their homes and land. The lower part of the Delaware basin from Philadelphia southward to the Delaware Bay is tidal and much wider than portions further north, and is not prone to river-related flooding (although tidal surges can cause minor flooding in this area).\nThe Delaware River Basin Commission, along with local governments, is working to try to address the issue of flooding along the river. As the past few years have seen a rise in catastrophic floods, most residents of the river basin feel that something must be done. The local governments have worked in association with FEMA to address many of these problems, however, due to insufficient federal funds, progress is slow.\nOil spills.\nA number of oil spills have taken place in the Delaware over the years.\nAtlantic sturgeon.\nThe National Marine Fisheries Service is considering designating sixteen rivers as endangered habitat for the Atlantic sturgeon which would require more attention to be given to uses of the rivers that affect the fish.\nNational Wild and Scenic River.\nThe river is part of the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52617", "revid": "15449111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52617", "title": "Morgannwg", "text": "Morgannwg may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52619", "revid": "1316404769", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52619", "title": "United Kingdom of the Netherlands", "text": "Concert of Europe era state consisting of modern-day Netherlands and Belgium (1815\u20131839)\nThe United Kingdom of the Netherlands is the unofficial name given to the Kingdom of the Netherlands as it existed from 1815 to 1839. The United Netherlands was created in the aftermath of the Napoleonic Wars through the fusion of territories that had belonged to the former Dutch Republic, Austrian Netherlands, and Prince-Bishopric of Li\u00e8ge in order to form a buffer state between the major European powers. The polity was a constitutional monarchy, ruled by William I of the House of Orange-Nassau.\nThe polity collapsed in 1830 with the outbreak of the Belgian Revolution. With the \"de facto\" secession of Belgium, the Netherlands was left as a rump state and refused to recognise Belgian independence until 1839 when the Treaty of London was signed, fixing the border between the two states and guaranteeing Belgian independence and neutrality as the Kingdom of Belgium. Today, the Netherlands and Belgium are still kingdoms and Luxembourg is still a grand duchy and the only surviving grand duchy in the world.\nIn French, spoken by the southern residents, this state was officially referred to by a variant of the name \" Belgica\", the Latin name for the entire region of the Low Countries, taken from the name of the Roman province \"Gallia Belgica\". However, after the Belgian Revolution, in which the rebels took the name of \"Belgium\" for their new country, the rump (northern) Netherlands were given the name of the direct translation for \"Netherlands/Low Countries\" () .\nBackground.\nBefore the French Revolutionary Wars (1792\u20131802), the Low Countries was a patchwork of different polities created by the Eighty Years' War (1568\u20131648). The Dutch Republic in the north was independent; the Southern Netherlands was split between the Austrian Netherlands and the Prince-Bishopric of Li\u00e8ge \u2013 the former being part of Habsburg monarchy, while both were part of the Holy Roman Empire. In the aftermath of the French Revolution, the War of the First Coalition broke out in 1792 and France was invaded by Prussia and the Holy Roman Empire. After two years of fighting, the Austrian Netherlands and Li\u00e8ge were captured by the French in 1794 and annexed into France. The Dutch Republic collapsed in 1795 and became a French client state.\nCreation of the United Netherlands.\nIn 1813, the Netherlands was liberated from French rule by Prussian and Russian troops during the Napoleonic Wars. It was taken for granted that any new regime would have to be headed by the son of the last Dutch \"stadhouder\", William Frederik of Orange-Nassau. A provisional government was formed, most of whose members had helped drive out the House of Orange 18 years earlier. However, they realised that it would be better in the long term to offer leadership of the new government to William Frederik themselves rather than have him imposed by the allies. Accordingly, William Frederick was installed as the \"sovereign prince\" of a new Sovereign Principality of the United Netherlands. The future of the Southern Netherlands, however, was less clear. In June 1814, the Great Powers secretly agreed to the Eight Articles of London which allocated the region to the Dutch as William had advocated. That August, William Frederik was made Governor-General of the Southern Netherlands and the Prince-Bishop of Li\u00e8ge, which combined are almost all of what is now Belgium. For all intents and purposes, William Frederik had completed his family's three-century dream of uniting the Low Countries under a single rule.\nDiscussions on the future of the region were still ongoing at the Congress of Vienna when Napoleon attempted to return to power in the \"Hundred Days\". William used the occasion to declare himself king on 16 March 1815 as William I. After the Battle of Waterloo, discussions continued.\nIn exchange for the Southern Netherlands, William agreed to cede the Principality of Orange-Nassau and parts of the Li\u00e8ge to Prussia on 31 May 1815. In exchange, William also gained control over the Duchy of Luxembourg, which was elevated to a grand duchy and placed in personal union with the Netherlands, though it remained part of the German Confederation.\nGovernment.\nConstitution and government.\nThough the United Netherlands was a constitutional monarchy, the king retained significant control as head of state and head of government. Beneath the king was a bicameral legislature known as the States General with a Senate and House of Representatives.\nFrom the start, the administrative system proved controversial. Representation in the seat House of Representatives, for example, was divided equally between south and north, although the former had a larger population. This was resented in the south, which believed that the government was dominated by northerners. Additionally, the king had somewhat greater power than is the case for Dutch and Belgian monarchs. The ministers were responsible to him.\nProvinces.\nThe United Netherlands was divided into 17 provinces and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg which was constitutionally distinct. All of these provinces can trace their origin to a medieval lordship, county, duchy or bishopric, apart from Antwerp (previously part of Duchy of Brabant) and Limburg (previously part of Prince-Bishopric of Li\u00e8ge and Duchy of Gelderland). Their status changed when they came under French rule, when their administration was centralised, reducing their powers. They included:\nThe United Netherlands was also a colonial power with overseas colonies in the East Indies and elsewhere:\nEconomic policy.\nEconomically, the United Netherlands prospered. Supported by the state, the Industrial Revolution began to affect the Southern Netherlands where a number of modern industries emerged, encouraged by figures such as John Cockerill who created the steel industry in Wallonia. Antwerp emerged as major trading port.\nWilliam I actively supported economic modernisation. Modern universities were established in Leuven, in Li\u00e8ge, and in Ghent in 1817. Lower education was also extended. The General Netherlands Society for Advancing National Industry (\"Algemeene Nederlandsche Maatschappij ter Begunstiging van de Volksvlijt\") was created in 1822 to encourage industrialisation in the south, while the Netherlands Trading Society (\"Nederlandsche Handel-Maatschappij\") was created in 1825 to encourage trade with the colonies. William I also embarked on a program of canal building that saw the creation of the North Holland, Ghent\u2013Terneuzen and Brussels\u2013Charleroi canals.\nLanguage policy.\nWillem I felt that one nation must have one language and began a policy of Dutchification in politics and education. In the southern provinces of Antwerp, East-, West-Flanders, Limburg (1819), and the bilingual South Brabant (1823); Dutch was made the sole official language. While in the Walloon provinces of Hainaut, Li\u00e8ge, Namur; French was maintained as official language but Dutch was gradually introduced into education. Although French was still used to some degree in administration in both North and South. In the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, French was the \"de facto\" official language while German was used in education.\nRegional tensions.\nDifferences between Southern and Northern Netherlands were never totally resolved. The two were divided by the issue of religion because the south was strongly Roman Catholic and the north largely Dutch Reformed. The Catholic Church in Belgium resented the state's encroachment on its traditional privileges, especially in education. In French-speaking parts of the south, attempts to enforce the use of Dutch language were particularly resented among the elite. Many Belgians believed that the United Netherlands' constitution discriminated against them. Though they represented 62 percent of the population, they were only allocated 50 percent of the seats in the House and less in the Senate while the state extracted money from the richer south to subsidise the north. By the mid-1820s, a union of opposition had formed in Belgium, uniting liberals and Catholic conservatives against Dutch rule.\nBelgian Revolution and secession.\nThe Belgian Revolution broke out on 25 August 1830, inspired by the recent July Revolution in France. A military intervention in September failed to defeat the rebels in Brussels, radicalising the movement. Belgium was declared an independent state on 4 October 1830. A constitutional monarchy was established under King Leopold I.\nWilliam I refused to accept the secession of Belgium. In August 1831, he launched the Ten Days' Campaign, a major military offensive into Belgium. Though initially successful, the French intervened to support the Belgians and the invasion had to be abandoned. After a period of tension, a settlement was agreed at the Treaty of London in 1839. The Dutch recognised Belgian independence, in exchange for territorial concessions. The frontier between the two countries was finally fixed by the Treaty of Maastricht in 1843. Luxembourg became an autonomous state in personal union with the Dutch, though ceding some territory to Belgium.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52620", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52620", "title": "Gower Peninsula", "text": "Peninsula in Wales\nThe Gower Peninsula (), or simply Gower (), is a peninsula in the south-west of Wales. It is the most westerly part of the historic county of Glamorgan, and is now within the City and County of Swansea. It projects towards the Bristol Channel. In 1956, the majority of Gower became the first area in the United Kingdom to be designated an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.\nUntil 1974, Gower was administered as a rural district. It was then merged with the county borough of Swansea. From 1974 to 1996, it formed the Swansea district. Since 1996, Gower has been administered as part of the unitary authority of the City and County of Swansea.\nSince its establishment in 1999, the Gower Senedd constituency has only elected Labour members. The Gower constituency in Westminster had previously also elected only Labour Members of Parliament (MPs) since 1908; the longest run (with Normanton and Makerfield) of any UK constituency. This ended in 2015 when the Conservatives took the seat. In 2017, it returned to Labour. The area of both constituencies covers the peninsula and the outer Gower areas of Clydach, Gowerton, Gorseinon, Felindre, Garnswllt and encompasses the area of the historic Lordship of Gower apart from the city of Swansea.\nGeography.\nAbout in area, Gower is known for its coastline, popular with walkers and outdoor enthusiasts, especially surfers. Gower has many caves, including Paviland Cave and Minchin Hole Cave. The peninsula is bounded by the Loughor Estuary to the north and Swansea Bay to the east. Gower Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty covers 188\u00a0km2, including most of the peninsula west of Crofty, Three Crosses, Upper Killay, Blackpill and Bishopston. The highest point of Gower is The Beacon at Rhossili Down at overlooking Rhossili Bay. Pwll Du and the Bishopton Valley form a statutory Local Nature Reserve.\nThe southern coast consists of a series of small, rocky or sandy bays, such as Langland and Three Cliffs, and larger beaches such as Port Eynon, Rhossili and Oxwich Bay. The north of the peninsula has fewer beaches, and is home to the cockle-beds of Penclawdd.\nThe northern coast is mainly salt marsh, and is used for raising Gower salt marsh lamb which was registered as a Protected Designation of Origin in 2021 under UK law and in 2023 under EU law.\nThe interior is mainly farmland and common land. The population mainly resides in small villages and communities with some suburban development in eastern Gower; part of the Swansea Urban Area.\nHistory.\nIn the caves of Bacon Hole and Minchin Hole on the southern coast of the Gower, remains of Pleistocene aged animals have been found, primarily animals present in the area during the Last Interglacial and the beginning of the Last Glacial Period (around 130-87,000 years ago) when the area had a similar climate to today, including animals such as straight-tusked elephants, the narrow-nosed rhinoceros, bison, cave lions, wolves, cave hyenas (who at times used the caves as dens), red foxes, red deer, roe deer, and fallow deer, as well as woolly mammoths in younger layers, with later layers in the caves dating to cooler phases of the Last Glacial having cold adapted species like reindeer and wolverines.\nStone Age.\nWales is known to have been inhabited since at least the Upper Paleolithic period, and the Gower Peninsula has been the scene of several important archaeological discoveries. In 1823, archaeologists discovered a fairly complete Upper Paleolithic human male skeleton in Paviland Cave. They named their find the Red Lady of Paviland because the skeleton is dyed in red ochre, though later investigators determined it was actually a male. This was the first human fossil to have been found anywhere in the world, and is still the oldest ceremonial burial anywhere in Western Europe. The most recent re-calibrated radiocarbon dating in 2009 indicates that the skeleton can be dated to around 33,000 Before Present (BP). In 1937 the Parc Cwm long cairn was identified as a Severn-Cotswold type of chambered long barrow. Also known as Parc le Breos burial chamber, it is a partly restored Neolithic chambered tomb. The megalithic burial chamber, or \"cromlech\", was built around 6,000 BP. In the 1950s, members of Cambridge University excavating in a cave on the peninsula found 300\u2013400 pieces of flint related to toolmaking, and dated it to between 14,000 and 12,000 BC. In 2010, an instructor from Bristol University exploring Cathole Cave discovered a rock drawing of a red deer from the same period. This may be the oldest cave art found in Great Britain.\nBronze Age.\nGower is also home to menhirs or standing stones from the Bronze Age. Of the nine stones, eight remain today. One of the most notable of the stones is Arthur's stone near Cefn Bryn. Its 25-ton capstone was most likely a glacial erratic (a piece of rock/conglomerate carried by glacial ice some distance from the rock outcrop from which it came): the builders dug under it and supported it with upright stones to create a burial chamber. The remains of Sweyne Howes on Rhossili Down, Penmaen Burrows Tomb (Pen-y-Crug) and Nicholaston Long Cairn are three other well-known Neolithic chambered tombs. During the Bronze Age, people continued to use local caves for shelter and for burying their dead. Bronze Age evidence, such as funeral urns, pottery and human remains, has been found in Tooth Cave at Llethryd, Culver Hole (Port Eynon) and Cathole Cave. With the transition into the Iron Age, hill forts (timber fortifications on hill tops and coastal promontories) and earthworks began to appear. The largest example of this type of Iron Age settlement in the Gower Peninsula is Cilifor Top near Llanrhidian.\nRoman era.\nRoman occupation brought new settlement. The Romans built Leucarum, a rectangular or trapezoidal fort at the mouth of the River Loughor, in the late 1st century AD to house a regiment of Roman auxiliary troops. Its remains are located beneath the town of Loughor. Stone defences were added to the earthen ditch and rampart by AD 110 and the fort was occupied until the middle or end of that century. However, it was later abandoned for a time and in the early 3rd century the ditch naturally silted up. It appears to have been brought back into use during the reign of Carausius who was worried about Irish raids, but was abandoned again before the 4th century. A Norman castle was later built on the site.\nAnglicisation.\nFollowing the Norman invasion of Wales the commote of G\u0175yr passed into the hands of English-speaking barons, and its southern part soon became Anglicised. In 1203 King John (1199\u20131216) granted the Lordship of Gower to William III de Braose (died 1211) for the service of one knight's fee. It remained with the Braose family until the death of William de Braose, 2nd Baron Braose in 1326, when it passed from the family to the husband of one of his two daughters and co-heiresses, Aline and Joan. In 1215 a local lord, Rhys Gryg of Deheubarth, claimed control of the peninsula, but in 1220 he ceded control to the Anglo-Norman lords, perhaps on the orders of his overlord, Llywelyn ap Iorwerth.\nAs an Anglo-Norman peninsula isolated from its Welsh hinterland but with coastal links to other parts of south Wales and southwest England, it developed its own Gower dialect of English.\nGlamorgan.\nIn 1535, the Act of Union resulted in the Lordship of Gower becoming part of the historic county of Glamorgan with the southwest part becoming the hundred of Swansea.\nPresent day.\nAgriculture remains important to the area with tourism playing an ever-increasing role in the local economy. The peninsula has a Championship status golf course at Fairwood Park just off Fairwood Common, which twice hosted the Welsh PGA Championships in the 1990s. Meanwhile, the Gower Golf Club at Three Crosses hosts the West Wales Open, a two-day tournament on Wales' professional golf tour, the Dragon Tour. Gower is part of the Swansea travel to work area.\nLandmarks.\nThere are six castles on the Gower Peninsula: Landimore Castle\u2014also known as Bovehill Castle\u2014Oystermouth Castle, Oxwich Castle, Pennard Castle, Penrice Castle, Weobley Castle and numerous cairns and standing stones.\nFour beaches have Blue Flag beach and Seaside (2006) awards for their high standards: Bracelet Bay, Caswell Bay, Langland Bay and Port Eynon Bay. Five other beaches have been given the Green Coast Award 2005 for \"natural, unspoiled environment\": Rhossili Bay, Mewslade Bay, Tor Bay, Pwll Du Bay, and Limeslade Bay.\nOther beaches:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Swansea Bay\nLlethryd Tooth Cave.\nThe Llethryd Tooth Cave, or Tooth Hole cave, is a Bronze Age ossuary site in a limestone cave, about north north west of the Parc Cwm long cairn cromlech, on private land along the Parc Cwm valley, near the village of Llethryd. In 1961 the cave was rediscovered by cavers, who found human bones. An excavation was carried out by D.P.\u00a0Webley &amp; J.\u00a0Harvey in 1962 revealing the disarticulated remains (i.e. not complete skeletons) of six adults and two children, dated to the Early Bronze Age or Beaker culture. Other finds are now held at the National Museum of Wales, Cardiff: Early Bronze Age, or Beaker, collared urn pottery; flaked knives; a scraper; flint flakes; a bone spatula; a needle &amp; bead; and animal bones \u2013 the remains of domesticated animals, cat and dog. Archaeologists Alasdair Whittle and Michael Wysocki note that this period of occupation may be \"significant\", with respect to Parc Cwm long cairn, as it is \"broadly contemporary with the secondary use of the tomb\". In their article published in The Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society (vol.64 (1998), pp.\u00a0139\u201382) Whittle and Wysocki suggest corpses may have been placed in caves near the cromlech until they decomposed, when the bones were moved to the tomb \u2013 a process known as \"excarnation\".\nAt 1,525\u00a0m long (nearly 1 mile), the Tooth Cave is the longest cave in Gower. It has tight and flooded sections, and so is kept locked for safety.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52621", "revid": "2278355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52621", "title": "Gower (electoral ward)", "text": "Gower () electoral ward is an electoral ward in Britain. It is a ward of the City and County of Swansea, and comprises the western part of the Gower Peninsula. It lies within the UK Parliamentary constituency of Gower.\nThe electoral ward consists of some or all of the following villages and areas: Cheriton, Horton, Knelston, Landimore, Llandewi, Llangennith, Llanmadoc, Llanrhidian, Middleton, Oldwalls, Overton, Oxwich Green, Oxwich, Penrice, Port Eynon, Reynoldston, Rhossili, Slade, Scurlage.\nIt also includes the communities of Ilston, \"Llangennith, Llanmadoc and Cheriton\", Llanrhidian Lower, Penrice, Swansea, Port Eynon, Reynoldston and Rhossili.\nNeighbouring wards are Penclawdd to the north east, Fairwood to the east and Pennard to the south-east.\n2022 boundary changes.\nFollowing recommendations by the Local Democracy and Boundary Commission for Wales the community of Ilston was transferred from the Gower ward to the Pennard ward, effective from the 2022 local elections.\n2012 local council elections.\nLocal council elections for Gower were held on 3 May 2012, along with wards in 21/22 local authorities in Wales. The turn-out for Gower was 47.51%. The results were:\nSenedd.\nGower Ward is part of the Gower constituency and returns one constituency Member of the Senedd to the Senedd.\nIt votes in the South Wales West region, which elects four list members.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
