{"id": "51173", "revid": "134766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51173", "title": "Quikscript", "text": "Alternative English-language alphabet\nQuikscript (also known as the Read Alphabet and Second Shaw) is a constructed alphabet intended to replace traditional English orthography. It is a revised version of the Shavian alphabet, designed to be written more quickly by hand than its predecessor and to be more universal.\nOrigins and history.\nRead organized a lengthy public testing phase of Shavian by some 500 users from around the world who spoke different dialects of English. Once he had analyzed the results of those tests, Read decided to revise Shavian to incorporate a number of improvements to make it both easier and faster to write. He called the revised alphabet \"Quikscript\". In 1966, he published the Quikscript manual which set out the alphabet's rationale, and briefly discussed different possible methods of alphabet reform. The manual provides comprehensive instructions regarding the use of the alphabet along with reading samples.\nDescription.\nEach Quikscript letter represents a single English phoneme. There are 25 consonants and 15 vowels, making 40 letters in all. The letters are designed to be written easily, each requiring only one (usually curved) pen stroke.\nJust as in the Roman alphabet, there are short letters (e.g. a, c, e, m, and n), written between the base writing line and the \"upper parallel\" (as Read calls it), tall letters (e.g. b, d, f, k, and t), which ascend above the top of the short letters, and deep letters (e.g. g, j, p and y), which descend below the base writing line. Quikscript, however, makes better use of these possibilities with 11 tall, 11 deep, and 18 short letters. All vowels have short letter shapes, and the most common phonemes have the simplest letter shapes.\nSimilar-sounding phonemes have similar letter shapes, for example:\nWhile the Roman alphabet has two distinct forms for each letter, designated minuscule and majuscule, most letters in Quikscript have only one form. Names and proper nouns are preceded with a mid-line \"name-dot\" (\u00b7) which is sufficient to distinguish them from ordinary words.\nJunior Quikscript.\nBeginners learn Junior Quikscript first, which is much more similar to the Shavian alphabet. Each word is spelled \"as it is spoken\". Each letter is written separately from the next so that it is equivalent to what is termed \"printing\" in the Roman alphabet. Some people may prefer Junior Quikscript for printed texts as readers are used to the Roman alphabet being printed in that manner.\nSenior Quikscript.\nSenior Quikscript introduces a number of advanced techniques which save time in writing, namely ligatures, cursive, alternate letter forms, abbreviations and half-letters.\nLigatures and cursive.\nThe most obvious difference is that Senior encourages ligatures as long as the shapes of the letters are not altered. The design of the alphabet fosters these natural connections, as each Quikscript letter either begins or ends on the base line or the upper parallel. This structure permits letters to connect easily yet maintains the shapes of the individual letters because there are no connecting strokes between letters as there are in cursive Roman alphabet writing. It is common that Senior writing will have several conjoined letters in a row, but when such a connection is not possible, the letters are simply left unconnected.\nAlternate letter forms and abbreviations.\nRead added a very small number of alternative letter forms, which permit even more letters to connect easily, along with a number of abbreviations for the most common English words, further reducing the space requirement for printed material and hence the costs of physical publication; it is the writer's choice whether to use them or not.\nHalf-letters.\nSenior Quikscript also introduces the concept of half-letters. Read recognized that the top half of several tall letters and the bottom half of several deep letters are sufficient to clearly distinguish them. Therefore, the portion of the vertical shafts of those letters which lies between the base line and upper parallel can be discarded with no effect to legibility. Half-letters increase the number of letters which can be conjoined, yielding several benefits:\nReferences in literature.\nBook two of the popular \"Cole's Funny Picture Books\", published in Australia by E. W. Cole at the turn of the 20th century, was revised in 1979 to include an article introducing Quikscript under the name Second Shaw.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51174", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51174", "title": "Uncle Tom", "text": "Title character of Uncle Tom's Cabin\nUncle Tom is the title character of Harriet Beecher Stowe's 1852 novel \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\". The character was seen in the Victorian era as a ground-breaking literary attack against the dehumanization of slaves. Tom is a deeply religious Christian preacher to his fellow slaves who uses nonresistance, but who accepts being flogged to death rather than violate the plantation's code of silence by informing against the route being used by two women who have just escaped from slavery. However, the character also came to be criticized for allegedly being inexplicably kind to white slaveowners, especially based on his portrayal in pro-compassion dramatizations. This led to the use of \"Uncle Tom\" \u2014 sometimes shortened to just \"a Tom\" \u2014 as a derogatory epithet for an exceedingly subservient person or house negro, particularly one accepting and uncritical of their own lower-class status.\nOriginal characterization and critical evaluations.\nAt the time of the novel's initial publication in 1851, Uncle Tom was a rejection of the existing stereotypes of minstrel shows; Stowe's melodramatic story humanized the suffering of slavery for white audiences by portraying Tom as a young, strong Jesus-like figure who is ultimately martyred, beaten to death by a cruel master (Simon Legree) because he refuses to betray the whereabouts of two women who had escaped from slavery. Stowe reversed the gender conventions of slave narratives by juxtaposing Uncle Tom's passivity against the daring of three African American women who escape from slavery.\nThe novel was both influential and commercially successful, published as a serial from 1851 to 1852 and as a book from 1852 onward. An estimated 500,000 copies had sold worldwide by 1853, including unauthorized reprints. Senator Charles Sumner credited \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\" for the election of Abraham Lincoln, an opinion that is later echoed in the apocryphal story of Lincoln greeting Stowe with the quip, \"So \"you're\" the little woman who wrote the book that made this great war!\" Frederick Douglass praised the novel as \"a flash to light a million camp fires in front of the embattled hosts of slavery.\" Despite Douglass's enthusiasm, an anonymous 1852 reviewer for William Lloyd Garrison's publication, \"The Liberator\", suspected a racial double standard in the idealization of Uncle Tom:\nUncle Tom's character is sketched with great power and rare religious perception. It triumphantly exemplifies the nature, tendency, and results of Christian non-resistance. We are curious to know whether Mrs. Stowe is a believer in the duty of non-resistance for the white man, under all possible outrage and peril, as for the black man ... [For whites in parallel circumstances, it is often said] Talk not of overcoming evil with good\u00a0\u2013 it is madness! Talk not of peacefully submitting to chains and stripes\u00a0\u2013 it is base servility! Talk not of servants being obedient to their masters\u00a0\u2013 let the blood of tyrants flow! How is this to be explained or reconciled? Is there one law of submission and non-resistance for the black man, and another of rebellion and conflict for the white man? When it is the whites who are trodden in the dust, does Christ justify them in taking up arms to vindicate their rights? And when it is the blacks who are thus treated, does Christ require them to be patient, harmless, long-suffering, and forgiving? Are there two Christs?\nJames Weldon Johnson, a prominent figure of the Harlem Renaissance, expressed an antipathetic opinion in his autobiography:\nFor my part, I was never an admirer of Uncle Tom, nor of his type of goodness; but I believe that there were lots of old Negroes as foolishly good as he.\nIn 1949, American writer James Baldwin rejected the emasculation of the title character \"robbed of his humanity and divested of his sex\" as the price of spiritual salvation for a dark-skinned man in a fiction whose African-American characters, in Baldwin's view, were invariably two-dimensional stereotypes. To Baldwin, Stowe was closer to a pamphleteer than a novelist and her artistic vision was fatally marred by polemics and racism that manifested especially in her handling of the title character. Stowe had stated that her sons had wept when she first read them the scene of Uncle Tom's death. But after Baldwin's essay, it ceased being respectable to accept the melodrama of the Uncle Tom story. Uncle Tom became what critic Linda Williams describes as \"an epithet of servility\" and the novel's reputation plummeted until feminist critics led by Jane Tompkins reassessed the tale's female characters.\nAccording to Debra J. Rosenthal, in an introduction to a collection of critical appraisals for the \"Routledge Literary Sourcebook on Harriet Beecher Stowe's \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\"\", overall reactions have been mixed, with some critics praising the novel for affirming the humanity of the African American characters and for the risks Stowe assumed in taking a very public stand against slavery before abolitionism had become a socially acceptable cause, and others criticizing the very limited terms upon which those characters's humanity was affirmed and the artistic shortcomings of political melodrama.\nInspiration.\nA specific impetus for the novel was the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, which imposed heavy fines upon law enforcement personnel in Northern states if they refused to assist the return of people who escaped from slavery. The new law also stripped African Americans of the right to request a jury trial or to testify on their own behalf, even if they were legally free, whenever a single claimant presented an affidavit of ownership. The same law authorized a $1000 (~$ in 2024) fine and six months imprisonment for anyone who knowingly harbored or assisted a fugitive slave. These terms infuriated Stowe, so the novel was written, read, and debated as a political abolitionist tract.\nStowe drew inspiration for the Uncle Tom character from several sources. The best-known of these was Josiah Henson, an ex-slave whose autobiography, \"The Life of Josiah Henson, Formerly a Slave, Now an Inhabitant of Canada, as Narrated by Himself\", was originally published in 1849 and later republished in two extensively revised editions after the publication of \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\". Henson was enslaved at birth in 1789. He became a Christian at age eighteen and began preaching. Henson attempted to purchase his freedom for $450, but after selling his personal assets to raise $350 and signing a promissory note for the remainder, Henson's owner raised the price to $1000; Henson was unable to prove that the original agreement had been for a lesser amount. Shortly afterward Henson was ordered on a trip south to New Orleans. When he learned that he was to be sold there, he obtained a weapon. He contemplated murdering his white companions with the weapon, but decided against violence because his Christian morals forbade it. A sudden illness in one of his companions forced their return to Kentucky, and shortly afterward Henson escaped north with his family, settling in Canada where he became a civic leader.\nStowe read the first edition of Henson's narrative and later confirmed that she had incorporated elements from it into \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\". Kentucky and New Orleans figure in both Henson's narrative and the novel's settings, and some other story elements are similar.\nIn the public imagination, however, Henson became synonymous with Uncle Tom. After Stowe's death her son and grandson claimed she and Henson had met before \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\" was written, but the chronology does not hold up to scrutiny and she probably drew material only from his published autobiography.\nEpithet.\nThe term \"Uncle Tom\" is used as an epithet for an excessively subservient person, particularly when that person perceives their own lower-class status based on race. It is similarly used to negatively describe people who betray their own group by participating in its oppression, whether willingly or not. The term has also, with more intended neutrality, been applied in psychology in the form of \"Uncle Tom syndrome\", a term for the use of subservience, appeasement, and passivity to cope with intimidation and threats.\nThe popular negative connotations of \"Uncle Tom\" have largely been attributed to the numerous derivative works inspired by \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\" in the decade after its release, rather than to the original novel itself, whose title character is a more positive figure. These works, often called a \"Tom show,\" lampooned and distorted the portrayal of Uncle Tom with politically loaded overtones.\nHistory.\nAmerican copyright law before 1856 did not give novel authors any control over derivative stage adaptations, so Stowe neither approved the adaptations nor profited from them. Minstrel show retellings in particular, usually performed by white men in blackface, tended to be derisive and pro-slavery, transforming Uncle Tom from a Christian martyr to a fool or apologist for slavery. The performer and theatre manager George Kunkel was the first to adapt Stowe's novel into the minstrel show format; portraying the role of Uncle Tom in its first minstrel show adaptation in Charleston, South Carolina in 1861. Kunkel became the most prominent minstrel show performer in that part, performing it throughout the United States for decades and on a tour of England in 1883. His last performance of the part was in January 1885 less than a month before his death.\nAdapted theatrical performances of the novel, called Tom Shows, remained in continual production in the United States for at least 80 years beyond the 1850s (1930s). These representations had a lasting cultural impact and influenced the pejorative nature of the term \"Uncle Tom\" in later popular use.\nAlthough not every minstrel depiction of Uncle Tom was negative, the dominant version developed into a character very different from Stowe's hero. Whereas Stowe's Uncle Tom was a young, muscular, and virile man who refused to obey his cruel master, Simon Legree, when Legree ordered him to beat other slaves, the stock character of the minstrel shows was degenerated into a shuffling, asexual individual, with a receding hairline and graying hair. For Jo-Ann Morgan, author of \"Uncle Tom's Cabin as Visual Culture,\" these shifting representations undermined the subversive layers of Stowe's original characterization by redefining Uncle Tom until he fitted within prevailing racist norms. Particularly after the Civil War, as the political thrust of the novel which had arguably helped to precipitate that war became obsolete to actual political discourse, popular depictions of the title character recast him within the apologetics of the Lost Cause of the Confederacy. The virile father of the abolitionist serial and first book edition degenerated into a decrepit old man, and with that transformation the character lost the capacity for resistance that had originally given meaning to his choices. Stowe never meant Uncle Tom to be a derided name, but the term, as a pejorative, has developed based on how later versions of the character, stripped of his inherent strength, were depicted on stage.\nClaire Parfait, author of \"The Publishing History of Uncle Tom's Cabin, 1852\u20132002,\" opined that \"the many alterations in retellings of the Uncle Tom story demonstrate an impulse to correct the retellers's perceptions of its flaws\" and of \"the capacity of the novel to irritate and rankle, even a century and a half after its first publication.\"\n20th-century Black cultural critique.\nSpike Lee's 2000 film \"Bamboozled\" was a dark modern satire or comedy drama that challenges this kind of negative stereotyping. The film featured popular Black actors such as Damon Wayans as Pierre \"Peerless Dothan\" Delacroix and Jada Pinkett Smith as Sloan Hopkins, comedians such as Tommy Davidson as Womack \"Sleep 'n Eat\" and Paul Mooney as Junebug, and hip hop artists such as Yasiin Bey formerly known as Mos Def as Julius \"Big Blak Afrika\" Hopkins and The Roots as the Alabama Porchmonkeys. Lee's use of popular celebrities as satirical stock characters challenged long-held stereotypes of Black people in mainstream popular culture from novels to the screen. Casting hip-hop artists also allowed the filmmaker to allude to the role of negative stereotyping gangsta rap in the early aughts: \"Spike Lee says in the DVD commentary [about \"Bamboozled\"] that gangsta rap is a kind of stereotype that doesn't advance the interests of blacks. He reiterated this position at his talk at Northeastern.\"\n\"Bamboozled\" challenges notions of \"Uncle Toming\" or \"acting white\" as well as demonstrating the concept of double-consciousness coined by the notable sociologist W. E. B. Du Bois in his book \"The Souls of Black Folk\" (1903). \nAlso see the Emmy Award-winning 1987 documentary film \"Ethnic Notions\" by Black gay filmmaker Marlon Riggs narrated by actor Esther Rolle. The documentary narrates the history and legacy of the dehumanizing effects of African-American stereotypes and racializing caricatures from the \"Loyal Uncle Tom\" to grinning fools (see Stepin Fetchit) in cartoons, minstrel shows, advertisements, household artifacts, and even children's rhymes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51175", "revid": "48163266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51175", "title": "Garrett Park, Maryland", "text": "Garrett Park is a town in Montgomery County, Maryland, United States. It was named after a former president of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, Robert W. Garrett. The population was 996 at the 2020 census. Garrett Park is home to Garrett Park Elementary School, located just outside the town proper.\nHistory.\nGarrett Park was an early planned community, originally promoted by businessman Henry W. Copp, who purchased the land in 1886. Copp wanted to build a suburban development reminiscent of an English village, and even went so far as to name the streets after locations in the novels of the English author Walter Scott, such as Kenilworth and Strathmore. Copp worked in conjunction with the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, which in 1893 built a train station. Builders were given reduced rates to transport workers and materials to the town site, and new residents were given free trips to move in. The town lies along the former B&amp;O railway corridor (now used by CSX, Amtrak, and MARC). It was named for John Work Garrett, who had led the B&amp;O for nearly three decades, including during the American Civil War. Copp limited commercial development in the community. Today the town has a four-star restaurant, post office, and farmer's market.\nGarrett Park incorporated as a town in 1898, at which time it had thirty buildings and approximately 100 residents. However, rail suburbs did not catch on, and the community stagnated as automobiles replaced commuter trains and streetcars. In the 1920s, another company built approximately 50 more houses, now including garages. Sections of the town are included in the Garrett Park Historic District, listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1975. For example, Garrett Park's first school house, designed in 1928 by prominent local architect Howard Wright Cutler and now preserved as part of a residential home, is a designated historic site by the Maryland Historical Trust.\nIn 1977, the town became a declared arboretum, maintaining a tree inventory of all town trees and a scheduled tree planting schedule. In May 1982 the townspeople of Garrett Park voted 245 to 46 to ban the production, transportation, storage, processing, disposal, or use of nuclear weapons within the town. This made Garrett Park the first nuclear-weapon-free zone in the United States.\nGeography.\nGarrett Park is located in southern Montgomery County at 39\u00b02' North, 77\u00b06' West. It is just west of Kensington, due north of Bethesda, northwest of Silver Spring, and southeast of Rockville. It is approximately halfway between Rockville and Silver Spring. Rock Creek Stream Valley Park, operated by Montgomery County, is located along the town's southeast borders.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all of it land.\nGarrett Park is primarily a residential town, with a post office, and a few small businesses. The only road open to automotive traffic into or out of Garrett Park is Maryland State Highway 547 (Strathmore Avenue). The town is served by the MARC Train Brunswick Line. The town is unusual in that residents pick up their mail at the post office in person, rather than having home delivery.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 992 people, 380 households, and 277 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 401 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 91.6% White, 1.3% African American, 0.2% Native American, 3.6% Asian, 0.4% from other races, and 2.8% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.5% of the population.\nThere were 380 households, of which 35.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 61.3% were married couples living together, 8.9% had a female householder with no husband present, 2.6% had a male householder with no wife present, and 27.1% were non-families. 20.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.61 and the average family size was 3.05.\nThe median age in the town was 46.8 years. 25.5% of residents were under the age of 18; 5.1% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 16.5% were from 25 to 44; 34.8% were from 45 to 64; and 18.2% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the town was 48.0% male and 52.0% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 917 people, 347 households, and 266 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 356 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 91.82% White, 0.87% Black or African American, 0.22% Native American, 3.05% Asian, 1.53% from other races, and 2.51% from two or more races. 2.51% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 347 households, out of which 35.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 68.0% were married couples living together, 6.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 23.3% were non-families. 18.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.64 and the average family size was 3.02.\nIn the town, the population was spread out, with 25.4% under the age of 18, 3.1% from 18 to 24, 21.6% from 25 to 44, 31.7% from 45 to 64, and 18.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 45 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.9 males.\nThe median income for a household in the town was $106,883, and the median income for a family was $126,662. Males had a median income of $96,588 versus $66,563 for females. The per capita income for the town was $50,305. None of the families and 0.8% of the population were living below the poverty line, including no under 18 and 2.6% of those over 64.\nLaw and government.\nThe Garrett Park Chapel was purchased by the town in 1968, and now serves as the town hall. Its form of government follows a strong-mayor structure as defined by the following characteristics specified in the town charter: the mayor and council members are elected separately by the residents and hold separate and distinct powers and functions of town governance. The mayor serves as chief executive officer and oversees the administrative operations of the town government, responsible for executing the town's budget and operations. The mayor appoints with approval by the council a clerk-treasurer, whose role as chief financial officer is responsible for formulating the town's fiscal year budget under supervision of the mayor for council review and adoption.\nThe council is the legislative body, comprising five elected officials. Each council member is elected for a two\u2013year term, with two members and the mayor elected in even-numbered years, three in odd-numbered years. As the legislative body, the council sets policy by ordinance or resolution and adopts the annual budget by approving the allocation of appropriated funds by ordinance. All executive powers of the town are vested in the mayor, who is elected separately by the town residents (in the even-numbered years) and also serves a two-year term.\nMayor or city executive.\nRecent mayors/chief executive officers (dual roles) of the town of Garrett Park (elected for two-year terms):\nEducation.\nGarrett Park is served by the Montgomery County Public Schools.\nSchools that serve the town include:\nThe Washington Japanese Language School (WJLS, \u30ef\u30b7\u30f3\u30c8\u30f3\u65e5\u672c\u8a9e\u5b66\u6821 \"Washington Nihongo Gakk\u014d\"), a supplementary weekend Japanese school, has its school office at Quinn Hall of the Holy Cross Church in North Bethesda, adjacent to Garrett Park. The WJLS holds its classes in Bethesda. The institution, giving supplemental education to Japanese-speaking children in the Washington DC area, was founded in 1958, making it the oldest Japanese government-sponsored supplementary school in the U.S.\nTransportation.\nThe only state highway serving Garrett Park is Maryland Route 547. MD 547 connects the town with Maryland Route 355 to the west and Maryland Route 185 to the east, which both provide connections to Interstate 495 (the Capital Beltway) and to Washington, D.C. The former B&amp;O railway, which was instrumental in the town's inception, still serves the community as the MARC commuter rail. The Garrett Park station is on the Brunswick Line, between Union Station, DC, and Harper's Ferry, WV.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51176", "revid": "18421420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51176", "title": "John Eager Howard", "text": "American politician (1752\u20131827)\nJohn Eager Howard (June 4, 1752\u00a0\u2013 October 12, 1827) was an American soldier and politician from Maryland. He was elected as governor of the state in 1788, and served three one-year terms. He also was elected to the Continental Congress, the Congress of the Confederation, the United States Senate, and the Maryland Senate. In the 1816 presidential election, Howard received 22 electoral votes for vice president on the Federalist Party ticket with Rufus King; the ticket lost to Democratic-Republicans James Monroe and Daniel D. Tompkins in a landslide.\nHoward County, Maryland, is named for him, as are three streets in Baltimore. For seven days in November 1800, Howard was president pro tempore of the Senate.\nEarly life and education.\nJohn Eager Howard was the son of Cornelius Howard and Ruth (Eager) Howard, of the Maryland planter elite and was born at their plantation \"The Forest\" in Baltimore County, Maryland. Howard grew up in an Anglican slaveholding family.\nHoward joined a Baltimore lodge of Freemasons.\nMilitary career.\nCommissioned a captain at the beginning of the American Revolutionary War (1775\u20131783), Howard rose in 1777 to the rank of colonel in the Maryland Line of the Continental Army, fighting in the Battle of White Plains in 1776 and in the Battle of Monmouth in 1778. He was awarded a silver medal by the Confederation Congress for his leadership at the Battle of Cowpens in 1781, during which he commanded the 2nd Maryland Regiment. In September 1781, he was wounded in a bayonet charge at the Battle of Eutaw Springs. Major General Nathanael Greene wrote that Howard was \"as good an officer as the world affords. He has great ability and the best disposition to promote the service...He deserves a statue of gold.\"\nAt the conclusion of the war, Colonel Howard was admitted as an original member of the Society of the Cincinnati of Maryland. He went on to serve as the vice president (1795\u20131804) and president (1804\u20131827) of the Society in Maryland.\nPolitical life.\nFollowing his army service, Howard held several electoral political positions: elected to the Confederation Congress in 1788; fifth Governor of Maryland for three one-year terms from 1788 through 1791; later as State Senator from 1791 through 1795; and elector in the presidential election of 1792. He declined an offer from George Washington in 1795 to serve as Secretary of War. He subsequently joined the newly organized Federalist Party and was elected to the Senate of the Fourth Congress by the General Assembly of Maryland to serve the remainder of the term of Richard Potts, who had resigned. He was elected to a Senate term of his own in 1797, serving until March 3, 1803, and briefly served as president pro tempore of the Senate in November 1800. While in Congress, he was the sole Federalist to vote against the Sedition Act.\nIn 1798, amidst rising tensions with France, Howard declined a commission as brigadier general in the United States Army.\nAt the end of his Senate term in 1803, Howard returned to Baltimore, where he avoided elected office but continued in public service and philanthropy. He was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1815. In the 1816 presidential election, he received 22 electoral votes for Vice President as the running mate of Federalist Rufus King, losing to Democratic-Republican candidates James Monroe and Daniel D. Tompkins in a landslide. No formal Federalist nomination had been made, and it is not clear whether Howard himself, who was one of several Federalists who received electoral votes for vice president, actually wanted to run.\nHoward developed property in the city of Baltimore and was active in city planning. His house was constructed north of the city, in what later became the Mount Vernon neighborhood, where he owned slaves.\nMarriage and family.\nHoward married Margaret (\"Peggy\") Chew, daughter of Pennsylvania Supreme Court justice Benjamin Chew, in 1787. They had nine children:\nDeath and legacy.\nHoward died in 1827. He is buried at Old Saint Paul's Cemetery in Baltimore.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51177", "revid": "50990734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51177", "title": "Frederick, Maryland", "text": "Frederick is a city in and the county seat of Frederick County, Maryland, United States. Frederick's population was 78,171 people as of the 2020 census, making it the second-largest incorporated city in Maryland behind Baltimore. It is a part of the Washington metropolitan area and the greater Washington\u2013Baltimore combined statistical area.\nThe city is located at an important crossroads at the intersection of a major north\u2013south Native American trail and east\u2013west routes to the Chesapeake Bay, both at Baltimore and what became Washington, D.C., and across the Appalachian Mountains to the Ohio River watershed.\nFrederick is home to Frederick Municipal Airport (IATA: FDK), which accommodates general aviation, and Fort Detrick, a U.S. Army bioscience and communications research installation and Frederick County's largest employer.\nHistory.\nPre-colonization.\nLocated where Catoctin Mountain, the easternmost ridge of the Blue Ridge Mountains, meets the rolling hills of the Piedmont region, the Frederick area became a crossroads long before European explorers and traders arrived. \nNative American hunters, possibly including the Susquehannocks, the Algonquian-speaking Shawnee, the Seneca, or Tuscarora or other members of the Iroquois Confederation followed the Monocacy River from the Susquehanna River watershed in Pennsylvania to the Potomac River watershed and the lands of the more agrarian and maritime Algonquian peoples, particularly the Lenape of the Delaware Valley or the Piscataway and Powhatan of the lower Potomac River watershed and Chesapeake Bay. This became known as the Monocacy Trail or the Great Indian Warpath to the western Piedmont in North Carolina, or traveling down other watersheds in Virginia toward the Chesapeake Bay, such as those of the Rappahannock, James, and York Rivers.\n18th century.\nThe earliest European settlement was slightly north of Frederick in Monocacy, Maryland. Monocacy was founded before 1730 (when the Indian trail became a wagon road) and was abandoned before the American Revolutionary War, likely due to the river's periodic flooding, hostilities predating the French and Indian War, or simply Frederick's better location with easier access to the Potomac River near its confluence with the Monocacy.\nDaniel Dulany, a land speculator, laid out what was initially called Frederick Town by 1745. Three years earlier, All Saints Church had been founded on a hilltop near a warehouse/trading post. Sources disagree as to which Frederick the town was named for, but the likeliest candidates are Frederick Calvert, 6th Baron Baltimore (one of the proprietors of Maryland), Frederick Louis, Prince of Wales, and Frederick the Great, King of Prussia.\nIn 1748, Frederick County was formed by carving a section off of Prince George's County. Frederick Town (now Frederick) was made the county seat of Frederick County. The county originally extended to the Appalachian mountains (areas further west being disputed between the colonies of Virginia and Pennsylvania until 1789). The current town's first house was built by a young German Reformed schoolmaster from the Rhineland Palatinate named Johann Thomas Schley (died 1790), who led a party of immigrants (including his wife, Maria Von Winz) to the Maryland colony. The Palatinate settlers bought land from Dulany on the banks of Carroll Creek, and Schley's house stood at the northwest corner of Middle Alley and East Patrick Street into the 20th century. Schley's settlers also founded a German Reformed Church, now known as Evangelical Reformed Church, and part of the UCC. Probably the oldest house still standing in Frederick today is Schifferstadt, built in 1756 by German settler Joseph Brunner and now the Schifferstadt Architectural Museum. The spire of the church and its clock tower were completed in 1763 and will undergo a restoration project in 2025.\nSchley's group was among the many Pennsylvania Dutch, Scots-Irish, French, and later Irish, who migrated south and westward in the late-18th century. Frederick was an important stop along the migration route that became known as the Great Wagon Road, which came down from Gettysburg, Pennsylvania and Emmitsburg, Maryland and continued south following the Great Appalachian Valley through Winchester and Roanoke, Virginia. Another important route continued along the Potomac River from near Frederick, to Hagerstown, where it split. One branch crossed the Potomac River near Martinsburg, West Virginia and continued down into the Shenandoah valley. The other continued west to Cumberland, Maryland, and ultimately crossed the Appalachian Mountains into the watershed of the Ohio River. Thus, British General Edward Braddock marched his troops (including the youthful George Washington) west in 1755 through Frederick on the way to their fateful ambush near Fort Duquesne (later Fort Pitt, then Pittsburgh) during the French and Indian War. However, the British after the Proclamation of 1763 restricted that westward migration route until after the American Revolutionary War. Other westward migrants continued south from Frederick to Roanoke along the Great Wagon Road, crossing the Appalachians into Kentucky and Tennessee at the Cumberland Gap near the Virginia/North Carolina border.\nOther German settlers in Frederick were Evangelical Lutherans, led by Rev. Henry Muhlenberg. They moved their mission church from Monocacy to what became a large complex a few blocks further down Church Street from the Anglicans and the German Reformed Church. Methodist missionary Robert Strawbridge, who accepted an invitation to preach at Frederick town in 1770, and Francis Asbury, who arrived two years later, both helped found a congregation which became Calvary Methodist Church, worshipping in a log building from 1792 (although superseded by larger buildings in 1841, 1865, 1910 and 1930). Frederick also had a Catholic mission, to which Rev. Jean DuBois was assigned in 1792, which became St. John the Evangelist Church (built in 1800).\nTo control this crossroads during the American Revolution, the British garrisoned a German Hessian regiment in the town; the war (the stone, L-shaped \"Hessian Barracks\" still stand).[ [update]]\n19th century.\nAs the county seat for Western Maryland, Frederick not only was an important market town but also the seat of justice. Although Montgomery County and Washington County were split off from Frederick County in 1776, Frederick remained the seat of the smaller (though still large) county. Important lawyers who practiced in Frederick included John Hanson, Francis Scott Key and Roger B. Taney.\nFrederick was also known during the 19th century for its religious pluralism, with one of its main thoroughfares, Church Street, hosting about a half dozen major churches. In 1793, All Saints Church hosted the first confirmation of an American citizen, by the newly consecrated Episcopal Bishop Thomas Claggett. That original colonial building was replaced in 1814 by a brick classical revival structure. It still stands today, although the principal worship space has become an even larger brick gothic church joining it at the back and facing Frederick's City Hall (so the parish remains the oldest Episcopal Church in western Maryland). The main Catholic church, dedicated to St. John the Evangelist, was built in 1800, then rebuilt in 1837 (across the street) one block north of Church Street on East Second Street, where it still stands along with a school and convent established by the Visitation Sisters. The stone Evangelical Lutheran Church of 1752 was also rebuilt and enlarged in 1825, then replaced by the current twin-spired structure in 1852.\nThe oldest African-American church in the town is Asbury United Methodist Church, founded as the Old Hill Church, a mixed congregation in 1818. It became an African-American congregation in 1864, renamed Asbury Methodist Episcopal Church in 1870, and built its current building on All Saints Street in 1921.\nTogether, these churches dominated the town, set against the backdrop of the first ridge of the Appalachians at Catoctin Mountain. The abolitionist poet John Greenleaf Whittier later immortalized this view of Frederick in his poem to \"Barbara Fritchie\": \"The clustered spires of Frederick stand/Green-walled by the hills of Maryland.\"\nWhen U.S. President Thomas Jefferson commissioned National Road from Baltimore toward St. Louis, eventually built to Vandalia, then the state capital of Illinois, National Pike ran through Frederick along Patrick Street; it later became U.S. Route 40. Frederick's Jacob Engelbrecht corresponded with Jefferson in 1824 and received a transcribed psalm from Jefferson in return. Engelbrecht kept a diary from 1819 through 1878, which remains an important first-hand account of 19th century life on National Road. An important house remaining from this era is the Tyler Spite House, built in 1814 at 112 W. Church Street by a local doctor to prevent the city from extending Record Street south through his land to meet West Patrick Street.\nFrederick also became one of the new nation's leading mining counties in the early 19th century. It exported gold, copper, limestone, marble, iron, and other minerals. As early as the American Revolution, Catoctin Furnace near Thurmont became an important source of iron production. Other mining areas split off into Washington County, Maryland and Allegheny County, Maryland but continued to ship their ore through Frederick to Eastern cities and ports.\nFrederick had easy access to the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal, which began operations in 1831 and continued hauling freight until 1924. Also in 1831, the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad (B&amp;O) completed its Frederick Branch line from the Frederick (or Monocacy) Junction off the main Western Line from Baltimore to Harpers Ferry, Cumberland, and the Ohio River. The railroad reached Chicago and St. Louis by the 1850s.\nCivil War.\nFrederick became Maryland's capital city briefly in 1861, as the legislature moved from Annapolis to vote on the secession question. President Lincoln arrested several members, and the assembly was unable to convene a quorum to vote on secession.\nAs a major crossroads, Frederick, like Winchester, Virginia, and Martinsburg, West Virginia, saw considerable action during the American Civil War. Slaves also escaped from or through Frederick (since Maryland was still a \"slave state\" although it had not seceded) to join the Union forces, work against the Confederacy and seek freedom. During the Maryland campaigns, both Union and Confederate troops marched through the city. Frederick also hosted several hospitals to nurse the wounded from those battles, as is related in the National Museum of Civil War Medicine on East Patrick Street.\nA legend related by John Greenleaf Whittier claimed that Frederick's Pennsylvania Dutch women (including Barbara Fritchie who reportedly waved a flag) booed the Confederates in September 1862, as General Stonewall Jackson led his light infantry division through Frederick on his way to the battles of Crampton's, Fox's and Turner's Gaps on South Mountain and Antietam near Sharpsburg. Union Major General Jesse L. Reno's IX Corps followed Jackson's men through the city a few days later on the way to the Battle of South Mountain, where Reno died. The sites of the battles are due west of the city along the National Road, west of Burkittsville. Confederate troops under Jackson and Walker unsuccessfully attempted to halt the Federal army's westward advance into the Cumberland Valley and towards Sharpsburg. Gathland State Park has the War Correspondents' Memorial stone arch erected by reporter/editor George Alfred Townsend (1841\u20131914). The 1889 memorial commemorating Major General Reno and the Union soldiers of his IX Corps is on Reno Monument Road west of Middletown, just below the summit of Fox's Gap, as is a 1993 memorial to slain Confederate Brig. Gen. Samuel Garland Jr., and the North Carolina troops who held the line.\nPresident Abraham Lincoln, on his way to visit Gen. George McClellan after the Battle of South Mountain and the Battle of Antietam, delivered a short speech at what was then the B&amp;O Railroad depot at the current intersection of East All Saints and South Market Streets. A plaque commemorates the speech (at what is today the Frederick Community Action Agency, a Social Services office).\nAt the Prospect Hall mansion off Jefferson Street to Buckeystown Pike near what is now Butterfly Lane, in the early morning hours of June 28, 1863, a messenger arrived from President Abraham Lincoln and General-in-Chief Henry Halleck, informing General George Meade that he would be replacing General Joseph Hooker after the latter's disastrous performance at Chancellorsville in May. The Army of the Potomac camped around the Prospect Hall property for the several days as skirmishers pursued Lee's Confederate Army of Northern Virginia before Gettysburg. A large granite rectangular monument made from one of the boulders at the \"Devil's Den\" in Gettysburg to the east along the driveway commemorates the midnight change-of-command.\nIn July 1864, in the third Southern invasion, Confederate troops led by Lieutenant General Jubal Early occupied Frederick and extorted $200,000 ($ in 2024 dollars) from citizens in exchange for not razing the city on their way to Washington, D.C. Union troops under Major General Lew Wallace fought a successful delaying action, in what became the last significant Confederate advance at the Battle of Monocacy, also known as the \"Battle that Saved Washington.\" The Monocacy National Battlefield lies just southeast of the city limits, along the Monocacy River at the B&amp;O Railroad junction where two bridges cross the stream: an iron-truss bridge for the railroad and a covered wooden bridge for the Frederick-Urbana-Georgetown Pike, which was the site of the main battle of July 1864. Some skirmishing occurred further northeast of town at the stone-arched \"Jug Bridge\" where the National Road crossed the Monocacy; and an artillery bombardment occurred along the National Road west of town near Red Man's Hill and Prospect Hall mansion as the Union troops retreated eastward. Antietam National Battlefield and South Mountain State Battlefield Park which commemorates the 1862 battles are located 23 miles and 35 miles respectively to the west-northwest, while Gettysburg National Battlefield of 1863 lies approximately to the north-northeast.\nThe reconstructed home of Barbara Fritchie stands on West Patrick Street, just past Carroll Creek linear park. Fritchie, a significant figure in Maryland history in her own right, is buried in Frederick's Mount Olivet Cemetery. British Prime Minister Winston Churchill quoted Whittier's poem to President Franklin D. Roosevelt when they stopped here in 1941 on a car trip to the presidential retreat, then called \"Shangra-La\" (now \"Camp David\") within the Catoctin Mountains near Thurmont.\nAdmiral Winfield Scott Schley (1839\u20131911) was born at \"Richfields\", the mansion home of his father. He became an important naval commander of the American fleet on board his flagship and heavy cruiser USS \"Brooklyn\" along with Admiral William T. Sampson in the Battle of Santiago de Cuba off the shores of the Spanish island colony of Cuba in the Spanish\u2013American War in 1898. Major Henry Schley's son, Dr. Fairfax Schley, was instrumental in setting up the Frederick County Agricultural Society and the Great Frederick Fair. Gilmer Schley served as Mayor from 1919 to 1922, and the Schleys remained one of the town's leading families into the late-20th century.\nNathaniel Wilson Schley, a prominent banker, and his wife Mary Margaret Schley helped organize and raise funds for the annual Great Frederick Fair, one of the two largest agricultural fairs in the State. Since the 1960s, the fair has featured many outstanding country-western singers and become a major music festival. Schley Avenue commemorates the family's role in the city's heritage.\nThe Frederick and Pennsylvania Line railroad ran from Frederick to the Pennsylvania\u2013Maryland state line, also known as the Mason\u2013Dixon line. Chartered in 1867, construction began in 1869 and the line opened October 8, 1872. However, it defaulted on its interest payments in 1874 and was acquired by the Pennsylvania Railroad in 1875, which formed a new division to operate the rail line. In the spring of 1896, the Frederick and Pennsylvania Line railroad was liquidated in a judicial sale to the Pennsylvania Railroad for $150,000. The railroad survived through mergers and the Penn-Central bankruptcy. However, the State of Maryland acquired the Frederick and Pennsylvania Line in 1982. As of 2013, all but two miles () at the southern terminus at Frederick still exist, operated by either the Walkersville Southern, or the Maryland Midland Railway (MMID) railroads.\nJewish pioneers Henry Lazarus and Levy Cohan settled in Frederick in the 1740s as merchants. Mostly German Jewish immigrants organized a community in the mid-19th century, creating the Frederick Hebrew Congregation in 1858. Later the congregation lapsed, but was reorganized in 1917 as a cooperative effort between the older settlers and more recently arrived Eastern European Jews under the name Beth Sholom Congregation.\n20th century.\nIn 1905, Rev. E. B. Hatcher started the First Baptist Church of Frederick.\nAfter the Civil War, the Maryland legislature established racially segregated public facilities by the end of the 19th century, re-imposing white supremacy. Black institutions were typically underfunded in the state, and it was not until 1921 that Frederick established a public high school for African Americans. First located at 170 West All Saints Street, it moved to 250 Madison Street, where it eventually was adapted as South Frederick Elementary. The building presently houses the Lincoln Elementary School. The Laboring Sons Memorial Grounds, a cemetery for free blacks, was founded in 1851.\nFrederick county began a shift away from Agriculture and towards manufacturing over the post-Civil War era, like most of the country. In 1914, more Marylanders worked in industry than in Agriculture, and more lived in urban areas than rural. In Frederick, many farms converted to dairy and orchards, with a decrease in milling. The shift away from rural life dawned a rise of subdivisions surrounding the urban center, with the creation of West Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh streets, as well as the Frederick City Hospital (now Frederick Health Hospital).\nIn the past few decades, the greatest theme and challenge of the city has been rapid expansion, per census data. The primary cause of this has been the expansion of the federal government and corresponding sprawl of the Metropolitan Washington area.\nThis rapid expansion has created a rise of traffic as a key political issue in the city.\nGeography.\nFrederick is located in Frederick County in the northern part of the state of Maryland. The city has served as a major crossroads since colonial times. Today it is located at the junction of Interstate 70, Interstate 270, U.S. Route 340, U.S. Route 40, U.S. Route 40 Alternate and U.S. Route 15 (which runs north\u2013south). In relation to nearby cities, Frederick lies west of Baltimore, north and slightly west of Washington, D.C., southeast of Hagerstown and southwest of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water. The city's area is predominantly land, with small areas of water being the Monocacy River, which runs to the east of the city, Carroll Creek (which runs through the city and causes periodic floods, such as that during the summer of 1972 and fall of 1976), as well as several neighborhood ponds and small city owned lakes, such as Culler Lake, a man-made small body of water in the downtown area.\nClimate.\nThe climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally cool winters. It lies to the west of the fall line, which gives the city slightly lower temperatures compared to locales further east. According to the K\u00f6ppen Climate Classification system, Frederick has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated \"Cfa\" on climate maps. Frederick is also the site of the highest temperature recorded in Maryland at on July 10, 1936.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 78,171 people residing in Frederick city.\n2020 census data put the racial makeup of the city at 48.9% White, 18.6% Black or African American, 0.2% Native American, 5.7% Asian American or Pacific Islander, and 20.9% Hispanic or Latino of any race. Roughly 5% of the city's population was of two or more races, with 0.6% categorized as \"Some Other Race\".\nIn regard to minority group growth, the 2020 census data show the city's Hispanic population at 16,368, a 74 percent increase compared with 9,402 in 2010, making Hispanics/Latinos the fastest growing race group in the city and in Frederick county (87 percent increase). Frederick city had 4,425 Asian residents in 2020, a 16 percent increase from the city's 3,800 Asian residents in 2010. The city's Black or African-American population increased roughly 20 percent, from 12,144 in 2010 to 14,526 in 2020.\nAccording to American Community Survey estimates in 2021, for the roughly 33,907 households in the city, 30.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.4% were married couples living together, 30.4% had a female householder with no spouse/partner present, and 20.3% male householders with no spouse/partner present. Approximately 14.8% of all households were made up of individuals living alone and 2.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.29 and the average family size was 2.97.\nEconomy.\nFrederick's relative proximity to Washington, D.C., has always been an important factor in the development of its local economy, along with the presence of Fort Detrick, its largest employer.\nFrederick is the home of Riverside Research Park, a large research park located on Frederick's east side. Tenants include the relocated main offices of the National Cancer Institute's Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research as well as Charles River Labs; JLG Industries intends to establish a facility here in 2025. As a result of continued and enhanced federal government investment, the Frederick area will likely maintain a continued growth pattern over the next decade. Frederick has also been impacted by recent national trends centered on the gentrification of the downtown areas of cities across the nation (particularly in the northeast and mid-Atlantic), and to re-brand them as sites for cultural consumption.\nThe Frederick Historic District in the city's downtown houses more than 200 retailers, restaurants and antique shops along Market, Patrick and East Streets. Restaurants feature a diverse array of cuisines, including Italian American, Thai, Vietnamese, and Cuban, as well as a number of regionally recognized dining establishments.\nIn addition to retail and dining, downtown Frederick is home to 600 businesses and organizations totaling nearly 5,000 employees. A growing technology sector can be found in downtown's historic renovated spaces, as well as in new office buildings located along Carroll Creek Park.\nCarroll Creek Park began as a flood control project in the late 1970s. It was an effort to reduce the risk to downtown Frederick from the 100-year floodplain and restore economic vitality to the historic commercial district. Today, more than $150 million in private investing is underway or planned in new construction, infill development or historic renovation in the park area.\nThe first phase of the park improvements, totaling nearly $11 million in construction, run from Court Street to just past Carroll Street. New elements to the park include brick pedestrian paths, water features, planters with shade trees and plantings, pedestrian bridges and a 350-seat amphitheater for outdoor performances.\nA recreational and cultural resource, the park also serves as an economic development catalyst, with private investment along the creek functioning as a key component to the park's success. More than 400,000 sf of office space; 150,000 sf of commercial/retail space; nearly 300 residential units; and more than 2,000 parking spaces are planned or under construction.\nOn the first Saturday of every month, Frederick hosts an evening event in the downtown area called \"First Saturday\". Each Saturday has a theme, and activities are planned according to those themes in the downtown area (particularly around the Carroll Creek Promenade). The event spans a ten-block area of Frederick and takes place from 5 p.m. to 9 p.m. During the late spring, summer, and early fall months, this event draws particularly large crowds from neighboring cities and towns in Maryland, and nearby locations in the tri-state area (Virginia and Pennsylvania). The average number of attendees visiting downtown Frederick during first Saturday events is around 11,000, with higher numbers from May to October.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the county's comprehensive annual financial reports, the top employers by number of employees in the county are the following. (\"NR\" indicates the employer was not ranked among the top ten employers that year.)\nCulture.\nCityscape.\nFrederick is well known for the \"clustered spires\" skyline of its historic downtown churches. These spires are depicted on the city's seal and many other city-affiliated logos and insignia. The phrase \"clustered spires\" is used as the name of several city locations such as Clustered Spires Cemetery and the city-operated Clustered Spires Golf Course.\nThe scale of the older part of the city is dense, with streets and sidewalks suitable for pedestrians, and a variety of shops and restaurants, comprising what \"Forbes\" magazine in 2010 called one of the United States' \"Greatest Neighborhoods\".\nFrederick has a bridge painted with a mural titled \"Community Bridge\". The artist William Cochran has been acclaimed for the \"trompe-l'\u0153il\" realism of the mural. Thousands of people sent ideas representing \"community\", which he painted on the stonework of the bridge. The residents of Frederick call it \"the mural\", \"painted bridge\", or more commonly, the \"mural bridge\".\nTheatre and arts.\nThe Frederick Arts Council is the designated arts organization for Frederick County. The organization is charged with promoting, supporting, and advocating the arts. There are over ten art galleries in downtown Frederick, and three theaters are located within 50 feet of each other (Cultural Arts Center, Weinberg Center for the Arts, and the Maryland Ensemble Theatre). Frederick is the home of The Delaplaine Visual Arts Education Center, a leading non-profit in the region, as well as the Maryland Shakespeare Festival.\nIn August 2007, the streets of Frederick were adorned with 30 life-size fiberglass keys as part of a major public art project entitled \"The Keys to Frederick\". In October 2007, artist William Cochran created a large-scale glass project titled \"The Dreaming\". The project is in the historic theater district, across from the Wienberg Center for the Arts.\nThe Maryland Ensemble Theatre (MET), a professional theater company, is housed on the lower level of the Francis Scott Key Hotel. The MET first produced mainstage theater in 1997, but the group began performing together with its creation of The Comedy Pigs sketch comedy/improv troupe in April 1993. The students at Hood College also have a theatre club and put on shows at least once during the school year, sometimes two shows are presented during the school year.\nThe film \"Blair Witch Project\" (1999) was set in the woods west of Burkittsville, Maryland, in western Frederick County, but it was not filmed there.\nMusic.\nFrederick has a community orchestra, the Frederick Symphony Orchestra, that performs five concerts per year consisting of classical masterpieces. Other musical organizations in Frederick include the Frederick Chorale, the Choral Arts Society of Frederick, the Frederick Regional Youth Orchestra, and the Frederick Symphonic Band. The Frederick Children's Chorus has performed since 1985. It is a five-tier chorus, with approximately 150 members ranging in age from 5 to 18. A weekly recital is played on the Joseph Dill Baker Carillon every Sunday, year 'round, at 12:30\u00a0p.m. for half an hour. The carillon can be heard from anywhere in Baker Park, and the city carillonneur can be seen playing in the tower once a year as part of the Candlelight tour of Historic Houses of Worship, on the first weekday after Christmas.\nFrederick is home to the Frederick School of Classical Ballet, the official school for Maryland Regional Ballet. Approximately 30 dance studios are located around the city. Each year, these studios perform at the annual DanceFest event.\nFrederick also has a large amphitheater in Baker Park, which features regular music performances of local and national acts, particularly in the summer months.\nClutch, a successful rock band formed in 1990, calls Frederick their home. The band rehearses for each album and tour in Frederick while drummer Jean-Paul Gaster has been a resident of Frederick since 2001. One of the band's biggest hits, \"50,000 Unstoppable Watts\", was written about Fort Detrick and Frederick.\nFrederick is also home to indie-rock band Silent Old Mtns. The music video for their 2012 single \"Dead All The Time\" was shot entirely in Historic Downtown Frederick.\nLibrary.\nThe main library for Frederick County is located in downtown Frederick, with several branches across the county.\nRetail.\nThe city's main mall is the Francis Scott Key Mall. An abandoned retail center, the Frederick Towne Mall existed previously, and closed in 2013. There are plans for the Frederick Towne Mall, now known as District 40 to include new shopping options as construction which began in 2020. The movie theater Warehouse Cinemas opened here in September 2020.\nReligion.\nThere are numerous religious denominations in Frederick: the first churches were established by early Protestant settlers, followed by Irish Catholics and other European Catholics.\nSt. Paul African Methodist Episcopal Church in Della (now Urbana) is one of the oldest active African-American churches in Frederick County, Maryland, according to a testimonial placed in its cornerstone which stated that it was the first A.M.E. church built in the southern part of Frederick County. It was built in 1916 on a foundation first laid in 1908.\nOther denominations represented in Frederick City and in the surrounding county include large numbers of Brethren, as well as some Pentecostal churches. Quinn Chapel, of the African Methodist Episcopal (A.M.E.) Church, is located on East Third Street. The AME Church, founded in Philadelphia in the early 19th century by free blacks, is the first black independent denomination in the United States. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) has had a presence in Frederick since the 1970s when the first congregation was organized and now includes four congregations in two buildings within the city.\nBeth Sholom Congregation, a conservative synagogue, has been in Frederick since 1917. Congregation Kol Ami, a Reform synagogue, was founded in 2003. http:// , a Chabad, was founded in 2009.\nSri Bhaktha Anjaneya Temple, located in Urbana, serves Frederick's Hindu community.\nThe Islamic Society of Frederick, founded in the early 1990s, serves Frederick's Muslim community.\nSports.\nBaseball.\nThe Frederick Keys are a collegiate summer baseball team in the MLB Draft League that was formerly a minor league baseball team associated with the Baltimore Orioles (1989\u20132020). The Keys are named after Francis Scott Key, who was a resident of Frederick. They play at Nymeo Field at Harry Grove Stadium.\nThe Spire City Ghost Hounds are an independent baseball team in the Atlantic League of Professional Baseball that began playing at Nymeo Field at Harry Grove Stadium in April 2023. The team went on hiatus for the 2024 season, planning to return in 2025 when the Atlantic League expands to 12 teams.\nBasketball.\nThe Flying Cows are a professional basketball team competing in The Basketball League that started playing in Woodsboro Bank Arena at Hood College in April 2024. In the early 1990s, the Frederick Flyers played in the Atlantic Basketball League at Frederick Community College's arena before they relocated to Pennsylvania.\nSoccer.\nFC Frederick is a semi-pro team in the National Premier Soccer League. The club plays home games at Thomas Athletic Field at Hood College.\nRugby.\nIn 1990, Frederick Men's Rugby was formed. They are a D3 program in the Capital Rugby Union. They play their home matches at Tobin Triebel Pitch at Walnut Ridge Park.\nIn 2004, Frederick Women's Rugby was formed. They are a D3 program in the Capital Rugby Union. They play their home matches at Tobin Triebel Pitch at Walnut Ridge Park.\nCricket.\nA proposed cricket ground at the junction of Interstate 70 and East Patrick Street, abutting the Monocacy River was approved by the Frederick Planning Commission in July 2025, construction of which would require local land use rezoning. Significant public opposition emerged in advance of pending approval by the Frederick Council.\nGovernment.\nVoting and voter registration.\nAs of the November 4, 2025 local election, Frederick had 59,688 registered voters;A1 the majority of local voting took place via mail-in and early voting rather than in-person on Election Day.A10 A city-only voter registration roll came into effect in September 2024 coincident with allowing all residents, regardless of citizenship status, to vote in municipal elections.A1 People who have state-level registration do not need to register at the city level.A1 As of February 2025, not a single person had yet taken advantage of the city-level registration.A10\nCity executive.\nIn 2017, Democrat Michael O'Connor was elected mayor of Frederick.\nPrevious mayors include:\nRepresentative body.\nFrederick has a board of aldermen of six members (one of whom is the mayor) that serves as its legislative body. Elections are held every four years. Following the elections on November 2, 2021, Kelly Russell, Donna Kuzemchak, Derek Shackelford, Katie Nash (City Council President),A1 and Ben MacShane, all Democrats, were elected to the board. Democrat Michael O'Connor was re-elected mayor. Two additional members should be added in December 2025 following legislation passed in September 2024.\nPolice.\nThe city has its own police department and is also covered by the county sheriff's office.\nBudget.\nThe proposed County budget for 2026 has been reported to be US$, the approved 2025 budget being about US$.\nEducation.\nPublic schools.\nFrederick County Public Schools (FCPS) operates area public schools.\nFCPS ranks number one in the state of Maryland in the 2012 School Progress Index accountability data, which includes overall student performance, closing achievement gaps, student growth and college and career readiness. FCPS holds the second-lowest dropout rate in the state of Maryland at 3.84%, with a graduation rate at 93.31%. In 2013, FCPS's SAT average combined mean score was 1538, which is 55 points higher than Maryland's combined average of 1483 and 40 points higher than the nation's average of 1498. Academic achievement improved from 2024 to 2025 across the system, based on the Maryland School Report Card dataset. All of FCPS's high schools, except for Oakdale High School, which was not open to all grade levels at the time of the survey, are ranked in the top 10% of the nation for encouraging students to take AP classes.\nHigh schools serving Frederick students include:\nOther high schools in Frederick County:\nOther public schools: Adult Education, Career and Technology Center, Heather Ridge School, Outdoor School, Rock Creek School, and The Earth and Space Science Laboratory. A public charter school, Frederick Classical Charter School, also serves students. Frederick County was long-time home to a highly innovative outdoor school for all sixth graders in Frederick County. This school was located at Camp Greentop, near the presidential retreat at Camp David and Cunningham Falls State Park.\nMedia.\nTelevision.\nFrederick is licensed one Maryland Public Television station affiliate: WFPT 62 (PBS/MPT).\nRadio.\nThe city is home to WSHE 820 AM (the former WZYQ 1370) and 94.3 FM, relaying free-form The Gamut; WFMD 930 AM broadcasting a news/talk/sports format; WFRE 99.9 FM broadcasting country music; and WAFY 103.1 FM which plays all the latest pop songs. The following box details all of the radio stations in the local market.\nPrint.\nFrederick's newspaper of record is \"The Frederick News-Post\".\nTransportation.\nFrederick's location as a crossroads has been a factor in its development as a minor distribution center both for the movement of people in Western Maryland, as well as goods. This intersection has created an efficient distribution network for commercial traffic in and out, as well as through the city.\nMajor roads and streets in Frederick are intersected by: \nFrom 1896 to 1961, Frederick was served by the Hagerstown &amp; Frederick Railway, an interurban trolley service that was among the last surviving systems of its kind in the United States.\nThe city is served by MARC commuter rail service, which operates several trains daily on the former Baltimore and Ohio Railroad's Old Main Line and Metropolitan Branch subdivisions to Washington, D.C.; Express bus route 991, which operates to the Shady Grove Metrorail Station, and a series of buses operated by TransIT services of Frederick, Maryland. Greyhound Lines also serves the city.\nFrederick Municipal Airport has a mile-long runway and a second 3600' runway.\nBeginning in the 1990s, Frederick has invested in several urban infrastructure projects, including streetscape, new bus routes, as well as multi-use paths. A circular road, Monocacy Boulevard, is an important component to the revitalization of its historic core.\nThe Mayor's Ad-hoc Bicycle Committee was formed in 2010 and given the mission to achieve designation for the city as a Bicycle Friendly Community (BFC) by the League of American Bicyclists. The first application resulted in an Honorable Mention. Upon reapplication In 2012, Frederick achieved the bronze level BFC designation. The city's third application resulted in re-certification as a Bronze Bicycle Friendly Community. Work is ongoing to achieve an even stronger designation (Silver) at the time of the next application.\nIn 2013, the Mayor's Ad-hoc Bicycle Committee was expanded in scope to include pedestrian issues and was formally adopted by https:// as a permanent standing committee called the Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Committee (BPAC). The BPAC advises City officials and staff on the sound development, management, and safe use of The City of Frederick's pedestrian and bicycle systems as they relate to infrastructure, accessibility, and promoting the benefits of these systems.\nIn 2024, the BPAC was renamed as the Active Mobility Advisory Committee (AMAC), wish a larger scope targeting other forms of transportation including \"walking, biking, skateboarding... wheelchair, e-scooter, or any other form of micromobility.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51178", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51178", "title": "Carroll County", "text": "Carroll County may refer to\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "51179", "revid": "11882203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51179", "title": "Putnam County", "text": "Putnam County is the name of nine counties in the United States of America:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51180", "revid": "8259432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51180", "title": "Henry County", "text": "Henry County is the name of ten counties in the United States of America:\nAll are named in honor of Patrick Henry, of Virginia, except Henry County, Iowa, which is named for General Henry Dodge.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "51181", "revid": "1096790345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51181", "title": "Lake County", "text": "Lake County may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "51182", "revid": "17216044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51182", "title": "Jean le Rond d'Alembert", "text": "French mathematician, mechanician, physicist, philosopher and music theorist (1717\u20131783)\nJean-Baptiste le Rond d'Alembert ( ; ; 16 November 1717 \u2013 29 October 1783) was a French mathematician, mechanician, physicist, philosopher, and music theorist. Until 1759 he was, together with Denis Diderot, a co-editor of the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\". D'Alembert's formula for obtaining solutions to the wave equation is named after him. The wave equation is sometimes referred to as d'Alembert's equation, and the fundamental theorem of algebra is named after d'Alembert in French.\nEarly years.\nBorn in Paris, d'Alembert was the natural son of the writer Claudine Gu\u00e9rin de Tencin and the chevalier Louis-Camus Destouches, an artillery officer. Destouches was abroad at the time of d'Alembert's birth. Days after birth his mother left him on the steps of the Saint-Jean-le-Rond de Paris church. According to custom, he was named after the patron saint of the church. D'Alembert was placed in an orphanage for foundling children, but his father found him and placed him with the wife of a glazier, Madame Rousseau, with whom he lived for nearly 50 years. She gave him little encouragement. When he told her of some discovery he had made or something he had written she generally replied,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You will never be anything but a philosopher\u2014and what is that but an ass who plagues himself all his life, that he may be talked about after he is dead.\nDestouches secretly paid for the education of Jean le Rond, but did not want his paternity officially recognised.\nStudies and adult life.\nD'Alembert first attended a private school. The chevalier Destouches left d'Alembert an annuity of 1,200 livres on his death in 1726. Under the influence of the Destouches family, at the age of 12 d'Alembert entered the Jansenist Coll\u00e8ge des Quatre-Nations (the institution was also known under the name \"Coll\u00e8ge Mazarin\"). Here he studied philosophy, law, and the arts, graduating as \"baccalaur\u00e9at en arts\" in 1735.\nIn his later life, d'Alembert scorned the Cartesian principles he had been taught by the Jansenists: \"physical promotion, innate ideas and the vortices\". The Jansenists steered d'Alembert toward an ecclesiastical career, attempting to deter him from pursuits such as poetry and mathematics. Theology was, however, \"rather unsubstantial fodder\" for d'Alembert. He entered law school for two years, and was nominated \"avocat\" in 1738.\nHe was also interested in medicine and mathematics. Jean enrolled first as Jean-Baptiste Daremberg and subsequently changed his name, perhaps for reasons of euphony, to d\u2019Alembert.\nLater, in recognition of d'Alembert's achievements, Frederick the Great of Prussia proposed the name \"d'Alembert\" for a suspected (but non-existent) moon of Venus, however d'Alembert refused the honor.\nCareer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn July 1739 he made his first contribution to the field of mathematics, pointing out the errors he had detected in \"Analyse d\u00e9montr\u00e9e\" (published 1708 by Charles-Ren\u00e9 Reynaud) in a communication addressed to the Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences. At the time \"L'analyse d\u00e9montr\u00e9e\" was a standard work, which d'Alembert himself had used to study the foundations of mathematics. D'Alembert was also a Latin scholar of some note and worked in the latter part of his life on a translation of Tacitus, for which he received wide praise including that of Denis Diderot.\nIn 1740, he submitted his second scientific work from the field of fluid mechanics \"M\u00e9moire sur la r\u00e9fraction des corps solides\", which was recognised by Clairaut. In this work d'Alembert theoretically explained refraction.\nIn 1741, after several failed attempts, d'Alembert was elected into the Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences. He was later elected to the Berlin Academy in 1746 and a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1748.\nIn 1743, he published his most famous work, \"Trait\u00e9 de dynamique\", in which he developed his own laws of motion.\nWhen the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" was organised in the late 1740s, d'Alembert was engaged as co-editor (for mathematics and science) with Diderot, and served until a series of crises temporarily interrupted the publication in 1757. He authored over a thousand articles for it, including the famous \"Preliminary Discourse\". D'Alembert \"abandoned the foundation of Materialism\" when he \"doubted whether there exists outside us anything corresponding to what we suppose we see.\" In this way, d'Alembert agreed with the Idealist Berkeley and anticipated the transcendental idealism of Kant.\nIn 1752, he wrote about what is now called D'Alembert's paradox: that the drag on a body immersed in an inviscid, incompressible fluid is zero.\nIn 1754, d'Alembert was elected a member of the Acad\u00e9mie des sciences, of which he became Permanent Secretary on 9 April 1772.\nIn 1757, an article by d'Alembert in the seventh volume of the \"Encyclopedia\" suggested that the Geneva clergymen had moved from Calvinism to pure Socinianism, basing this on information provided by Voltaire. The Pastors of Geneva were indignant, and appointed a committee to answer these charges. Under pressure from Jacob Vernes, Jean-Jacques Rousseau and others, d'Alembert eventually made the excuse that he considered anyone who did not accept the Church of Rome to be a Socinianist, and that was all he meant, and he abstained from further work on the encyclopaedia following his response to the critique.\nHe was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1781.\nMusic theories.\nD'Alembert's first exposure to music theory was in 1749 when he was called upon to review a \"M\u00e9moire\" submitted to the Acad\u00e9mie by Jean-Philippe Rameau. This article, written in conjunction with Diderot, would later form the basis of Rameau's 1750 treatise \"D\u00e9monstration du principe de l'harmonie\". D'Alembert wrote a glowing review praising the author's deductive character as an ideal scientific model. He saw in Rameau's music theories support for his own scientific ideas, a fully systematic method with a strongly deductive synthetic structure.\nTwo years later, in 1752, d'Alembert attempted a fully comprehensive survey of Rameau's works in his \"El\u00e9ments de musique th\u00e9orique et pratique suivant les principes de M. Rameau\". Emphasizing Rameau's main claim that music was a mathematical science that had a single principle from which could be deduced all the elements and rules of musical practice as well as the explicit Cartesian methodology employed, d'Alembert helped to popularise the work of the composer and advertise his own theories. He claims to have \"clarified, developed, and simplified\" the principles of Rameau, arguing that the single idea of the \"corps sonore\" was not sufficient to derive the entirety of music. D'Alembert instead claimed that three principles would be necessary to generate the major musical mode, the minor mode, and the identity of octaves. Because he was not a musician, however, d'Alembert misconstrued the finer points of Rameau's thinking, changing and removing concepts that would not fit neatly into his understanding of music.\nAlthough initially grateful, Rameau eventually turned on d'Alembert while voicing his increasing dissatisfaction with J. J. Rousseau's \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" articles on music. This led to a series of bitter exchanges between the men and contributed to the end of d'Alembert and Rameau's friendship. A long preliminary discourse d'Alembert wrote for the 1762 edition of his \"El\u00e9mens\" attempted to summarise the dispute and act as a final rebuttal.\nD'Alembert also discussed various aspects of the state of music in his celebrated \"Discours pr\u00e9liminaire\" of Diderot's \"Encyclop\u00e9die\". D'Alembert claims that, compared to the other arts, music, \"which speaks simultaneously to the imagination and the senses,\" has not been able to represent or imitate as much of reality because of the \"lack of sufficient inventiveness and resourcefulness of those who cultivate it.\" He wanted musical expression to deal with all physical sensations rather than merely the passions alone. D'Alembert believed that modern (Baroque) music had only achieved perfection in his age, as there existed no classical Greek models to study and imitate. He claimed that \"time destroyed all models which the ancients may have left us in this genre.\" He praises Rameau as \"that manly, courageous, and fruitful genius\" who picked up the slack left by Jean-Baptiste Lully in the French musical arts.\nPersonal life.\nD'Alembert was a participant in several Parisian salons, particularly those of Marie Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Rodet Geoffrin, of the marquise du Deffand and of Julie de Lespinasse. D'Alembert became infatuated with Julie de Lespinasse, and eventually took up residence with her.\nDeath.\nHe suffered bad health for many years and his death was as the result of a urinary bladder illness. As a known unbeliever, D'Alembert was buried in a common unmarked grave.\nLegacy.\nIn France, the fundamental theorem of algebra is known as the d'Alembert/Gauss theorem, as an error in d'Alembert's proof was caught by Gauss.\nHe also created his ratio test, a test to determine if a series converges.\nThe D'Alembert operator, which first arose in D'Alembert's analysis of vibrating strings, plays an important role in modern theoretical physics.\nWhile he made great strides in mathematics and physics, d'Alembert is also famously known for incorrectly arguing in \"Croix ou Pile\" that the probability of a coin landing heads increased for every time that it came up tails. In gambling, the strategy of decreasing one's bet the more one wins and increasing one's bet the more one loses is therefore called \"the D'Alembert system\", a type of martingale.\nIn South Australia, a small inshore island in south-western Spencer Gulf was named\" Ile d'Alembert\" by the French explorer, Nicolas Baudin during his expedition to New Holland. The island is better known by the alternative English name of Lipson Island. The island is a conservation park and seabird rookery.\nFictional portrayal.\nDiderot portrayed d'Alembert in \"Le r\u00eave de D'Alembert\" (\"D'Alembert's Dream\"), written after the two men had become estranged. It depicts d'Alembert ill in bed, conducting a debate on materialist philosophy in his sleep.\n\"D'Alembert's Principle\", a 1996 novel by Andrew Crumey, takes its title from D'Alembert's principle in physics. Its first part describes d'Alembert's life and his infatuation with Julie de Lespinasse.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51184", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51184", "title": "120s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 129 BC \u2013 120 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51185", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51185", "title": "130s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 139 BC \u2013 130 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51187", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51187", "title": "140s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 149 BC \u2013 140 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51188", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51188", "title": "150s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 159 BC \u2013 150 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51189", "revid": "2731577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51189", "title": "Julius Nepos", "text": "Western Roman emperor from 474 to 480\nJulius Nepos (died 9 May 480), or simply Nepos, ruled as Roman emperor of the West from 24 June 474 to 28 August 475. After losing power in Italy, Nepos retreated to his home province of Dalmatia, from which he continued to claim the western imperial title, with recognition from the Eastern Roman Empire, until he was murdered in 480. Though Nepos' successor in Italy, Romulus Augustulus (r.\u2009475\u00a0\u2013\u00a0476), is traditionally deemed the last western Roman emperor, Nepos is regarded by some historians as the true last emperor of the west, being the last widely recognised holder of the position.\nA native of Dalmatia, Nepos began his career as the semi-autonomous governor of the province, succeeding his uncle Marcellinus, a prominent general, as ('master of troops') of Dalmatia. After the death of the western emperor Anthemius (r.\u2009467\u00a0\u2013\u00a0472), who had been appointed by the eastern emperor Leo I (r.\u2009457\u00a0\u2013\u00a0474), as well as Anthemius' successor Olybrius (r.472), Leo sought to assert his authority in the west, granting Nepos command of an army in December 473 to attack Italy and depose Glycerius (r.\u2009473\u00a0\u2013\u00a0474), who had been proclaimed emperor by the Burgundian general Gundobad. Nepos left for Italy in the spring of 474, backed by Leo's successor Zeno, and landed with his army at Portus, near Rome. Nepos swiftly deposed Glycerius and was crowned western emperor in Rome on 24 June 474. He was the last emperor to be crowned in the city until Charlemagne in the ninth century. Whether the original intention of the invasion was to install Nepos as western emperor is unclear, but in any event, he was quickly recognised as the legitimate western emperor by Zeno.\nNepos worked to restore the prestige and authority of the Western Empire, though mostly unsuccessfully. He may have repelled a Visigothic attack on Italy and managed to once more reduce the Burgundians into \"foederati\". Nepos focused most of his attention on reasserting imperial control and authority in Gaul, but the Western Empire could no longer project enough strength to halt Visigothic conquests in the region. The failure to defeat the Visigoths in Gaul, and Zeno's brief overthrow in Constantinople by the usurper Basiliscus, weakened Nepos' already shaky position in Italy. In 475, Nepos' newly appointed \"magister militum\" Orestes revolted and marched on Ravenna, capital of the Western Empire. Unable to deal with Orestes' forces, Nepos fled back to Dalmatia and two months later, Orestes proclaimed his young son Romulus Augustulus as emperor.\nAlthough no longer in control of Italy, Nepos never renounced his claim to the Western Empire and continued to be recognised as the legitimate western emperor by the Eastern Empire. In 476, the barbarian general Odoacer deposed Romulus Augustulus and became the first king of Italy. Nepos repeatedly petitioned Zeno, who by then had defeated Basiliscus, for help in regaining control of Italy, though all he achieved was nominal recognition by Odoacer, who minted coins in Nepos' name but otherwise mostly ignored him. In 480, Nepos was murdered by two of his generals, Ovida and Viator, perhaps in Diocletian's Palace, possibly while planning an expedition of his own to recover Italy.\nBackground.\nGeopolitical background.\nThe idea that the Roman Empire had grown too large to efficiently be managed by one emperor, and was more appropriately governed by two co-ruling emperors, had become established by the time of emperor Diocletian (r.284\u2013305) in the late 3rd century. Throughout the 4th century, various different divisions were made until the empire was firmly and permanently divided into western and eastern spheres of imperial administration from the death of emperor Theodosius I (r.379\u2013395) in 395. Though modern historians typically use the terms Western Roman Empire and Eastern Roman Empire to describe the new political situation, the Romans themselves never considered the empire to have been formally divided, still viewing it as a single unit, although most often having two rulers rather than one. The Western Roman Empire was more rural than the east, with fewer people and a less stable economy. Throughout the 5th century, it experienced an increasing number of Germanic barbarian invasions and settlements and a period of decline. In 410, the Visigoths under Alaric I had sacked Rome; in 455, the last western emperor of the Theodosian dynasty, Valentinian III (r.425\u2013455), was deposed and murdered. That same year, Rome was sacked again, this time by the Vandals under Gaiseric, who captured Valentinian's widow, Licinia Eudoxia, and two of his daughters, Eudocia and Placidia. The Western Roman army gradually became increasingly reliant on barbarian mercenaries. After Valentinian's murder, the most powerful barbarian generals, such as Ricimer, became politically dominant, ruling through proclaiming puppet emperors. In the time between the death of Valentinian and the accession of Julius Nepos, a period of less than twenty years, seven different emperors ruled the west and effective imperial control was only exercised in Italy, Raetia and some regions of Gaul.\nAncestry and family.\nJulius Nepos was a native of the Roman province of Dalmatia. Dalmatia, although politically, economically and geographically oriented towards the Western Roman Empire, had formally been under the authority of the Eastern Roman Empire since 437, when the western emperor Valentinian III had ceded it to the east. In practical terms, the province was often more or less autonomous. Nepos was the son of Nepotianus (died 465), a general who served under the western emperor Majorian (r.457\u2013461). The nephew of the ('master of troops', a high-ranking military officer) Marcellinus (died 468), being the son of one of Marcellinus' sisters. Nepos may have been part of a prominent local Roman family in Dalmatia. This is supported by memorial inscriptions from four roughly contemporary individuals; Aelia Nepotes, Aelia Nepos, another Julius Nepos and Nepotes, having been identified from Dalmatia.\nNepos' uncle Marcellinus was a prominent late Roman general, having fought the Vandals in several campaigns and playing a notable role in momentarily fending off Vandal attempts at controlling Sardinia. In 461, after the murder of Emperor Majorian by Ricimer, Marcellinus appears to have planned to invade Italy to depose Ricimer's puppet emperor Libius Severus (r.461\u2013465), but he was dissuaded from this course of action by the eastern emperor Leo I. Nepos married a Roman noblewoman whose name is not recorded, but who was related to the eastern empress Verina, possibly a niece of Leo I.\nBy the time of his death, Marcellinus had been a semi-autonomous governor in Dalmatia, and after his death, Nepos inherited this position. Nepos is first attested on 1 June 473, when he is described as , although it is possible that he had held that rank ever since Marcellinus' death. Nepos might have held this position until he became emperor in 474, by which point he had also become a patrician.\nAppointment.\nAfter the death of the western emperor Anthemius (r.467\u2013472) as well as his successor Olybrius (r.472), who had not been recognised in the east, Leo I, the sole remaining Roman emperor, maintained that he had the right to select the new western emperor. At first, Leo did not act on this right, perhaps because he had no suitable candidates to promote or because of the violent end of Anthemius, who had been previously appointed by Leo I. In March 473, the Burgundian king Gundobad, nephew of Ricimer, appointed the (commander of the palace guard) Glycerius as western emperor. Angered by this, Leo appointed Nepos as the commander of an army to attack Italy and depose Glycerius. Why Leo waited so long to appoint Nepos is not known, but by this time the winter meant that Nepos could not take action against Glycerius for a few months. By appointing Nepos to lead the invasion, Leo not only sought to assert his authority in the west but perhaps also hoped to rid himself of a possible rival in the east. After the political situation in Constantinople had stabilised sufficiently in the aftermath of Leo I's death on 18 January 474, Nepos left for Italy in the spring of 474, with the backing of the new eastern emperor Zeno.\nReign.\nEmperor in Italy (474\u2013475).\nNepos and his force sailed from Constantinople and landed at Portus, near Rome, where he was promptly proclaimed , per the procedure preceding elevation to the rank of (emperor). On 24 June, having deposed Glycerius, Nepos was proclaimed the western \"Augustus\" in Rome. Nepos thus accomplished the exact intervention into Italy that had been planned by his uncle Marcellinus some years prior. Nepos was the last emperor to be crowned in Rome until the coronation of Charlemagne in 800. Glycerius put up no resistance against Nepos, and his life was spared; he was consecrated as bishop of Salona, the provincial capital of Dalmatia. It is not clear if Nepos becoming emperor had been Zeno's plan, but in any event, Zeno swiftly recognised him as the legitimate western emperor. His rule was likewise accepted by the Roman Senate and the people of Italy.\nFew records of Nepos' reign survive, and little is known of his activities. He is known to have issued coins throughout Italy, such as at Rome, Ravenna and Mediolanum. Coinage minted in northern Gaul in his name indicates that his rule was accepted by the Roman general Syagrius, who ruled a more-or-less autonomous province of his own there. Nepos also issued symbolic coins of Zeno and his junior colleague Leo II, indicating his close ties and gratitude to the eastern court.\nNepos worked to restore imperial prestige. Through his initial efforts, a Visigothic attack on Italy appears to have been repelled and the Burgundians were once again made into \"foederati\" (barbarian allies of the empire). It appears that Nepos mainly directed his efforts to attempting to restore and consolidate imperial authority in Gaul. The remaining imperial territories in Gaul were at the time being invaded by Euric, king of the Visigoths, who hoped to take control of the province of Aquitania Prima. To combat the threat, Nepos appointed Ecdicius, a son of the former western emperor Avitus (r.455\u2013456) as patrician and \"magister militum\". Per the surviving writings of contemporary Gallo-Roman authors, such as Sidonius Apollinaris, Nepos' accession was enthusiastically accepted in the remaining imperial possessions in Gaul. Ecdicius successfully managed to relieve a Visigothic siege of Arles in 474. Still, he was less successful in 475 as there simply were not enough remaining military resources to achieve victory. Even after Ecdicius had proven unable to defeat the Visigoths, the threat of imperial invasion made Euric willing to negotiate with Nepos. In the spring of 475, Nepos sent as his ambassadors to Euric a group of Roman bishops, which included Epiphanius of Pavia, who had previously brokered peace between Ricimer and emperor Anthemius. Although Epiphanius and his delegation apparently achieved peace, a second delegation, consisting of the bishops Leontius of Arles, Faustus of Riez, Graecus of Marseilles, and Basilius of Aix, was sent later in 475, possibly tasked with working out the concrete terms of the peace treaty. The Romans in Gaul, including Sidonius Apollinaris, were shocked to learn that the peace had involved ceding the Auvergne region to the Visigoths in turn for them leaving the rest of what remained under imperial control in Gaul alone. Nepos' failure to actually defeat the Visigoths, combined with Zeno's overthrow in Constantinople in early 475 by the usurper Basiliscus, weakened Nepos' position, which had been shaky in Italy from the very beginning.\nIn his foreign policy, Nepos also had to deal with the Vandals, who ruled North Africa, and their renewed and increased pirate attacks throughout the Mediterranean. Because of the weak position of the western empire, Nepos was forced to recognise Vandal rule over the territories they had already taken in Africa and throughout the Mediterranean, such as the islands of Sardinia and Corsica, the Balearics, and parts of Sicily.\nAfter the failure of Nepos' efforts in Gaul, he dismissed Ecdicius and replaced him as with Orestes, a distinguished officer who had once served as (secretary) to the Hunnic king Attila. Nepos tasked Orestes with leading another army against the Visigoths, and against the Burgundians, who were rebelling, in southern Gaul. Orestes' army included many \"foederati\" troops, whom he learned were upset with the emperor for refusing their requests to be granted land. With the backing of this army, Orestes disobeyed Nepos' orders and instead marched on Ravenna, the capital of the western empire. Hoping to maintain control, Nepos recalled Ecdicius from Gaul, but he was unable to arrive in time. On 28 August 475, Orestes entered Ravenna with his army, and Nepos escaped across the Adriatic Sea to Salona in Dalmatia, having ruled in Italy for only 14 months. On 31 October, Orestes proclaimed his young son, Romulus Augustulus, as emperor.\nExile in Dalmatia (475\u2013480).\nLittle is known of Nepos' later activities in Dalmatia due to the scarcity of surviving sources. Nepos never renounced his claim to the Western Empire and continued to be recognised in the east instead of Romulus Augustulus. Throughout his time in exile, Nepos hoped to regain control of Italy. On 4 September 476, Romulus Augustulus was deposed by the barbarian general Odoacer, who became the first king of Italy. Odoacer sent Romulus' western imperial regalia to Zeno in the east, and swore allegiance to him, ruling without further imperial successors in the west. Odoacer considered the Roman Empire from this point on as only requiring a single emperor, ruling from Constantinople. At the same time, an embassy from Nepos arrived in Constantinople, congratulating Zeno on regaining Constantinople from Basiliscus and requesting his assistance in restoring Nepos to power in Italy. Zeno responded to the ambassadors sent by Odoacer, members of the Roman Senate, that they had killed one east-supported emperor (Anthemius) and driven one out (Nepos) and that they would do well in receiving Nepos back as their ruler. Zeno also stated that Odoacer would do best in receiving the rank of patrician, which he had requested, not from Zeno, but from the legal western ruler, Nepos, although Zeno promised to grant the rank if Nepos would not. Zeno also urged Odoacer to accept Nepos back as emperor in Italy. Although Zeno and Verina, who remained influential at court, officially supported Nepos' restoration and continued to regard him as the western emperor, he was not granted the necessary military support or funding to retake Italy.\nOdoacer only nominally accepted Nepos' rule, resuming the production of gold coins in the name of Nepos at Italian mints, but taking no serious action to restore his throne. Coins of both Nepos and Zeno were minted in Italy, and Odoacer perhaps provided Nepos with a pension, but in practice ignored him. In 477 or 478, Nepos again petitioned Zeno to help him retake Italy. Also in 477, some of the remaining imperial possessions in southern Gaul rebelled against Odoacer, probably intending to fight for the restoration of Nepos. Zeno received embassies from both Odoacer and Gaul, but was forced to support Odoacer given that supporting the Gallic rebels against Odoacer would have amounted to declaring war on Odoacer, which Zeno was not prepared to do.\nIn 479, Nepos' hopes may have been ignited when Theodoric, the king of the Ostrogoths, offered to pledge his troops to fight for Nepos' claim. Nepos was murdered on 9 May 480, at his villa near Salona, possibly the same building as Diocletian's Palace, by members of his retinue, the Ovida and Viator. It is possible that the former emperor Glycerius, whom Nepos had deposed, also played a leading role in the murder, possibly as the instigator. If Glycerius was not the instigator, it is possible that the murder was caused by Nepos in 480 actively beginning to prepare his forces for a real attempt at recovering Italy militarily, and that his supporters in Dalmatia were unwilling to embark on such an adventure. Though the chroniclers of the time wrote of Nepos' violent and unexpected death, it was given little attention and no actions were taken against his murderers for quite some time. Only in late 481 or 482 did Odoacer invade Dalmatia and put Ovida, who had become the ruler of the province, to death, using Nepos' murder as a pretext to conquer the province for himself. The eastern empire made no attempt to stop him. After Nepos' death, Odoacer recognised Zeno as his new suzerain and Zeno did not appoint a new western emperor, becoming the first proper sole Roman emperor of the entire empire since the death of Theodosius I in 395 (though he continued to only effectively control the eastern provinces).\nLegacy.\nNepos' successor in Italy, Romulus Augustulus, is typically regarded as the last western Roman emperor, though several historians argue that this distinction is better applied to Nepos, given that he continued to rule in Dalmatia with the imperial title and the full recognition, although not the full military support, of the eastern empire, until he was murdered in 480. Romulus Augustulus, by strange coincidence, shares the name of both the founder of Rome (Romulus) and its first emperor (Augustus), which may, in addition to being the last western emperor to rule Italy, have contributed to him being viewed as the last emperor over Nepos. Nepos shares a similar coincidence, in that he shares his first name, Julius, with Julius Caesar, Augustus' adoptive father and predecessor as authoritarian ruler of the Roman state.\nBy the time of Nepos' death in 480, the Western Roman Empire was gone, and Nepos had, in the words of the Roman historian Ralph W. Mathisen, become an \"unwanted anachronism\"; a hindrance to Odoacer who wished to expand into Dalmatia himself and an embarrassment to Zeno, who could not offer him his full support. Though his death was seen as marking the end of the line of emperors in the west, it was barely acknowledged at the time. By the next century, eastern Roman historians no longer recognised Nepos' reign in Dalmatia from 475 to 480 as a legitimate continuation of his imperial reign: the 6th-century eastern historians Marcellinus Comes, Procopius and Jordanes all considered the child emperor, Romulus Augustulus, to have been the last western emperor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51190", "revid": "12824384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51190", "title": "5 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \n5 BC was a common year starting on Monday or Tuesday of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a leap year starting on Saturday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. In the Roman world, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Sulla (or, less frequently, year 749 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 5 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51191", "revid": "38193058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51191", "title": "6 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 6 BC was a common year starting on Sunday or Monday of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Friday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Balbus and Vetus (or, less frequently, year 748 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 6 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51192", "revid": "88026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51192", "title": "Andrew Sarris", "text": "American film critic (1928\u20132012)\nAndrew Sarris (October 31, 1928 \u2013 June 20, 2012) was an American film critic. He was a leading proponent of the auteur theory of film criticism.\nEarly life.\nSarris was born in Brooklyn, New York, to Greek immigrant parents, Themis (n\u00e9e Katavolos) and George Andrew Sarris, and grew up in Ozone Park, Queens. After attending John Adams High School in South Ozone Park (where he overlapped with Jimmy Breslin), he graduated from Columbia University in 1951 and then served for three years in the U.S. Army Signal Corps, during the Korean War, before moving to Paris for a year, where he became a friend of Jean-Luc Godard and Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut. Upon returning to New York's Lower East Side, Sarris briefly pursued graduate studies at his alma mater and Teachers College, Columbia University before turning to film criticism as a vocation.\nCareer.\nAfter initially writing for \"Film Culture\", he moved to \"The Village Voice\" where his first piece\u2014a laudatory review of \"Psycho\"\u2014was published in 1960. Later he remembered, \"\"The Voice\" had all these readers\u2014little old ladies who lived on the West Side, guys who had fought in the Spanish Civil War\u2014and this seemed so regressive to them, to say that Hitchcock was a great artist\". Around this time, he returned to Paris where he was present at the premiere of such French New Wave films such as Truffaut's \"Shoot the Piano Player\" (1960) and Godard's \"A Woman Is a Woman\" (1961). The experience expanded his view of film criticism: \"To show you the dividing line in my thinking, when I did a Top Ten list for \"the Voice\" in 1958, I had a Stanley Kramer film on the list and I left off both \"Vertigo\" and \"Touch of Evil\"\". He continued to write film criticism regularly until 2009 for \"The New York Observer\", and was a professor of film at Columbia University (where he earned an M.A. in English in 1998), teaching courses in international film history, American cinema, and Alfred Hitchcock until his retirement in 2011. Sarris was a co-founder of the National Society of Film Critics.\n\"Notes on the Auteur Theory\".\nSarris is generally credited with popularizing the auteur theory in the United States and coining the term in his 1962 essay, \"Notes on the Auteur Theory,\" which critics writing in \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\" had inspired. Sarris wrote the highly influential book \"The American Cinema: Directors and Directions 1929\u20131968\" (1968), an opinionated assessment of films of the sound era, organized by director. The book would influence many other critics and help raise awareness of the role of the film director and, in particular, of the auteur theory. In \"The American Cinema\", Sarris lists what he termed the \"pantheon\" of the 14 greatest film directors who had worked in the United States: the Americans Robert Flaherty, John Ford, D. W. Griffith, Howard Hawks, Buster Keaton, and Orson Welles; the Germans/Austrians Fritz Lang, Ernst Lubitsch, F. W. Murnau, Max Oph\u00fcls, and Josef von Sternberg; the British Charles Chaplin and Alfred Hitchcock; and the French Jean Renoir. He also identified second\u2014and third\u2014tier directors, downplaying the work of Billy Wilder, David Lean, and Stanley Kubrick, among others. In his 1998 book \"You Ain't Heard Nothing Yet: The American Talking Film, History and Memory 1927\u20131949\", Sarris upgraded the status of Billy Wilder to pantheon level and apologized for his earlier harsh assessment in \"The American Cinema\".\nFor many years, he wrote for both \"NY Film Bulletin\" and \"The Village Voice\". During this part of his career, he was often seen as a rival to \"The New Yorker\"'s Pauline Kael, who had originally attacked the auteur theory in her essay \"Circles and Squares.\" Speaking of his long-time critical feuds with Kael, Sarris says that, oddly, \"We made each other. We established a dialectic.\"\nLegacy.\nIn 2001, film scholar and critic Emanuel Levy edited \"Citizen Sarris, American Film Critic: Essays in Honor of Andrew Sarris\", a collection of 39 essays by notable critics (Dave Kehr, Todd McCarthy, Gerald Peary) and filmmakers (Martin Scorsese, John Sayles, Peter Bogdanovich, Curtis Hanson) alongside fans of Sarris's works.\nFilm critics such as J. Hoberman, Kenneth Turan, Armond White,\nMichael Phillips, and A. O. Scott have cited him as an influence. His career is discussed in \"\", first with other critics discussing how he brought the auteur theory from France, and then by Sarris himself explaining how he applied that theory to his original review of Alfred Hitchcock's \"Psycho\". In 1997, Camille Paglia described Sarris as her third favorite critic, praising \"his acute columns during the high period of \"The Village Voice\".\"\nPersonal life.\nSarris married fellow film critic Molly Haskell in 1969; they lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. He died at St. Luke's Hospital in Manhattan on June 20, 2012, from an infection developed after a fall.\nSarris wrote \"When people have asked me to name the greatest film of all time\u2014in my humble opinion, of course\u2014my instant answer has been unvarying for the past 30 years or so: Max Oph\u00fcls\u2019 \"Madame de\u2026\" (1953).\" He added that \"I usually answer questions about the greatest film of all time by immediate throwing in my own two runners-up: Mizoguchi's \"Ugetsu Monogatari\" (1953) and Renoir's \"La R\u00e8gle du Jeu\" (1939). Then, if I can grasp the questioner's lapels long enough (much like Coleridge's crazed Ancient Mariner), I rattle off the rest off my all-time-ten-greatest-list: Alfred Hitchcock's \"Vertigo\" (1958), John Ford's \"The Searchers\" (1956), Orson Welles' \"The Magnificent Ambersons\" (1942), Luis Bu\u00f1uel\u2019s \"Belle de Jour\" (1967), F. W. Murnau's \"\" (1927), Charles Chaplin's \"Modern Times\" (1936) and Buster Keaton's \"The General\" (1927).\"\nCriticism.\nSarris's method of ranking directors in \"The American Cinema\" has been criticized as elitist and subjective. Those who do not make the cut of his 1968 \"Pantheon\" category were sorted under categorical headings listed in the table of contents that descend as follows: \"The Far Side of Paradise\"; \"Expressive Esoterica\"; \"Fringe Benefits\"; \"Less Than Meets The Eye\"; \"Lightly Likable\"; \"Strained Seriousness\"; \"Oddities, One-Shots, and Newcomers\"; \"Subjects for Further Research\"; \"Make Way for the Clowns!\"; \"and Miscellany.\"\nCriticism of the auteur theory often stems from a misunderstanding of its \"dogmatic\" nature. Endlessly reviewing and revising his opinions, Sarris defended his original article \"Notes on Auteur Theory\" in \"The American Cinema\" stating: \"the article was written in what I thought was a modest, tentative, experimental manner, it was certainly not intended as the last word on the subject\". He further stated that the auteur theory should not be considered a theory at all but rather \"a collection of facts\", and \"a reminder of movies to be resurrected, of genres to be redeemed, of directors to be rediscovered.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51193", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51193", "title": "7 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 7 BC was a common year starting on Saturday or Sunday of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Thursday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. In the Roman world, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Tiberius and Piso (or, less frequently, year 747 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 7 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51194", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51194", "title": "8 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 8 BC was either a common year starting on Friday or Saturday or a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Wednesday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Censorinus and Gaius Asinius (or, less frequently, year 746 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 8 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51195", "revid": "33839581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51195", "title": "9 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 9 BC was either a common year starting on Wednesday, Thursday or Friday or a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a leap year starting on Monday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Drusus and Crispinus (or, less frequently, year 745 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 9 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51196", "revid": "48191322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51196", "title": "340s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 349 BC \u2013 340 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51198", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51198", "title": "Signal frequency spectrum", "text": ""}
{"id": "51199", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51199", "title": "Power spectrum", "text": ""}
{"id": "51200", "revid": "50683917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51200", "title": "Samizdat", "text": "Underground publications in the Soviet bloc\nSamizdat (, , lit.\u2009'self-publishing', Ukrainian: \u0441\u0430\u043c\u0432\u0438\u0434\u0430\u0432, [s\u0251m\u028b\u026a\u02c8d\u0251u\u032f] ) was a form of dissident activity across the Eastern Bloc in which individuals reproduced censored and underground makeshift publications, often by hand, and passed the documents from reader to reader. The practice of manual reproduction was widespread, because printed texts could be traced back to the source. This was a grassroots practice used to evade official Soviet censorship.\nName origin and variations.\nEtymologically, the word \"samizdat\" derives from \"sam\" ( 'self, by oneself') and \"izdat\" (, an abbreviation of , 'publishing house'), and thus means 'self-published'. Ukrainian has a similar term: \"samvydav\" (\u0441\u0430\u043c\u0432\u0438\u0434\u0430\u0432), from \"sam\" 'self' and \"vydavnytstvo\" 'publishing house'.\nThe Russian poet Nikolay Glazkov coined a version of the term as a pun in the 1940s when he typed copies of his poems and included the note \"Samsebyaizdat\" (\u0421\u0430\u043c\u0441\u0435\u0431\u044f\u0438\u0437\u0434\u0430\u0442, \"Myself by Myself Publishers\") on the front page.\n\"Tamizdat\" refers to literature published abroad (\u0442\u0430\u043c, \"tam\" 'there'), often from smuggled manuscripts.\nThe Polish term for this phenomenon coined around 1980 was \"drugi obieg\", or the \"second circuit\" of publishing.\nTechniques.\nSergo Mikoyan claimed that decades prior to the early 1960s, offices and stores had to submit papers with examples of their typewriters' typeface to local KGB branches so that any printed text could be traced back to the source, to prosecute those who had used the typewriter to produce material deemed illegal. With the introduction of photocopying machines, the KGB's Fifth Directorate and Agitprop Department required individuals to get authorization to use printing office photocopiers to prevent the mass production of unapproved material, though restrictions could be bypassed by bribing employees.\nPrivately owned typewriters were considered the most practical means of reproducing samizdat during this time due to these copy machine restrictions. Usually, multiple copies of a single text would be simultaneously made on carbon paper or tissue paper, which were inexpensive and relatively easy to conceal. Copies would then be passed around within trusted networks.\nPhysical form.\nSamizdat distinguishes itself not only by the ideas and debates that it helped spread to a wider audience but also by its physical form. The hand-typed, often blurry and wrinkled pages with numerous typographical errors and nondescript covers helped to separate and elevate Russian samizdat from Western literature. The physical form of samizdat arose from a simple lack of resources and the necessity to be inconspicuous. \nIn time, dissidents in the USSR began to admire these qualities for their own sake, the ragged appearance of samizdat contrasting sharply with the smooth, well-produced appearance of texts passed by the censor's office for publication by the State. The form samizdat took gained precedence over the ideas it expressed and became a potent symbol of the resourcefulness and rebellious spirit of the inhabitants of the Soviet Union. In effect, the physical form of samizdat itself elevated the reading of samizdat to a prized clandestine act.\nReadership.\nSamizdat originated from the dissident movement of the Russian intelligentsia, and most samizdat directed itself to a readership of Russian elites. While circulation of samizdat was relatively low, at around 200,000 readers on average, many of these readers possessed positions of cultural power and authority. Furthermore, with the simultaneous censorship of information and necessity of absorbing information to know how to censor it, many government officials became readers of samizdat. Although the general public at times came into contact with samizdat, most of the public lacked access to the few expensive samizdat texts in circulation and expressed discontent with the highly censored reading material made available by the state.\nThe purpose and methods of samizdat may contrast with the purpose of the concept of copyright.\nHistory.\nSelf-published and self-distributed literature has a long history in Russia. \"Samizdat\" is unique to the post-Stalin USSR and other countries with similar systems. Faced with the state's powers of censorship, society turned to underground literature for self-analysis and self-expression.\nSamizdat books and editions.\nThe first full-length book to be distributed as samizdat was Boris Pasternak's 1957 novel \"Doctor Zhivago\". Although the literary magazine \"Novy Mir\" had published ten poems from the book in 1954, a year later the full text was judged unsuitable for publication and entered samizdat circulation.\nCertain works, though published legally by the State-controlled media, were practically impossible to find in bookshops and libraries, and found their way into samizdat: for example Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's novel \"One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich\" was widely distributed via samizdat.\nAt the outset of the Khrushchev Thaw in the mid-1950s USSR poetry became very popular. Writings of a wide variety of poets circulated among the Soviet intelligentsia: known, prohibited, repressed writers as well as those young and unknown. A number of samizdat publications carried unofficial poetry, among them the Moscow magazine \"Sintaksis\" (1959\u20131960) by writer Alexander Ginzburg, Vladimir Osipov's \"Boomerang\" (1960), and \"Phoenix\" (1961), produced by Yuri Galanskov and Alexander Ginzburg. The editors of these magazines were regulars at impromptu public poetry readings between 1958 and 1961 on Mayakovsky Square in Moscow. The gatherings did not last long, for soon the authorities began clamping down on them. In the summer of 1961, several meeting regulars were arrested and charged with \"anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda\" (Article 70 of the RSFSR Penal Code), putting an end to most of the magazines.\nNot everything published in samizdat had political overtones. In 1963, Joseph Brodsky was charged with \"social parasitism\" and convicted for samizdat poetry. His poems circulated in samizdat, with only four judged as suitable for official Soviet anthologies. In the mid-1960s an unofficial literary group known as SMOG (a word meaning variously \"one was able\", \"I did it\", etc.; as an acronym the name also bore a range of interpretations) issued an almanac titled \"The Sphinxes\" (\"Sfinksy\") and collections of prose and poetry. Some of their writings were close to the Russian avant-garde of the 1910s and 1920s.\nThe 1965 show trial of writers Yuli Daniel and Andrei Sinyavsky, charged with anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda, and the subsequent increased repression, marked the demise of the Thaw and the beginning of harsher times for samizdat authors. The trial was carefully documented in a samizdat collection called \"The White Book\" (1966), compiled by Yuri Galanskov and Alexander Ginzburg. Both writers were among those later arrested and sentenced to prison in what was known as Trial of the Four. In the following years some samizdat content became more politicized and played an important role in the dissident movement in the Soviet Union.\nSamizdat periodicals.\nThe earliest samizdat periodicals were short-lived and mainly literary in focus: \"Sintaksis\" (1959\u20131960), \"Boomerang\" (1960), and \"Phoenix\" (1961). From 1964 to 1970, communist historian Roy Medvedev regularly published \"The Political Journal\" (\u041f\u043e\u043b\u0438\u0442\u0438\u0447\u0435\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u0434\u043d\u0435\u0432\u043d\u0438\u043a, or political diary), which contained analytical materials that later appeared in the West.\nThe longest-running and best-known samizdat periodical was \"A Chronicle of Current Events\" (\u0425\u0440\u043e\u043d\u0438\u043a\u0430 \u0442\u0435\u043a\u0443\u0449\u0438\u0445 \u0441\u043e\u0431\u044b\u0442\u0438\u0439). It was dedicated to defending human rights by providing accurate information about events in the USSR. Over 15 years, from April 1968 to December 1982, 65 issues were published, all but two appearing in English translation. The anonymous editors encouraged the readers to use the same distribution channels in order to send feedback and local information to be published in subsequent issues.\nThe \"Chronicle\" was distinguished by its dry, concise style and punctilious correction of even the smallest error. Its regular rubrics were \"Arrests, Searches, Interrogations\", \"Extra-judicial Persecution\", \"In Prisons and Camps\", \"Samizdat update\", \"News in brief\", and \"Persecution of Religion\". Over time, sections were added on the \"Persecution of the Crimean Tatars\", \"Persecution and Harassment in Ukraine\", \"Lithuanian Events\", and so on.\nThe \"Chronicle\" editors maintained that, according to the 1936 Soviet Constitution, then in force, their publication was not illegal. The authorities did not accept the argument. Many people were harassed, arrested, imprisoned, or forced to leave the country for their involvement in the \"Chronicle\"'s production and distribution. The periodical's typist and first editor Natalya Gorbanevskaya was arrested and put in a psychiatric hospital for taking part in the August 1968 Red Square protest against the invasion of Czechoslovakia. In 1974, two of the periodical's close associates (Pyotr Yakir and Victor Krasin) were persuaded to denounce their fellow editors and the \"Chronicle\" on Soviet television. This put an end to the periodical's activities, until Sergei Kovalev, Tatyana Khodorovich and Tatyana Velikanova openly announced their readiness to resume publication. After being arrested and imprisoned, they were replaced, in turn, by others.\nAnother notable and long-running (about 20 issues in the period of 1972\u20131980) publication was the \"refusenik\" political and literary magazine \"\u0415\u0432\u0440\u0435\u0438 \u0432 \u0421\u0421\u0421\u0420\" (Yevrei v SSSR, \"Jews in the USSR\"), founded and edited by Alexander Voronel and, after his imprisonment, by Mark Azbel and Alexander Luntz.\nThe late 1980s, which were marked by an increase in informal organizations, saw a renewed wave of samizdat periodicals in the Soviet Union. Publications that were active during that time included \"Glasnost\" (edited by Sergei Grigoryants), \"Ekspress-khronika\" (\"Express-Chronicle,\" edited by Alexander Podrabinek), \"Svobodnoye slovo\" (\"Free word\", by the Democratic Union formed in May 1988), \"Levyi povorot\" (\"Left turn\", edited by Boris Kagarlitsky), \"Otkrytaya zona\" (\"Open zone\") of Club Perestroika, \"Merkurii\" (\"Mercury\", edited by Elena Zelinskaya) and \"Khronograph\" (\"Chronograph\", put out by a number of Moscow activists).\nNot all samizdat trends were liberal or clearly opposed to the Soviet government and the official literary establishment. \"The \"Russian Party\"... was a very strange element of the political landscape of Leonid Brezhnev's era\u2014feeling themselves practically dissidents, members of the \"Russian Party\" with rare exceptions took quite prestigious official positions in the world of writers or journalists,\" wrote Oleg Kashin in 2009.\nGenres.\nSamizdat covered a large range of topics, mainly including literature and works focused on religion, nationality, and politics. The state censored a variety of materials such as detective novels, adventure stories, and science fiction in addition to dissident texts, resulting in the underground publication of samizdat covering a wide range of topics. Though most samizdat authors directed their works towards the intelligentsia, samizdat included lowbrow genres in addition to scholarly works.\nHyung-Min Joo carried out a detailed analysis of an archive of samizdat (\u0410\u0440\u0445\u0438\u0432 \u0421\u0430\u043c\u0438\u0437\u0434\u0430\u0442\u0430, \"Arkhiv Samizdata\") by \"Radio Liberty\", sponsored by the US Congress and launched in the 1960s, and reported that of its 6,607 items, 1% were literary, 17% nationalist, 20% religious, and 62% political, noting that as a rule, literary works were not collected there, so their 1% (only 73 texts) are not representative of their real share of circulation.\nLiterary.\nIn its early years, samizdat defined itself as a primarily literary phenomenon that included the distribution of poetry, classic unpublished Russian literature, and famous 20th century foreign literature. Literature played a key role in the existence of the samizdat phenomenon. For instance, the USSR's refusal to publish Boris Pasternak's epic novel \"Doctor Zhivago\" led to the novel's subsequent underground publication. Likewise, the circulation of Alexander Solzhenitsyn's famous work about the gulag system, \"The Gulag Archipelago\", promoted a samizdat revival during the mid-1970s. However, because samizdat by definition placed itself in opposition to the state, samizdat works became increasingly focused on the state's violation of human rights, before shifting towards politics.\nPolitical.\nThe majority of samizdat texts were politically focused. Most of the political texts were personal statements, appeals, protests, or information on arrests and trials. Other political samizdat included analyses of various crises within the USSR, and suggested alternatives to the government's handling of events.\nNo unified political thought existed within samizdat; rather, authors debated from a variety of perspectives. Samizdat written from socialist, democratic and Slavophile perspectives dominated the debates. Socialist authors compared the current state of the government to the Marxist ideals of socialism and appealed to the state to fulfil its promises. Socialist samizdat writers hoped to give a \"human face\" to socialism by expressing dissatisfaction with the system of censorship. Many socialists put faith in the potential for reform in the Soviet Union, especially because of the political liberalization which occurred under Dub\u010dek in Czechoslovakia. However, the Soviet Union invasion of a liberalizing Czechoslovakia, in the events of \"Prague Spring\", crushed hopes for reform and stymied the power of the socialist viewpoint. Because the state proved itself unwilling to reform, samizdat began to focus on alternative political systems. In Czechoslovakia itself, it became central to the underground counter-culture emerging under the normalization regime that followed the invasion.\nWithin samizdat, several works focused on the possibility of a democratic political system. Democratic samizdat possessed a revolutionary nature because of its claim that a fundamental shift in political structure was necessary to reform the state, unlike socialists, who hoped to work within the same basic political framework to achieve change. Despite the revolutionary nature of the democratic samizdat authors, most democrats advocated moderate strategies for change. Most democrats believed in an evolutionary approach to achieving democracy in the USSR, and they focused on advancing their cause along open, public routes, rather than underground routes.\nIn opposition to both democratic and socialist samizdat, Slavophile samizdat grouped democracy and socialism together as Western ideals that were unsuited to the Eastern European mentality. Slavophile samizdat brought a nationalistic Russian perspective to the political debate and espoused the importance of cultural diversity and the uniqueness of Slavic cultures. Samizdat written from the Slavophile perspective attempted to unite the USSR under a vision of a shared glorious history of Russian autocracy and Orthodoxy. \nConsequently, the fact that the USSR encompassed a diverse range of nationalities and lacked a singular Russian history hindered the Slavophile movement. By espousing frequently racist and anti-Semitic views of Russian superiority, through either purity of blood or the strength of Russian Orthodoxy, the Slavophile movement in samizdat alienated readers and created divisions within the opposition.\nReligious.\nPredominantly Orthodox, Catholic, Baptist, Pentecostal, and Adventist groups authored religious samizdat texts. Though a diversity of religious samizdat circulated, including three Buddhist texts, no known Islamic samizdat texts exist. The lack of Islamic samizdat appears incongruous with the large percentage of Muslims who resided in the USSR.\nNational.\nJewish samizdat advocated for the end of repression of Jews in the USSR and some expressed a desire for \"aliyah\", the ability to leave Russia for an Israeli homeland. The \"aliyah\" movement also broached broader topics of human rights and freedoms of Soviet citizens. However, a divide existed within Jewish samizdat between more militant authors who advocated Jewish emigration and wrote mostly in politically-focused periodicals, and those who argued that Jews should remain in the USSR to inculcate Jewish consciousness and culture, writing in periodicals centered on cultural-literary information. \nCrimean Tatars, Volga Germans, and Meskhetian Turks also created samizdat literature, protesting the state's refusal to allow them to return to their homelands following Stalin's death. Descriptions in the samizdat literature of Crimean Tatars, Volga Germans, and Meskhetian Turks documenting the political injustices borne by those peoples are dominated by references to \"genocide\" and \"concentration camps\". Ukrainian samizdat opposed the assumed superiority of Russian culture over the Ukrainian and condemned the forced assimilation of Ukrainians to the Russian language.\nContraband audio.\nRibs, \"music on the ribs\", \"bone records\", or \"roentgenizdat\" (\"roentgen-\" from the Russian term for X-ray, named for Wilhelm R\u00f6ntgen) were homemade phonograph records, copied from forbidden recordings that were smuggled into the country. Their content was Western rock and roll, jazz, mambo, and other music, and music by banned emigres, such as Pyotr Leshchenko and Alexander Vertinsky. They were sold and traded on the black market. \nEach disc is a thin, flexible plastic sheet recorded with a spiral groove on one side, playable on a normal phonograph turntable at 78 RPM. They were made from an inexpensive, available material: used X-ray film (hence the name \"roentgenizdat\"). Each large rectangular sheet was trimmed into a circle and individually recorded using an improvised recording lathe. The discs and their limited sound quality resemble the mass-produced flexi discs and may have been inspired by it.\n\"Magnitizdat\" (\"magnit-\" from \"magnitofon\", the Russian word for tape recorder) is the distribution of sound recordings on audio tape, often of bards, Western artists, and underground music groups. \"Magnitizdat\" replaced \"roentgenizdat\", as it was cheaper and more efficient method of reproduction that resulted in higher quality copies.\nFurther influence.\nIn hacker and computer jargon, the term samizdat was used for the dissemination of needed and hard to obtain documents or information.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51201", "revid": "4995598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51201", "title": "Chupicabra", "text": ""}
{"id": "51202", "revid": "16996095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51202", "title": "Four Freedoms (software)", "text": ""}
{"id": "51203", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51203", "title": "Coefficient", "text": "Multiplicative factor in a mathematical expression\nIn mathematics, a coefficient is a multiplicative factor involved in some term of a polynomial, a series, or any other type of expression. It may be a number without units, in which case it is known as a numerical factor. It may also be a constant with units of measurement, in which it is known as a constant multiplier. In general, coefficients may be any expression (including variables such as a, b and c). When the combination of variables and constants is not necessarily involved in a product, it may be called a \"parameter\". \nFor example, the polynomial formula_1 has coefficients 2, \u22121, and 3, and the powers of the variable formula_2 in the polynomial formula_3 have coefficient parameters formula_4, formula_5, and formula_6.\nA &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;constant coefficient, also known as constant term or simply constant, is a quantity either implicitly attached to the zeroth power of a variable or not attached to other variables in an expression; for example, the constant coefficients of the expressions above are the number 3 and the parameter \"c\", involved in 3\n\"c\"\u22c5\"x\"0. \nThe coefficient attached to the highest degree of the variable in a polynomial of one variable is referred to as the leading coefficient; for example, in the example expressions above, the leading coefficients are 2 and \"a\", respectively.\nIn the context of differential equations, these equations can often be written in terms of polynomials in one or more unknown functions and their derivatives. In such cases, the coefficients of the differential equation are the coefficients of this polynomial, and these may be non-constant functions. A coefficient is a \"constant coefficient\" when it is a constant function. For avoiding confusion, in this context a coefficient that is not attached to unknown functions or their derivatives is generally called a \"constant term\" rather than a constant coefficient. In particular, in a linear differential equation with constant coefficient, the constant coefficient term is generally not assumed to be a constant function.\nTerminology and definition.\nIn mathematics, a coefficient is a multiplicative factor in some term of a polynomial, a series, or any expression. For example, in the polynomial\nformula_7\nwith variables formula_2 and formula_9, the first two terms have the coefficients 7 and \u22123. The third term 1.5 is the constant coefficient. In the final term, the coefficient is 1 and is not explicitly written.\nIn many scenarios, coefficients are numbers (as is the case for each term of the previous example), although they could be parameters of the problem\u2014or any expression in these parameters. In such a case, one must clearly distinguish between symbols representing variables and symbols representing parameters. Following Ren\u00e9 Descartes, the variables are often denoted by x, y, ..., and the parameters by a, b, c, ..., but this is not always the case. For example, if y is considered a parameter in the above expression, then the coefficient of x would be \u22123\"y\", and the constant coefficient (with respect to x) would be 1.5 + \"y\".\nWhen one writes \nformula_10\nit is generally assumed that x is the only variable, and that a, b and c are parameters; thus the constant coefficient is c in this case.\nAny polynomial in a single variable x can be written as\nformula_11\nfor some nonnegative integer formula_12, where formula_13 are the coefficients. This includes the possibility that some terms have coefficient 0; for example, in formula_14, the coefficient of formula_15 is 0, and the term formula_16 does not appear explicitly. For the largest formula_17 such that formula_18 (if any), formula_19 is called the leading coefficient of the polynomial. For example, the leading coefficient of the polynomial\nformula_20\nis 4. This can be generalised to multivariate polynomials with respect to a monomial order, see .\nLinear algebra.\nIn linear algebra, a system of linear equations is frequently represented by its coefficient matrix. For example, the system of equations\nformula_21\nthe associated coefficient matrix is formula_22 Coefficient matrices are used in algorithms such as Gaussian elimination and Cramer's rule to find solutions to the system.\nThe leading entry (sometimes \"leading coefficient\") of a row in a matrix is the first nonzero entry in that row. So, for example, in the matrix\nformula_23\nthe leading coefficient of the first row is 1; that of the second row is 2; that of the third row is 4, while the last row does not have a leading coefficient.\nThough coefficients are frequently viewed as constants in elementary algebra, they can also be viewed as variables as the context broadens. For example, the coordinates formula_24 of a vector formula_25 in a vector space with basis formula_26 are the coefficients of the basis vectors in the expression \nformula_27"}
{"id": "51204", "revid": "1110478131", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51204", "title": "Nilo-Saharan", "text": ""}
{"id": "51209", "revid": "486612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51209", "title": "Kinase", "text": "Enzyme catalyzing transfer of phosphate groups onto specific substrates\nIn biochemistry, a kinase () is an enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of phosphate groups from high-energy, phosphate-donating molecules to specific substrates. This process is known as phosphorylation, where the high-energy ATP molecule donates a phosphate group to the substrate molecule. As a result, kinase produces a phosphorylated substrate and ADP. Conversely, it is referred to as dephosphorylation when the phosphorylated substrate donates a phosphate group and ADP gains a phosphate group (producing a dephosphorylated substrate and the high energy molecule of ATP). These two processes, phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, occur four times during glycolysis.\nKinases are part of the larger family of phosphotransferases. Kinases should not be confused with phosphorylases, which catalyze the addition of inorganic phosphate groups to an acceptor, nor with phosphatases, which remove phosphate groups (dephosphorylation). The phosphorylation state of a molecule, whether it be a protein, lipid or carbohydrate, can affect its activity, reactivity and its ability to bind other molecules. Therefore, kinases are critical in metabolism, cell signalling, protein regulation, cellular transport, secretory processes and many other cellular pathways, which makes them very important to physiology.\nBiochemistry and functional relevance.\nKinases mediate the transfer of a phosphate moiety from a high energy molecule (such as ATP) to their substrate molecule, as seen in the figure below. Kinases are needed to stabilize this reaction because the phosphoanhydride bond contains a high level of energy. Kinases properly orient their substrate and the phosphoryl group within their active sites, which increases the rate of the reaction. Additionally, they commonly use positively charged amino acid residues, which electrostatically stabilize the transition state by interacting with the negatively charged phosphate groups. Alternatively, some kinases utilize bound metal cofactors in their active sites to coordinate the phosphate groups. Protein kinases can be classed as catalytically active (canonical) or as pseudokinases, reflecting the evolutionary loss of one or more of the catalytic amino acids that position or hydrolyse ATP. However, in terms of signalling outputs and disease relevance, both kinases and pseudokinases are important signalling modulators in human cells, making kinases important drug targets.\nKinases are used extensively to transmit signals and regulate complex processes in cells. Phosphorylation of molecules can enhance or inhibit their activity and modulate their ability to interact with other molecules. The addition and removal of phosphoryl groups provides the cell with a means of control because various kinases can respond to different conditions or signals. Mutations in kinases that lead to a loss-of-function or gain-of-function can cause cancer and disease in humans, including certain types of leukemia and neuroblastomas, glioblastoma, spinocerebellar ataxia (type 14), forms of agammaglobulinaemia, and many others.\nHistory and classification.\nThe first protein to be recognized as catalyzing the phosphorylation of another protein using ATP was observed in 1954 by Eugene P. Kennedy at which time he described a liver enzyme that catalyzed the phosphorylation of casein. In 1956, Edmond H. Fischer and Edwin G. Krebs discovered that the interconversion between phosphorylase a and phosphorylase b was mediated by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. The kinase that transferred a phosphoryl group to Phosphorylase b, converting it to Phosphorylase a, was named Phosphorylase Kinase. Years later, the first example of a kinase cascade was identified, whereby Protein Kinase A (PKA) phosphorylates Phosphorylase Kinase. At the same time, it was found that PKA inhibits glycogen synthase, which was the first example of a phosphorylation event that resulted in inhibition. In 1969, Lester Reed discovered that pyruvate dehydrogenase was inactivated by phosphorylation, and this discovery was the first clue that phosphorylation might serve as a means of regulation in other metabolic pathways besides glycogen metabolism. In the same year, Tom Langan discovered that PKA phosphorylates histone H1, which suggested phosphorylation might regulate nonenzymatic proteins. The 1970s included the discovery of calmodulin-dependent protein kinases and the finding that proteins can be phosphorylated on more than one amino acid residue. The 1990s may be described as the \"decade of protein kinase cascades\". During this time, the MAPK/ERK pathway, the JAK kinases (a family of protein tyrosine kinases), and the PIP3-dependent kinase cascade were discovered.\nKinases are classified into broad groups by the substrate they act upon: protein kinases, lipid kinases, carbohydrate kinases. Kinases can be found in a variety of species, from bacteria to mold to worms to mammals. More than five hundred different protein kinases have been identified in humans. Their diversity and their role in signaling makes them an interesting object of study. Various other kinases act on small molecules such as lipids, carbohydrates, amino acids, and nucleotides, either for signaling or to prime them for metabolic pathways. Specific kinases are often named after their substrates. Protein kinases often have multiple substrates, and proteins can serve as substrates for more than one specific kinase. For this reason protein kinases are named based on what regulates their activity (i.e. Calmodulin-dependent protein kinases). Sometimes they are further subdivided into categories because there are several isoenzymatic forms. For example, type I and type II cyclic-AMP dependent protein kinases have identical catalytic subunits but different regulatory subunits that bind cyclic AMP.\nProtein kinases.\nProtein kinases act on proteins, by phosphorylating them on their serine, threonine, tyrosine, or histidine residues. Phosphorylation can modify the function of a protein in many ways. It can increase or decrease a protein's activity, stabilize it or mark it for destruction, localize it within a specific cellular compartment, and it can initiate or disrupt its interaction with other proteins. The protein kinases make up the majority of all kinases and are widely studied. These kinases, in conjunction with phosphatases, play a major role in protein and enzyme regulation as well as signalling in the cell.\nA common point of confusion arises when thinking about the different ways a cell achieves biological regulation. There are countless examples of covalent modifications that cellular proteins can undergo; however, phosphorylation is one of the few reversible covalent modifications. This provided the rationale that phosphorylation of proteins is regulatory. The potential to regulate protein function is enormous given that there are many ways to covalently modify a protein in addition to regulation provided by allosteric control. In his Hopkins Memorial Lecture, Edwin Krebs asserted that allosteric control evolved to respond to signals arising from inside the cell, whereas phosphorylation evolved to respond to signals outside of the cell. This idea is consistent with the fact that phosphorylation of proteins occurs much more frequently in eukaryotic cells in comparison to prokaryotic cells because the more complex cell type evolved to respond to a wider array of signals.\nCyclin dependent kinases.\nCyclin dependent kinases (CDKs) are a group of several different kinases involved in regulation of the cell cycle. They phosphorylate other proteins on their serine or threonine residues, but CDKs must first bind to a cyclin protein in order to be active. Different combinations of specific CDKs and cyclins mark different parts of the cell cycle. Additionally, the phosphorylation state of CDKs is also critical to their activity, as they are subject to regulation by other kinases (such as CDK-activating kinase) and phosphatases (such as Cdc25). Once the CDKs are active, they phosphorylate other proteins to change their activity, which leads to events necessary for the next stage of the cell cycle. While they are most known for their function in cell cycle control, CDKs also have roles in transcription, metabolism, and other cellular events.\nBecause of their key role in the controlling cell division, mutations in CDKs are often found in cancerous cells. These mutations lead to uncontrolled growth of the cells, where they are rapidly going through the whole cell cycle repeatedly. CDK mutations can be found in lymphomas, breast cancer, pancreatic tumors, and lung cancer. Therefore, inhibitors of CDK have been developed as treatments for some types of cancer.\nMitogen-activated protein kinases.\nMAP kinases (MAPKs) are a family of serine/threonine kinases that respond to a variety of extracellular growth signals. For example, growth hormone, epidermal growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor, and insulin are all considered mitogenic stimuli that can engage the MAPK pathway. Activation of this pathway at the level of the receptor initiates a signaling cascade whereby the Ras GTPase exchanges GDP for GTP. Next, Ras activates Raf kinase (also known as MAPKKK), which activates MEK (MAPKK). MEK activates MAPK (also known as ERK), which can go on to regulate transcription and translation. Whereas RAF and MAPK are both serine/threonine kinases, MAPKK is a tyrosine/threonine kinase.\nMAPK can regulate transcription factors directly or indirectly. Its major transcriptional targets include ATF-2, Chop, c-Jun, c-Myc, DPC4, Elk-1, Ets1, Max, MEF2C, NFAT4, Sap1a, STATs, Tal, p53, CREB, and Myc. MAPK can also regulate translation by phosphorylating the S6 kinase in the large ribosomal subunit. It can also phosphorylate components in the upstream portion of the MAPK signalling cascade including Ras, Sos, and the EGF receptor itself.\nThe carcinogenic potential of the MAPK pathway makes it clinically significant. It is implicated in cell processes that can lead to uncontrolled growth and subsequent tumor formation. Mutations within this pathway alter its regulatory effects on cell differentiation, proliferation, survival, and apoptosis, all of which are implicated in various forms of cancer.\nLipid kinases.\nLipid kinases phosphorylate lipids in the cell, both on the plasma membrane as well as on the membranes of the organelles. The addition of phosphate groups can change the reactivity and localization of the lipid and can be used in signal transmission.\nPhosphatidylinositol kinases.\nPhosphatidylinositol kinases phosphorylate phosphatidylinositol species, to create species such as phosphatidylinositol 3,4-bisphosphate (PI(3,4)P2), phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3), and phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P). The kinases include phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 3-kinase, and phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase. The phosphorylation state of phosphatidylinositol plays a major role in cellular signalling, such as in the insulin signalling pathway, and also has roles in endocytosis, exocytosis and other trafficking events. Mutations in these kinases, such as PI3K, can lead to cancer or insulin resistance.\nThe kinase enzymes increase the rate of the reactions by making the inositol hydroxyl group more nucleophilic, often using the side chain of an amino acid residue to act as a general base and deprotonate the hydroxyl, as seen in the mechanism below. Here, a reaction between adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and phosphatidylinositol is coordinated. The end result is a phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate as well as adenosine diphosphate (ADP). The enzymes can also help to properly orient the ATP molecule, as well as the inositol group, to make the reaction proceed faster. Metal ions are often coordinated for this purpose.\nSphingosine kinases.\nSphingosine kinase (SK) is a lipid kinase that catalyzes the conversion of sphingosine to sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P). Sphingolipids are ubiquitous membrane lipids. Upon activation, sphingosine kinase migrates from the cytosol to the plasma membrane where it transfers a \u03b3 phosphate (which is the last or terminal phosphate) from ATP or GTP to sphingosine. The S1P receptor is a GPCR receptor, so S1P has the ability to regulate G protein signaling. The resulting signal can activate intracellular effectors like ERKs, Rho GTPase, Rac GTPase, PLC, and AKT/PI3K. It can also exert its effect on target molecules inside the cell. S1P has been shown to directly inhibit the histone deacetylase activity of HDACs. In contrast, the dephosphorylated sphingosine promotes cell apoptosis, and it is therefore critical to understand the regulation of SKs because of its role in determining cell fate. Past research shows that SKs may sustain cancer cell growth because they promote cellular-proliferation, and SK1 (a specific type of SK) is present at higher concentrations in certain types of cancers.\nThere are two kinases present in mammalian cells, SK1 and SK2. SK1 is more specific compared to SK2, and their expression patterns differ as well. SK1 is expressed in lung, spleen, and leukocyte cells, whereas SK2 is expressed in kidney and liver cells. The involvement of these two kinases in cell survival, proliferation, differentiation, and inflammation makes them viable candidates for chemotherapeutic therapies.\nCarbohydrate kinases.\nFor many mammals, carbohydrates provide a large portion of the daily caloric requirement. To harvest energy from oligosaccharides, they must first be broken down into monosaccharides so they can enter metabolism. Kinases play an important role in almost all metabolic pathways. The figure on the left shows the second phase of glycolysis, which contains two important reactions catalyzed by kinases. The anhydride linkage in 1,3 bisphosphoglycerate is unstable and has a high energy. 1,3-bisphosphogylcerate kinase requires ADP to carry out its reaction yielding 3-phosphoglycerate and ATP. In the final step of glycolysis, pyruvate kinase transfers a phosphoryl group from phosphoenolpyruvate to ADP, generating ATP and pyruvate.\nHexokinase is the most common enzyme that makes use of glucose when it first enters the cell. It converts D-glucose to glucose-6-phosphate by transferring the gamma phosphate of an ATP to the C6 position. This is an important step in glycolysis because it traps glucose inside the cell due to the negative charge. In its dephosphorylated form, glucose can move back and forth across the membrane very easily. Mutations in the hexokinase gene can lead to a hexokinase deficiency which can cause nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia.\nPhosphofructokinase, or PFK, catalyzes the conversion of fructose-6-phosphate to fructose-1,6-bisphosphate and is an important point in the regulation of glycolysis. High levels of ATP, H+, and citrate inhibit PFK. If citrate levels are high, it means that glycolysis is functioning at an optimal rate. High levels of AMP stimulate PFK. Tarui's disease, a glycogen storage disease that leads to exercise intolerance, is due to a mutation in the PFK gene that reduces its activity.\nOther kinases.\nKinases act upon many other molecules besides proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates. There are many that act on nucleotides (DNA and RNA) including those involved in nucleotide interconverstion, such as nucleoside-phosphate kinases and nucleoside-diphosphate kinases. Other small molecules that are substrates of kinases include creatine, phosphoglycerate, riboflavin, dihydroxyacetone, shikimate, and many others.\nRiboflavin kinase.\nRiboflavin kinase catalyzes the phosphorylation of riboflavin to create flavin mononucleotide(FMN). It has an ordered binding mechanism where riboflavin must bind to the kinase before it binds to the ATP molecule. Divalent cations help coordinate the nucleotide. The general mechanism is shown in the figure below.\nRiboflavin kinase plays an important role in cells, as FMN is an important cofactor. FMN also is a precursor to flavin adenine dinucleotide(FAD), a redox cofactor used by many enzymes, including many in metabolism. In fact, there are some enzymes that are capable of carrying out both the phosphorylation of riboflavin to FMN, as well as the FMN to FAD reaction. Riboflavin kinase may help prevent stroke, and could possibly be used as a treatment in the future. It is also implicated in infection, when studied in mice.\nThymidine kinase.\nThymidine kinase is one of the many nucleoside kinases that are responsible for nucleoside phosphorylation. It phosphorylates thymidine to create thymidine monophosphate (dTMP). This kinase uses an ATP molecule to supply the phosphate to thymidine, as shown below. This transfer of a phosphate from one nucleotide to another by thymidine kinase, as well as other nucleoside and nucleotide kinases, functions to help control the level of each of the different nucleotides.\nAfter creation of the dTMP molecule, another kinase, thymidylate kinase, can act upon dTMP to create the diphosphate form, dTDP. Nucleoside diphosphate kinase catalyzes production of thymidine triphosphate, dTTP, which is used in DNA synthesis. Because of this, thymidine kinase activity is closely correlated with the cell cycle and used as a tumor marker in clinical chemistry. Therefore, it can sometime be used to predict patient prognosis. Patients with mutations in the thymidine kinase gene may have a certain type of mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, a disease that leads to death in early childhood.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51210", "revid": "29381211", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51210", "title": "Slow-scan television", "text": "Image transmission over radio\nSlow-scan television (SSTV) is a picture transmission method, used mainly by amateur radio operators, to transmit and receive static pictures via radio in monochrome or color.\nA literal term for SSTV is narrowband television. Analog broadcast television requires at least 6\u00a0MHz wide channels, because it transmits 25 or 30 picture frames per second (see ITU analog broadcast standards), but SSTV usually only takes up to a maximum of 3\u00a0kHz of bandwidth. It is a much slower method of still picture transmission, usually taking from about eight seconds to a couple of minutes, depending on the mode used, to transmit one image frame.\nSince SSTV systems operate on voice frequencies, amateurs use it on shortwave (also known as HF by amateur radio operators), VHF and UHF radio.\nHistory.\nConcept.\nThe concept of SSTV was introduced by Copthorne Macdonald in 1957\u201358. He developed the first SSTV system using an electrostatic monitor and a vidicon tube. It was deemed sufficient to use 120 lines and about 120 pixels per line to transmit a black-and-white still picture within a 3\u00a0kHz telephone channel. First live tests were performed on the 11-meter ham band\u00a0\u2013 which was later given to the CB service in the US. In the 1970s, two forms of paper printout receivers were invented by hams.\nEarly usage in space exploration.\nSSTV was used to transmit images of the far side of the Moon from Luna 3.\nThe first space television system was called Seliger-Tral-D and was used aboard Vostok. Vostok was based on an earlier videophone project which used two cameras, with persistent LI-23 iconoscope tubes. Its output was 10 frames per second at 100 lines per frame video signal.\nA similar concept, also named \"SSTV\", was used on \"Faith 7\", as well as on the early years of the NASA Apollo program.\nThe Apollo TV cameras used SSTV to transmit images from inside Apollo\u00a07, Apollo\u00a08, and Apollo\u00a09, as well as the Apollo\u00a011 Lunar Module television from the Moon. NASA had taken all the original tapes and erased them for use on subsequent missions; however, the Apollo\u00a011 Tape Search and Restoration Team formed in 2003 tracked down the highest-quality films among the converted recordings of the first broadcast, pieced together the best parts, then contracted a specialist film restoration company to enhance the degraded black-and-white film and convert it into digital format for archival records. \nProgression.\nCommercial systems started appearing in the United States in 1970, after the FCC had legalized the use of SSTV for advanced level amateur radio operators in 1968.\nSSTV originally required quite a bit of specialized equipment. Usually there was a scanner or camera, a modem to create and receive the characteristic audio howl, and a cathode-ray tube from a surplus radar set. The special cathode-ray tube would have \"long persistence\" phosphors that would keep a picture visible for about ten seconds.\nThe modem would generate audio tones between 1,200 and 2,300\u00a0Hz from picture signals, and picture signals from received audio tones. The audio would be attached to a radio receiver and transmitter.\nCurrent systems.\nA modern system, having gained ground since the early 1990s, uses a personal computer and special software in place of much of the custom equipment. The sound card of a PC, with special processing software, acts as a modem. The computer screen provides the output. A small digital camera or digital photos provide the input.\nModulation.\nLike the similar radiofax mode, SSTV is an analog signal. SSTV uses frequency modulation, in which every different value of brightness in the image gets a different audio frequency. In other words, the signal frequency shifts up or down to designate brighter or darker pixels, respectively. Color is achieved by sending the brightness of each color component (usually red, green and blue) separately. This signal can be fed into an SSB transmitter, which in part modulates the carrier signal.\nThere are a number of different modes of transmission, but the most common ones are \"Martin M1\" (popular in Europe) and \"Scottie S1\" (used mostly in the USA). Using one of these, an image transfer takes 114 (M1) or 110 (S1) seconds. Some black and white modes take only 8 seconds to transfer an image.\nHeader.\nA calibration header is sent before the image. It consists of a 300-millisecond leader tone at 1,900\u00a0Hz, a 10\u00a0ms break at 1,200\u00a0Hz, another 300-millisecond leader tone at 1,900\u00a0Hz, followed by a digital VIS (vertical interval signaling) code, identifying the transmission mode used. The VIS consists of bits of 30 milliseconds in length. The code starts with a start bit at 1,200\u00a0Hz, followed by 7 data bits (LSB first; 1,100\u00a0Hz for 1, 1,300\u00a0Hz for 0). An even parity bit follows, then a stop bit at 1,200\u00a0Hz. For example, the bits corresponding the decimal numbers 44 or 32 imply that the mode is Martin M1, whereas the number 60 represents Scottie S1.\nScanlines.\nA transmission consists of horizontal lines, scanned from left to right. The color components are sent separately one line after another. The color encoding and order of transmission can vary between modes. Most modes use an RGB color model; some modes are black-and-white, with only one channel being sent; other modes use a YC color model, which consists of luminance (Y) and chrominance (R\u2013Y and B\u2013Y). The modulating frequency changes between 1,500 and 2,300\u00a0Hz, corresponding to the intensity (brightness) of the color component. The modulation is analog, so even though the horizontal resolution is often defined as 256 or 320 pixels, they can be sampled using any rate. The image aspect ratio is conventionally 4:3. Lines usually end in a 1,200\u00a0Hz horizontal synchronization pulse of 5\u00a0milliseconds (after all color components of the line have been sent); in some modes, the synchronization pulse lies in the middle of the line.\nModes.\nBelow is a table of some of the most common SSTV modes and their differences. These modes share many properties, such as synchronization and/or frequencies and grey/color level correspondence. Their main difference is the image quality, which is proportional to the time taken to transfer the image and in the case of the AVT modes, related to synchronous data transmission methods and noise resistance conferred by the use of interlace.\n\u00b9 Martin and Scottie modes actually send 256 scanlines, but the first 16 are usually grayscale.\nThe mode family called AVT (for \"Amiga Video Transceiver\") was originally designed by Ben Blish-Williams (N4EJI, then AA7AS) for a custom modem attached to an Amiga computer, which was eventually marketed by AEA corporation.\nThe Scottie and Martin modes were originally implemented as ROM enhancements for the Robot Research Corporation SSTV unit. The exact line timings for the Martin M1 mode are given in this reference.\nThe Robot SSTV modes were designed by Robot Research Corporation for their own SSTV units.\nAll four sets of SSTV modes are now available in various PC-resident SSTV systems and no longer depend upon the original hardware.\nAVT.\nAVT is an abbreviation of \"Amiga Video Transceiver\", software and hardware modem originally developed by \"Black Belt Systems\" (USA) around 1990 for the Amiga home computer popular all over the world before the IBM PC family gained sufficient audio quality with the help of special sound cards. These AVT modes differ radically from the other modes mentioned above, in that they are synchronous, that is, they have no per-line horizontal synchronization pulse but instead use the standard VIS vertical signal to identify the mode, followed by a frame-leading digital pulse train which pre-aligns the frame timing by counting first one way and then the other, allowing the pulse train to be locked in time at any single point out of 32 where it can be resolved or demodulated successfully, after which they send the actual image data, in a fully synchronous and typically interlaced mode.\nInterlace, no dependence upon sync, and interline reconstruction gives the AVT modes a better noise resistance than any of the other SSTV modes. Full frame images can be reconstructed with reduced resolution even if as much as 1/2 of the received signal was lost in a solid block of interference or fade because of the interlace feature. For instance, first the odd lines are sent, then the even lines. If a block of odd lines are lost, the even lines remain, and a reasonable reconstruction of the odd lines can be created by a simple vertical interpolation, resulting in a full frame of lines where the even lines are unaffected, the good odd lines are present, and the bad odd lines have been replaced with an interpolation. This is a significant visual improvement over losing a non-recoverable contiguous block of lines in a non-interlaced transmission mode. Interlace is an optional mode variation, however without it, much of the noise resistance is sacrificed, although the synchronous character of the transmission ensures that intermittent signal loss does not cause loss of the entire image. \nThe AVT modes are mainly used in Japan and the United States. There is a full set of them in terms of black and white, color, and scan line counts of 128 and 256. Color bars and greyscale bars may be optionally overlaid top and/or bottom, but the full frame is available for image data unless the operator chooses otherwise. For receiving systems where timing was not aligned with the incoming image's timing, the AVT system provided for post-receive re-timing and alignment.\nFrequencies.\nUsing a receiver capable of demodulating single-sideband modulation, SSTV transmissions can be heard on the following frequencies:\nIn popular culture.\nIn Valve's 2007 video game \"Portal\", there was an internet update of the program files on 3\u00a0March 2010. This update gave a challenge to find hidden radios in each test chamber and bring them to certain spots to receive hidden signals. The hidden signals became part of an ARG-style analysis by fans of the game hinting at a sequel of the game\u00a0\u2013 some sounds were of Morse code strings that implied the restarting of a computer system, while others could be decoded as purposefully low-quality SSTV images. When some of these decoded images were put together in the correct order, it revealed a decodable MD5 hash for a bulletin-board system phone number (425)822-5251. It provides multiple ASCII art images relating to the game and its potential sequel. The sequel, \"Portal 2\", was later confirmed. According to a hidden commentary node SSTV image from \"Portal 2\", the BBS is running from a Linux-based computer and is linked to a 2,400\u00a0bit/s modem from 1987. It is hooked up in an unspecified Valve developer's kitchen. They kept spare modems in case one failed, and one did. The BBS only sends about 20\u00a0megabytes of data in total.\nIn the aforementioned sequel, \"Portal 2\", there are four SSTV images. One is broadcast in a Rattman den. When decoded, this image is a very subtle hint towards the game's ending. The image is of a Weighted Companion Cube on the Moon. The other three images are decoded from a commentary node in another Rattman den. These 3 images are slides with bullet points on how the ARG was done, and what the outcome was, such as how long it took the combined internet to solve the puzzle (the average completion time was 7&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 hours).\nIn another video game, \"Kerbal Space Program\", there is a small hill in the southern hemisphere on the planet \"Duna\", which transmits a color SSTV image in Robot\u00a024 format. It depicts four astronauts standing next to what is either the Lunar Lander from the Apollo missions, or an unfinished pyramid. Above them is the game's logo and three circles. It emits sound if an object is near the hill. As of the latest version of the game (1.12), the hill no longer transmits the signal.\nCaparezza, an Italian songwriter, inserted an image on the ghost track of his album \"Prisoner\u00a0709\".\nThe Aphex Twin release 2 Remixes by AFX contains a track that displays an SSTV image that has text about the programs used to make the release as well as a picture of Richard sitting on a couch.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nWorld Ham/11mtr SSTV cams - https://worldsstv.com/\nModem software:"}
{"id": "51214", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51214", "title": "Offroad cycling", "text": ""}
{"id": "51215", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51215", "title": "Airliner", "text": "Aircraft designed for commercial transportation of passengers and cargo\nAn airliner is a type of airplane for transporting passengers and air cargo. Such aircraft are most often operated by airlines. The modern and most common variant of the airliner is a long, tube shaped, and jet powered aircraft. The largest of them are wide-body jets which are also called twin-aisle because they generally have two separate aisles running from the front to the back of the passenger cabin. These are usually used for long-haul flights between airline hubs and major cities. A smaller, more common class of airliners is the narrow-body or single-aisle. These are generally used for short to medium-distance flights with fewer passengers than their wide-body counterparts.\nRegional airliners typically seat fewer than 100 passengers and may be powered by turbofans or turboprops. These airliners are the non-mainline counterparts to the larger aircraft operated by the major carriers, legacy carriers, and flag carriers, and are used to feed traffic into the large airline hubs. These regional routes then form the spokes of a hub-and-spoke air transport model.\nThe lightest aircraft are short-haul regional feeder airliner type aircraft that carry a small number of passengers are called commuter aircraft, commuterliners, feederliners, and air taxis, depending on their size, engines, how they are marketed, region of the world, and seating configurations. The Beechcraft 1900, for example, has only 19 seats.\nHistory.\nEmergence.\nWhen the Wright brothers made the world's first sustained heavier-than-air flight, they laid the foundation for what would become a major transport industry. Their flight, performed in the Wright Flyer during 1903, was just 11 years before what is often defined as the world's first airliner. By the 1960s, airliners had expanded capabilities, making a significant impact on global society, economics, and politics.\nDuring 1913, Igor Sikorsky developed the first large multi-engine airplane, the Russky Vityaz. This aircraft was subsequently refined into the more practical Ilya Muromets, being furnished with dual controls for a pilot and copilot and a comfortable cabin with a lavatory, cabin heating and lighting.\nThis large four-engine biplane was further adapted into an early bomber aircraft, preceding subsequent transport and bomber aircraft.\nIt first flew on 10 December 1913 and took off for its first demonstration flight with 16 passengers aboard on 25 February 1914.\nHowever, it was never used as a commercial airliner due to the onset of the First World War which led to military applications being prioritised.\nInterwar period.\nIn 1919, shortly after the end of the First World War, large numbers of ex-military aircraft flooded the market. One such aircraft was the French Farman F.60 Goliath, which had originally been designed as a long-range heavy bomber; a number were converted for commercial use into passenger airliners starting in 1919, being able to accommodate a maximum of 14 seated passengers. and around 60 were built. Initially, several publicity flights were made, including one on 8 February 1919, when the Goliath flew 12 passengers from Toussus-le-Noble to RAF Kenley, near Croydon, despite having no permission from the British authorities to land. Dozens of early airlines subsequently procured the type. One high-profile flight, made on 11 August 1919, involved an F.60 flying eight passengers and a ton of supplies from Paris via Casablanca and Mogador to Koufa, north of Saint-Louis, Senegal, flying more than .\nAnother important airliner built in 1919 was the Airco DH.16; a redesigned Airco DH.9A with a wider fuselage to accommodate an enclosed cabin seating four passengers, plus pilot in an open cockpit. In March 1919, the prototype first flew at Hendon Aerodrome. Nine aircraft were built, all but one being delivered to the nascent airline, Aircraft Transport and Travel, which used the first aircraft for pleasure flying, and on 25 August 1919, it inaugurated the first scheduled international airline service from London to Paris. One aircraft was sold to the River Plate Aviation Company in Argentina, to operate a cross-river service between Buenos Aires and Montevideo.\nMeanwhile, the competing Vickers converted its successful First World War era bomber, the Vickers Vimy, into a civilian version, the Vimy Commercial. It was redesigned with a larger-diameter fuselage (largely of spruce plywood), and first flew from the Joyce Green airfield in Kent on 13 April 1919.\nThe world's first all-metal transport aircraft was the Junkers F.13, which also made its first flight in 1919. Junkers marketed the aircraft towards business travellers and commercial operators, and European entrepreneurs bought examples for their private use and business trips. Over 300 Junkers F 13s were built between 1919 and 1932.\nThe Dutch Fokker company produced the Fokker F.II, then the enlarged F.III. These were used by the Dutch airline KLM, including on its Amsterdam-London service in 1921. A relatively reliable aircraft for the era, the Fokkers were flying to destinations across Europe, including Bremen, Brussels, Hamburg, and Paris.\nThe Handley Page company in Britain produced the Handley Page Type W, its first civil transport aircraft. It housed two crew in an open cockpit and 15 passengers in an enclosed cabin. Powered by two Napier Lion engines, the prototype first flew on 4 December 1919, shortly after it was displayed at the 1919 Paris Air Show at Le Bourget. It was ordered by the Belgian firm Sabena, a further ten Type Ws were produced under license in Belgium by SABCA. In 1921 the Air Ministry ordered three aircraft, built as the W.8b, for use by Handley Page Transport, and later by Imperial Airways, on services to Paris and Brussels.\nIn France, the Bleriot-SPAD S.33 was introduced during the early 1920s. It was commercially successful, initially serving the Paris-London route, and later on continental routes. The enclosed cabin could carry four passengers with an extra seat in the cockpit. It was further developed into the Bl\u00e9riot-SPAD S.46. Throughout the 1920s, companies in Britain and France were at the forefront of the civil airliner industry.\nBy 1921, the capacity of airliners needed to be increased to achieve more favourable economics. The English company de Havilland, built the 10-passenger DH.29 monoplane, while starting work on the design of the DH.32, an eight-seater biplane with a more economical but less powerful Rolls-Royce Eagle engine. For more capacity, DH.32 development was replaced by the DH.34 biplane, accommodating 10 passengers. A commercially successful aircraft, Daimler Airway ordered a batch of nine.\nThe Ford Trimotor had two engines mounted on the wings and one in the nose, and a slabsided body, it carried eight passengers and was produced from 1925 to 1933. It was an important early airliner in America. It was used by the predecessor to Trans World Airlines, and by other airlines long after production ceased. The Trimotor helped to popularise numerous aspects of modern aviation infrastructure, including paved runways, passenger terminals, hangars, airmail, and radio navigation. Pan Am opened up transoceanic service in the late 1920s and early 1930s, based on a series of large seaplanes \u2013 the Sikorsky S-38 through Sikorsky S-42.\nBy the 1930s, the airliner industry had matured and large consolidated national airlines were established with regular international services that spanned the globe, including Imperial Airways in Britain, Lufthansa in Germany, KLM in the Netherlands, and United Airlines in America. Multi-engined aircraft were now capable of transporting dozens of passengers in comfort.\nDuring the 1930s, the British de Havilland Dragon emerged as a short-haul, low-capacity airliner. Its relatively simple design could carry six passengers, each with of luggage, on the London-Paris route on a fuel consumption of 13 gal (49 L) per hour. The DH.84 Dragon entered worldwide service. During early August 1934, one performed the first non-stop flight between the Canadian mainland and Britain in 30 hours 55 minutes, although the intended destination had originally been Baghdad in Iraq. British production of the Dragon ended in favour of the de Havilland Dragon Rapide, a faster and more comfortable successor.\nBy November 1934, series production of the Dragon Rapide had commenced. De Havilland invested into advanced features including elongated rear windows, cabin heating, thickened wing tips, and a strengthened airframe for a higher gross weight of . Later aircraft were amongst the first airliners to be fitted with flaps for improved landing performance, along with downwards-facing recognition light and metal propellers, which were often retrofitted to older aircraft. It was also used in military roles; civil Dragon Rapides were impressed into military service during the Second World War.\nMetal airliners came into service in the 1930s. In the United States, the Boeing 247, and the 14-passenger Douglas DC-2, flew during the first half of the decade, while the more powerful, faster, 21\u201332 passenger Douglas DC-3 first appeared in 1935. DC-3s were produced in quantity for the Second World War and were sold as surplus afterward, becoming widespread within the commercial sector. It was one of first airliners to be profitable without the support of postal or government subsidies.\nLong-haul flights were expanded during the 1930s as Pan American Airways and Imperial Airways competed on transatlantic travel using fleets of flying boats, such as the British Short Empire and the American Boeing 314. Imperial Airways' order for 28 Empire flying boats was viewed by some as a bold gamble. At the time, flying boats were the only practical means of building aircraft of such size and weight as land-based aircraft would have unfeasibly poor field performance. One Boeing 314, registration NC18602, became the first commercial plane to circumnavigate the globe during December 1941 and January 1942.\nThe postwar era.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, the Brabazon Committee was formed in 1942 under John Moore-Brabazon, 1st Baron Brabazon of Tara to forecast advances in aviation technology and the air transport needs of the postwar British Empire (in South Asia, Africa, and the Near and Far East) and Commonwealth (Australia, Canada, New Zealand). For British use, multi-engine aircraft types were allegedly split between the US for military transport aircraft and the UK for heavy bombers. That such a policy was suggested or implemented have been disputed, at least by Sir Peter Masefield. British aircraft manufacturers were tied up to fulfill military requirements, and had no free capacity to address other matters though the war.\nThe committee final report pushed four designs for the state-owned airlines British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC) and later British European Airways (BEA): three piston-powered aircraft of varying sizes, and a jet-powered 100-seat design at the request of Geoffrey de Havilland, involved in the first jet fighters development.\nAfter a brief contest, the Type I design was given to the Bristol Aeroplane Company, building on a \"100 ton bomber\" submission. This evolved into the Bristol Brabazon but this project folded in 1951 as BOAC lost interest and the first aircraft needed a costly wing re-design to accommodate the Bristol Proteus engine.\nThe Type II was split between the de Havilland Dove and Airspeed Ambassador conventional piston designs, and the Vickers model powered by newly developed turboprops: first flown in 1948, the VC.2 Viceroy was the first turboprop design to enter service; a commercial success with 445 Viscounts built. The Type III requirement led to the conventional Avro Tudor and the more ambitious Bristol Britannia, although both aircraft suffered protracted developments, with the latter entering service with BOAC in February 1957, over seven years following its order.\nThe jet-powered Type IV became the de Havilland Comet in 1949. It featured an aerodynamically clean design with four de Havilland Ghost turbojet engines buried in the wings, a pressurised fuselage, and large square windows. On 2 May 1952, the Comet took off on the world's first jetliner flight carrying fare-paying passengers and simultaneously inaugurated scheduled service between London and Johannesburg. However, roughly one year after introduction, three Comets broke up mid-flight due to airframe metal fatigue, not well understood at the time. The Comet was grounded and tested to discover the cause, while rival manufacturers heeded the lessons learned while developing their own aircraft. The improved Comet 2 and the prototype Comet 3 culminated in the redesigned Comet 4 series which debuted in 1958 and had a productive career over 30 years, but sales never fully recovered.\nBy the 1960s, the UK had lost the airliner market to the US due to the Comet disaster and a smaller domestic market, not regained by later designs like the BAC 1-11, Vickers VC10, and Hawker Siddeley Trident. The STAC committee was formed to consider supersonic designs and worked with Bristol to create the Bristol 223, a 100-passenger transatlantic airliner. The effort was later merged with similar efforts in France to create the Concorde supersonic airliner to share the cost.\nUnited States.\nThe first batch of the Douglas DC-4s went to the U.S. Army and Air Forces, and was named the C-54 Skymaster. Some ex-military DC-6s were later converted into airliners, with both passenger and cargo versions flooding the market shortly after the war's end. Douglas also developed a pressurized version of the DC-4, which it designated the Douglas DC-6. Rival company Lockheed produced the Constellation, a triple-tailed aircraft with a wider fuselage than the DC-4.\nThe Boeing 377 Stratocruiser was based on the C-97 Stratofreighter military transport, it had a double deck and a pressurized fuselage.\nConvair produced the Convair 240, a 40-person pressurized airplane; 566 examples flew. Convair later developed the Convair 340, which was slightly larger and could accommodate between 44 and 52 passengers, of which 311 were produced. The firm also commenced work on the Convair 37, a relatively large double-deck airliner that would have served transcontinental routes; however, the project was abandoned due to a lack of customer demand and its high development costs.\nRival planes include the Martin 2-0-2 and Martin 4-0-4, but the 2-0-2 had safety concerns and was unpressurized, while the 4-0-4 only sold around 100 units.\nDuring the postwar years, engines became much larger and more powerful, and safety features such as deicing, navigation, and weather information were added to the planes. American planes were allegedly more comfortable and had superior flight decks than those produced in Europe.\nFrance.\nIn 1936, the French Air Ministry requested transatlantic flying boats that could hold at least 40 passengers, leading to three Lat\u00e9co\u00e8re 631s introduced by Air France in July 1947. However, two crashed and the third was removed from service over safety concerns. The SNCASE Languedoc was the first French post-war airliner. Accommodating up to 44 seats, 40 aircraft were completed for Air France between October 1945 and April 1948. Air France withdrew the last Languedoc from its domestic routes in 1954, being replaced by later designs. First flying in February 1949, the four-engined Breguet Deux-Ponts was a double-decker transport for passengers and cargo. Air France used it on its busiest routes, including from Paris to the Mediterranean area and to London.\nThe Sud-Aviation Caravelle was developed during the late 1950s as the first short range jet airliner. The nose and cockpit layout were licensed from the de Havilland Comet, along with some fuselage elements. Entering service in mid 1959, 172 Caravelles had been sold within four years and six versions were in production by 1963. Sud Aviation then focused its design team on a Caravelle successor.\nThe Super-Caravelle was a supersonic transport project of similar size and range to the Caravelle. It was merged with the similar Bristol Aeroplane Company project into the Anglo-French Concorde. The Concorde entered service in January 1967 as the second and last commercial supersonic transport, after large overruns and delays, costing \u00a31.3\u00a0billion. All subsequent French airliner efforts were part of the Airbus pan-European initiative.\nUSSR.\nSoon after the war, most of the Soviet fleet of airliners consisted of DC-3s or Lisunov Li-2s. These planes were in desperate need of replacement, and in 1946, the Ilyushin Il-12 made its first flight. The Il-12 was very similar in design to American Convair 240, except was unpressurized. In 1953, the Ilyushin Il-14 made its first flight, and this version was equipped with much more powerful engines. The main contribution that the Soviets made in regards to airliners was the Antonov An-2. This plane is a biplane, unlike most of the other airliners, and sold more units than any other transport plane.\nTypes.\nNarrow-body airliners.\nThe most common airliners are the narrow-body aircraft, or single-aisles.\nThe earliest jet airliners were narrowbodies: the initial de Havilland Comet, the Boeing 707 and its competitor the Douglas DC-8.\nThey were followed by smaller models : the Douglas DC-9 and its MD-80/MD-90/Boeing 717 derivatives; the Boeing 727, 737 and 757 using the 707 cabin cross-section; or the Tupolev Tu-154, Ilyushin Il-18, and the Ilyushin Il-62.\nCurrently produced narrow-body airliners include the Airbus A220, A320 family, Boeing 737, Embraer E-Jet family and Comac C919, generally used for medium-haul flights with 100 to 240 passengers. \nThey could be joined by the in-development Irkut MC-21.\nWide-body airliners.\nThe larger wide-body aircraft, or twin-aisle as they have two separate aisles in the cabin, are used for long-haul flights.\nThe first was the Boeing 747 quadjet, followed by the trijets: the Lockheed L-1011 and the Douglas DC-10, then its MD-11 stretch.\nThen other quadjets were introduced: the Ilyushin Il-86 and Il-96, the Airbus A340 and the double-deck A380.\nTwinjets were also put into service: the Airbus A300/A310, A330 and A350; the 767, 777 and 787.\nRegional aircraft.\nRegional airliners seat fewer than 100 passengers.\nThese smaller aircraft are often used to feed traffic at large airline hubs to larger aircraft operated by the major mainline carriers, legacy carriers, or flag carriers; often sharing the same livery.\nRegional jets include the Bombardier CRJ100/200 and Bombardier CRJ700 series, or the Embraer ERJ family.\nCurrently produced turboprop regional airliners include the Dash-8 series, and the ATR 42/72.\nCommuter aircraft.\nLight aircraft can be used as small commuter airliners, or as air taxis.\nTwin turboprops carrying up to 19 passengers include the Beechcraft 1900, Fairchild Metro, Jetstream 31, DHC-6 Twin Otter and Embraer EMB 110 Bandeirante.\nSmaller airliners include the single-engined turboprops like the Cessna Caravan and Pilatus PC-12; or twin piston-powered aircraft made by Cessna, Piper, Britten-Norman, and Beechcraft.\nThey often lack lavatories, stand-up cabins, pressurization, galleys, overhead storage bins, reclining seats, or a flight attendant.\nEngines.\nUntil the beginning of the Jet Age, piston engines were common on propliners such as the Douglas DC-3. Nearly all modern airliners are now powered by turbine engines, either turbofans or turboprops. Gas turbine engines operate efficiently at much higher altitudes, are more reliable than piston engines, and produce less vibration and noise. The use of a common fuel type \u2013 kerosene-based jet fuel \u2013 is another advantage.\nAirliner variants.\nSome variants of airliners have been developed for carrying freight or for luxury corporate use. Many airliners have also been modified for government use as VIP transports and for military functions such as airborne tankers (for example, the Vickers VC10, Lockheed L-1011, Boeing 707), air ambulance (USAF/USN McDonnell Douglas DC-9), reconnaissance (Embraer ERJ 145, Saab 340, and Boeing 737), as well as for troop-carrying roles.\nConfiguration.\nModern jetliners are usually low-wing designs with two engines mounted underneath the swept wings, while turboprop aircraft are slow enough to use straight wings. Smaller airliners sometimes have their engines mounted on either side of the rear fuselage. Numerous advantages and disadvantages exist due to this arrangement. Perhaps the most important advantage to mounting the engines under the wings is that the total aircraft weight is more evenly distributed across the wingspan, which imposes less bending moment on the wings and allows for a lighter wing structure. This factor becomes more important as aircraft weight increases, and no in-production airliners have both a maximum takeoff weight more than 50 tons and engines mounted on the fuselage. The Antonov An-148 is the only in-production jetliner with high-mounted wings (usually seen in military transport aircraft), which reduces the risk of damage from unpaved runways.\nExcept for a few experimental or military designs, all aircraft built to date have had all of their weight lifted off the ground by airflow across the wings. In terms of aerodynamics, the fuselage has been a mere burden. NASA and Boeing are currently developing a blended wing body design in which the entire airframe, from wingtip to wingtip, contributes lift. This promises a significant gain in fuel efficiency.\nCurrent manufacturers.\nThe major manufacturers with large aircraft airliners currently in production include:\nThe narrow-body and wide-body airliner market is dominated by Airbus and Boeing, and the regional airliner market is shared between ATR Aircraft, De Havilland Canada, and Embraer.\nSetting up a reliable customer support network, ensuring uptime, availability and support 24/7 and anywhere, is critical for the success of airliner manufacturers.\nBoeing and Airbus are ranked 1 and 2 in customer satisfaction for aftermarket support by a survey by Inside MRO and Air Transport World, and this is a reason why Mitsubishi Aircraft Corporation purchased the Bombardier CRJ program.\nIt is an entry barrier for new entrants like the Xian MA700 and Comac C919, with no credible previous experience with the MA60, or the Irkut MC-21 after the Sukhoi Superjet 100.\nFleet.\nThe airliner fleet went from 13,500 in 2000 to 25,700 in 2017: 16% to 30.7% in Asia/Pacific (2,158 to 7,915), 34.7% to 23.6% in USA (4,686 to 6,069) and 24% to 20.5% in Europe (3,234 to 5,272).\nIn 2018, there were 29,398 airliners in service: 26,935 passenger transports and 2,463 freighters, while 2,754 others were stored.\nThe largest fleet was in Asia-Pacific with 8,808 (5% stored), followed by 8,572 in North America (10% stored), 7,254 in Europe (9% stored), 2,027 in Latin America, 1,510 in Middle East and 1,347 in Africa.\nNarrowbody are dominant with 16,235, followed by 5,581 Widebodies, 3,743 Turboprops, 3,565 Regional jets and 399 Others.\nBy the end of 2018, there were 1,826 parked or in storage jetliners out of 29,824 in service (6.1%): 1,434 narrowbodies and 392 widebodies, down from 9.8% of the fleet at the end of 2012 and 11.3% at the end of 2001.\nMarket.\nSince it began, the jet airliner market had a recurring pattern of seven years of growth followed by three years of deliveries falling 30\u201340%, except a steady growth from 2004 due to the economic rise of China going from 3% of world market in 2001 to 22% in 2015, expensive jet fuel till 2014 stimulating old jets replacement allowed by low interest rates since 2008, and strong airline passenger demand since.\nIn 2004, 718 Airbus and Boeings were delivered, worth $39.3 billion; 1,466 are expected in 2017, worth $104.4 billion: a growth by 3.5 from 2004 to 2020 is unprecedented and highly unusual for any mature market.\nIn 2016, the deliveries went for 38% in Asia-Pacific, 25% in Europe, 22% in North America, 7% in Middle East, 6% in South America and 2% in Africa. 1,020 narrowbodies were delivered and their backlog reach 10891: 4,991 A320neo, 644 A320ceo; 3,593 737 Max, 835 737NG, 348 CSeries, 305 C919 and 175 MC-21; while 398 widebodies were delivered : 137 Dreamliners and 99 B777 for \nBoeing (65%) against 63 A330 and 49 A350 for Airbus, more than 2,400 widebodies were in backlog, led by the A350 with 753 (31%) then the Boeing 787 with 694 (28%).\nThe most important driver of orders is airline profitability, itself driven mainly by world GDP growth but also supply and demand balance and oil prices, while new programmes by Airbus and Boeing help to stimulate aircraft demand.\nIn 2016, 38% of the 25 years old airliners had been retired, 50% of the 28 years old : there will be 523 aircraft reaching 25 years old in 2017, 1,127 in 2026 and 1,628 in 2041.\nDeliveries rose by 80% from 2004 to 2016, they represented 4.9% of the fleet in 2004 and 5.9% in 2016, down from 8% previously.\nOil prices and airshow orders are trending together.\nIn 2020, deliveries were down by more than 50% compared to 2019 due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on aviation, after 10 years of growth.\nStorage, scrapping and recycling.\nStorage can be an adjustment variable for the airliner fleet: as Jan\u2013Apr 2018 RPKs are up by 7% over a year and FTKs up by 5.1%, the IATA reports 81 net aircraft went back from storage (132 recalled and 51 stored) in April.\nIt is the second month of storage contraction after eight of expansion and the largest in four years, while new aircraft deliveries fell slightly to 448 from 454 due to supply-chain issues and in-service issues grounding others.\nRetirements were down by 8% and utilization up by 2%, according to Canaccord Genuity, driving used aircraft and engines values up while MRO shops have unexpected demand for legacy products like the PW4000 and GE CF6.\nCabin configurations and features.\nAn airliner will usually have several classes of seating: first class, business class, and/or economy class (which may be referred to as coach class or tourist class, and sometimes has a separate \"premium\" economy section with more legroom and amenities). The seats in more expensive classes are wider, more comfortable, and have more amenities such as \"lie flat\" seats for more comfortable sleeping on long flights. Generally, the more expensive the class, the better the beverage and meal service.\nDomestic flights generally have a two-class configuration, usually first or business class and coach class, although many airlines instead offer all-economy seating. International flights generally have either a two-class configuration or a three-class configuration, depending on the airline, route and aircraft type. Many airliners offer movies or audio/video on demand (this is standard in first and business class on many international flights and may be available on economy). Cabins of all classes have lavatory facilities, reading lights, and air vents. Some larger airliners have a rest compartment reserved for crew use during breaks.\nSeats.\nThe types of seats that are provided and how much legroom is given to each passenger are decisions made by the individual airlines, not the aircraft manufacturers. Seats are mounted in \"tracks\" on the floor of the cabin and can be moved back and forth by the maintenance staff or removed altogether. One driver of airline profitability is how many passengers can be seated in economy class cabins, meaning that airline companies have an incentive to place seats close together to fit as many passengers in as possible. In contrast, \u2018premium class\u2019 seat configurations provide more space for travelers.\nPassengers seated in an exit row (the row of seats adjacent to an emergency exit) usually have substantially more legroom than those seated in the remainder of the cabin, while the seats directly in front of the exit row may have less legroom and may not even recline (for evacuation safety reasons). However, passengers seated in an exit row may be required to assist cabin crew during an emergency evacuation of the aircraft opening the emergency exit and assisting fellow passengers to the exit. As a precaution, many airlines prohibit young people under the age of 15 from being seated in the exit row.\nThe seats are designed to withstand strong forces so as not to break or come loose from their floor tracks during turbulence or accidents. The backs of seats are often equipped with a fold-down tray for eating, writing, or as a place to set up a portable computer, or a music or video player. Seats without another row of seats in front of them have a tray that is either folded into the armrest or that clips into brackets on the underside of the armrests. However, seats in premium cabins generally have trays in the armrests or clip-on trays, regardless of whether there is another row of seats in front of them. Seatbacks now often feature small colour LCD screens for videos, television and video games. Controls for this display as well as an outlet to plug in audio headsets are normally found in the armrest of each seat.\nOverhead bins.\nThe overhead bins, also known as overhead lockers or pivot bins, are used for stowing carry-on baggage and other items. While the airliner manufacturer will normally specify a standard version of the product to supply, airlines can choose to have bins of differing size, shape, or color installed. Over time, overhead bins evolved out of what were originally overhead shelves that were used for little more than coat and briefcase storage. As concerns about falling debris during turbulence or in accidents increased, enclosed bins became the norm. Bins have increased in size to accommodate the larger carry-on baggage passengers can bring onto the aircraft. Newer bin designs have included a handrail, useful when moving through the cabin.\nPassenger service units.\nAbove the passenger seats are Passenger Service Units (PSU). These typically contain reading lights, air vents, and a flight attendant call light. On most narrowbody aircraft (and some Airbus A300s and A310s), the flight attendant call button and the buttons to control the reading lights are located directly on the PSU, while on most widebody aircraft, the flight attendant call button and the reading light control buttons are usually part of the in-flight entertainment system. The units frequently have small \"Fasten Seat Belt\" and \"No Smoking\" illuminated signage and may also contain a speaker for the cabin public address system. On some newer aircraft, a \"Turn off electronic devices\" sign is used instead of the \"No Smoking\" sign, as smoking isn't permitted on board the aircraft anyway.\nThe PSU will also normally contain the drop-down oxygen masks which are activated if there is a sudden drop in cabin pressure. These are supplied with oxygen by means of a chemical oxygen generator. By using a chemical reaction rather than a connection to an oxygen tank, these devices supply breathing oxygen for long enough for the airliner to descend to thicker, more breathable air. Oxygen generators do generate considerable heat in the process. Because of this, the oxygen generators are thermally shielded and are only allowed in commercial airliners when properly installed \u2013 they are not permitted to be loaded as freight on passenger-carrying flights. ValuJet Flight 592 crashed on May 11, 1996, as a result of improperly loaded chemical oxygen generators.\nCabin pressurization.\nAirliners developed since the 1940s have had pressurized cabins (or, more accurately, pressurized hulls including baggage holds) to enable them to carry passengers safely at high altitudes where low oxygen levels and air pressure would otherwise cause sickness or death. High altitude flight enabled airliners to fly above most weather systems that cause turbulent or dangerous flying conditions, and also to fly faster and further as there is less drag due to the lower air density. Pressurization is applied using compressed air, in most cases bled from the engines, and is managed by an environmental control system which draws in clean air, and vents stale air out through a valve.\nPressurization presents design and construction challenges to maintain the structural integrity and sealing of the cabin and hull and to prevent rapid decompression. Some of the consequences include small round windows, doors that open inwards and are larger than the door hole, and an emergency oxygen system.\nTo maintain a pressure in the cabin equivalent to an altitude close to sea level would, at a cruising altitude around , create a pressure difference between inside the aircraft and outside the aircraft that would require greater hull strength and weight. Most people do not suffer ill effects up to an altitude of , and maintaining cabin pressure at this equivalent altitude significantly reduces the pressure difference and therefore the required hull strength and weight. A side effect is that passengers experience some discomfort as the cabin pressure changes during ascent and descent to the majority of airports, which are at low altitudes.\nCabin climate control.\nThe air bled from the engines is hot and requires cooling by air conditioning units. It is also extremely dry at cruising altitude, and this causes sore eyes, dry skin and mucosa on long flights. Although humidification technology could raise its relative humidity to comfortable middle levels, this is not done since humidity promotes corrosion to the inside of the hull and risks condensation which could short electrical systems, so for safety reasons it is deliberately kept to a low value, around 10%. Another problem of the air coming from the ventilation (unto which the oil lubrication system of the engines is hooked up) is that fumes from components in the synthetic oils can sometimes travel along, causing passengers, pilots and crew to be intoxicated. The illness it causes is called aerotoxic syndrome.\nBaggage holds.\nAirliners must have space on board to store \"checked\" baggage \u2013 that which will not safely fit in the passenger cabin.\nDesigned to hold baggage as well as freight, these compartments are called \"cargo bins\", \"baggage holds\", \"luggage holds\", or occasionally \"pits\". Occasionally baggage holds may be referred to as cargo decks on the largest of aircraft. These compartments can be accessed through doors on the outside of the aircraft.\nDepending on the aircraft, baggage holds are normally inside the hull and are therefore pressurized just like the passenger cabin although they may not be heated. While lighting is normally installed for use by the loading crew, typically the compartment is unlit when the door is closed.\nBaggage holds on modern airliners are equipped with fire detection equipment and larger aircraft have automated or remotely activated fire-fighting devices installed.\nNarrow-body airliners.\nMost \"narrow-body\" airliners with more than 100 seats have space below the cabin floor, while smaller aircraft often have a special compartment separate from the passenger area but on the same level.\nBaggage is normally stacked within the bin by hand, sorted by destination category. Netting that fits across the width of the bin is secured to limit movement of the bags. Airliners often carry items of freight and mail. These may be loaded separately from the baggage or mixed in if they are bound for the same destination. For securing bulky items \"hold down\" rings are provided to tie items into place.\nWide-body airliners.\n\"Wide-body\" airliners frequently have a compartment like the ones described above, typically called a \"bulk bin\". It is normally used for late arriving luggage or bags which may have been checked at the gate.\nHowever, most baggage and loose freight items are loaded into containers called Unit Load Devices (ULDs), often referred to as \"cans\". ULDs come in a variety of sizes and shapes, but the most common model is the LD3. This particular container has approximately the same height as the cargo compartment and fits across half of its width.\nULDs are loaded with baggage and are transported to the aircraft on dolly carts and loaded into the baggage hold by a loader designed for the task. By means of belts and rollers an operator can maneuver the ULD from the dolly cart, up to the aircraft baggage hold door, and into the aircraft. Inside the hold, the floor is also equipped with drive wheels and rollers that an operator inside can use to move the ULD properly into place. Locks in the floor are used to hold the ULD in place during flight.\nFor consolidated freight loads, like a pallet of boxes or an item too oddly shaped to fit into a container, flat metal pallets that resemble large baking sheets that are compatible with the loading equipment are used.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51216", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51216", "title": "Two-Tone", "text": ""}
{"id": "51217", "revid": "48014761", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51217", "title": "Third wave ska", "text": ""}
{"id": "51218", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51218", "title": "Culture of Egypt", "text": " \nThe culture of Egypt has thousands of years of recorded history. A cradle of civilization, Ancient Egypt was among the earliest civilizations in the world. For millennia, Egypt developed strikingly unique, complex and stable cultures that influenced other cultures of Europe, Africa and Asia.\nLanguages.\nArabic is currently Egypt's official language. It came to Egypt in the 7th century, and it is the formal and official language of the state which is used by the government and newspapers. Meanwhile, the Egyptian Arabic dialect or \"Masri\" is the official spoken language of the people. Of the many varieties of Arabic, the Egyptian dialect is the most widely spoken and the most understood, due to the great influence of Egyptian cinema and the Egyptian media throughout the Arabic-speaking world. Today many foreign students tend to learn it throughout Egyptian songs and movies, and the dialect is usually labelled by the general public as one of the easiest and fastest to learn, mainly due to the huge amount of accessible sources (movies, series, TV shows, books, etc.) that contribute to its learning process. Egypt's position in the heart of the Arabic speaking world has made it the centre of culture and its widespread dialect has had a huge influence on almost all neighbouring dialects, having so many Egyptian sayings in their daily lives. \nThe Egyptian language, which formed a separate branch among the family of Afro-Asiatic languages, was among the first written languages and is known from the hieroglyphic inscriptions preserved on monuments and sheets of papyrus. The Coptic language, the most recent stage of Egyptian written in mainly Greek alphabet with seven demotic letters, is today the liturgical language of the Coptic Orthodox Church.\nThe \"Koin\u00e9\" dialect of the Greek language was important in Hellenistic Alexandria, and was used in the philosophy and science of that culture, and was later studied by Arabic scholars.\nIn the upper Nile Valley, southern Egypt, around Kom Ombo and south of Aswan, there are about 300,000 speakers of Nubian languages; mainly Noubi, but also Kenuzi-Dongola. In Siwa Oasis, there is also the Siwi language that is spoken by about 20,000 speakers. Other minorities include roughly two thousand Greek speakers in Alexandria and Cairo as well as roughly 5,000 Armenian speakers.\nLiterature.\nMany Egyptians believed that when it came to a death of their Pharaoh, they would have to bury the Pharaoh deep inside the Pyramid.\nThe ancient Egyptian literature dates back to the Old Kingdom, in the third millennium BC. Religious literature is best known for its hymns to and its mortuary texts. The oldest extant Egyptian literature is the Pyramid Texts: the mythology and rituals carved around the tombs of rulers. The later, secular literature of ancient Egypt includes the \"wisdom texts\", forms of philosophical instruction. The \"Instruction of Ptahhotep\", for example, is a collation of moral proverbs by an Egto (the middle of the second millennium BC) seem to have been drawn from an elite administrative class, and were celebrated and revered into the New Kingdom (to the end of the second millennium). In time, the Pyramid Texts became Coffin Texts (perhaps after the end of the Old Kingdom), and finally, the mortuary literature produced its masterpiece, the \"Book of the Dead\", during the New Kingdom.\nThe Middle Kingdom was the golden age of Egyptian literature. Some texts include the Tale of Neferty, the Instructions of Amenemhat I, the Tale of Sinuhe, the Story of the Shipwrecked Sailor and the Story of the Eloquent Peasant. \"Instructions\" became a popular literary genre of the New Kingdom, taking the form of advice on proper behavior. The Story of Wenamun and the \"Instruction of Any\" are examples from this period.\nDuring the Greco-Roman period (332 BC \u2212 AD 639), Egyptian literature was translated into other languages, and Greco-Roman literature fused with native art into a new style of writing. From this period comes the Rosetta Stone, which became the key to unlocking the mysteries of Egyptian writing to modern scholarship. The city of Alexandria boasted its Library of almost half a million handwritten books during the third century BC. Alexandria's center of learning also produced the Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible, the Septuagint.\nDuring the first few centuries of the Christian era, Egypt was a source of a great deal of ascetic literature in the Coptic language. Egyptian monasteries translated many Greek and Syriac words, which are now only extant in Coptic. Under Islam, Egypt continued to be a great source of literary endeavor, now in the Arabic language. In 970, al-Azhar University was founded in Cairo, which to this day remains the most important center of Sunni Islamic learning. In 12th-century Egypt, the Jewish Talmudic scholar Maimonides produced his most important work.\nIn contemporary times, Egyptian novelists and poets were among the first to experiment with modern styles of Arabic-language literature, and the forms they developed have been widely imitated. The first modern Egyptian novel \"Zaynab\" by Muhammad Husayn Haykal was published in 1913 in the Egyptian vernacular. Egyptian novelist Naguib Mahfouz was the first Arabic-language writer to win the Nobel Prize in Literature. Many Egyptian books and films are available throughout the Middle East. Other Egyptian writers include Nawal El Saadawi, known for her feminist works and activism, and Alifa Rifaat who also wrote about women and tradition. Vernacular poetry is said to be the most popular literary genre amongst Egyptians, represented by Bayram el-Tunsi, Ahmed Fouad Negm (Fagumi), Salah Jaheen and Abdel Rahman el-Abnudi. \nAn example of modern poetry in classical Arabic style with themes of Pan-Arabism is the work of Aziz Pasha Abaza. He came from Abaza family which produced notable Arabic literary figures including Ismail Pasha Abaza, Fekry Pasha Abaza, novelist Tharwat Abaza, and Desouky Bek Abaza, among others.\nReligion.\nAbout 85-95% percent of Egypt's population is Muslim, with a Sunni majority. About 5- 15% percent of the population is Coptic Christian; other religions and other forms of Christianity comprise the remaining three percent. \nSunni Islam sees Egypt as an important part of its religion due to not only Quranic verses mentioning the country, but also due to the Al-Azhar University, one of the earliest of the world universities. It was created as a school for religion studies and works.\nVisual art.\nEgyptian art in antiquity.\nThe Egyptians were one of the first major civilizations to codify design elements in art. The wall painting done in the service of the Pharaohs followed a rigid code of visual rules and meanings. Early Egyptian art is characterized by the absence of linear perspective, which results in a seemingly flat space. These artists tended to create images based on what they knew, and not as much on what they saw. Objects in these artworks generally do not decrease in size as they increase in distance and there is little shading to indicate depth. Sometimes, distance is indicated through the use of \"tiered space\", where more distant objects are drawn higher above the nearby objects, but in the same scale and with no overlapping of forms. People and objects are almost always drawn in profile.\nPainting achieved its greats height in Dynasty XVIII during the reigns of Tuthmose IV and Amenhotep III. The Fragmentary panel of the Lady Thepu, on the right, dates from the time of the latter king.\nEarly Egyptian artists did have a system for maintaining dimensions within artwork. They used a grid system that allowed them to create a smaller version of the artwork, and then scale up the design based upon proportional representation in a larger grid.\nEgyptian art in modern times.\nModern and contemporary Egyptian art can be as diverse as any works in the world art scene. Some well-known names include Mahmoud Mokhtar, Abdel Hadi Al Gazzar, Farouk Hosny, Gazbia Sirry, Kamal Amin, Hussein El Gebaly, Sawsan Amer and many others. Many artists in Egypt have taken on modern media such as digital art and this has been the theme of many exhibitions in Cairo in recent times. There has also been a tendency to use the World Wide Web as an alternative outlet for artists and there is a strong Art-focused internet community on groups that have found origin in Egypt.\nScience.\nEgypt's cultural contributions have included great works of science, art, and mathematics, dating from antiquity to modern times.\nImhotep.\nConsidered to be the first engineer, architect and physician in history known by name, Imhotep designed the Pyramid of Djoser (the Step Pyramid) at Saqqara in Egypt around 2630\u20132611 BC, and may have been responsible for the first known use of columns in architecture. The Egyptian historian Manetho credited him with inventing stone-dressed building during Djoser's reign, though he was not the first to actually build with stone. Imhotep is also believed to have founded Egyptian medicine, being the author of the world's earliest known medical document, the Edwin Smith Papyrus.\nPtolemaic and Roman Egypt.\nThe silk road led straight through ancient Alexandria. Also, the Royal Library of Alexandria was once the largest in the world. It is usually assumed to have been founded at the beginning of the 3rd century BC during the reign of Ptolemy II of Egypt after his father had set up the Temple of the Muses or Museum. The initial organization is attributed to Demetrius Phalereus. The Library is estimated to have stored at its peak 400,000 to 700,000 scrolls.\nOne of the reasons so little is known about the Library is that it was lost centuries after its creation. All that is left of many of the volumes are tantalizing titles that hint at all the history lost due to the building's destruction. Few events in ancient history are as controversial as the destruction of the Library, as the historical record is both contradictory and incomplete. Its destruction has been attributed by some authors to, among others, Julius Caesar, Augustus, and Catholic zealots during the purge of the Arian heresy, Not surprisingly, the Great Library became a symbol of knowledge itself, and its destruction was attributed to those who were portrayed as ignorant barbarians, often for purely political reasons.\nA new library was inaugurated in 2003 near the site of the old library.\nThe Lighthouse of Alexandria, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, designed by Sostratus of Cnidus and built during the reign of Ptolemy I Soter served as the city's landmark, and later, lighthouse.\nMathematics and technology.\nAlexandria, being the center of the Hellenistic world, produced a number of great mathematicians, astronomers, and scientists such as Ctesibius, Pappus, and Diophantus. It also attracted scholars from all over the Mediterranean such as Eratosthenes of Cyrene.\nPtolemy.\nPtolemy is one of the most famous astronomers and geographers from Egypt, famous for his work in Alexandria. Born Claudius Ptolemaeus (Greek: \u039a\u03bb\u03b1\u03cd\u03b4\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 \u03a0\u03c4\u03bf\u03bb\u03b5\u03bc\u03b1\u03af\u03bf\u03c2; c.\u200985\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009165), he was a geographer, astronomer, and astrologer.\nPtolemy was the author of two important scientific treatises. One is the astronomical treatise that is now known as the \"Almagest\" (in Greek \"\u0397 \u03bc\u03b5\u03b3\u03ac\u03bb\u03b7 \u03a3\u03cd\u03bd\u03c4\u03b1\u03be\u03b9\u03c2\", \"The Great Treatise\"). In this work, one of the most influential books of antiquity, Ptolemy compiled the astronomical knowledge of the ancient Greek and Babylonian world. Ptolemy's other main work is his \"Geography\". This too is a compilation, of what was known about the world's geography in the Roman Empire in his time.\nIn his \"Optics\", a work which survives only in an Arabic translation, he writes about properties of light, including reflection, refraction and colour. His other works include \"Planetary Hypothesis\", \"Planisphaerium\" and \"Analemma\". Ptolemy's treatise on astrology, the \"Tetrabiblos\", was the most popular astrological work of antiquity and also enjoyed great influence in the Islamic world and the medieval Latin West.\nPtolemy also wrote influential work Harmonics on music theory. After criticizing the approaches of his predecessors, Ptolemy argued for basing musical intervals on mathematical ratios (in contrast to the followers of Aristoxenus) backed up by empirical observation (in contrast to the over-theoretical approach of the Pythagoreans). He presented his own divisions of the tetrachord and the octave, which he derived with the help of a monochord. Ptolemy's astronomical interests appeared in a discussion of the music of the spheres.\nTributes to Ptolemy include Ptolemaeus crater on the Moon and Ptolemaeus crater on Mars.\nModern Egypt.\nAhmed Zewail.\nAhmed Zewail () (born February 26, 1946) is an Egyptian chemist, and the winner of the 1999 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work on femtochemistry. Born in Damanhur (60\u00a0km south-east of Alexandria) and raised in Disuq, he moved to the United States to complete his PhD at the University of Pennsylvania. He was awarded a faculty appointment at Caltech in 1976, where he has remained since.\nZewail's key work has been as the pioneer of femtochemistry. He developed a method using a rapid laser technique (consisting of ultrashort laser flashes), which allows the description of reactions at the atomic level. It can be viewed as a highly sophisticated form of flash photography\nIn 1999, Zewail became the third Egyptian to receive the Nobel Prize, following Anwar Sadat (1978 in Peace) and Naguib Mahfouz (1988 in Literature). In 1999, he received Egypt's highest state honor, the Grand Collar of the Nile.\nEgyptology.\nIn modern times, archaeology and the study of Egypt's ancient heritage as the field of Egyptology has become a major scientific pursuit in the country itself. The field began during the Middle Ages, and has been led by Europeans and Westerners in modern times. The study of Egyptology, however, has in recent decades been taken up by Egyptian arch\u00e6ologists such as Zahi Hawass and the Supreme Council of Antiquities he leads.\nThe discovery of the Rosetta Stone, a tablet written in ancient Greek, Egyptian Demotic script, and Egyptian hieroglyphs, has partially been credited for the recent stir in the study of Ancient Egypt. Greek, a well-known language, gave linguists the ability to decipher the mysterious Egyptian hieroglyphic language. The ability to decipher hieroglyphics facilitated the translation of hundreds of the texts and inscriptions that were previously indecipherable, giving insight into Egyptian culture that would have otherwise been lost to the ages. The stone was discovered on July 15, 1799, in the port town of Rosetta, Egypt, and has been held in the British Museum since 1802.\nSport.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Egypt. Egyptian football clubs, especially Zamalek and Al Ahly are known throughout Africa. The Egyptian national football team won the African Cup of Nations a record 7 times (in 1957, 1959, 1986, 1998, 2006 (on home soil), 2008 and 2010). Egypt was the first African country to join FIFA, but it has only made it to the FIFA World Cup three times, in 1934, 1990 and 2018. Egypt also won the World Military Cup five times and finished as runners-up twice.\nOther popular sports in Egypt are basketball, handball, squash, and tennis.\nThe Egyptian national basketball team holds the record for best performance at the Basketball World Cup and at the Summer Olympics in Middle East and Africa. Egypt hosted the 2017 FIBA Under-19 Basketball World Cup and is the only African country to host an official basketball world cup at junior or senior level. Further, the country hosted the official African Basketball Championship on six occasions. Egypt also hosted multiple continental youth championships including the 2020 FIBA Africa Under-18 Championship and the 2020 FIBA Africa Under-18 Championship for Women. \"The Pharaohs\", as they are commonly known, won 16 medals at the African Championship.\nSince the early 1990s, the Egyptian national handball team has won regional and continental tournaments as well as reaching fourth place internationally in 2001. The Junior national handball team won the world title in 1993 and it hosted the tournament in 2010.\nLocal sports clubs receive financial support from the local governments, and many sporting clubs are financially and administratively supported by the government.\nMedia.\nCinema.\nIn 1940, Egyptian cinema has flourished since the 1930s. As a result, the Egyptian capital has been dubbed the \"Hollywood of the Middle East\", where the world-renowned Cairo International Film Festival is held every year. The festival has been rated by the International Federation of Film Producers Associations as being among the 11 top-class film festivals worldwide.\nThe Egyptian film industry is the largest &amp; most developed within Arabic-speaking cinema.\nMusic and dance.\nEgyptian music is a rich mixture of indigenous Egyptian and Western influences.\nAs early as 4000 BC, ancient Egyptians were playing harps and flutes, as well as two indigenous instruments: the ney and the oud. However, there is a little notation of Egyptian music before the 7th century AD, when Egypt became part of the Muslim world. Percussion and vocal music became important at this time and has remained an important part of Egyptian music today.\nContemporary Egyptian music traces its beginnings to the creative work of Abdu-l Hamuli, Almaz, Sayed Mikkawi, and Mahmud Osman, who were all patronized by Khedive Ismail and who influenced the later work of Sayed Darwish, Umm Kulthum, Mohammed Abdel Wahab, Abdel Halim Hafez and other Egyptian musicians.\nFrom the 1970s onwards, Egyptian pop music has become increasingly important in Egyptian culture, particularly among the large youth population of Egypt. Egyptian folk music is also popular, played during weddings and other festivities. In the last quarter of the 20th century, Egyptian music was a way to communicate social and class issues. The most popular Egyptian pop singers are Amr Diab, Tamer Hosny, Mohamed Mounir, Angham and Ali El Haggar. Electronic music composers, Halim El-Dabh, is an Egyptian.\nBelly dance, or \"Raqs Sharqi\" (literally: oriental dancing) may have originated in Egypt.\nThe Arabic musical discipline known as \"maqam,\" or chanting has both secular and religious uses. Maqams are almost always sung by men in the region, where women who perform music or sing publicly are often viewed as promiscuous. The members of Alhour, Egypt's first all-female Muslim recitation choir, are challenging deep-rooted taboos about women singing in public or reciting from the Quran in the socially conservative country. Alhour choir was launched in 2017.\nClothing.\nThe hijab became more unpopular with educated women, including devout Muslims, in the early 20th century as the British authorities discouraged it and as women sought to gain modern positions of power. The hijab became more popular in the 1970s, with women choosing to adopt it due to the surge of pan-Arabism (especially its islamically rooted side) and Wahabbism as a result of the returning Egyptian migrants from Gulf Arab countries who got influenced by their beliefs &amp; cultural set during their stay there.\nIn 2012, Misr International Films was producing a television series based on the novel \"Zaat\" by Sonallah Ibrahim. Filming of scenes set at Ain Shams University was scheduled to occur that year. However, Muslim Brotherhood student members and some teachers at the school protested, stating that the 1970s era clothing worn by the actresses was indecent and would not allow filming unless the clothing was changed. Gaby Khoury, the head of the film company, stated that the engineering department head, Sherif Hammad, \"insisted that the filming should stop and that we would be reimbursed ... explaining that he was not able to guarantee the protection of the materials or the artists.\"\nCuisine.\nEgyptian cuisine consists of local culinary traditions such as Ful medames, Falafel, Kushari, and Molokhia. It also shares similarities with food found throughout the eastern Mediterranean like Kebab and Shawarma.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51219", "revid": "33299132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51219", "title": "Thrasamund", "text": "Thrasamund (c.450 \u2013 523), became King of the Vandals and Alans in 496, the fourth king in a line of rulers over the North African Kingdom of the Vandals. He was the son of Gento and the grandson of the Vandal Kingdom's founder, Gaiseric. Thrasamund ruled longer than any other Vandal king in Africa aside from his grandfather. He was known for his commitment to Arianism and for his antagonism towards Catholics. Upon his death in 523, Thrasamund was succeeded by his cousin, Hilderic.\nEarly life.\nThrasamund was born to Gaiseric's son, Gento, and became king in 496 after his brother, King Gunthamund died. Upon Gunthamund's death, Thrasamund was one of only two living grandsons of Gaiseric and inherited the throne in accordance with a law enacted by his grandfather, which bestowed the kingship on the eldest male member of a deceased king's family. \nThe Byzantine historian Procopius described Thrasamund as \"especially good-looking\" and quipped that the Vandal king was \"gifted with discretion and high-mindedness.\"\nReign.\nDuring Thrasamnund's monarchy, the Vandals in North Africa enjoyed lengthy periods of relative peace, the economy was flourishing, and cultural life was thriving. The Vandal king Thrasamund has been depicted as a \"scholar king\" in a number of poems from the sixth-century. More specifically, one poem by Florentinus praised Thrasamund's reverence, foresight, bravery, vigorous education, and intelligence, while claiming that with him as king, \"the citadel of Carthage shines forth steadily\". Florentinus essentially casts Thrasamund in the very \"mold of a Roman emperor\" and depicts him as having created a favorable cultural environment for scholarly debate, including over matters of theology. \nIf Procopius can be believed, Thrasamund did not take a hard line against Catholics like his immediate Vandal predecessors had, but instead sought more earnestly to coerce them at first. To ensure his authority, Thrasamund required annual oaths of loyalty from his subordinates, indicated by panegyrics from contemporaneous figures. To his credit perhaps, his ascension was marked by substantial changes in the Vandal \"regnum\"'s diplomatic situation. \nTies to Theodoric the Great.\nPerhaps to strengthen the bonds among the barbarian kingdoms, Theoderic the Great married his widowed sister Amalafrida to Thrasamund, providing a dowry consisting of the promontory of Lilybaeum in Sicily, and a retinue of a thousand elite troops and five thousand armed retainers. It is conceivable that such a sizable contingent of Goths surrounding Amalafrida was Theodoric's way of ensuring he could intervene in Vandal affairs if necessary and could have potentially made Thrasamund a \"subordinate\" to the Ostrogothic king. After all, historian Hans-Ulrich Wiemer points out that Thrasamund's force strength was only about twice what Theodeoric sent with Amalafridfa. A panegyric from 507 celebrated Vandal \"obedience\" to Theodoric's rule and the Roman statesman Cassiodorus\u2014serving in Theodoric's employ\u2014implied that one of Italy's great enemies had been \"brought to heel by Gothic diplomacy\". Austrian historian Herwig Wolfram places the date of the marriage between Amalafrida and Thrasamund at around 500. This union secured a strong bond between the kingdoms in North Africa and Italy. The arrangements between the three barbarian kingdoms of Vandals, Ostrogoths, and Visigoths\u2014each of which occupied adjacent realms around the Mediterranean\u2014were strengthened by their shared Arianism and could have been \"anti-Byzantine in purpose\". \nInstead of receiving tribute payments, Thrasamund had to be content thereafter with friendly relations between his Vandals and Theodoric's Ostrogoths. Despite this alliance, Thrasamund was unable to aid the Ostrogothic king Theodoric when the Byzantine Navy ravaged the coast of southern Italy, which also prevented him from coming to the assistance of King Alaric II of the Visigoths during the Battle of Vouill\u00e9, contributing to a Visigothic defeat. It seems Thrasamund was wary of sending his fleet against the Byzantine emperor, since he appeared to have valued his relationship with emperor Anastasius over any alliance obligations he otherwise had to Theodoric. It would not be the last time that Thrasamund disappointed the Ostrogothic king. Nonetheless, Thrasamund remained \"closely allied\" to Byzantium. \nSometime in 510, Gesalec\u2014the illegitimate son of the Visigoth king Alaric II\u2014who became king himself and was once recognized by Theodoric, fell from the Ostrogothic monarch's favor and was driven from the throne after losing a key strategic node\u2014the former Visigothic capital at Narbonne; after which, he fled to Thrasamund in Carthage. Thrasamund generously gave Gesalec money, who then returned to his kingdom and formed an army at Aquitaine to fight the Ostrogothic general Ibbas. Defeated by Ibbas, Geselec tried to flee to the Burgundians but was captured and put to death before reaching them. Feeling again betrayed by Thrasamund for harboring and aiding an identified rival of the Ostrogothic kingdom, Theodoric expressed his displeasure in a letter to his brother-in-law: \nAlthough, to reinforce concord [\"concordia\"] with sundry kings, We joined to them, at their request, either nieces or daughters as God inspired Us, still We think We conferred on no one anything comparable to making Our sister, the singular glory of the Amal line, your spouse: a woman your equal in wisdom [\"prudentia\"], a woman who can be admired for her council even more than she should be revered by your kingdom. \nBut I am stunned that, despite the fact that you were obligated by these favors, Gesalec, who joined our enemies while favored by Ourselves, was received into your protection in such a way that, although he came to you abandoned by his forces and bereft of means, yet he was outfitted with a sudden abundance of money and sent over [the Mediterranean] to foreign peoples [\"gentes exteras\"]; and though he proved utterly harmless, thanks be to God, he still unveiled the nature of your mind. \nWhat can the rights of foreigners expect, if kinship by marriage [\"affinitas\"] deserves such treatment? If he was received in your kingdom out of pity, he should have been held there; if he was expelled for Our sake, then he should not have been sent with riches over to the kingdoms of others, which Our struggles absolutely prevented from becoming hostile to yourself.\nNow the undisputed master of the Iberian Peninsula, Theodoric communicated from a place of power, which Thrasamund recognized, remorsefully appealing to Theodoric for forgiveness\u2014a plea accompanied with precious gifts of gold. \nNot only did Theodoric forgive Thrasamund, admonishing him accordingly, but he also returned the gold. Historian Peter Heather explains that Theodoric's rejection of a gift and its return was a \"calculated insult\" and a warning to Thrasamund that \"the Vandal kingdom was still on probation\". Thrasamund subsequently never again \"dared to provoke\" the Ostrogothic king.\nMoors on the periphery.\nAt the time of his wedding, Thrasamund and his Vandals were already at war with several Moorish kingdoms. Throughout the course of his rule, Thrasamund faced the ongoing threat posed by the Moors along the periphery of his territories, who became increasingly destructive and formidable across north Africa. \nIn the final year of Thrasamund's reign, the important port city of Leptis Magna was sacked by a mixed army of Moors and Berbers. Procopius describes a battle between the Berbers of Tripoli under Cabaon and the Vandals, in which the Berbers used unusual tactics to defeat the Vandal cavalry. Historian Guy Halsall described the event as a \"severe defeat\" for the Vandals at Moorish hands in much the way it was for the next Vandal king, which eventually brought intervention to North Africa from Emperor Justinian.\nPersecution of Catholics.\nAccording to Gregory of Tours, Thrasamund engaged in persecution of Catholics in Spain in order to force them to embrace Arian Christianity. Gregory wrote of a story where a noblewoman was forcibly re-baptized against her will during which, she began to bleed into the water from menstruation while they carried it out. They subsequently killed her by beheading. However, Gregory's jaded version of Thrasamund's stance towards Catholics is not especially reliable according to scholars John Moorhead and Andrew Cain, who avow his chronology was confused and that Gregory was instead describing events that occurred under Gunderic's reign.\nStill, Thrasamund was strongly disposed to his Arianism and to traditional Roman culture, and he tried to persuade Catholics across his kingdom to turn away from the faith's doctrine and went so far as to even bribe Catholic officials. In 515, he also participated in a written theological dispute (favoring Arianism as he did) with the leading figure of the Catholics, Fulgentius of Ruspe, whom he invited\u2014along with Arian bishops\u2014to Carthage. Yet none of this intellectual exchange prevented him for persecuting members of the Catholic clergy; for instance, he banished Bishop Eugenius of Carthage and Fulgentius several times, including sending them to Sardinia. Other African clerics were likewise sent into exile at Sardinia by Thrasamund during his reign.\nEventually, Thrasamund ended many years of pressure upon the Catholic Church, which had begun under his uncle Huneric, a move which improved the Vandals' relations with the Byzantine Empire. Procopius states that Thrasamund became \"a very special friend of the Emperor Anastasius.\"\nDeath.\nSometime during 523, Thrasamund died in North Africa and was succeeded by his cousin Hilderic.\nShortly in the wake of Thrasamund's death, Hilderic reversed Thrasamund's strict policies towards Nicene Christians and \"allowed Catholics to worship freely\"; Thrasamund's widow Amalafrida then fled to the Moors on the edge of the Byzacena desert before being captured by the new Vandal king's agents and placed in prison, where she died.\nReferences.\nInformational notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51220", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51220", "title": "Francois Truffaut", "text": ""}
{"id": "51221", "revid": "33299132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51221", "title": "Gunthamund", "text": "Gunthamund (c. 450\u2013496), King of the Vandals and Alans (484\u2013496) was the third king of the north African Vandal Kingdom. He succeeded his unpopular uncle Huneric, and for that reason alone, enjoyed a rather successful reign.\nGunthamund was the second son born to Gento, the fourth and youngest son of Genseric, the founder of the Vandal kingdom in Africa. Because most of Genseric's immediate family was dead, his elder brothers having been murdered by Huneric, When Huneric died on 23 December 484, Gunthamund was the eldest male member of the family. In accordance with Genseric's laws on succession, which decreed that the oldest member of the family would be the successor, he was proclaimed king.\nGunthamund benefited throughout his reign from the fact that the Vandals' most powerful rivals, the Visigoths, Ostrogoths, and the Byzantine Empire, were all heavily involved in wars. Although the Vandals' power had fallen off greatly since its zenith under Genseric, they enjoyed peace under Gunthamund. While he was also an Arian, Gunthamund eased up on Huneric's persecutions of Catholic Christians, which reduced unrest in the kingdom, and stabilized the kingdom's economy, which had been on the verge of collapse.\nUnfortunately for the Vandals, Gunthamund died in his mid-forties and thus did not reign for a long time. He was succeeded by his brother Thrasamund, who was not as effective in ruling the kingdom."}
{"id": "51222", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51222", "title": "War of Jenkins Ear", "text": ""}
{"id": "51224", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51224", "title": "War of Jenkins' Ear", "text": "1739\u20131748 conflict between Britain and Spain\nThe War of Jenkins' Ear was fought between Great Britain and Spain from 1739 to 1748. Most of the fighting took place in New Granada and the Caribbean Sea, with major operations over by 1742. It is considered a related conflict of the 1740 to 1748 War of the Austrian Succession.\nThe name derives from Robert Jenkins, a British sea captain whose ear was allegedly severed in April 1731 by Spanish coast guards searching his ship for contraband. In 1738, opposition politicians in the British Parliament used the incident to incite support for a war against Spain.\nThe most significant operation of the war was a failed British attack on Cartagena in 1741, which resulted in heavy casualties and was not repeated. Apart from minor actions in Spanish Florida, Georgia, and Havana, after 1742 Britain and Spain focused their efforts on the War of the Austrian Succession in Europe.\nFighting formally ended with the 1748 Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, the terms of which meant Britain largely failed to achieve its original territorial and economic ambitions in the Americas. The war is significant in British naval history for George Anson's voyage around the world from 1740 to 1744.\nBackground.\nWhile the conflict is often portrayed as a trade dispute, modern historians argue Spanish concerns over British colonial expansion in North America were equally important. They also suggest a decisive factor in the path to war was the campaign by the Tory opposition, who sought to remove the Whig government led by Robert Walpole, Prime Minister since 1721.\nThe 1713 Treaty of Utrecht gave British merchants access to markets in Spanish America, including the , a monopoly to supply 5,000 slaves a year. Another was the , permitting two ships a year to sell 500 tons of goods each in Porto Bello in Panama, and Veracruz in Mexico. Both concessions were held by the South Sea Company, owned by the British government since 1720, although their value was insignificant compared to the trade between Britain and mainland Spain. \nThe itself has been described as a 'commercial illusion', with only eight ships in total sent from Britain between 1718 and 1733. Even for these, their primary purpose was to transport consumer goods that evaded customs duties. High tariffs on imported goods, combined with demand from local colonists, made smuggling too lucrative to be stopped. The Spanish therefore tried to either manage the illegal trade, or use it as an instrument of policy. During the Anglo-Spanish War (1727\u20131729), French ships were allowed through but British ones stopped, a policy reversed when Britain backed Spain in the 1733 to 1735 War of the Polish Succession.\nUnder the 1729 Treaty of Seville, the Spanish were allowed to check British vessels trading with the Americas for contraband. In 1731, the brig \"Rebecca\" was found to be carrying smuggled sugar, its captain Robert Jenkins later alleging his ear was partially amputated during the search by Spanish customs officers. While deprecating such treatment, the Royal Naval commander in Port Royal argued those involved in \"clandestine trade\" could not complain if their cargoes were confiscated, and often used violence themselves.\nTensions increased after the founding of the British colony of Georgia in 1732, seen as a threat to Spanish Florida, vital to protect shipping routes with mainland Spain. For their part, the British viewed the 1733 between Louis XV of France and Philip V of Spain as the first step in being replaced by France as Spain's largest trading partner. A second round of Spanish \"depredations\" in 1738 led to demands for compensation, with Tory-backed newsletters and pamphlets presenting them as being inspired by France. In London, opposition newspapers\u2014particularly the essay-paper \"The Champion\"\u2014ran serial columns (\u201cIndex to the Times\u201d and \u201cJournal of the War\u201d) that criticised naval preparation and ministerial conduct during the opening phase of the war. In support of their campaign against Walpole, the Tories exhibited Jenkins in the House of Commons, at which point the incident was widely publicised.\nThe January 1739 Convention of Pardo established a Commission to resolve the Georgia-Florida boundary dispute. It also agreed Spain would compensate British merchants for damages, while the South Sea Company would pay Philip V his share of profits on the , but the company refused to comply. As a result, George II declared war on 15 June, a decision formally ratified by Parliament on 23 October. On 20 July, a naval force under Admiral Edward Vernon sailed for the West Indies, and reached Antigua in early October.\nConduct of the war.\nFirst attack on La Guaira (22 October 1739).\nOn 22 October, Vernon sent three ships commanded by Captain Thomas Waterhouse to intercept Spanish ships between La Guaira and Porto Bello. He decided to attack a number of vessels that he observed at La Guaira, which was controlled by the Royal Guipuzcoan Company of Caracas. The governor of the Province of Venezuela, Brigadier Don had prepared the port defences, and Spanish troops were well-commanded by Captain Don Francisco Saucedo. On 22 October, Waterhouse entered the port of La Guaira flying the Spanish flag. Expecting attack, the port gunners were not deceived by his ruse; they waited until the British squadron was within range and then simultaneously opened fire. After three hours of heavy shelling, Waterhouse ordered a withdrawal. The battered British squadron sailed to Jamaica to undertake emergency repairs. Trying later to explain his actions, Waterhouse argued the capture of a few small Spanish vessels would not have justified the loss of his men.\nCapture of Portobelo (20\u201322 November 1739).\nPrior to 1739, trade between mainland Spain and its colonies was conducted only through specific ports; twice a year, outward bound ships assembled in C\u00e1diz and the \"Flota\" escorted to Portobelo or Veracruz. One way to impact Spanish trade was by attacking or blockading these ports but as many ships carried cargoes financed by foreign merchants, the strategy also risked damaging British and neutral interests.\nDuring the 1727 to 1729 Anglo-Spanish War, the British attempted to take Portobelo but retreated after heavy losses from disease. On 22 November 1739, Vernon attacked the port with six ships of the line; it fell within twenty-four hours and the British occupied the town for three weeks before withdrawing, having first destroyed its fortifications, port and warehouses.\nThe victory was widely celebrated in Britain; the famous song \"Rule Britannia\" was written in 1740 to mark the occasion and performed for the first time at a dinner in London honouring Vernon. The suburb of Portobello in Edinburgh and Portobello Road in London are among the places in Britain named after this success, while more medals were awarded for its capture than any other event in the eighteenth century.\nTaking a port in Spain's American empire was considered a foregone conclusion by many Patriot Whigs and opposition Tories. They now pressed a reluctant Walpole to launch larger naval expeditions to the Gulf of Mexico. In the longer term, the Spanish replaced the twice yearly \"Flota\" with a larger number of smaller convoys, calling at more ports and Portobelo's economy did not recover until the building of the Panama Canal nearly two centuries later.\nFirst attack on Cartagena de Indias (13\u201320 March 1740).\nFollowing the success of Portobelo, Vernon decided to focus his efforts on the capture of Cartagena de Indias in present-day Colombia. Both Vernon and Edward Trelawny, governor of Jamaica, considered the Spanish gold shipping port to be a prime objective. Since the outbreak of the war, and Vernon's arrival in the Caribbean, the British had made a concerted effort to gain intelligence on the defences of Cartagena. In October 1739, Vernon sent First Lieutenant Percival to deliver a letter to Blas de Lezo and Don Pedro Hidalgo, governor of Cartagena. Percival was to use the opportunity to make a detailed study of the Spanish defences. This effort was thwarted when Percival was denied entry to the port.\nOn 7 March 1740, in a more direct approach, Vernon undertook a reconnaissance-in-force of the Spanish city. Vernon left Port Royal in command of a squadron including ships of the line, two fire ships, three bomb vessels, and transport ships. Reaching Cartagena on 13 March, Vernon immediately landed several men to map the topography and to reconnoitre the Spanish squadron anchored in Playa Grande, west of Cartagena. Having not seen any reaction from the Spanish, on 18 March Vernon ordered the three bomb vessels to open fire on the city. Vernon intended to provoke a response that might give him a better idea of the defensive capabilities of the Spanish. Understanding Vernon's motives, Lezo did not immediately respond. Instead, Lezo ordered the removal of guns from some of his ships, in order to form a temporary shore battery for the purpose of suppressive fire. Vernon next initiated an amphibious assault, but in the face of strong resistance, the attempt to land 400 soldiers was unsuccessful. The British then undertook a three-day naval bombardment of the city. In total, the campaign lasted 21 days. Vernon then withdrew his forces, leaving HMS \"Windsor Castle\" and HMS \"Greenwich\" in the vicinity, with a mission to intercept any Spanish ship that might approach.\nDestruction of the fortress of San Lorenzo el Real Chagres (22\u201324 March 1740).\nAfter the destruction of Portobelo the previous November, Vernon proceeded to remove the last Spanish stronghold in the area. He attacked the fortress of San Lorenzo el Real Chagres, in present-day Panama on the banks of the Chagres River, near Portobelo. The fort was defended by Spanish patrol boats, and was armed with four guns and about thirty soldiers under Captain of Infantry Don Juan Carlos Guti\u00e9rrez Cevallos.\nAt 3 pm on 22 March 1740, the British squadron, composed of the ships \"Stafford\", \"Norwich\", \"Falmouth\" and \"Princess Louisa\", the frigate \"Diamond\", the bomb vessels \"Alderney\", \"Terrible\", and \"Cumberland\", the fireships \"Success\" and \"Eleanor\", and transports \"Goodly\" and \"Pompey\", under command of Vernon, began to bombard the Spanish fortress. Given the overwhelming superiority of the British forces, Captain Cevallos surrendered the fort on 24 March, after resisting for two days.\nFollowing the strategy previously applied at Porto Bello, the British destroyed the fort and seized the guns along with two Spanish patrol boats.\nDuring this time of British victories along the Caribbean coast, events taking place in Spain would prove to have a significant effect on the outcome of the largest engagement of the war. Spain had decided to replace Don Pedro Hidalgo as governor of Cartagena de Indias. But, the new governor-designate, Lieutenant General of the Royal Armies Sebasti\u00e1n de Eslava y Lazaga had first to dodge the Royal Navy in order to get to his new post. Starting from the Galician port of Ferrol, the vessels \"Galicia\" and \"San Carlos\" set out on the journey. Hearing the news, Vernon immediately sent four ships to intercept the Spanish. They were unsuccessful in their mission. The Spanish managed to circumvent the British interceptors and entered the port of Cartagena on 21 April 1740, landing there with the new governor and several hundred veteran soldiers.\nSecond attack on Cartagena de Indias (3 May 1740).\nIn May, Vernon returned to Cartagena de Indias aboard the flagship in charge of 13 warships, with the intention of bombarding the city. Lezo reacted by deploying his six ships of the line so that the British fleet was forced into ranges where they could only make short or long shots that were of little value. Vernon withdrew, asserting that the attack was merely a manoeuver. The main consequence of this action was to help the Spanish test their defences.\nThird attack on Cartagena de Indias (13 March\u201320 May 1741).\nThe largest action of the war was a major amphibious attack launched by the British under Admiral Edward Vernon in March 1741 against Cartagena de Indias, one of Spain's principal gold-trading ports in their colony of New Granada (today Colombia). Vernon's expedition was hampered by inefficient organisation, his rivalry with the commander of his land forces, and the logistical problems of mounting and maintaining a major trans-Atlantic expedition. The strong fortifications in Cartagena and the able strategy of Spanish Commander Blas de Lezo were decisive in repelling the attack. Heavy losses on the British side were due in large part to virulent tropical diseases, primarily an outbreak of yellow fever, which took more lives than were lost in battle.\nThe extreme ease with which the British destroyed Porto Bello led to a change in British plans. Instead of Vernon concentrating his next attack on Havana as expected, in order to conquer Cuba, he planned to attack Cartagena de Indias. Located in Colombia, it was the main port of the Viceroyalty and main point of the West Indian fleet for sailing to the Iberian Peninsula. In preparation the British gathered in Jamaica one of the largest fleets ever assembled. It consisted of 186 ships (60 more than the famous Spanish Armada of Philip II), bearing 2,620 artillery pieces and more than 27,000 men. Of that number, 10,000 were soldiers responsible for initiating the assault. There were also 12,600 sailors, 1,000 Jamaican slaves and macheteros, and 4,000 recruits from Virginia. The latter were led by Lawrence Washington, the older half-brother of George Washington, future President of the United States.\nColonial officials assigned Admiral Blas de Lezo to defend the fortified city. He was a marine veteran hardened by numerous naval battles in Europe, beginning with the War of the Spanish Succession, and by confrontations with European pirates in the Caribbean Sea and Pacific Ocean, and Barbary pirates in the Mediterranean Sea. Assisting in that effort were Melchor de Navarrete and Carlos Desnaux, with a squadron of six ships of the line (the flagship vessel together with the \"San Felipe,\" \"San Carlos,\" \"\u00c1frica,\" \"Drag\u00f3n,\" and \"Conquistador\") and a force of 3,000 soldiers, 600 militia and a group of native Indian archers.\nVernon ordered his forces to clear the port of all scuttled ships. On 13 March 1741, he landed a contingent of troops under command of Major General Thomas Wentworth and artillery to take Fort de San Luis de Bocachica. In support of that action, the British ships simultaneously opened with cannon fire, at a rate of 62 shots per hour. In turn, Lezo ordered four of the Spanish ships to aid 500 of his troops defending Desnaux's position, but the Spanish eventually had to retire to the city. Civilians were already evacuating it. After leaving Fort Bocagrande, the Spanish regrouped at Fort San Felipe de Barajas, while Washington's Virginians took up positions in the nearby hill of La Popa. Vernon, believing the victory at hand, sent a message to Jamaica stating that he had taken the city. The report was subsequently forwarded to London, where there was much celebration. Commemorative medals were minted, depicting the defeated Spanish defenders kneeling before Vernon. The robust image of the enemy depicted in the British medals bore little resemblance to Admiral Lezo. Maimed by years of battle, he was one-eyed with limited use of one hand.\nOn the evening of 19 April, the British mounted an assault in force upon Castillo San Felipe de Barajas. Three columns of grenadiers, supported by Jamaicans and several British companies, moved under cover of darkness, with the aid of an intense naval bombardment. The British fought their way to the base of the fort's ramparts where they discovered that the Spanish had dug deep trenches. This effectively rendered the British scaling equipment too short for the task. The British advance was stymied since the fort's walls had not been breached, and the ramparts could not be topped. Neither could the British easily withdraw in the face of intense Spanish fire and under the weight of their own equipment. The Spanish seized on this opportunity, with devastating effect.\nReversing the tide of battle, the Spanish initiated a fixed bayonet charge at first light, inflicting heavy casualties on the British. The surviving British forces retreated to the safety of their ships. The British maintained a naval bombardment, sinking what remained of the small Spanish squadron (after Lezo's decision to scuttle some of his ships in an effort to block the harbour entrance). The Spanish thwarted any British attempt to land another ground assault force. The British troops were forced to remain aboard ship for a month, without sufficient reserves. With supplies running low, and with the outbreak of disease (primarily yellow fever), which took the lives of many on the crowded ships, Vernon was forced to raise the siege on 9 May and return to Jamaica. Six thousand British died while only one thousand Spanish perished.\nVernon carried on, successfully attacking the Spanish at Guant\u00e1namo Bay, Cuba. On 5 March 1742, with the help of reinforcements from Europe, he launched an assault on Panama City, Panama. In 1742, Vernon was replaced by Rear-Admiral Chaloner Ogle and returned to England, where he gave an accounting to the Admiralty. He learned that he had been elected MP for Ipswich. Vernon maintained his naval career for another four years before retiring in 1746. In an active parliamentary career, Vernon advocated for improvements in naval procedures. He continued to hold an interest in naval affairs until his death in 1757.\nNews of the defeat at Cartagena was a significant factor in the downfall of the British Prime Minister Robert Walpole. Walpole's anti-war views were considered by the Opposition to have contributed to his poor prosecution of the war effort.\nThe new government under Lord Wilmington wanted to shift the focus of Britain's war effort away from the Americas and into the Mediterranean. Spanish policy, dictated by the queen Elisabeth Farnese of Parma, also shifted to a European focus, to recover lost Spanish possessions in Italy from the Austrians. In 1742, a large British fleet under Nicholas Haddock was sent to try and intercept a Spanish army being transported from Barcelona to Italy, which he failed to do having only 10 ships. With the arrival of additional ships from Britain in February 1742, Haddock successfully blockaded the Spanish coast failing to force the Spanish fleet into an action.\nLawrence Washington survived the yellow fever outbreak, and eventually retired to Virginia. He named his estate Mount Vernon, in honour of his former commander.\nAnson expedition.\nThe success of the Porto Bello operation led the British, in September 1740, to send a squadron under Commodore George Anson to attack Spain's possessions in the Pacific. Before they reached the Pacific, numerous men were killed by disease, they had to outrun pursuing Spanish naval vessels, and ultimately the fleet found itself in no shape to launch any sort of attack. Anson reassembled his force in the Juan Fern\u00e1ndez Islands, allowing them to recuperate before he moved up the Chilean coast, raiding the small town of Paita. He reached Acapulco too late to intercept the yearly Manila galleon, which had been one of the principal objectives of the expedition. He retreated across the Pacific, running into a storm that forced him to dock for repairs in Canton. After this he tried again the following year to intercept the Manila galleon. He accomplished this on 20 June 1743 off Cape Espiritu Santo, capturing more than a million gold coins.\nAnson sailed home, arriving in London more than three and a half years after he had set out, having circumnavigated the globe in the process. Less than a tenth of his forces had survived the expedition. Anson's achievements helped establish his name and wealth in Britain, leading to his appointment as First Lord of the Admiralty. One of his ships, HMS \"Wager\", was presumed lost in the storms round Cape Horn. The survivors would later take part in a sensational public inquiry concerning allegations of mutiny, cannibalism, and murder among the \"Wager\"'s crew.\nFlorida.\nIn 1740, the inhabitants of Georgia launched an overland attack on the fortified city of St. Augustine in Florida, supported by a British naval blockade, but were repelled. The British forces led by James Oglethorpe, the Governor of Georgia, besieged St. Augustine for over a month before retreating, and abandoned their artillery in the process. The failure of the Royal Navy blockade to prevent supplies reaching the settlement was a crucial factor in the collapse of the siege. Oglethorpe began preparing Georgia for an expected Spanish assault. The Battle of Bloody Mose, where the Spanish and free black forces repelled Oglethorpe's forces at Fort Mose, was also a part of the War of Jenkins' Ear.\nFrench neutrality.\nWhen war broke out in 1739, both Britain and Spain expected that France would join the war on the Spanish side. This played a large role in the tactical calculations of the British. If the Spanish and French were to operate together, they would have a superiority of ninety ships of the line. In 1740, there was an invasion scare when it was believed that a French fleet at Brest and a Spanish fleet at Ferrol were about to combine and launch an invasion of England. Although this proved not to be the case, the British kept the bulk of their naval and land forces in or near southern England to act as a deterrent.\nMany in the British government were afraid to launch a major offensive against the Spanish, for fear that a major British victory would draw France into the war to protect the balance of power.\nInvasion of Georgia.\nIn 1742, the Spanish launched an attempt to seize the British colony of Georgia. Manuel de Montiano commanded 2,000 troops, who were landed on St Simons Island off the coast. General Oglethorpe rallied the local forces and defeated the Spanish regulars at Bloody Marsh and Gully Hole Creek, forcing them to withdraw. Border clashes between the colonies of Florida and Georgia continued for the next few years, but neither Spain nor Britain undertook offensive operations on the North American mainland.\nSecond attack on La Guaira (2 March 1743).\nThe British attacked several locations in the Caribbean with little consequence to the geopolitical situation in the Atlantic. The weakened British forces under Vernon launched an attack against Cuba, landing in Guant\u00e1namo Bay with a plan to march the 45 miles to Santiago de Cuba and capture the city. Vernon clashed with the army commander, and the expedition withdrew when faced with heavier Spanish opposition than expected. Vernon remained in the Caribbean until October 1742, before heading back to Britain; he was replaced by admiral Chaloner Ogle, who took command of a sickly fleet. Fewer than half the sailors were fit for duty. The following year, a smaller Royal Navy squadron led by commodore Charles Knowles raided the Venezuelan coast, on 2 March 1743 attacking newly La Guaira controlled by Royal Guipuzcoan Company of Caracas whose ships had rendered assistance to the Spanish navy during War in carrying troops, arms, stores and ammunition from Spain to her colonies, and its destruction could have been a severe blow both to the Company and the Spanish Crown.\nAfter a fierce defence by Governor 's troops, Commodore Knowles, having suffered 97 killed and 308 wounded over three days, decided to retire west before sunrise on 6 March. He decided to attack nearby Puerto Cabello. However, despite his orders to rendezvous at Borburata Keys\u2014 east of Puerto Cabello, the captains of the detached \"Burford\", \"Norwich\", \"Assistance\", and \"Otter\" proceeded to Cura\u00e7ao. The commodore angrily followed them in. On 28 March, he sent his smaller ships to cruise off Puerto Cabello, and once his main body had been refitted, went to sea again on 31 March. He struggled against contrary winds and currents for two weeks before finally diverting to the eastern tip of Santo Domingo by 19 April.\nMerger with wider war.\nBy mid-1742, the War of the Austrian Succession had broken out in Europe. Principally fought by Prussia and Austria over possession of Silesia, the war soon engulfed most of the major powers of Europe, who joined two competing alliances. The scale of this new war dwarfed any of the fighting in the Americas, and drew Britain and Spain's attention back to operations on the European continent. The return of Vernon's fleet in 1742 marked the end of major offensive operations in the War of Jenkins' Ear. France entered the war in 1744, emphasizing the European theatre and planning an ambitious invasion of Britain. While it ultimately failed, the threat persuaded British policymakers of the dangers of sending significant forces to the Americas which might be needed at home.\nBritain did not attempt any additional attacks on Spanish possessions. In 1745, William Pepperrell of New England led a colonial expedition, supported by a British fleet under Commodore Peter Warren, against the French fortress of Louisbourg on Cape Breton Island off Canada. Pepperrell was knighted for his achievement, but Britain returned Louisbourg to the French by the Treaty of Aix-La-Chapelle in 1748. A decade later, during the Seven Years' War (known as the French and Indian War in the North American theatre), British forces under Lord Jeffrey Amherst and General Wolfe recaptured it.\nPrivateering.\nThe war involved privateering by both sides. Anson captured a valuable Manila galleon, but this was more than offset by the numerous Spanish privateering attacks on British shipping along the transatlantic triangular trade route. They seized hundreds of British ships, looting their goods and slaves, and operated with virtual impunity in the West Indies; they were also active in European waters. The Spanish convoys proved almost unstoppable. During the Austrian phase of the war, the British fleet attacked poorly protected French merchantmen instead.\nLisbon negotiations.\nFrom August 1746, negotiations began in the city of Lisbon, in neutral Portugal, to try to arrange a peace settlement. The death of Philip V of Spain had brought his son Ferdinand VI to the throne, and he was more willing to be conciliatory over the issues of trade. Because of their commitments to their Austrian allies, the British were unable to agree to Spanish demands for territory in Italy and talks broke down.\nAftermath.\nThe eventual diplomatic resolution formed part of the wider settlement of the War of the Austrian Succession by the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle which restored the . British territorial and economic ambitions on the Caribbean had been repelled, while Spain, although unprepared at the start of the war, proved successful in defending its American possessions. Moreover, the war put an end to the British smuggling, and the Spanish fleet was able to dispatch three treasure convoys to Europe during the war and off-balance the British squadron at Jamaica. The issue of the was not mentioned in the treaty, as its importance had lessened for both nations. The issue was finally settled by the 1750 Treaty of Madrid in which Britain agreed to renounce its claim to the in exchange for a payment of \u00a3100,000. The South Sea Company ceased its activity, although the treaty also allowed favourable conditions for British trade with Spanish America.\nGeorge Anson's expedition to the Southeast Pacific led the Spanish authorities in Lima and Santiago to advance the position of the Spanish Empire in the area. Forts were thus built in the Juan Fern\u00e1ndez Islands and the Chonos Archipelago in 1749 and 1750.\nRelations between Britain and Spain improved temporarily, in subsequent years, due to a concerted effort by the Duke of Newcastle to cultivate Spain as an ally. A succession of Anglophile ministers were appointed in Spain, including Jos\u00e9 de Carvajal and Ricardo Wall, all of whom were on good terms with British Ambassador Benjamin Keene, in an effort to avoid a repeat of hostilities. As a result, during the early part of the Seven Years' War between Britain and France, Spain remained neutral. However, it later joined the French side and lost Havana and Manila to the British in 1762; although both were returned as part of the peace settlement, in exchange the Spanish ceded Florida to the British.\nThe War of Jenkins' Ear is commemorated annually on the last Saturday in May at Wormsloe Plantation in Savannah, Georgia.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51226", "revid": "1325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51226", "title": "Ford Maddox Ford", "text": ""}
{"id": "51228", "revid": "15945847", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51228", "title": "Langston Hughs", "text": ""}
{"id": "51231", "revid": "29566584", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51231", "title": "Wiltshire", "text": "County of England\nWiltshire (; abbreviated to Wilts) is a ceremonial county in South West England. It borders Gloucestershire to the north, Oxfordshire to the north-east, Berkshire to the east, Hampshire to the south-east and south, Dorset to the south, and Somerset to the west. The largest settlement is Swindon.\nThe county has an area of and had a population of 767,575 in 2024. The county is mostly rural, and the centre and south-west are sparsely populated. Swindon is located in the north-east, and the county's other major settlements include the city of Salisbury in the south-east and the towns of Trowbridge and Chippenham in the west. For local government purposes the county comprises two unitary authority areas, Swindon and Wiltshire.\nThe north-west of Wiltshire is part of the limestone Cotswolds, and the remainder of the county is characterised by chalk downlands. The Marlborough Downs lie in the north-east of the county and encompass Savernake Forest. To their south is the Vale of Pewsey, south of which, in the centre of the county, is Salisbury Plain. The south-west contains the West Wiltshire Downs, to the south of which is the Vale of Wardour, and the far south comprises part of Cranborne Chase. The south-east contains part of the New Forest. The county's two major rivers are both called the Avon. The northern Avon enters the county in the north-west and flows in a south-westerly direction before exiting near Bradford-on-Avon, its vale separating the Cotswolds from the rest of the county. The southern Avon rises on Salisbury Plain and flows south through Salisbury, then into Hampshire. Much of the county is protected: the Marlborough Downs, West Wiltshire Downs, Vale of Wardour, Cranbourne Chase, and the Cotswolds are each part of national landscapes, and the New Forest is a national park.\nSalisbury Plain is noted for the Stonehenge and Avebury stone circles, which together are a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and other ancient landmarks. Much of the plain is a training area for the British Army. Salisbury is notable for its medieval cathedral. Large country houses open to the public include Longleat, which also features a safari park, and the National Trust's Stourhead.\nToponymy.\nThe county, in the 9th century written as \"Wiltunscir\", is named after the former county town of Wilton.\nHistory.\nWiltshire is notable for its pre-Roman archaeology. The Mesolithic, Neolithic and Bronze Age people who occupied southern Britain built settlements on the hills and downland that cover Wiltshire. Stonehenge and Avebury are perhaps the most famous Neolithic sites in the UK.\nIn the 6th and 7th centuries, Wiltshire was at the western edge of Saxon Britain, as Cranborne Chase and the Somerset Levels prevented the advance to the west. The Battle of Bedwyn was fought in 675 between Escuin, a West Saxon nobleman who had seized the throne of Queen Saxburga, and King Wulfhere of Mercia. In 878 the Danes invaded the county. Following the Norman Conquest in 1066, large areas of the country came into the possession of the crown and the church.\nAt the time of the Domesday Survey, the industry of Wiltshire was largely agricultural; 390 mills are mentioned, and vineyards at Tollard and Lacock. In the succeeding centuries, sheep-farming was vigorously pursued, and the Cistercian monastery of Stanley exported wool to the Florentine and Flemish markets in the 13th and 14th centuries.\nIn the 17th century, during the English Civil War, Wiltshire was largely Parliamentarian. The Battle of Roundway Down, a Royalist victory, was fought near Devizes.\nIn 1794, it was decided at a meeting at the Bear Inn in Devizes to raise a body of ten independent troops of Yeomanry for the county of Wiltshire, which formed the basis for what would become the Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry, who served with distinction both at home and abroad, during the Boer War, World War I and World War II. The Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry lives on as Y (RWY) Squadron, based in Swindon, and B (RWY) Squadron, based in Salisbury, of the Royal Wessex Yeomanry.\nAround 1800, the Kennet and Avon Canal was built through Wiltshire, providing a route for transporting cargoes from Bristol to London until the development of the Great Western Railway.\nInformation on the 261 civil parishes of Wiltshire is available at Wiltshire Council's Wiltshire Community History website, which has maps, demographic data, historic and modern pictures, and short histories.\nThe local nickname for Wiltshire natives is \"Moonrakers\". This originated from a story of smugglers who managed to foil the local Excise men by hiding their alcohol, possibly French brandy in barrels or kegs, in a village pond. When confronted by the excise men, they raked the surface to conceal the submerged contraband with ripples, and claimed that they were trying to rake in a large round cheese visible in the pond, really a reflection of the full moon. The officials took them for simple yokels or mad and left them alone, allowing them to continue with their illegal activities. Many villages claim the tale for their own village pond, but the story is most commonly linked with The Crammer in Devizes.\nGeography.\nTwo-thirds of Wiltshire, a mostly rural county, lies on chalk, a kind of soft, white, porous limestone that is resistant to erosion, giving it a high chalk downland landscape. This chalk is part of a system of chalk downlands throughout eastern and southern England formed by the rocks of the Chalk Group and stretching from the Dorset Downs in the west to Dover in the east. The largest area of chalk in Wiltshire is Salisbury Plain, which is used mainly for arable agriculture and by the British Army as training ranges. The highest point in the county is the Tan Hill\u2013Milk Hill ridge in the Pewsey Vale, just to the north of Salisbury Plain, at above sea level.\nThe chalk uplands run north-east into West Berkshire in the Marlborough Downs ridge, and south-west into Dorset as Cranborne Chase. Cranborne Chase, which straddles the border, has, like Salisbury Plain, yielded much Stone Age and Bronze Age archaeology. The Marlborough Downs are part of the North Wessex Downs AONB (Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty), a conservation area.\nIn the north-west of the county, on the border with South Gloucestershire and Bath and North East Somerset, the underlying rock is the resistant oolite limestone of the Cotswolds. Part of the Cotswolds AONB is also in Wiltshire, in the county's north-western corner.\nBetween the areas of chalk and limestone downland are clay valleys and vales. The largest of these vales is the Avon Vale. The Avon cuts diagonally through the north of the county, flowing through Bradford-on-Avon and into Bath and Bristol. The Vale of Pewsey has been cut through the chalk into Greensand and Oxford Clay in the centre of the county. In the south west of the county is the Vale of Wardour. The south-east of the county lies on the sandy soils of the northernmost area of the New Forest.\nChalk is a porous rock, so the chalk hills have little surface water, and the main settlements in the county were therefore established at wet points. Notably, Salisbury lies between the chalk of Salisbury Plain and the marshy flood plains.\nClimate.\nAlong with the rest of South West England, Wiltshire has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than counties further east. The annual mean temperature is approximately . Although there is a marked maritime influence, this is generally rather less pronounced than it is for other south-western counties, which are closer to the sea. July and August are the warmest months with mean daily maxima of approximately . In winter mean minimum temperatures of or are usual and air frost is frequent. In the summer, the Azores high pressure affects south-west England; however, convective cloud sometimes forms inland, reducing the number of hours of sunshine. Annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1,600 hours.\nIn December 1998, there were 20 days without sun recorded at Yeovilton (Somerset). Most of the rainfall in the south-west is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection, though a proportion is caused orographically (uplift over hills). Autumn and winter are the rainiest, caused by Atlantic depressions, which are then most active. Even so, any month can be the wettest or driest in a given year, but the wettest is much more likely to be Oct-Mar, and the driest Apr-Sept. In summer, a greater proportion of the rainfall is caused by the sun heating the ground, leading to convection and showers and thunderstorms. It is often the northern half of the county that sees most of the showers with south-westerly winds in summer, whereas in the south of the county, the proximity of a relatively cold English Channel often inhibits showers. In autumn and winter, however, the sea is often relatively warm, compared with the air passing over it, and can often lead to a higher rainfall in the south of the county (e.g., Salisbury recorded over 200mm of rain in November 2009 and January 2014). Average rainfall for the county is around , drier parts averaging 700mm (28ins)and the wettest 900mm (around 35ins). About 8\u201315 days of snowfall is typical. November to March have the highest mean wind speeds, and June to August have the lightest winds. The predominant wind direction is from the south-west.\nGreen belt.\nThe county has a green belt mainly along its western fringes as a part of the extensive Avon Green Belt. It reaches as far as the outskirts of Rudloe/Corsham and Trowbridge, preventing urban sprawl particularly from the latter in the direction of Bradford-on-Avon, and affording further protection to surrounding villages and towns from Bath in Somerset.\nDemographics.\nEthnicity.\nThe population of the ceremonial county of Wiltshire was historically ethnically homogeneous, White British, but is now becoming less homogeneous, with the largest ethnic group, White British, constituting 85.1% of the population in the 2021 census. This proportion has consistently declined in each modern census, down from 94.8% in the 2001 census. \nIn the 2021 census, the ethnic composition of the ceremonial county of Wiltshire comprised: 90.3% White, 5.1% Asian, 1.6% Black, 2.0% Mixed, and 0.9% Other.\n \nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 census, the religious composition of the ceremonial county of Wiltshire comprised: 49.0% Christian, 41.0% No religion, 1.3% Muslim, 1.1% Hindu, 0.6% Buddhist, 0.3% Sikh, 0.1% Jewish, 0.6% Other religion, and 5.9% Not stated.\nGovernance.\nUnitary authorities.\nThe ceremonial county of Wiltshire consists of two unitary authority areas, Wiltshire and Swindon, governed respectively by Wiltshire Council and Swindon Borough Council.\nUntil the 2009 structural changes to local government, Wiltshire (apart from Swindon) was a two-level county, divided into four local government districts \u2013 Kennet, North Wiltshire, Salisbury and West Wiltshire \u2013 which existed alongside Wiltshire County Council, covering the same area and carrying out more strategic tasks, such as education and county roads. On 1 April 2009, these five local authorities were merged into a single unitary authority called Wiltshire Council. With the abolition of the District of Salisbury, a new Salisbury City Council was created at the same time to carry out several citywide functions and to hold the city's charter.\n2025 Wiltshire Council election.\nThe 2025 Wiltshire Council election was held on 1 May 2025. The Conservatives had maintained majority control since 2000 but lost well over a third of their seats, resulting in no overall control, with the Liberal Democrats becoming the largest party. Reform UK contested the election for the first time, winning 10 seats. Labour's share of the total vote more than halved, retaining only one of its three seats. At the subsequent annual council meeting on 20 May 2025, Liberal Democrat councillor Ian Thorn was elected leader of a minority administration supported by independent councillors.\nPlaces of interest in Wiltshire include:\nAreas of countryside in Wiltshire include:\nTransport.\nRoad.\nRoads running through Wiltshire include The Ridgeway, an ancient route, and Roman roads, the Fosse Way, London to Bath road and Ermin Way. National Cycle Route 4 and the Thames Path, a modern long distance footpath, run through the county.\nRoutes through Wiltshire include:\nRail.\nThree main railway routes, all of which carry passenger traffic, cross Wiltshire.\nOther routes include:\nThe major junction stations are Salisbury and Westbury, and important junctions are also found at Swindon, Chippenham and Trowbridge.\nThere is also the Swindon and Cricklade Railway in the Thames Valley.\nIn general, Wiltshire is well served by rail, with 14 stations within its boundaries, although towns not served include Calne, Marlborough and Devizes. Several destinations on bus routes, including the aforementioned three towns, have integrated through ticketing, where one ticket may be bought to cover both the bus and rail journey.\nAir.\nAirfields in Wiltshire include Old Sarum Airfield and Clench Common Airfield. RAF Lyneham was an air transport hub for British forces until its closure in 2012. Airports with scheduled services near Wiltshire include Bournemouth Airport, Bristol Airport, Cardiff Airport, Exeter Airport, Gloucestershire Airport, Oxford Airport, Heathrow Airport and Southampton Airport.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51232", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51232", "title": "Single-occupancy vehicle", "text": "A single-occupancy vehicle (SOV) is a privately operated vehicle whose only occupant is the driver. The drivers of SOVs use their vehicles primarily for personal travel, daily commuting and for running errands. The types of vehicles include, but are not limited to, sport utility vehicles (SUVs), light-duty trucks, and any combination thereof, along with all the various van and car sizes, but would generally be taken to exclude human-powered vehicles such as bicycles. This term is used by transportation engineers and planners. SOVs contrast with high-occupancy vehicles (HOV), which have two or more occupants. Keep in mind that SOV in this context refers to a status and usage, not the vehicle type. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51239", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51239", "title": "Quercus kelloggii", "text": "Species of oak tree\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nQuercus kelloggii, the California black oak or Kellogg oak, is an oak in the red oak section (genus \"Quercus\", section \"Lobatae\", series \"Agrifoliae\") native to western North America.\nDescription.\n\"Quercus kelloggii\" grows from one to several vertical roots which penetrate to bedrock, with large, laterally spreading roots extending off from vertical ones. It also has a number of surface roots. It can reproduce vegetatively with new growth sprouting from the root crown after the tree is top-killed by wildfire, logging, frost, or other events. While individual trees generally have a lifespan between 100 and 200 years, California black oak can live up to 500\u00a0years.\nThe tree typically grows from in height and from in diameter. Large trees may exceed in height and diameter, with the record holder measuring tall and thick (in the Siskiyou National Forest in Oregon). The species also grows in shrubby scrub-oak form on poor sites. In open areas, the crown is broad and rounded, with lower branches nearly touching the ground or forming a browse line. In closed stands, the crown is narrow and slender in young trees and irregularly broad in old trees. Trunks are usually free of branches on the lower in closed stands. Trunks are often forked, and usually decayed and hollow in older trees. The bark is thin and smooth in young trees, becoming thick, ridged, plate-like, and blackish with age.\nThe leaves are typically long and deeply lobed, usually into seven portions; they are red and velvety when young, turning yellow-green then orange-brown in autumn. Blooming late in spring, the species is monoecious, with male flowers in catkins and females in leaf axils. The acorns are relatively large, from long and wide.\nSimilar species.\nIts leaves (but not its fruit) appear very similar to several other members of the red oak section, including the red oak (\"Quercus rubra\") and the black oak (\"Quercus velutina\") found in eastern and central North America, despite being genetically separated from them for more than 20 million years.\nIt hybridizes with \"Quercus wislizeni\".\nDistribution and habitat.\nCalifornia black oak is a deciduous tree growing in mixed evergreen forests, oak woodlands, and coniferous forests. California black oak is distributed along foothills and lower mountains of California and western Oregon. It can be found at altitudes of up to , for example near Mount Shasta.\nIt is found from Lane County, Oregon, south through the Cascade Range, the Sierra Nevada, and the Coast, Transverse, and Peninsular Ranges to San Diego County, California. The tree occurs in pure or mixed stands. Pure stands usually indicate sites unfavorable to conifer growth or recurring disturbance such as fire or logging activities. The tree can grow in many types of soils, but they must be well-drained.\nEcology.\nThe California black oak is a critical species for wildlife. Oaks (\"Quercus\" spp.) may be the single most important genus used by wildlife for food and cover in California forests and rangelands, and California black oak occupies more total area in California than any other hardwood species. Livestock also make heavy use of this species for food and cover.\nOlder trees affected by heart rot have cavities which provide den or nest sites for owls, various woodpeckers, tree squirrels, and American black bears. Trees provide valuable shade for livestock and wildlife during the hot summer. California black oak forest types are heavily used for spring, summer, and fall cover by black bears.\nIt is browsed by deer and livestock. Acorns are heavily used by livestock, mule deer, feral pigs, rodents, mountain quail, Steller's jays, and woodpeckers. Acorns constitute an average of 50% of the fall and winter diets of western gray squirrels and black-tailed deer during good mast years. Fawn survival rates increase or decrease with the size of the acorn crop.\nIt is a preferred foraging substrate for many birds. All of 68 bird species observed in oak woodlands of the Tehachapi Mountains of California used California black oak for part of their foraging activities. Acorn woodpecker, Bullock's oriole, and Nashville warbler show strong preferences for California black oak. The parasitic plant Pacific mistletoe (\"Phoradendron villosum\"), which commonly grows on this oak, produces berries that attract birds, as well.\nMany animals cache the acorns, and acorns that have been stored in the ground or otherwise buried are more likely to sprout than those that remain on the surface.\nThe tree is adapted to wildfire. It is protected from smaller fires by its thick bark. If it is top-killed and burned away in a larger fire, it easily resprouts and has a good supply of nutrients and water stored in its root system. Acorns sprout into seedlings after fire, and sites that have been cleared of canopy and leaf litter in fires are ideal for seedling success.\nThe tree is less shade tolerant than its associate ponderosa pine. It is vulnerable to sudden oak death.\nAllergenicity.\nThe pollen is released in spring and is a severe allergen.\nUses.\nSome California Native Americans prefer California black oak acorns over those of other species for making acorn meal. Historically, this acorn was a staple food for many Native American groups, who usually leached out the bitter tannin. Native Americans recognized the importance of fire to this oak, and purposely lit fires in oak woodlands to promote its health and ensure their food source.\nThe wood is used for making furniture, pallets, and construction timber. The tree is used as an ornamental.\nTimber.\nCalifornia black oak comprises a total volume of 29% of California's hardwood timber resources, and is the major hardwood sawn into lumber there. The total estimated area of species occurrence is 361,800 hectares (3,618\u00a0square kilometers or 894,000 acres); 239,200 ha (2,392\u00a0km2 or 591,000 acres) of timberland and 122,600 ha (1,226\u00a0km2 or 303,000 acres) of woodland. Of this land 60% is privately owned, 31% is in National Forests, and 9% is on other public lands. It has greatly decreased from its historic abundance. This is due to a number of factors, including drought, disease, animal foraging, logging practices, fire suppression, and a variety of other human impacts. Cutting green trees for fuelwood has contributed to the decline of this species, and illegal harvesting of green trees from public lands is a continuing problem.\nIt was long considered by foresters and government agencies to be a weed tree. In its earlier years, its only use to settlers was to feed the boilers of donkey engines bringing in the valuable pine and fir logs. For a period in the mid-1960s, the U.S. Forest Service policy in California's National Forests was systematic extermination of California black oak by girdling the trees. The objective was to make room for more coniferous growth. In the rush to use the pines, firs, and redwoods, the dense hardwoods were looked on with contempt. Like a few other visionaries in the 1960s, Guy Hall thought the California black oak presented a beautiful challenge that deserved better than eradication. In 1965, Hall convinced federal agencies to cease their extermination policies.\nPlantations of California black oak have been successfully established in clearcuts from acorn plantings. Thinning such stands promotes stand productivity and wood quality, and is recommended when trees are from tall or when stand density (basal area) exceeds 29 m2/ha (125\u00a0ft2/acre). This tree has also been managed for hardwood production by maintaining scattered pure stands within coniferous forests. Stands of this species often establish on poorer sites, where conifer seedling establishment has not been successful.\nCultivation.\n\"Q. kelloggii\" is cultivated in the specialty horticulture trade as an ornamental tree for native plant, drought-tolerant, water-conserving, and habitat gardens, and various types of municipal, commercial, and agency sustainable landscape and restoration projects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51246", "revid": "38469862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51246", "title": "Chernyakhovsk", "text": "Town in Kaliningrad Oblast, Russia\nChernyakhovsk (; ; ; ) is a town in Kaliningrad Oblast, Russia, and the administrative center of Chernyakhovsky District. With a population of 35,705 as of 2023, it is the third-largest city of the Kaliningrad Oblast (behind Kaliningrad and Sovetsk).\nIt is located at the confluence of the Instruch and Angrapa rivers, which unite to become the Pregolya river below Chernyakhovsk.\nFounded in 1337, it is one of the main towns of the region of Lithuania Minor. It was formerly inhabited by Lithuanians, Germans, Poles and French. It was the location of a German-operated prisoner-of-war camp for Allied POWs during World War II. It has a number of preserved heritage sights, including the ruins of two medieval castles and a historic stud farm. It hosts the Chernyakhovsk Air Base.\nHistory.\nMedieval period.\nInsterburg was founded in 1337 by the Teutonic Knights on the site of a former Old Prussian fortification when Dietrich von Altenburg, the Grand Master of the Teutonic Knights, built a castle called \"Insterburg\" following the Prussian Crusade. During the Teutonic Knights' Northern Crusades campaign against the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, the town was devastated in 1376. The castle had been rebuilt as the seat of a Procurator and a settlement also named \"Insterburg\" grew up to serve it. In 1454, Polish King Casimir IV Jagiellon incorporated the region to the Kingdom of Poland upon the request of the anti-Teutonic Prussian Confederation. During the subsequent Thirteen Years' War (1454\u20131466) between Poland and the Teutonic Knights, the settlement was devastated by Polish troops in 1457. After the war, since 1466, the settlement was a part of Poland as a fief held by the Teutonic Knights.\nEarly modern period.\nWhen the Prussian Duke Albert of Brandenburg-Ansbach in 1525 secularized the monastic State of the Teutonic Order per the Treaty of Krak\u00f3w, Insterburg became part of the Duchy of Prussia, a vassal duchy of the Kingdom of Poland. The settlement was granted town privileges on 10 October 1583 by the Prussian regent Margrave George Frederick. In the early 17th century, the town had a mixed population, and had Lithuanian, German and Polish preachers.\nInsterburg became part of the Kingdom of Prussia in 1701, and because the area had been depopulated by plague in the early 18th century, King Frederick William I of Prussia invited Protestant refugees who had been expelled from the Archbishopric of Salzburg to settle in Insterburg in 1732. French-language Calvinist church services were held in the town for several decades since 1731. During the Seven Years' War, the town was occupied by Russia.\nLate modern period.\nDuring the Napoleonic Wars, French troops passed through the town in 1806, 1807, 1811 and 1813. In 1818, after the Napoleonic Wars, the town became the seat of Insterburg District within the Gumbinnen Region. Michael Andreas Barclay de Tolly died at Insterburg in 1818 on his way from his Livonian manor to Germany, where he wanted to renew his health. Following the unsuccessful November Uprising, Polish insurgents were interned in the town in 1832. In 1863, a Polish secret organization was founded and operated in Insterburg, which was involved in arms trafficking to the Russian Partition of Poland during the January Uprising. Since May 1864, the leader of the organization was J\u00f3zef Racewicz.\nInsterburg became a part of the German Empire following the 1871 unification of Germany, and on May\u00a01, 1901, it became an independent city separate from Insterburg District. During World War I the Russian Army seized Insterburg on 24 August 1914, but it was retaken by Germany on 11 September 1914. The Weimar Germany era after World War I saw the town separated from the rest of the country as the province of East Prussia had become an exclave. The association football club Yorck Boyen Insterburg was formed in 1921.\nWorld War II and post-war period.\nDuring World War II, the Germans operated a Dulag Luft transit prisoner-of-war camp for Allied POWs in the town. A local branch of the Peasant Battalions was established by the Polish resistance, under the cryptonym \"Wystru\u0107\", the historic Polish name of the town. Several French forced laborers cooperated with the Polish resistance. The town was heavily bombed by the British Royal Air Force on July\u00a027, 1944. The town was stormed by Red Army troops on January\u00a021\u201322, 1945. As part of the northern part of East Prussia, Insterburg was transferred from Germany to the Soviet Union after the war as previously agreed between the victorious powers at the Potsdam Conference. On 7 April 1946, Insterburg was renamed as Chernyakhovsk in honor of the Soviet World War II Army General, Ivan Chernyakhovsky, who commanded the army that first entered East Prussia in 1944.\nAfter 1989, a group of people introduced the Akhal-Teke horse breed to the area and opened an Akhal-Teke breeding stable.\nMayovka, formerly a separate village, forms part of the town.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nWithin the framework of administrative divisions, Chernyakhovsk serves as the administrative center of Chernyakhovsky District. As an administrative division, it is, together with five rural localities, incorporated within Chernyakhovsky District as the town of district significance of Chernyakhovsk. As a municipal division, the town of district significance of Chernyakhovsk is incorporated within Chernyakhovsky Municipal District as Chernyakhovskoye Urban Settlement.\nMilitary.\nChernyakhovsk is home to the Chernyakhovsk naval air facility.\nCoat of arms controversy.\nIn September 2019 the local court ruled that the coat of arms was illegal because it carries \"elements of foreign culture.\" The local court alleged that Russian laws do not allow the use of foreign languages and symbols in Russian state symbols and ordered the town \"to remove any violations of the law.\"\nThe town's coat of arms, adopted in 2002, was based on the historic coat of arms of the town that before 1946 was known under its original Prussian name \u2013 Insterburg.\nThe full version of coat of arms in question has a picture of a Prussian man with a horn and the Latin initials G.F. for the Regent of Prussia George Frederick, margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach (1543\u20131603), who gave Insterburg the status of town and with it his family coat of arms.\nThe case brought before the court follows a trend among several towns in the region that have announced their intentions to change their coat of arms as tensions mount between Russia and the West following the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation in 2014 and its support for pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nChernyakhovsk is twinned with:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51249", "revid": "915833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51249", "title": "Industrial organization", "text": "Field that examines the structure of firms and markets\nIn economics, industrial organization is a field that extends the theory of the firm by analyzing the structure of firms and markets, as well as the boundaries between them. It introduces real-world features that depart from the perfectly competitive model, such as transaction costs, imperfect information, and barriers to entry faced by potential competitors.\nThe field studies how firms and markets are organized and how they behave across a spectrum ranging from competitive markets to monopoly, including cases shaped by government intervention and regulation.\nIndustrial organization combines theoretical models and empirical analysis to study issues such as market power, competition policy, oligopoly behavior, pricing strategies, vertical integration, and the design of contracts and institutions. It has applications in public policy, business strategy, and the regulation of industries.\nThere are different approaches to the subject. One approach is descriptive in providing an overview of industrial organization, such as measures of competition and the size-concentration of firms in an industry. A second approach uses microeconomic models to explain internal firm organization and market strategy, which includes internal research and development along with issues of internal reorganization and renewal. A third aspect is oriented to public policy related to economic regulation, antitrust law, and, more generally, the economic governance of law in defining property rights, enforcing contracts, and providing organizational infrastructure.\nThe extensive use of game theory in industrial economics has led to the export of this tool to other branches of microeconomics, such as behavioral economics and corporate finance. Industrial organization has also had significant practical impacts on antitrust law and competition policy.\nThe development of industrial organization as a separate field owes much to Edward Chamberlin, Joan Robinson, Edward S. Mason, J. M. Clark, Joe S. Bain and Paolo Sylos Labini, among others.\nSubareas.\nThe Journal of Economic Literature (JEL) classification codes are one way of representing the range of economics subjects and subareas. There, Industrial Organization, one of 20 primary categories, has 9 secondary categories, each with multiple tertiary categories. The secondary categories are listed below with corresponding available article-preview links of The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Online and footnotes to their respective JEL-tertiary categories and associated New-Palgrave links.\nhttp:// \u2013 Market Structure, Firm Strategy, and Market Performance\nhttp:// \u2013 Firm Objectives, Organization, and Behavior\nhttp:// \u2013 Non-profit organizations and Public enterprise\nhttp:// \u2013 Antitrust Issues and Policies\nhttp:// \u2013 Regulation and Industrial policy\nhttp:// \u2013 Industry Studies: Manufacturing\nhttp:// \u2013 Industry Studies: Primary Products and Construction\nhttp:// \u2013 Industry Studies: Services\nhttp:// \u2013 Industry Studies: Transportation and Utilities\nMarket structures.\nThe common market structures studied in this field are: perfect competition, monopolistic competition, duopoly, oligopoly, oligopsony, monopoly and monopsony.\nAreas of study.\nIndustrial organization investigates the outcomes of these market structures in environments with\nHistory of the field.\nA 2009 book \"Pioneers of Industrial Organization\" traces the development of the field from Adam Smith to recent times and includes dozens of short biographies of major figures in Europe and North America who contributed to the growth and development of the discipline.\nOther reviews by publication year and earliest available cited works those in 1970/1937, 1972/1933, 1974, 1987/1937-1956 (3 cites), 1968\u20139 (7 cites), 2009/c. 1900, and 2010/1951.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51250", "revid": "44329041", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51250", "title": "Wojciech Jaruzelski", "text": "Leader of Poland from 1981 to 1989\nWojciech Witold Jaruzelski ( ; ; 6 July 1923 \u2013 25 May 2014) was a Polish military general, politician and \"de facto\" leader of the Polish People's Republic from 1981 until 1989, and a military dictator from 13 December 1981 until 22 July 1983. He was the First Secretary of the Polish United Workers' Party between 1981 and 1989, making him the last leader of the Polish People's Republic. Jaruzelski served as Prime Minister from 1981 to 1985, the Chairman of the Council of State from 1985 to 1989 and briefly as President of Poland from 1989 to 1990, when the office of President was restored after 37 years. He was also the last commander-in-chief of the Polish People's Army, which in 1990 became the Polish Armed Forces. \nBorn to Polish nobility in Kur\u00f3w in eastern (then-central) Poland, Jaruzelski was deported with his family to Siberia by the NKVD after the invasion of Poland. Assigned to forced labour in the Siberian wilderness, he developed photokeratitis which forced him to wear protective sunglasses for the rest of his life. In 1943, Jaruzelski joined the newly created First Polish Army and fought alongside the Soviets against Nazi Germany in the Eastern Front, most notably in the liberation of Warsaw and in the Battle of Berlin. Following the Polish October and the expatriation of Marshal Konstantin Rokossovsky back to the Soviet Union, Jaruzelski became the chief political officer of the Polish People's Army and eventually Polish Minister of Defence in 1968.\nJaruzelski became the First Secretary of the Polish United Workers' Party and leader of Poland after the brief one-year term of Stanis\u0142aw Kania. Kania's predecessor, Edward Gierek, left Poland indebted by accepting loans from foreign creditors and the country's economy, rocked by strikes, was unstable by the time Jaruzelski became head of state. As Poland headed towards insolvency, rationing was enforced due to shortages of basic goods, which only contributed to the tense social and political situation. The declining living and working conditions triggered anger among the masses and strengthened anti-Communist sentiment; the Solidarity union was also gaining support, which worried the Polish Central Committee and the Soviet Union, which viewed Solidarity as a threat to the Warsaw Pact. Fearing a Soviet intervention similar to those in Hungary (1956) and Czechoslovakia (1968), Jaruzelski imposed martial law in Poland on 13 December 1981 to crush the anti-communist opposition. The military junta, curfew and travel restrictions lasted until 22 July 1983.\nBy the mid-1980s, censorship lost its importance and the authority of the United Workers' Party disintegrated, allowing more freedom of expression in Poland. During the revolutions of 1989 in Central and Eastern Europe, Jaruzelski supported the change of government for the benefit of the country and resigned after the Polish Round Table Agreement, which led to multi-party elections in Poland. He briefly served as President of Poland from July 1989 but exercised no real power and, in the 1990 Polish presidential election, Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa succeeded him as the first President elected in a popular vote. \nHaving served as the country's leader during its turbulent final years of Communist rule, Jaruzelski remains a controversial figure in Poland to this day. He was praised for allowing the country's peaceful transition into democracy, but was also fiercely criticized by contemporaries for his imposition of martial law, including his government's violent suppression of protests and imprisonment of thousands of opposition activists without definite charges, among other human rights violations.\nEarly life.\nWojciech Witold Jaruzelski was born on 6 July 1923 in Kur\u00f3w, into a family of Polish gentry. He was the son of Wanda (n\u00e9e Zaremba) and W\u0142adys\u0142aw Mieczys\u0142aw Jaruzelski, a Czech-educated agronomist and volunteered soldier who fought in the war against Soviet Russia in 1920 and was raised on the family estate near Wysokie (in the vicinity of Bia\u0142ystok). From 1933 until September 1939, he was educated in a Catholic school in Warsaw where he received strict religious education.\nWorld War II commenced on 1 September 1939 with the invasion of Poland by Germany, aided by the Soviet invasion of Poland sixteen days later. These resulted in the complete defeat of Poland by October and a partition between Soviet and German zones of control. Jaruzelski and his family fled to Lithuania to stay with some friends. However, a few months later, after Lithuania and the other Baltic states were forcibly incorporated into the Soviet Union, Jaruzelski and his family were captured by the Red Army and designated for deportation to Siberia. \nIn June 1941, they were stripped of their valuable possessions and deported. At the railway station, Jaruzelski was separated from his father, who was sent directly to a gulag. Jaruzelski and his mother were sent on a month-long journey to Biysk, Altai Krai. After that, Jaruzelski walked for to Turochak where he was responsible for forest cleaning. During his labour work, he was stricken with snow blindness, suffering permanent damage to his eyes as well as to his back. His eye condition forced him to wear dark sunglasses most of the time for the rest of his life, which became his trademark. Jaruzelski's father died on 4 June 1942 from dysentery; his mother and sister survived the war (she died in 1966).\nMilitary career.\nJaruzelski was selected by the Soviet authorities for enrollment into the Soviet Officer Training School. During his time in the Kazakh Republic, Jaruzelski wanted to join the non-Soviet controlled Polish exile army led by W\u0142adys\u0142aw Anders, but in 1943, by which time the Soviet Union was fighting in Europe against Germany in the Eastern Front, he joined the Polish army units being formed under Soviet command. He served in this Soviet-controlled First Polish Army during the war. He participated in the 1945 Soviet military takeover of Warsaw and the Battle of Berlin. By the time the war ended that year, he had gained the rank of lieutenant. He \"further credited himself in Soviet eyes\" by engaging in combat against the non-Communist Polish Home Army, from 1945 to 1947.\nAfter the end of the war, Jaruzelski graduated from the Polish Higher Infantry School and then from the General Staff Academy. He joined Poland's Communist party, the Polish United Workers' Party, in 1948 and became an informant for the Soviet supervised Main Directorate of Information of the Polish Army using the cover name Wolski. In the initial post-war years, he was among those who fought the Polish anti-Communists (\"cursed soldiers\") in the \u015awi\u0119tokrzyskie region. A BBC News profile of Jaruzelski states that his career \"took off after the departure [from Poland] in 1956 of Polish-born Soviet Marshal, Konstantin Rokossovsky\", who had been Poland's Commander in Chief and Minister of Defence. Jaruzelski was elected to be a member of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers' Party and became the Chief Political Officer of the Polish armed forces in 1960, its chief of staff in 1964; and Polish Minister of Defence in 1968, succeeding in the latter post Marshal Marian Spychalski persecuted in the years 1948-1956, albeit without the rank.\nIn August 1968, Jaruzelski, as the defence minister, ordered the 2nd Army under General Florian Siwicki (of the \"LWP\") to invade Czechoslovakia, resulting in military occupation of northern Czechoslovakia until 11 November 1968 when under his orders and agreements with the Soviet Union his Polish troops were withdrawn and replaced by the Soviet Army. In 1970, he was involved in the successful plot against W\u0142adys\u0142aw Gomu\u0142ka, which led to the appointment of Edward Gierek as General Secretary of the Polish United Workers Party. There is some question whether he took part in organising the brutal suppression of striking workers; or whether his orders to the Communist military led to massacres in the coastal cities of Gda\u0144sk, Gdynia, Elbl\u0105g and Szczecin. As Minister of Defense, General Jaruzelski was ultimately responsible for 27,000 troops used against unarmed civilians. He claims that he was circumvented, which is why he never apologised for his involvement. Jaruzelski became a candidate member for the Politburo of the Polish United Workers' Party, the chief executive body of the party, obtaining full membership the following year.\nLeader of the Polish military government.\nOn 11 February 1981, Jaruzelski was named Chairman of the Council of Ministers (Prime Minister). On 18 October, Stanis\u0142aw Kania was ousted as First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers' Party after a listening device recorded him criticising the Soviet leadership. Jaruzelski was elected his successor, becoming the only professional soldier to become the leader of a ruling European Communist party.\nA fortnight after taking power, Jaruzelski met with Solidarity head Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa and Catholic bishop J\u00f3zef Glemp, and hinted that he wanted to bring the church and the union into a sort of coalition government. However, his intention was to crush Solidarity. As early as September, while he was still merely prime minister, he met with his aides to find an excuse to impose martial law. On 13 December, citing purported recordings of Solidarity leaders planning a coup, Jaruzelski organised his own coup by proclaiming martial law. A Military Council of National Salvation was formed, with Jaruzelski as chairman. A BBC News profile of Jaruzelski contends that the establishment of martial law was \"an attempt to suppress the Solidarity movement.\"\nProtests held in response to martial law were violently suppressed by the military of paramilitary units mostly by the use of water cannons, tear gas, batons, truncheons, and clubs, with one notable exception in Wujek: following a \"shoot-to-kill\" order, ZOMO units opened fire on demonstrators there, killing nine and wounding 21 others. The total number of deaths during martial law, while still uncertain and subject to dispute, is estimated to be 91 in total. \nIn 1982, Jaruzelski helped reorganise the Front of National Unity, the organisation the Communists used to manage their satellite parties, as the Patriotic Movement for National Rebirth. At the invitation of Jaruzelski, a delegation of the ruling Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party visited Poland between 27 and 29 December of that year, with the Hungarian delegation sharing their experiences on crushing the 1956 Hungarian Revolution.\nIn spite of severe economic sanctions introduced by the Reagan Administration, martial law was largely successful in suppressing and demoralising the opposition, marginalising the Solidarity movement until the late 1980s. As demonstrators gradually declined towards the end of 1982, martial law was suspended on 31 December of that year, and was formally lifted (along with the final restrictions) on 22 July 1983.\nIn 1985, Jaruzelski resigned as prime minister and defence minister and became the Chairman of the Polish Council of State, a post equivalent to that of the head of state of Poland. However, his power centered on and firmly entrenched in his coterie of \"LWP\" generals and lower ranks officers of the Polish Communist Army. There were plans in the government circles to award him the rank of Marshal of Poland, ultimately abandoned largely due to his own negative attitude towards the proposal.\nSubsequent years saw his government and its internal security forces censor, persecute, and jail thousands of journalists and opposition activists without charge. The socio-economic crisis deepened even more than in the late 1970s and rationing of basic foods such as sugar, milk, and meat, as well as materials such as gasoline and consumer products, continued while the median income of the population fell by as much as 10 percent. During Jaruzelski's rule from 1981 to 1989, between 100,000 and 300,000 people left the country.\nJustification for imposing martial law.\nAccording to Jaruzelski, an internal crackdown on Solidarity through martial law was necessary to avoid a Soviet invasion. In a May 1992 interview with \"Der Spiegel\", Jaruzelski said: \"Given the strategic logic of the time, I probably would have acted the same way if I had been a Soviet general. At that time, Soviet political and strategic interests were threatened.\" Jaruzelski also claimed in 1997 that Washington had given him a \"green light\", stating that he had sent Eugeniusz Molczyk to confer with Vice-President George H. W. Bush, who had agreed with Molczyk that martial law was the lesser of two evils. Whether this meeting with the American vice-president occurred is disputed. While it is erroneously cited, Harvard historian Mark Kramer has pointed out that no documents support Jaruzelski's claim. At a press conference in September of that same year, however, former Warsaw Pact forces supreme commander Viktor Kulikov denied that the Soviet Union had either threatened or intended to intervene. \nHistorical evidence released under Boris Yeltsin's presidency paints a more complicated picture: while Eastern Bloc countries were fully in favour of a crackdown on Solidarity, minutes from Politburo, Warsaw Pact and special commission meetings from the year leading up martial law details strong internal divisions on the question of intervening: Senior Soviet party figures and ministers in a special commission formed to respond to developments in Poland, such as Mikhail Suslov, Yuri Andropov, Andrei Gromyko, and Dmitriy Ustinov were reluctant to intervene, citing the 1970 Polish protests and the ongoing Soviet-Afghan war, while the Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev, along with East German and Czechoslovak leaders Erich Honecker and Gust\u00e1v Hus\u00e1k, expressed a strong willingness to intervene if necessary. To this end, plans were made for a joint Soviet, East German, and Czechoslovak attack under the pretext of a Warsaw Pact military exercise called 'Soyuz-80,' (dubbed \"Operation Krkono\u0161e\" in Czechoslovakia\")\" in December 1980; Before it could be carried out, Brezhnev was convinced by Kania to postpone the planned invasion in order to give Polish leadership a chance.\nBy the time of Jaruzelski's rise to power, the Soviet leadership's anti-intervention faction had prevailed thanks to the influence of Andropov, who at this point was already a highly influential figure in the Politburo: minutes from their 29 October 1981 meeting details a discussion of Jaruzelski's demands for military support if he failed to control the situation, which were unanimously rejected. Contrary to his public statements after the fact, Jaruzelski was in fact highly insistent on Warsaw Pact military support. Following a long back-and-forth at Warsaw Pact and Politburo meetings, in which even a proposed bluffing statement of support was vetoed by Romania, any notion of a Warsaw Pact intervention was firmly and consequently shut down by Andropov in a Politburo meeting three days before Jaruzelski's proclamation: \"We do not intend to introduce troops into Poland. That is the proper position, and we must adhere to it until the end. I don't know how things will turn out in Poland, but even if Poland falls under the control of Solidarity, that's the way it will be.\"\nPresidency.\nThe policies of Mikhail Gorbachev stimulated political reform in Poland as well as in other communist countries in Central and Eastern Europe.\nFrom 6 February to 4 April 1989, negotiations were held between 13 working groups during 94 sessions of the roundtable talks. These negotiations \"radically altered the shape\" of the Polish government and society, and resulted in an agreement which stated that a great degree of political power would be given to a newly created bicameral legislature. It also restored the post of president to act as head of state and chief executive. Solidarity was also declared a legal organisation. During the ensuing partially-free elections, the Communists and their allies were allocated 65 percent of the seats in the Sejm. Solidarity won all the remaining elected seats, and 99 out of the 100 seats in the fully elected Senate were also won by Solidarity-backed candidates. Amid such a crushing defeat, there were fears Jaruzelski would annul the results. However, he allowed them to stand. Jaruzelski was elected by parliament to the position of president. He was the only candidate.\nJaruzelski was unsuccessful in convincing Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa to include Solidarity in a \"grand coalition\" with the Communists. He resigned as first secretary of the PZPR on 29 July 1989. Mieczys\u0142aw Rakowski succeeded him as party leader.\nThe Communists initially intended to give Solidarity a few token cabinet posts for the sake of appearances. However, Wa\u0142\u0119sa persuaded the Communists' two allied parties, the United People's Party (ZSL) and the Alliance of Democrats (SD), to break their alliance with the PZPR. Accepting that he would have to appoint a Solidarity member as prime minister, Jaruzelski then asked Wa\u0142\u0119sa to select three candidates, one of whom he would ask to form a government. Ultimately, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, who had helped organise the roundtable talks, was selected as first non-Communist prime minister of an Eastern Bloc country in four decades. Jaruzelski resigned as president in 1990. He was succeeded by Wa\u0142\u0119sa, who had won the presidential election on 9 December.\nOn 31 January 1991, Jaruzelski retired from the army.\nAfter retirement.\nIn October 1994, while attending a book-selling activity in Wroc\u0142aw, Jaruzelski was attacked by a male pensioner with a stone; his jaw was injured, requiring surgery. The attacker, who had been imprisoned during the martial law period, was sentenced to two years' imprisonment and fined 2,000,000 z\u0142oty.\nIn an interview in 2001, Jaruzelski said that he believed communism failed and that he was now a social democrat. He also announced his support for President Aleksander Kwa\u015bniewski and Leszek Miller, later Prime Minister. Both Kwa\u015bniewski and Miller were members of the Democratic Left Alliance, the social democratic party that included most of the remains of the PZPR.\nIn May 2005, Russian President Vladimir Putin awarded a medal commemorating the 60th anniversary of victory over Nazi Germany to Jaruzelski and other former leaders, including former Romanian King Michael I. Czech President V\u00e1clav Klaus criticised this step, saying that Jaruzelski was a symbol of the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968. Jaruzelski said that he had apologised and that the decision on the August 1968 invasion had been a great \"political and moral mistake\".\nOn 28 March 2006, Jaruzelski was awarded a Siberian Exiles Cross by Polish President Lech Kaczy\u0144ski. However, after making this fact public, Kaczy\u0144ski said that this was a mistake and blamed his staff for giving him a document containing 1,293 names without notifying him of Jaruzelski's inclusion. After this statement, Jaruzelski returned the cross.\nOn 31 March 2006, the IPN charged Jaruzelski with committing communist crimes, mainly the creation of a criminal military organisation with the aim of carrying out criminal acts\u2014mostly concerned with the illegal imprisonment of people. A second charge involved inciting state ministers to commit acts beyond their competence. Jaruzelski evaded most court appearances, citing poor health. In December 2010, Jaruzelski suffered from severe pneumonia and, in March 2011, he was diagnosed with lymphoma.\nDeath.\nJaruzelski died on 25 May 2014 in a Warsaw hospital after suffering a stroke earlier that month. He had reportedly requested confession and last rites by a Roman Catholic priest. President Bronis\u0142aw Komorowski, former Presidents Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa and Aleksander Kwa\u015bniewski, and hundreds of other Poles attended his funeral mass at the Field Cathedral of the Polish Army in Warsaw on 30 May. Wa\u0142\u0119sa and Komorowski, who were among the thousands imprisoned during the crackdown on Solidarity in 1981, both said that judgment against Jaruzelski \"would be left to God\". Jaruzelski was cremated and buried with full military honours at Pow\u0105zki Military Cemetery in Warsaw, near the grave of Boles\u0142aw Bierut, the first Communist leader of Poland after World War II. The decision to bury Jaruzelski at Pow\u0105zki, the burial place of Polish soldiers killed defending their country since the early 19th century, caused protests.\nPersonal life.\nJaruzelski married Barbara Halina Jaruzelska (1931\u20132017) in 1961. They had a daughter, Monika who was born on 11 August 1963. Monika has a son, Gustaw.\nLegacy.\nThe BBC reported in 2001 that \"for some Poles \u2014 particularly the Solidarity generation \u2014 he is little short of a traitor\". However, opinion polls as of 15 May 2001 suggested that a majority of the Polish people were open to agreeing with his explanation that martial law was implemented to forestall a Soviet invasion. In interviews in Russian media (\"Rossiyskaya Gazeta\", for example), he has been presented as the harbinger of Poland's democracy.\nCroatian writer Slavenka Drakuli\u0107 described Jaruzelski as a \"tragic believer in Communism who made a pact with the devil in good faith\".\nWritten works.\n\"R\u00f3\u017cni\u0107 si\u0119 m\u0105drze\" (English translation: \"To Differ Wisely\"; 1999).\n\"By\u0107 mo\u017ce to ostatnie s\u0142owo (wyja\u015bnienia z\u0142o\u017cone przed S\u0105dem)\" (English translation: \"It may be the last word (explanations given in the Court)\"; 2008).\nHonours and awards.\nPoland\nSoviet Union\nOther countries\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51251", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51251", "title": "NFS", "text": "NFS may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51252", "revid": "122189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51252", "title": "Network File System", "text": "Distributed file system protocol\nNetwork File System (NFS) is a distributed file system protocol originally developed by Sun Microsystems (Sun) in 1984, allowing a user on a client computer to access files over a computer network much like local storage is accessed. NFS, like many other protocols, builds on the Open Network Computing Remote Procedure Call (ONC RPC) system. NFS is an open IETF standard. After the first experimental version developed in house at Sun Microsystems, all subsequent versions of the protocol are defined in a series of Request for Comments i.e. RFCs, allowing anyone to implement the protocol.\nVersions and variations.\nSun used version\u00a01 only for in-house experimental purposes. When the development team added substantial changes to NFS version\u00a01 and released it outside of Sun, they decided to release the new version as v2, so that version interoperation and RPC version fallback could be tested.\nNFSv2.\nVersion\u00a02 of the protocol (defined in , March 1989) originally operated only over User Datagram Protocol (UDP). Its designers meant to keep the server side stateless, with locking (for example) implemented outside of the core protocol. People involved in the creation of NFS version\u00a02 include Russel Sandberg, Bob Lyon, Bill Joy, Steve Kleiman, and others.\nThe Virtual File System interface allows a modular implementation, reflected in a simple protocol. By February 1986, implementations were demonstrated for operating systems such as System V release\u00a02, DOS, and VAX/VMS using Eunice.\nNFSv2 only allows the first 2\u00a0GB of a file to be read due to 32-bit limitations.\nNFSv3.\nVersion\u00a03 (, June 1995) added:\nThe first NFS Version\u00a03 proposal within Sun Microsystems was created not long after the release of NFS Version\u00a02. The principal motivation was an attempt to mitigate the performance issue of the synchronous write operation in NFS Version\u00a02. By July 1992, implementation practice had solved many shortcomings of NFS Version\u00a02, leaving only lack of large file support (64-bit file sizes and offsets) a pressing issue. At the time of introduction of Version\u00a03, vendor support for TCP as a transport-layer protocol began increasing. While several vendors had already added support for NFS Version\u00a02 with TCP as a transport, Sun Microsystems added support for TCP as a transport for NFS at the same time it added support for Version\u00a03. Using TCP as a transport made using NFS over a WAN more feasible, and allowed the use of larger read and write transfer sizes beyond the 8\u00a0KB limit imposed by User Datagram Protocol.\nYANFS/WebNFS.\nYANFS (Yet Another NFS), formerly WebNFS, is an extension to NFSv2 and NFSv3 allowing it to function behind restrictive firewalls without the complexity of Portmap and MOUNT protocols. YANFS/WebNFS has a fixed TCP/UDP port number (2049), and instead of requiring the client to contact the MOUNT RPC service to determine the initial filehandle of every filesystem, it introduced the concept of a \"public filehandle\" (null for NFSv2, zero-length for NFSv3) which could be used as the starting point. Both of those changes were later incorporated into NFSv4. YANFS's post-WebNFS development has also included server-side integration.\nNFSv4.\nVersion\u00a04 (, December 2000; revised in , April 2003 and again in , March 2015), influenced by Andrew File System (AFS) and Server Message Block (SMB), includes performance improvements, mandates strong security, and introduces a stateful protocol. Version 4 became the first version developed with the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) after Sun Microsystems handed over the development of the NFS protocols.\nNFS version\u00a04.1 (, January 2010; revised in , August 2020) aims to provide protocol support to take advantage of clustered server deployments including the ability to provide scalable parallel access to files distributed among multiple servers (pNFS extension). Version\u00a04.1 includes Session trunking mechanism (Also known as NFS Multipathing) and is available in some enterprise solutions as VMware ESXi.\nNFS version\u00a04.2 () was published in November 2016 with new features including: server-side clone and copy, application I/O advise, sparse files, space reservation, application data block (ADB), labeled NFS with sec_label that accommodates any MAC security system, and two new operations for pNFS (LAYOUTERROR and LAYOUTSTATS).\nOne big advantage of NFSv4 over its predecessors is that only one UDP or TCP port, 2049, is used to run the service, which simplifies using the protocol across firewalls.\nOther extensions.\nWebNFS, an extension to Version\u00a02 and Version\u00a03, allows NFS to integrate more easily into Web-browsers and to enable operation through firewalls. In 2007 Sun Microsystems open-sourced their client-side WebNFS implementation.\nVarious side-band protocols have become associated with NFS. Note:\nPlatforms.\nNFS is available on:\nProtocol development.\nDuring the development of the ONC protocol (called SunRPC at the time), only Apollo's Network Computing System (NCS) offered comparable functionality. Two competing groups developed over fundamental differences in the two remote procedure call systems. Arguments focused on the method for data-encoding \u2014 ONC's External Data Representation (XDR) always rendered integers in big-endian order, even if both peers of the connection had little-endian machine-architectures, whereas NCS's method attempted to avoid byte-swap whenever two peers shared a common endianness in their machine-architectures. An industry-group called the Network Computing Forum formed (March 1987) in an (ultimately unsuccessful) attempt to reconcile the two network-computing environments.\nIn 1987, Sun and AT&amp;T announced they would jointly develop AT&amp;T's UNIX System V Release 4. This caused many of AT&amp;T's other licensees of UNIX System to become concerned that this would put Sun in an advantaged position, and ultimately led to Digital Equipment, HP, IBM, and others forming the Open Software Foundation (OSF) in 1988. Ironically, Sun and AT&amp;T had formerly competed over Sun's NFS versus AT&amp;T's Remote File System (RFS), and the quick adoption of NFS over RFS by Digital Equipment, HP, IBM, and many other computer vendors tipped the majority of users in favor of NFS.\nNFS interoperability was aided by events called \"Connectathons\" starting in 1986 that allowed vendor-neutral testing of implementations with each other. OSF adopted the Distributed Computing Environment (DCE) and the DCE Distributed File System (DFS) over Sun/ONC RPC and NFS. DFS used DCE as the RPC, and DFS derived from the Andrew File System (AFS); DCE itself derived from a suite of technologies, including Apollo's NCS and Kerberos.\n1990s.\nSun Microsystems and the Internet Society (ISOC) reached an agreement to cede \"change control\" of ONC RPC so that the ISOC's engineering-standards body, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), could publish standards documents (RFCs) related to ONC RPC protocols and could extend ONC RPC. OSF attempted to make DCE RPC an IETF standard, but ultimately proved unwilling to give up change control. Later, the IETF chose to extend ONC RPC by adding a new authentication flavor based on Generic Security Services Application Program Interface (GSSAPI), RPCSEC GSS, to meet IETF requirements that protocol standards have adequate security.\nLater, Sun and ISOC reached a similar agreement to give ISOC change control over NFS, although writing the contract carefully to exclude NFS version 2 and version 3. Instead, ISOC gained the right to add new versions to the NFS protocol, which resulted in IETF specifying NFS version 4 in 2003.\n2000s.\nBy the 21st century, neither DFS nor AFS had achieved any major commercial success as compared to SMB or NFS. IBM, which had formerly acquired the primary commercial vendor of DFS and AFS, Transarc, donated most of the AFS source code to the free software community in 2000. The OpenAFS project lives on. In early 2005, IBM announced end of sales for AFS and DFS.\nIn January, 2010, Panasas proposed an NFSv4.1 based on their \"Parallel NFS\" (pNFS) technology claiming to improve data-access parallelism capability. The NFSv4.1 protocol defines a method of separating the filesystem meta-data from file data location; it goes beyond the simple name/data separation by striping the data amongst a set of data servers. This differs from the traditional NFS server which holds the names of files and their data under the single umbrella of the server. Some products are multi-node NFS servers, but the participation of the client in separation of meta-data and data is limited.\nThe NFSv4.1 pNFS server is a set of server resources or components; these are assumed to be controlled by the meta-data server.\nThe pNFS client still accesses one meta-data server for traversal or interaction with the namespace; when the client moves data to and from the server it may directly interact with the set of data servers belonging to the pNFS server collection. The NFSv4.1 client can be enabled to be a direct participant in the exact location of file data and to avoid solitary interaction with one NFS server when moving data.\nIn addition to pNFS, NFSv4.1 provides:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51253", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51253", "title": "Nut", "text": "Nut often refers to:\nNut, Nuts, NUT or NUTS may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51254", "revid": "28979433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51254", "title": "Father of the House", "text": "Longest-serving continuous member of parliament\nFather of the House is a title that has been traditionally bestowed, unofficially, on certain members of some legislatures, most notably the House of Commons in the United Kingdom. In some legislatures the title refers to the longest continuously serving member, while in others it refers to the oldest member. Recently, the title Mother of the House or Mother of Parliament has also been used, although the usage varies among countries; it is either the female alternative to Father of the House, being applied when the relevant member is a woman, or refers to the oldest or longest-serving woman without reference to male members.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe Father of the House is a title that is bestowed on the senior male member of the House of Commons who has the longest continuous service. If two or more members have the same length of current uninterrupted service, then whoever was sworn in earlier, as listed in \"Hansard\", is named as Father of the House. Traditionally, however, the qualifications used for the Father of the House are not entirely clear and may have included the oldest member, the member with the longest aggregate service, or the member who entered the House longest ago. The first recorded usage of the term dates to 1788, in an obituary of Thomas Noel. In 2017, Harriet Harman was described as \"Mother of the House\" by Prime Minister Theresa May, in recognition of her status as the longest-continuously serving woman MP. During speeches at the re-opening of Parliament after the 2024 General Election, Diane Abbott was also described as the \"Mother of the House\" by Prime Minister Keir Starmer, and then Leader of the Opposition Rishi Sunak.\nThe only formal duty of the Father of the House is to preside over the election of the Speaker of the House of Commons. The Father of the House may also participate in ceremonial events, and is the second member to be sworn in after the Speaker.\nAmong the twentieth-century Fathers, there were several very prominent figures; four former Prime Ministers became Father of the House, and a fifth, Henry Campbell-Bannerman, was simultaneously Father of the House and Prime Minister from 22 May 1907 until shortly before his death on 22 April 1908.\nDevolved legislatures.\nIn the Senedd of Wales, Father of the House is an official title bestowed on the longest-serving Member of the Senedd. The first to hold the title was Rod Richards, who was the first member to be sworn in following the first election to the legislature in 1999, while the current father is John Griffiths, who was also elected in 1999. In the Scottish Parliament, both Father of the House and Mother of the House are used for the longest serving Members of the Scottish Parliament. The current mother is Christine Grahame while the current father is John Swinney, who were both first elected at the 1999 Scottish Parliament election. The Northern Ireland Assembly also grants the title of Father of the House to its longest serving male member. The current father is Alan Chambers.\nAustralia.\nThe titles \"Father of the House\" and \"Father of the Senate\" are sometimes used to refer to the members of each chamber of the Parliament of Australia with the longest continuous service. The current Father of the House is Bob Katter (MP since 1993) and the current Mother of the Senate is Penny Wong (senator since 2002).\nAccording to \"House of Representatives Practice\", the title Father of the House is a \"completely informal designation\" with \"no functions attached to it\". The equivalent publication for the Senate, \"Odgers' Australian Senate Practice\", describes the title Father of the Senate as \"now seldom referred to or used\". It also notes that \"as no woman senator has ever been in this situation, it is not clear what the title would be in that circumstance\".\nCanada.\nThe longest-serving member of the House of Commons who is not a cabinet minister is known as the Dean of the House, and presides over the election of the Speaker at the beginning of each Parliament. The current Dean of the House is Bloc Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois MP Louis Plamondon, who was first elected to the Commons as a member of the Progressive Conservative Party in 1984 and serving as the Dean of the House since 2008.\nCzech Republic.\nIn the Chamber of Deputies, if previous President of the Chamber of Deputies or his deputies are not elected, the oldest MP serves as the Acting President presiding over the constitutive session, before new president is elected.\nIn the Senate, if previous President of the Senate or his deputies are not elected for the next term, the oldest Senator serves as the Acting President presiding over the opening session gathered every two years, before election of the new president.\nEuropean Parliament.\nUntil 2009, the oldest member of the European Parliament presided over the opening of a new session and the election of the President of the European Parliament.\nGermany.\nStarting with the Frankfurter Nationalversammlung (Frankfurt Parliament) of 1848, and based on older regional traditions, basically all German nation-wide, state-level and lower parliaments had a father of the House at the start of each legislative period, usually called \"Alterspr\u00e4sident\" (President by right of age). This elder statesman steps forward to break the tie among equal members, to open the proceedings and to arrange the very first self-organizing election without external help from e.g. parliament employees. Then, the elected president takes over.\nThis tradition was continued from the North German Confederation into the 1871 German Empire (also known as Weimar Republic after 1918) and, after being discontinued in Nazi Germany, was resumed in 1949 by the present Parliament (Bundestag) in the Federal Republic until it was discontinued again before the 2017 German federal election to prevent any member of the upcoming Alternative for Germany (AfD), or any other new party, as the position was changed to refer to the longest sitting member. Thus the meaning of \"Alter\" (age, literally oldness) was shifted from \"Lebensalter\" (age of life) to \"Dienstalter\" (age of service).\nIn accordance with tradition up to 2013, the \"Alterspr\u00e4sident\" first ascertained himself that he was indeed the oldest member of the Bundestag by stating his date of birth and asking if anyone is present who was born before this date. If no older member of the Bundestag was present he would formally declare that he indeed is the Alterspr\u00e4sident and will start proceedings. Starting from 2017, the prospective Alterspr\u00e4sident states the number of years served in the Bundestag and asks if anyone has served more years.\nThe \"Alterspr\u00e4sident\" then greets the present members and delivers the first programmatic speech. After appointing members to write down notes, the identity, affiliation to parties or factions and number of members is checked. The largest faction usually is asked who they propose as candidate for president, and according to another tradition, this candidate is then elected without much controversy. After supervising the election of the President of the Bundestag the \"Alterspr\u00e4sident\" immediately yields his power to the elected president who, after receiving congratulations, takes over. The newly elected president will in turn supervise the elections of the Vice Presidents who form the Presidium of the Bundestag that organizes parliament sessions. Usually, each recognized faction proposes a candidate that is elected without much controversy. Since 2017, none of over 40 AfD candidates has been elected as Bundestags-Vizepr\u00e4sident, though, while some state parliaments have elected an AfD vice president. In addition, the factions appoint members for the \"\u00c4ltestenrat\", the Council of Elders of the Bundestag, which organizes the parliament work behind the scenes.\nThe rules of order of the Bundestag also state that the \"Alterspr\u00e4sident\" shall preside over sessions of the Bundestag at any given time during a legislative period, if the whole Presidium (i.e. the President and the Vice Presidents of the Bundestag) is altogether unable to perform its duties. With the number of vice presidents growing over time, this became unlikely.\nAs the \"Alterspr\u00e4sident\"'s opening speech usually draws a certain amount of public attention, the position has recently attracted controversy, when after German Reunification the Party of Democratic Socialism (the successor of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany which had ruled communist East Germany) obtained the position by including aged independents (writer Stefan Heym in 1994, Fred Gebhardt in 1998) in their party lists. In 2017, facing the new AfD, the Bundestag changed its rules of procedure to have the member with the longest service in the Bundestag serve as father of the house, rather than the oldest member, especially as the oldest member of the Bundestag at the time, Wilhelm von Gottberg, was a Holocaust denier; however, these changed rules of procedure nonetheless allowed Gregor Gysi of Die Linke (the successor of the PDS, of which he was the founder and inaugural leader) to attain this position.\nHong Kong.\nIn Hong Kong, there is no such term as \"Father of the House\". Instead, the longest-serving member was termed the Senior Unofficial Member and was the highest-ranking unofficial member of the Executive Council and the Legislative Council until the title was abolished in 1995 and 1992 respectively.\nAfter the handover of Hong Kong, the member of the Legislative Council with the highest order of precedence, determined according to the length of continuous service in the council, was tasked with presiding over the election of President of the council, until 2017.\nHungary.\nIn Hungary, the term (President by the age) refers to the oldest member of the National Assembly (previously House of Representatives, the lower house). Before the open session, the senior chairperson and junior notaries review the mandates of all the elected MPs in addition to their own. The member presides over the newly elected parliament until the appointment of the officials.\nIt is also worth mentioning that J\u00f3zsef Madar\u00e1sz who was Father of the House from 1892 to his death in 1915 at the age of 100, was also member of the Parliament from 1848 (whenever it was convened) and prior to that he was emissary of the Hungarian Diet, the predecessor of Parliament in Hungary, from 1832. Thus making him the longest serving member of Parliament in Hungary at a record of 82 years.\nIsrael.\nIn the beginning of some Knessets, the oldest member assumes temporary duties of the speaker before the election of a permanent speaker, In the past it was the oldest member of Knesset, now it is the longest-serving member. The oldest member of the 25th Knesset is Benjamin Netanyahu.\nIreland.\nIn Ireland, the term Father of the D\u00e1il is an unofficial title applied to the longest-serving Teachta D\u00e1la (TD) in D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann. The current Father of the D\u00e1il is Willie O'Dea having been first elected to the D\u00e1il in the February 1982 general election. On a number of occasions, two or more people have shared the position of Father of the D\u00e1il.\nLuxembourg.\nIn Luxembourg's unicameral parliament, the Chamber of Deputies, there is no formal title for the oldest member. Per the Chamber's regulations, the longest-serving deputy (variously known as the \"doyen\" in French or \"d\u00e9ngschteelsten D\u00e9put\u00e9ierten\" in Luxembourgish) serves as President of the Chamber during the first session of a legislature, until a President is formally elected. They are assisted in this task by the two youngest members, known as \"secr\u00e9taires d'\u00e2ge\". Until 2004, the role was fulfilled by the oldest member (\"doyen d'\u00e2ge\").\nTwo deputies have served both as \"secr\u00e9taire d'\u00e2ge\" and \"doyen\" over their careers: Jean Spautz (1959 and 1999) and Michel Wolter (1984 and 2023).\nMalaysia.\nIn Malaysia, the term \"Father of the House\" is rarely used. However, Tengku Razaleigh Hamzah, who was elected in 1974, was the previous longest-serving MP in the Dewan Rakyat. He was also the oldest MP between 2008 and 2018 (then-age 81), when former Prime Minister Tun Dr. Mahathir Mohamad was reelected to the Dewan Rakyat at the age of 92. Both of them ended their long tenures in the Dewan Rakyat after being defeated in 2022 Malaysian general election.\nSince 2022, Tan Kok Wai is now the \"Father of the House\", having served as MP continuously since 1986, firstly for Sungai Besi (1986\u20131995) and now Cheras (1995\u2013present).\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, the terms \"Father of the House\" and \"Mother of the House\", as unofficial titles, designate the longest-continuously serving male or female MP of the House of Representatives, respectively. The Father and Mother of the House have no official role in Parliament. The current Father of the House is Gerry Brownlee who has served continuously since 1996. The current Mother of the House is Judith Collins who has served continuously since 2002.\nPoland.\nFollowing a general election, the eldest member of each of the lower (Sejm) and upper (Senate) houses of the Polish parliament is given the honorary post of Senior Marshal until the new permanent leaders of the houses, the Marshal of the Sejm and the Marshal of the Senate, are elected in a vote by their respective members. This normally takes place as the first item on the agenda at the first session, over which the Senior Marshal presides. Most recently, the title of Senior Marshal was bestowed on Marek Sawicki, member of the X Sejm, and Micha\u0142 Sewery\u0144ski, senator of the XI Senate. Both assumed their roles on 13 November 2023, following the formation of the new parliament as a result of the 15 October general election.\nRussia.\nTraditionally when a new Russian parliament is formed the eldest deputy opens and manages the first session until a chairman is elected. In the history of the post-Soviet Dumas these were:\nSerbia.\nIn the National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia, the oldest MP serves as the Acting Speaker presiding over the constitutive session, before the Speaker is elected.\nSingapore.\nUntil his death on 23 March 2015, former Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew was the longest-serving Member of Parliament (Tanjong Pagar) and thus the Father of the House. As of \u00a02015[ [update]], emeritus Senior Minister and former Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong later became Father of the House, as the longest-serving MP (Marine Parade). Upon Goh's retirement in 2020, Senior Minister Lee Hsien Loong is Father of the House having served since 1984.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, the \"Riksdagsordningen\" law states that the member of the Riksdag who has held their elected seat for the longest shall be the \"\u00c5lderspresident\" which translates to \"President by age\". The \"\u00c5lderspresident\" acts as speaker of the Riksdag after each election, before the Speaker of the Riksdag has been elected. The \"\u00c5lderspresident\" also acts as speaker in case of hindrance on behalf of the Speaker and all three Deputy Speakers.\nMembers of the Riksdag who has held the position of \u00c5lderspresident since the abolition of bicameralism:\nUkraine.\nAccording to article 82 of the Constitution of Ukraine, the oldest deputy opens the first session of each new convocation of the Verkhovna Rada. The deputy also reads aloud the oath. As the constitution was adopted in 1996, the rule was first applied to the opening of the third convocation.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the title \"Father\" of the House (although used for about a century starting in 1816) does not exist, but in the lower house, the House of Representatives the position known as Dean of the House is almost exactly the same position\u2014that is, it is a largely ceremonial position bestowed on the member with the longest continuous service. Much like the Father of the British House of Commons, the Dean's only formal role relates to the installation of the Speaker, though in the American case it is to swear the newly-elected speaker in rather than preside over the election. Less similar is the position in the Senate (the upper house) known as President Pro Tempore, the holder of which has since 1945 gained the position through seniority, but who also must be a member of the party holding a majority in the Senate.\nSince March 2022, with the death of Don Young, the Dean of the House has been Hal Rogers, who was elected to the House of Representatives in 1980 and began serving in 1981.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51255", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51255", "title": "Charles de Gaulle", "text": "French general and statesman (1890\u20131970)\nCharles Andr\u00e9 Joseph Marie de Gaulle (22 November 1890\u00a0\u2013 9 November 1970) was a French general and statesman who led the Free French Forces against Nazi Germany and Vichy France in World War II and chaired the Provisional Government of the French Republic from 1944 to 1946 to restore democracy in France. Following the Algiers putsch, he came out of retirement at the request of President Ren\u00e9 Coty, who appointed him Prime Minister. He commissioned a new constitution which was approved by voters in a referendum, establishing the Fifth Republic. He was subsequently elected President of France later that year, a position he held until his resignation in 1969. He is widely considered the greatest Frenchman of the 20th century.\nBorn in Lille, he was a decorated officer of World War I, wounded several times and taken prisoner of war by the Germans. During the interwar period, he advocated mobile armoured divisions. During the German invasion of May 1940, he led an armoured division that counterattacked the invaders; he was then appointed Undersecretary for War. Refusing to accept his government's armistice with Germany, de Gaulle fled to England and exhorted the French to continue the fight in his Appeal of 18 June. He led the Free French Forces and later headed the French National Liberation Committee and emerged as the undisputed leader of Free France. He became head of the Provisional Government of the French Republic in June 1944, the interim government of France following its liberation. As early as 1944, de Gaulle introduced a dirigiste economic policy, which included substantial state-directed control over a capitalist economy, which was followed by 30 years of unprecedented growth, known as the \"Trente Glorieuses\". He resigned in 1946, but continued to be politically active as founder of the Rally of the French People. He retired in the early 1950s and wrote his \"War Memoirs\", which quickly became a staple of modern French literature.\nWhen the Algerian War threatened to bring the unstable Fourth Republic to collapse, the National Assembly brought him back to power during the May 1958 crisis. He founded the Fifth Republic with a strong presidency; he was elected with 78% of the vote to continue in that role. He managed to keep France together while taking steps to end the war, much to the anger of the \"Pieds-Noirs\" (ethnic Europeans born in Algeria) and the armed forces. He granted independence to Algeria and acted progressively towards other French colonies. In the context of the Cold War, de Gaulle initiated his \"politics of grandeur\", asserting that France as a major power should not rely on other countries, such as the United States, for its national security and prosperity. To this end, he pursued a policy of \"national independence\" which led him to withdraw from NATO's integrated military command and to launch an independent nuclear strike force which made France the world's fourth nuclear power. He restored cordial France\u2013Germany relations with Konrad Adenauer to create a European counterweight between the Anglo-American and Soviet spheres of influence through the signing of the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Treaty on 22 January 1963.\nDe Gaulle opposed any development of a supranational Europe, favouring Europe as a continent of sovereign nations. De Gaulle openly criticised the US intervention in Vietnam and the exorbitant privilege of the US dollar. In his later years, his support for the slogan \"\" and his two vetoes of Britain's entry into the European Economic Community generated considerable controversy in both North America and Europe. Although reelected to the presidency in 1965, he faced widespread protests by students and workers in May 68 but had the Army's support and won a snap election with an increased majority in the National Assembly. De Gaulle resigned in 1969 after losing a referendum in which he proposed more decentralisation. He died a year later at the age of 79, leaving his presidential memoirs unfinished. Many French political parties and leaders claim a Gaullist legacy; many streets and monuments in France and other parts of the world were dedicated to his memory after his death.\nEarly life.\nChildhood and origins.\nCharles Andr\u00e9 Joseph Marie de Gaulle was born on 22 November 1890 in Lille, the third of five children. He was raised in a devoutly Catholic and traditional family. His father, Henri de Gaulle, was a professor of history and literature at a Jesuit college and eventually founded his own school.\nHenri de Gaulle came from a long line of parliamentary gentry from Normandy and Burgundy. The name is thought to be Dutch in origin, and may have derived from \"van der Walle\", \"de Walle\" (\"from the rampart, defensive wall\") or \"de Waal\" (\"the wall\"). De Gaulle's mother, Jeanne (born Maillot), descended from a family of wealthy entrepreneurs from Lille. She had French, Irish, Scottish, and German ancestry.\nDe Gaulle's father encouraged historical and philosophical debate between his children, and through his encouragement, de Gaulle learned French history from an early age. Struck by his mother's tales of how she cried as a child when she heard of the French capitulation to the Germans at Sedan in 1870, he developed a keen interest in military strategy. He was also influenced by his uncle, also named Charles de Gaulle, who was a historian and passionate Celticist who advocated the union of the Welsh, Scots, Irish, and Bretons into one people. His grandfather Julien-Philippe was also a historian, and his grandmother Jos\u00e9phine-Marie wrote poems which impassioned his Christian faith.\nEducation and intellectual influences.\nDe Gaulle began writing in his early teens, especially poetry; his family paid for a composition, a one-act verse play, to be privately published. A voracious reader, he favored philosophical tomes by such writers as Bergson, P\u00e9guy, and Barr\u00e8s. In addition to the German philosophers Nietzsche, Kant, and Goethe, he read the works of the ancient Greeks (especially Plato) and the prose of Chateaubriand.\nDe Gaulle was educated in Paris at the Coll\u00e8ge Stanislas and studied briefly in Belgium. At the age of fifteen he wrote an essay imagining \"General de Gaulle\" leading the French Army to victory over Germany in 1930; he later wrote that in his youth he had looked forward with somewhat naive anticipation to the inevitable future war with Germany to avenge the French defeat of 1870.\nFrance during de Gaulle's adolescence was a divided society, with many developments which were unwelcome to the de Gaulle family: the growth of socialism and syndicalism, the legal separation of Church and state in 1905, and the reduction in the term of military service to two years. Equally unwelcome were the \"Entente Cordiale\" with Britain, the First Moroccan Crisis, and above all the Dreyfus Affair. Henri de Gaulle came to be a supporter of Dreyfus, but was less concerned with his innocence \"per se\" than with the disgrace which the army had brought onto itself. The period also saw a resurgence in evangelical Catholicism, the dedication of the Sacr\u00e9-C\u0153ur, Paris, and the rise of the cult of Joan of Arc.\nDe Gaulle was not an outstanding pupil until his mid-teens, but from July 1906 he focused on winning a place at the military academy, Saint-Cyr. Jean Lacouture suggests that de Gaulle joined the army, despite being more suited to a career as a writer and historian, partly to please his father and partly because it was one of the few unifying forces which represented the whole of French society. He later wrote that \"when I entered the Army, it was one of the greatest things in the world\", a claim which Lacouture points out needs to be treated with caution: the army's reputation was at a low. It was used extensively for strike-breaking and there were fewer than 700 applicants for Saint-Cyr in 1908, down from 2,000 at the turn of the century.\nEarly career.\nOfficer cadet and lieutenant.\nDe Gaulle won a place at Saint-Cyr in 1909. His class ranking was mediocre (119th out of 221). Under a law of 21 March 1905, aspiring army officers were required to serve a year in the ranks, including time as a private and as an NCO, before attending the academy. Accordingly, in October 1909, de Gaulle enlisted (for four years, as required, rather than the normal two-year term for conscripts) in the 33rd Infantry Regiment of the French Army, based at Arras. This was a historic regiment with Austerlitz, Wagram, and Borodino amongst its battle honours. In April 1910 he was promoted to corporal. His company commander declined to promote him to sergeant, the usual rank for a potential officer, commenting that the young man clearly felt that nothing less than Constable of France would be good enough for him. He was eventually promoted to sergeant in September 1910.\nDe Gaulle took up his place at Saint-Cyr in October 1910. By the end of his first year he had risen to 45th place. He was nicknamed \"the great asparagus\" because of his height (196\u00a0cm, 6'5\"), high forehead, and nose. He did well at the academy and received praise for his conduct, manners, intelligence, character, military spirit, and resistance to fatigue. In 1912, he graduated 13th in his class and his passing-out report noted that he was a gifted cadet who would undoubtedly make an excellent officer. The future Marshal Alphonse Juin was first in the class, although the two do not appear to have been close at the time.\nPreferring to serve in France rather than the overseas colonies, in October 1912 he rejoined the 33rd Infantry Regiment as a second lieutenant. The regiment was now commanded by Colonel (and future Marshal) Philippe P\u00e9tain, whom de Gaulle would follow for the next 15 years. He later wrote in his memoirs: \"My first colonel, P\u00e9tain, taught me the art of command\".\nIt has been claimed that in the build-up to World War I, de Gaulle agreed with P\u00e9tain about the obsolescence of cavalry and of traditional tactics, and often debated great battles and the likely outcome of any coming war with his superior. Lacouture is sceptical, pointing out that although P\u00e9tain wrote glowing appraisals of de Gaulle in 1913, it is unlikely that he stood out among the 19 captains and 32 lieutenants under his command. De Gaulle would have been present at the 1913 Arras manoeuvres, at which P\u00e9tain criticised General Gallet to his face, but there is no evidence in his notebooks that he accepted P\u00e9tain's unfashionable ideas about the importance of firepower against the dominant doctrine emphasizing \"offensive spirit\". De Gaulle stressed how Maurice de Saxe had banned volley fire, how French armies of the Napoleonic period had relied on infantry column attack, and how French military power had declined in the nineteenth century because of \u2013 supposedly \u2013 excessive concentration on firepower rather than \"\u00e9lan\". He also appears to have accepted the then-fashionable lesson drawn from the recent Russo-Japanese War of how bayonet charges by Japanese infantry with high morale had succeeded in the face of enemy firepower.\nDe Gaulle was promoted to first lieutenant in October 1913.\nWorld War I.\nCombat commander.\nWhen war broke out in France in early August 1914, the 33rd Regiment, considered one of the best fighting units in France, was immediately thrown into checking the German advance at Dinant. However, the French Fifth Army commander, General Charles Lanrezac, remained wedded to 19th-century battle tactics, throwing his units into pointless bayonet charges against German artillery, incurring heavy losses.\nAs a platoon commander, de Gaulle was involved in fierce fighting from the outset. He received his baptism of fire on 15 August and was among the first to be wounded, receiving a bullet in the knee at the Battle of Dinant. It is sometimes claimed that in hospital, he grew bitter at the tactics used, and spoke with other injured officers against the outdated methods of the French army. However, there is no contemporary evidence that he understood the importance of artillery in modern warfare. Instead, in his writing at the time, he criticised the \"overrapid\" offensive, the inadequacy of French generals, and the \"slowness of the English troops\".\nHe rejoined his regiment in October, as commander of the 7th company. Many of his former comrades were already dead. In December he became regimental adjutant.\nDe Gaulle's unit gained recognition for repeatedly crawling out into no man's land to listen to the conversations of the enemy, and the information brought back was so valuable that on 18 January 1915 he received the Croix de Guerre. On 10 February he was promoted to captain, initially on probation. On 10 March 1915, at the First Battle of Champagne, de Gaulle was shot in the left hand, a wound which initially seemed trivial but became infected. The wound incapacitated him for four months and later forced him to wear his wedding ring on the right hand. In August he commanded the 10th company before returning to duty as regimental adjutant. On 3 September 1915 his rank of captain became permanent. In late October, he returned to command of 10th company.\nAs a company commander at Douaumont (during the Battle of Verdun) on 2 March 1916, while leading a charge to try to break out of a position which had become surrounded, he received a bayonet wound to the left thigh after being stunned by a shell and was captured after passing out from the effects of poison gas. He was one of the few survivors of his battalion. The circumstances of his capture would later become a subject of debate as anti-Gaullists spread rumour that he had actually surrendered, a claim de Gaulle nonchalantly dismissed.\nPrisoner.\nDe Gaulle spent 32 months in six different prisoner camps, but he spent most time in the Ingolstadt Fortress, where his treatment was satisfactory.\nIn captivity, de Gaulle read German newspapers (he had learned German at school and spent a summer vacation in Germany) and gave talks on his view of the conflict to fellow prisoners. His patriotic fervour and confidence in victory earned him the nickname \"Le Conn\u00e9table\" (\"The Constable\"), the title of the medieval commander-in-chief of the French army. In Ingolstadt were also journalist Remy Roure, who would eventually become a political ally of de Gaulle, and Mikhail Tukhachevsky, a future commander of the Red Army. De Gaulle became acquainted with Tukhachevsky, whose theories about a fast-moving, mechanized army closely resembled his. He also wrote his first book, \"Discorde chez l'ennemi (The Enemy's House Divided)\", analysing the divisions within the German forces. The book was published in 1924.\nOriginally interned at Rosenberg Fortress, he was quickly moved to progressively higher-security facilities like Ingolstadt. De Gaulle made five unsuccessful escape attempts, and was routinely punished with long periods of solitary confinement and the withdrawal of privileges such as newspapers and tobacco. He attempted escape by hiding in a laundry basket, digging a tunnel, digging through a wall, and even posing as a nurse. In letters to his parents, he constantly spoke of his frustration that the war was continuing without him. As the war neared its end, he grew depressed that he was playing no part in the victory, but he remained in captivity until the armistice. On 1 December 1918, three weeks later, he returned to his father's house in the Dordogne to be reunited with his three brothers, who had all also served in the army.\nBetween the wars.\nEarly 1920s: Poland and staff college.\nAfter the armistice, de Gaulle served with the staff of the French Military Mission to Poland as an instructor of Poland's infantry during its war with communist Russia (1919\u20131921). He distinguished himself in operations near the River Zbrucz, with the rank of major in the Polish army, and won Poland's highest military decoration, the Virtuti Militari.\nDe Gaulle returned to France, where he became a lecturer in military history at Saint-Cyr. He studied at the \"\u00c9cole de Guerre\" (staff college) from November 1922 to October 1924. Here he clashed with his instructor Colonel Moyrand by arguing for tactics based on circumstances rather than doctrine, and after an exercise in which he had played the role of commander, he refused to answer a question about supplies, replying \"de minimis non curat praetor\" (roughly: \"a leader does not concern himself with trivia\") before ordering the responsible officer to answer Moyrand.\nHe obtained respectable, but not outstanding grades on many of his assessments. Moyrand wrote in his final report that he was \"an intelligent, cultured and serious-minded officer; has brilliance and talent\" but criticised him for not deriving as much benefit from the course as he should have, and for his arrogance: his \"excessive self-confidence\", his harsh dismissal of the views of others \"and his attitude of a King in exile\". Having entered 33rd out of 129, he graduated in 52nd place, with a grade of \"assez bien\" (\"good enough\"). He was posted to Mainz to help supervise supplies of food and equipment for the French Army of Occupation.\nDe Gaulle's book \"La Discorde chez l'ennemi\" had appeared in March 1924. In March 1925 he published an essay on the use of tactics according to circumstances, a deliberate defiance of Moyrand.\nMid-1920s: Ghostwriter for P\u00e9tain.\nDe Gaulle's career was saved by P\u00e9tain, who arranged for his staff college grade to be amended to \"bien\" (\"good\"\u2014but not the \"excellent\" needed for a general staff posting). From 1 July 1925 he worked for P\u00e9tain (as part of the \"Maison P\u00e9tain\"), largely as a \"pen officer\" (ghostwriter). De Gaulle disapproved of P\u00e9tain's decision to take command in Morocco in 1925 (he was later known to remark that \"Marshal P\u00e9tain was a great man. He died in 1925, but he did not know it\") and of what he saw as the lust for public adulation of P\u00e9tain and his wife. In 1925 de Gaulle began to cultivate Joseph Paul-Boncour, his first political patron. On 1 December 1925 he published an essay on the \"Historical Role of French Fortresses\". This was a popular topic because of the Maginot Line which was then being planned, but he argued that the aim of fortresses should be to weaken the enemy, not to economise on defence.\nFriction arose between de Gaulle and P\u00e9tain over \"Le Soldat\", a history of the French soldier which he had ghost-written and for which he wanted greater writing credit. He had written mainly historical material, but P\u00e9tain wanted to add a final chapter of his own thoughts. There was at least one stormy meeting late in 1926 after which de Gaulle was seen to emerge, white with anger, from P\u00e9tain's office. In October 1926 he returned to his duties with the Headquarters of the Army of the Rhine.\nDe Gaulle had sworn that he would never return to the \"\u00c9cole de Guerre\" except as commandant, but at P\u00e9tain's invitation, and introduced to the stage by his patron, he delivered three lectures there in April 1927: \"Leadership in Wartime\", \"Character\", and \"Prestige\". These later formed the basis for his book \"The Edge of the Sword\" (1932).\nLate-1920s: Trier and Beirut.\nAfter spending twelve years as a captain, a normal period, de Gaulle was promoted to \"commandant\" (major) on 25 September 1927. In November 1927 he began a two-year posting as commanding officer of the 19th \"chasseurs \u00e0 pied\" (a battalion of elite light infantry) with the occupation forces at Trier.\nDe Gaulle trained his men hard (a river crossing exercise of the freezing Moselle River at night was vetoed by his commanding general). He imprisoned a soldier for appealing to his deputy for a transfer to a cushier unit, and when investigated initially tried to invoke his status as a member of the \"Maison P\u00e9tain\", eventually appealing to P\u00e9tain to protect himself from a reprimand for interfering with the soldier's political rights. An observer wrote of de Gaulle at this time that although he encouraged young officers, \"his ego...glowed from far off\". In the winter of 1928\u20131929, thirty soldiers (\"not counting Annamese\") died from so-called \"German flu\", seven of them from de Gaulle's battalion. After an investigation, he was singled out for praise in the ensuing parliamentary debate as an exceptionally capable commanding officer, and mention of how he had worn a mourning band for a private soldier who was an orphan earned praise from the Prime Minister Raymond Poincar\u00e9.\nThe breach between de Gaulle and P\u00e9tain over the ghost-writing of \"Le Soldat\" had deepened in 1928. P\u00e9tain brought in a new ghostwriter, Colonel Audet, who was unwilling to take on the job and wrote to de Gaulle in some embarrassment to take over the project. P\u00e9tain was quite friendly about the matter but did not publish the book. In 1929 P\u00e9tain did not use de Gaulle's draft text for his eulogy for the late Ferdinand Foch, whose seat at the \"Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise\" he was assuming.\nThe Allied occupation of the Rhineland was ending, and de Gaulle's battalion was due to be disbanded, although the decision was later rescinded after he had moved to his next posting. De Gaulle wanted a teaching post at the \"\u00c9cole de Guerre\" in 1929. There was apparently a threat of mass resignation of the faculty were he appointed. There was talk of a posting to Corsica or North Africa, but on P\u00e9tain's advice he accepted a two-year posting to Lebanon and Syria. In Beirut he was chief of the 3rd Bureau (military operations) of General Louis-Paul-Gaston de Bigault du Granrut, who wrote him a glowing reference recommending him for high command.\n1930s: Staff officer.\nIn the spring of 1931, as his posting in Beirut drew to a close, de Gaulle once again asked P\u00e9tain for a posting to the \"\u00c9cole de Guerre\". P\u00e9tain tried to obtain an appointment for him as Professor of History there, but once again the faculty would not have him. Instead de Gaulle, drawing on plans he had drawn up in 1928 for reform of that institution, asked P\u00e9tain to create a special post for him which would enable him to lecture on \"the Conduct of War\" both to the \"\u00c9cole de Guerre\" and to the \"Centre des Hautes \u00c9tudes Militaires\" (CHEM \u2013 a senior staff college for generals, known as the \"school for marshals\"), to civilians at the \"\u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure\", and to civil servants.\nP\u00e9tain instead advised him to apply for a posting to the \"Secr\u00e9tariat G\u00e9n\u00e9ral du Conseil Sup\u00e9rieur de la D\u00e9fense Nationale\" (SGDN \u2013 General Secretariat of the Supreme War Council) in Paris. P\u00e9tain promised to lobby for the appointment, which he thought would be good experience for him. De Gaulle was posted to SGDN in November 1931, initially as a \"drafting officer\".\nHe was promoted to lieutenant-colonel in December 1932 and appointed Head of the Third Section (operations). His service at SGDN gave him six years' experience of the interface between army planning and government, enabling him to take on ministerial responsibilities in 1940.\nAfter studying arrangements in the US, Italy, and Belgium, de Gaulle drafted a bill for the organisation of the country in wartime. He made a presentation about his bill to the CHEM. The bill passed the Chamber of Deputies but failed in the Senate.\nEarly 1930s: Proponent of armoured warfare.\nUnlike P\u00e9tain, de Gaulle believed in the use of tanks and rapid maneuvers rather than trench warfare. De Gaulle became a disciple of \u00c9mile Mayer, a retired lieutenant-colonel (his career had been damaged by the Dreyfus Affair) and military thinker. Mayer thought that although wars were still bound to happen, it was \"obsolete\" for civilised countries to threaten or wage war on one another. He had a low opinion of French generals, and was a critic of the Maginot Line and a proponent of mechanised warfare. Lacouture suggests that Mayer focused de Gaulle's thoughts away from his obsession with the mystique of the strong leader (\"Le Fil d'Ep\u00e9e\": 1932) and back to loyalty to Republican institutions and military reform.\nIn 1934 de Gaulle wrote \"Vers l'Arm\u00e9e de M\u00e9tier\" (\"Towards a Professional Army\"). He proposed mechanization of the infantry, with stress on an \u00e9lite force of 100,000 men and 3,000 tanks. The book imagined tanks driving around the country like cavalry. De Gaulle's mentor Emile Mayer was somewhat more prophetic than he was about the future importance of air power on the battlefield. Such an army would both compensate for France's population shortage, and be an efficient tool to enforce international law, particularly the Treaty of Versailles. He also thought it would be a precursor to a deeper national reorganisation, and wrote that \"a master has to make his appearance [...] whose orders cannot be challenged \u2013 a man upheld by public opinion\".\nOnly 700 copies were sold in France; the claim that thousands of copies were sold in Germany is thought to be an exaggeration. De Gaulle used the book to widen his contacts among journalists, notably with Andr\u00e9 Pironneau, editor of \"L'\u00c9cho de Paris\". The book attracted praise across the political spectrum, apart from the hard left who were committed to the Republican ideal of a citizen army. De Gaulle's views attracted the attention of the maverick politician Paul Reynaud, to whom he wrote frequently, sometimes in obsequious terms. Reynaud first invited him to meet him on 5 December 1934.\nDe Gaulle was deeply focused on his career at this time. There is no evidence that he was tempted by fascism, and there is little evidence of his views either on domestic upheavals in 1934 and 1936 or the many foreign policy crises of the decade. He approved of the rearmament drive which the Popular Front government began in 1936, although French military doctrine remained that tanks should be used in penny packets for infantry support (ironically, in 1940 it would be German panzer units that would be used in a manner similar to what de Gaulle had advocated). A rare insight into de Gaulle's political views is a letter to his mother warning that war with Germany was inevitable and reassuring her that Pierre Laval's pact with the USSR in 1935 was for the best, likening it to Francis I's alliance with the Turks against Emperor Charles V.\nLate 1930s: Tank regiment.\nFrom April 1936, whilst still in his staff position at SGDN, de Gaulle was a lecturer to generals at CHEM. De Gaulle's superiors disapproved of his views about tanks, and he was passed over for promotion to full colonel in 1936, supposedly because his service record was not good enough. He called on his political patron Reynaud, who showed his record to Minister of War \u00c9douard Daladier. Daladier, who was an enthusiast for rearmament with modern weapons, ensured that his name was on the promotion list for the following year.\nIn 1937 General Bineau, who had taught him at Saint-Cyr, wrote on his report on his lectureship at CHEM that he was highly able and suitable for high command in the future, but that he hid his attributes under \"a cold and lofty attitude\". He was put in command of the 507th Tank Regiment (a battalion of medium Char D2s and a battalion of R35 light tanks) at Metz on 13 July 1937, and his promotion to full colonel took effect on 24 December that year. De Gaulle attracted public attention by leading a parade of 80 tanks into the Place d'Armes at Metz, in his command tank \"Austerlitz\".\nBy now de Gaulle was becoming a well-known figure, known as \"Colonel Motor(s)\". At the invitation of the publisher Plon, he produced another book, \"La France et son Arm\u00e9e (France and Her Army)\" in 1938. De Gaulle incorporated much of the text he had written for P\u00e9tain a decade earlier for the uncompleted book \"Le Soldat\", to P\u00e9tain's displeasure. De Gaulle agreed to include a dedication to P\u00e9tain (although he wrote his own rather than using the draft P\u00e9tain sent him), which was dropped from postwar editions. Until 1938 P\u00e9tain had treated de Gaulle, as Lacouture puts it, \"with unbounded good will\", but by October 1938 he privately thought his former prot\u00e9g\u00e9 \"an ambitious man, and very ill-bred\".\nWorld War II.\nDivision commander.\nAt the outbreak of World War II, de Gaulle was put in command of the French Fifth Army's tanks (five scattered battalions, largely equipped with R35 light tanks) under General Victor Bourret in Alsace. On 12 September 1939 he attacked at Bitche, simultaneously with the Saar Offensive.\nAt the start of October 1939, Reynaud asked for a staff posting under de Gaulle, but remained at his post as Minister of Finance. De Gaulle's tanks were inspected by President Lebrun, who was impressed, but regretted that it was too late to implement his ideas. He wrote a paper \"L'Av\u00e8nement de la force m\u00e9canique (The coming of the Armoured Force)\" which he sent to General Georges (commander-in-chief on the northeast front \u2013 who was not especially impressed) and the politician Leon Blum. Daladier, Prime Minister at the time, was too busy to read it.\nIn late February 1940, Reynaud told de Gaulle that he had been earmarked for command of an armoured division as soon as one became available. Early in 1940 (the exact date is uncertain), de Gaulle proposed to Reynaud that he be appointed Secretary-General of the War Council, which would in effect make him the government's military adviser. When Reynaud became prime minister in March, he was reliant on Daladier's backing, so the job went instead to the politician Paul Baudouin. In late March, Reynaud told de Gaulle that he would be given command of the 4th Armoured Division, due to form by 15 May. The government appeared likely to be restructured, as Daladier and Maurice Gamelin (commander-in-chief) were under attack in the aftermath of the Allied defeat in Norway, and had this happened de Gaulle, who on 3 May, was still lobbying Reynaud for a restructuring of the control of the war, might well have joined the government. By 7 May he was assembling the staff of his new division.\nBattle of France.\nThe Germans attacked the West on 10 May. De Gaulle activated his new division on 12 May. The Germans broke through at Sedan on 15 May 1940. That day, with three tank battalions assembled, less than a third of his paper strength, he was summoned to headquarters and told to attack to gain time for General Robert Touchon's Sixth Army to redeploy from the Maginot Line to the Aisne. General Georges told him it was his chance to implement his ideas.\nDe Gaulle attacked the German-held village at Montcornet, a key road junction near Laon. The attack began around 04:30 on 17 May. Outnumbered and without air support, he lost 23 of his 90 vehicles to mines, anti-tank weapons, and Stukas. On 18 May he was reinforced by two fresh regiments of armoured cavalry, bringing his strength to 150 vehicles. He attacked again on 19 May and his forces were once again devastated. He ignored orders from General Georges to withdraw, and in the early afternoon demanded two more divisions from Touchon, who refused. Although de Gaulle's tanks forced German infantry to retreat to Caumont, the action brought only temporary relief and did little to slow the spearhead of the German advance. Nevertheless, it was one of the few successes the French enjoyed while suffering defeats across the country.\nHe delayed his retreat until 20 May. On 21 May, at the request of propaganda officers, he gave a talk on French radio about his recent attack. In recognition for his efforts de Gaulle was promoted to the rank of brigadier-general on 23 May 1940. Later, De Gaulle attacked the German bridgehead at Abbeville on 28\u201329 May, taking around 300 German prisoners in the last attempt to cut an escape route for the Allied forces.\nDe Gaulle's rank of brigadier-general became effective on 1 June 1940. That day he was in Paris. After visiting his tailor to be fitted for his general's uniform, he met Reynaud, who appears to have offered him a government job for the first time, and afterwards the commander-in-chief Maxime Weygand, who congratulated him on saving France's honour and asked for his advice. On 2 June he sent a memo to Weygand vainly urging that the French armoured divisions be consolidated from four weak divisions into three stronger ones and concentrated into an armoured corps under his command. He made the same suggestion to Reynaud.\nGovernment minister.\nOn 5 June, the day the Germans began the second phase of their offensive \"(Fall Rot)\", Prime Minister Paul Reynaud appointed de Gaulle Under-Secretary of State for National Defence and War, with particular responsibility for coordination with the British. Weygand objected to the appointment, thinking him \"a mere child\". P\u00e9tain (deputy prime minister) was also displeased and told Reynaud the story of the ghost-writing of \"Le Soldat\". His appointment received a good deal of press attention, both in France and in the UK. He asked for an English-speaking aide and Geoffroy Chodron de Courcel was given the job.\nOn 8 June, de Gaulle visited Weygand, who believed it was \"the end\" and that after France was defeated Britain would soon sue for peace. A day later, de Gaulle flew to London and met British Prime Minister Winston Churchill for the first time. It was thought that half a million men could be evacuated to French North Africa, provided the British and French navies and air forces coordinated their efforts. Either at this meeting or on 16 June, he urged Churchill in vain to throw more Royal Air Force (RAF) aircraft into the Battle of France but conceded that Churchill was right to refuse.\nOn 11 June, de Gaulle drove to Arcis-sur-Aube and offered General Charles Huntziger Weygand's job as Commander-in-Chief. Huntziger accepted in principle, but de Gaulle was unable to persuade Reynaud to sack Weygand. On 13 June, de Gaulle attended another Anglo-French conference at Tours with Churchill, Lord Halifax, Lord Beaverbrook, Edward Spears, Sir Hastings Ismay, and Sir Alexander Cadogan. De Gaulle was dissuaded from resigning by the Interior Minister Georges Mandel, who argued that the war was just beginning, and that de Gaulle needed to keep his reputation unsullied. Nevertheless, at around 9:00 on 17 June, de Gaulle flew to London on a British aircraft with Spears. De Gaulle later told Andr\u00e9 Malraux of the mental anguish which his flight to London \u2013 a break with the French Army and with the recognised government, which would inevitably be seen as treason by many \u2013 had caused him.\nLeader of the Free French in exile.\nAppeal from London.\nDe Gaulle landed at Heston Airport soon after 12:30 on 17 June 1940. He saw Churchill at around 15:00 and Churchill offered him broadcast time on BBC. They both knew about P\u00e9tain's broadcast earlier that day that stated that \"the fighting must end\" and that he had approached the Germans for terms. That evening de Gaulle dined with Jean Monnet and denounced P\u00e9tain's \"treason\". The next day the British Cabinet (Churchill was not present, as it was the day of his \"Finest Hour\" speech) were reluctant to agree to de Gaulle's giving a radio address, as Britain was still in communication with the P\u00e9tain government about the fate of the French fleet. Duff Cooper (minister of information) had an advance copy of the address, to which there were no objections. The cabinet eventually agreed after individual lobbying, as indicated by a handwritten amendment to the cabinet minutes.\nDe Gaulle's \"Appeal of 18 June\" exhorted the French people not to be demoralized and to continue to resist occupation. He also \u2013 apparently on his own initiative \u2013 declared that he would broadcast again the next day. Few listened to the 18 June speech; the speech was published in some newspapers in mainland France. It was largely aimed at French soldiers who were in Britain after being evacuated from Norway and Dunkirk; most showed no interest in fighting for de Gaulle's Free French Forces and were repatriated to France to become German prisoners of war. The small audience of the 18 June appeal grew for later speeches, and the press by early August described Free French military as fighting under de Gaulle's command, although few in France knew anything about him.\nThe Vichy regime had already sentenced de Gaulle to four years' imprisonment; on 2 August 1940 he was condemned to death by court martial \"in absentia\", although P\u00e9tain commented that he would ensure that the sentence was never carried out. De Gaulle said of the sentence, \"I consider the act of the Vichy men as void; I shall have an explanation with them after the victory\". He and Churchill reached agreement on 7 August 1940, that Britain would fund the Free French, with the bill to be settled after the war (the financial agreement was finalised in March 1941). A separate letter guaranteed the territorial integrity of the French Empire.\nDe Gaulle's support grew out of a base in the colonial French Equatorial Africa. In the autumn of 1940, the colonial empire largely supported the Vichy regime. F\u00e9lix \u00c9bou\u00e9, governor of Chad, switched his support to General de Gaulle in September. Encouraged, de Gaulle traveled to Brazzaville in October, where he announced the formation of an Empire Defense Council in his \"Brazzaville Manifesto\", and invited all colonies still supporting Vichy to join him and the Free French forces in the fight against Germany, which most of them did by 1943.\nAlgiers.\nWorking with the French Resistance and other supporters in France's colonial African possessions after Operation Torch in November 1942, de Gaulle moved his headquarters to Algiers in May 1943. He became first joint head (with the less resolutely independent General Henri Giraud, the candidate preferred by the US who wrongly suspected de Gaulle of being a British puppet) and then\u2014after squeezing out Giraud by force of personality\u2014sole chairman of the French Committee of National Liberation.\nDe Gaulle was held in high regard by Allied commander General Dwight Eisenhower. In Algiers in 1943, Eisenhower gave de Gaulle the assurance in person that a French force would liberate Paris and arranged that the army division of French General Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque would be transferred from North Africa to the UK to carry out that liberation. Eisenhower was impressed by the combativeness of units of the Free French Forces and \"grateful for the part they had played in mopping up the remnants of German resistance\"; he also detected how strongly devoted many were to de Gaulle and how ready they were to accept him as the national leader.\nPreparations for D-Day.\nAs preparations for the liberation of Europe gathered pace, the US in particular found de Gaulle's tendency to view everything from the French perspective to be extremely tiresome. President Roosevelt, who refused to recognize any provisional authority in France until elections had been held, referred to de Gaulle as \"an apprentice dictator\", a view backed by a number of leading Frenchmen in Washington, including Jean Monnet, who later became instrumental in setting up the European Coal and Steel Community that led to the modern European Union. Roosevelt directed Churchill not to provide de Gaulle with strategic details of the imminent invasion because he did not trust him to keep the information to himself. French codes were considered weak, posing a risk since the Free French refused to use British or American codes. De Gaulle refused to share coded information with the British, who were then obliged secretly to break the codes to read French messages.\nUpon his arrival at RAF Northolt on 4 June 1944 he received an official welcome. Later, on his personal train, Churchill informed him that he wanted him to make a radio address, but when informed that the Americans continued to refuse to recognise his right to power in France, and after Churchill suggested he request a meeting with Roosevelt to improve his relationship with the president, de Gaulle became angry, demanding to know why he should \"lodge my candidacy for power in France with Roosevelt; the French government exists\".\nReturn to France.\nOn 14 June 1944, he left Britain for the city of Bayeux, Normandy, which he proclaimed as the capital of Free France. Appointing his Aide-de-Camp Francois Coulet as head of the civil administration, de Gaulle returned to the UK that same night on a French destroyer, and although the official position of the supreme military command remained unchanged, local Allied officers found it more practical to deal with the fledgling administration in Bayeux in everyday matters which set a precedent of the Provisional Government running the civil affairs of liberated France. De Gaulle flew to Algiers on 16 June and then went to Rome to meet the Pope and the new Italian government.\nAt the beginning of July, he visited Roosevelt in Washington, where he received the 17-gun salute of a senior military leader rather than the 21 guns of a visiting head of state. De Gaulle successfully lobbied for Paris to be made a priority for liberation on humanitarian grounds and obtained from Allied supreme commander General Dwight D. Eisenhower an agreement that French troops would be allowed to enter the capital first. A few days later, General Leclerc's division entered the outskirts of the city, and after six days of fighting in which the resistance played a major part, the German garrison of 5000 men surrendered on 25 August 1944, although some sporadic fighting continued for several days.\nOn the evening of 26 August, the \"Wehrmacht\" launched a massive aerial and artillery barrage of Paris in revenge, leaving several thousand dead or injured. The situation in Paris remained tense, and a few days later, de Gaulle asked General Eisenhower to send American troops into Paris as a show of strength. On 29 August, the US 28th Infantry Division was rerouted from its journey to the front line and paraded down the Champs Elysees.\nThe same day, Washington and London agreed to accept the position of the Free French. The following day General Eisenhower gave his de facto blessing with a visit to the General in Paris.\n1944\u20131946: Provisional Government of the French Republic.\nRoosevelt insisted that an Allied Military Government for Occupied Territories (AMGOT) should be implemented in France, but this was opposed by both the Secretary and Under-Secretary of War, as well as by Eisenhower, who had been strongly opposed to the imposition of AMGOT in North Africa. Eisenhower, unlike Roosevelt, wanted to cooperate with de Gaulle, and he secured a last-minute promise from the President on the eve of D-Day that the Allied officers would not act as military governors and would instead cooperate with the local authorities as the Allied forces liberated French Territory. De Gaulle would later claim in his memoirs that he blocked AMGOT.\nWith the prewar parties and most of their leaders discredited, there was little opposition to de Gaulle and his associates forming an interim administration. In order not to be seen as presuming on his position in such austere times, de Gaulle did not use one of the grand official residences such as Hotel de Matignon or the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Palace, but resided briefly in his old office at the Ministry of War. When he was joined by his wife and daughters, they moved into a small state-owned villa on edge of Bois de Boulogne which had once been set aside for Hermann G\u00f6ring.\nOn 10 November 1944, Churchill flew to Paris to a reception by de Gaulle and the two together were greeted by thousands of cheering Parisians on the next day. Harold Nicolson stated that Anthony Eden told him that \"not for one moment did Winston stop crying, and that he could have filled buckets by the time he received the Freedom of Paris.\" At an official luncheon, de Gaulle said: It is true that we would not have seen [the liberation] if our old and gallant ally England, and all the British dominions under precisely the impulsion and inspiration of those we are honouring today, had not deployed the extraordinary determination to win, and that magnificent courage which saved the freedom of the world. There is no French man or woman who is not touched to the depths of their hearts and souls by this.\nLegal purges (\"\u00c9puration l\u00e9gale\").\nKeenly aware of the need to seize the initiative and get the process under firm judicial control, de Gaulle appointed Justice Minister Fran\u00e7ois de Menthon to lead the Legal Purge (\"\u00c9puration l\u00e9gale\") to punish traitors and clear away traces of the Vichy regime. Knowing that he would need to reprieve many of the 'economic collaborators'\u2014such as police and civil servants who held minor roles under Vichy to keep the country running\u2014he assumed, as head of state, the right to commute death sentences. Of the near 2,000 people who received the death sentence from the courts, fewer than 800 were executed. De Gaulle commuted 998 of the 1,554 capital sentences submitted before him, including all women. Many others were given jail terms or had their voting rights and other legal privileges taken away. It is generally agreed that the purges were conducted arbitrarily, with often absurdly severe or overly lenient punishments being handed down. Less well-off people who were unable to pay for lawyers were more harshly treated. As time went by and feelings grew less intense, a number of people who had held fairly senior positions under the Vichy government\u2014such as Maurice Papon and Ren\u00e9 Bousquet\u2014escaped consequences by claiming to have worked secretly for the resistance or to have played a double game, working for the good of France by serving the established order.\nP\u00e9tain received a death sentence, which his old prot\u00e9g\u00e9 de Gaulle commuted to life imprisonment, while Maxime Weygand was eventually acquitted. There was a widespread belief, particularly in the years that followed, that de Gaulle was trying to appease both the Third Republic politicians and the former Vichy leaders who had made Laval their scapegoat.\nYalta and Potsdam.\nDe Gaulle was never invited to the summit conferences of Allied leaders such as Yalta and Potsdam. He never forgave the Big Three leaders (Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin) for their neglect and continued to rage against it as having been a negative factor in European politics for the rest of his life.\nAfter the Rhine crossings, the French First Army captured a large section of territory in southern Germany, but although this later allowed France to play a part in the signing of the German surrender, Roosevelt in particular refused to allow any discussion about de Gaulle participating in the Big Three conferences that would shape Europe in the post-war world. Churchill pressed hard for France to be included 'at the inter-allied table', but on 6 December 1944 the American president wired both Stalin and Churchill to say that de Gaulle's presence would \"merely introduce a complicating and undesirable factor\".\nAt the Yalta Conference in February 1945, despite Stalin's opposition, Churchill and Roosevelt insisted that France be allowed a post-war occupation zone in Germany, and also made sure that it was included among the five nations that invited others to the conference to establish the United Nations. This guaranteed France a permanent seat on the UN Security Council.\nVictory in Europe.\nIn May 1945 the German armies surrendered to the Americans and British at Rheims, and a separate armistice was signed with France in Berlin. De Gaulle refused to allow any British participation in the victory parade in Paris. However, among the vehicles that took part was an ambulance from the Hadfield-Spears Ambulance Unit, staffed by French doctors and British nurses. One of the nurses was Mary Spears, who had set up the unit and had worked almost continuously since the Battle of France with Free French forces in the Middle East, North Africa and Italy. Mary's husband was General Edward Spears, the British liaison to the Free French who had personally spirited de Gaulle to safety in Britain in 1940. When de Gaulle saw the Union Flags and Tricolours side by side on the ambulance, and heard French soldiers cheering, \"Voil\u00e0 Spears! Vive Spears!\", he ordered that the unit be closed down immediately and its British staff sent home. A number of French troops returned their medals in protest and Mary wrote, \"it is a pitiful business when a great man suddenly becomes small.\"\nAnother confrontation with the Americans broke out soon after the armistice when the French sent troops to occupy the French-speaking Italian border region of Val d'Aoste. The French commander threatened to fire on American troops if they tried to stop them, and an irate Truman ordered the immediate end to all arms shipments to France. Truman sent de Gaulle an angry letter saying that he found it unbelievable that the French could threaten to attack American troops after they had done so much to liberate France.\nWithin the same month another crisis developed in Syria where French troops tried to quell nationalist protests at the continued occupation of the Levant. Winston Churchill opposed French action and after they refused to negotiate he ordered British forces into Syria from Transjordan with orders to fire on the French if necessary. Known as the Levant Crisis, British forces swept into Syria forcing the French to stand down, and with political pressure added by the United States and Soviet Union, the French ordered a ceasefire. This crisis further infuriated Truman, and France evacuated its troops later in the year but de Gaulle said to the British ambassador Duff Cooper, 'you have betrayed France and betrayed the West. That cannot be forgotten'.47\nDe Gaulle was generally well received in the United States immediately after World War II and supported the US in public comments. He visited New York City on 27 August 1945 to great welcome by thousands of people of the city and its mayor Fiorello La Guardia. On that day, de Gaulle wished \"Long live the United States of America\". He visited New York City Hall and Idlewild Airport (now John F. Kennedy International Airport), and presented LaGuardia with the Grand Croix of the Legion of Honour award.\nNew elections and resignation.\nSince the liberation, the only parliament in France had been an enlarged version of the Algiers Provisional Consultative Assembly, and at last, in October 1945, elections were held for a new Constituent Assembly whose main task was to provide a new constitution for the Fourth Republic. De Gaulle favoured a strong executive for the nation, but all three of the main parties wished to severely restrict the powers of the president. The Communists wanted an assembly with full constitutional powers and no time limit, whereas de Gaulle, the Socialists and the Popular Republican Movement (MRP) advocated one with a term limited to only seven months, after which the draft constitution would be submitted for another referendum.\nOn 13 November 1945, the new assembly unanimously elected Charles de Gaulle head of the government, but problems immediately arose when it came to selecting the cabinet, due to his unwillingness to allow the Communists any important ministries. The Communists, now the largest party and with their charismatic leader Maurice Thorez back at the helm, were not prepared to accept this for a second time, and a furious row ensued, during which de Gaulle sent a letter of resignation to the speaker of the Assembly and declared that he was unwilling to trust a party that he considered to be an agent of a foreign power (Russia) with authority over the police and armed forces.\nEventually, the new cabinet was finalised on 21 November, with the Communists receiving five out of the twenty-two ministries, and although they still did not get any key portfolios, de Gaulle believed that the draft constitution placed too much power in the hands of parliament with its shifting party alliances. One of his ministers said he was \"a man equally incapable of monopolizing power as of sharing it\".\nDe Gaulle outlined a programme of further nationalisations and a new economic plan which were passed, but a further row came when the Communists demanded a 20-percent reduction in the military budget. Refusing to \"rule by compromise\", de Gaulle once more threatened to resign. There was a general feeling that he was trying to blackmail the assembly into complete subservience. Although the MRP managed to broker a compromise which saw the budget approved with amendments, it was a stop-gap measure.\nBarely two months after forming the new government, de Gaulle abruptly resigned on 20 January 1946. The move was called \"a bold and ultimately foolish political ploy\", with de Gaulle hoping that as a war hero, he would be soon brought back as a more powerful executive by the French people. However, that did not turn out to be the case. With the war finally over, the initial crisis had passed. Although there were still shortages, particularly of bread, France was now recovering, and de Gaulle suddenly did not seem so indispensable. The Communist publication \"Combat\" wrote, \"There was no cataclysm, and the empty plate didn't crack\".\n1946\u20131958: Out of power.\nDe Gaulle suddenly dropped out of sight and returned to his home in Colombey to write his war memoirs. De Gaulle had told Pierre Bertaux in 1944 that he planned to retire because \"France may still one day need an image that is pure ... If Joan of Arc had married, she would no longer have been Joan of Arc\". The famous opening paragraph of \"M\u00e9moires de guerre\" begins by declaring, \"All my life, I have had a certain idea of France (\"une certaine id\u00e9e de la France\")\", and ends by declaring that, given the divisive nature of French politics, France cannot truly live up to this ideal without a policy of \"grandeur\". During this period of formal retirement, however, de Gaulle maintained regular contact with past political lieutenants, including sympathizers involved in political developments in French Algeria, becoming \"perhaps the best-informed man in France\".\nIn April 1947, de Gaulle made a renewed attempt to transform the political scene by creating a \"Rassemblement du Peuple Fran\u00e7ais\" (Rally of the French People, \"RPF\"), which he hoped would be able to move above the party squabbles of the parliamentary system. Despite the new party's taking 40 percent of the vote in local elections and 121 seats in 1951, lacking its own press and access to television, its support ebbed. In May 1953, he withdrew again from active politics, though the \"RPF\" lingered until September 1955.\nAs with all colonial powers France began to lose its overseas possessions amid the surge of nationalism. French Indochina (now Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia), colonised by France during the mid-19th century, had been lost to the Japanese after the defeat of 1940. De Gaulle had intended to hold on to France's Indochina colony, ordering the parachuting of French agents and arms into Indochina in late 1944 and early 1945 with orders to attack the Japanese as American troops hit the beaches. Although de Gaulle had moved quickly to consolidate French control of the territory during his brief first tenure as president in the 1940s, the communist Vietminh under Ho Chi Minh began a determined campaign for independence from 1946. The French fought a bitter seven-year war (the First Indochina War) to hold on to Indochina. It was largely funded by the United States and grew increasingly unpopular, especially after the stunning defeat at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu in May 1954. France pulled out that summer under Prime Minister Pierre Mend\u00e8s France.\nThe independence of Morocco and Tunisia was arranged by Mend\u00e8s France and proclaimed in March 1956. Meanwhile, in Algeria some 350,000 French troops were fighting 150,000 combatants of the Algerian Liberation Movement (FLN). Within a few years, the Algerian war of independence reached a summit in terms of savagery and bloodshed and threatened to spill into metropolitan France itself.\nBetween 1946 and 1958 the Fourth Republic had 24 separate ministries. Frustrated by the endless divisiveness, de Gaulle famously asked, \"How can you govern a country which has 246 varieties of cheese?\"\n1958: Collapse of the Fourth Republic.\nThe Fourth Republic was wracked by political instability, failures in Indochina, and inability to resolve the Algerian question.\nOn 13 May 1958, Pied-Noir settlers seized the government buildings in Algiers, attacking what they saw as French government weakness in prosecuting the war against the FLN. A \"Committee of Civil and Army Public Security\" was created under the presidency of General Jacques Massu, a Gaullist sympathiser. General Raoul Salan, Commander-in-Chief in Algeria, announced on radio that he was assuming provisional power, and appealed for confidence.\nAt a 19 May press conference, de Gaulle asserted that he was at the disposal of the country. As a journalist expressed the concerns of some who feared that he would violate civil liberties, de Gaulle retorted: \"Have I ever done that? On the contrary, I have re-established them when they had disappeared. Who honestly believes that, at age 67, I would start a career as a dictator?\" A constitutionalist by conviction, he maintained that he would accept power only from the lawfully constituted authorities. De Gaulle did not wish to repeat the difficulty the Free French movement experienced in establishing legitimacy as the rightful government. He told an aide that the rebel generals \"will not find de Gaulle in their baggage\".\nThe crisis deepened as French paratroopers from Algeria seized Corsica and a landing near Paris was discussed (Operation Resurrection).\nPolitical leaders on many sides agreed to support the General's return to power, except Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, Pierre Mend\u00e8s France, Alain Savary, the Communist Party, and certain other leftists.\nOn 29 May the French President, Ren\u00e9 Coty, told parliament that the nation was on the brink of civil war, so he was turning towards the most illustrious of Frenchmen, towards the man who, in the darkest years of our history, was our chief for the reconquest of freedom and who refused dictatorship in order to re-establish the Republic. I ask General de Gaulle to confer with the head of state and to examine with him what, in the framework of Republican legality, is necessary for the immediate formation of a government of national safety and what can be done, in a fairly short time, for a deep reform of our institutions. De Gaulle accepted Coty's proposal under the precondition that a new constitution would be introduced creating a powerful presidency in which a sole executive, the first of which was to be himself, ruled for seven-year periods. Another condition was that he be granted extraordinary powers for a period of six months.\nDe Gaulle remained intent on replacing the weak constitution of the Fourth Republic. He is sometimes described as the author of the new constitution, as he commissioned it and was responsible for its overall framework. The actual drafter of the text was Michel Debr\u00e9 who wrote up de Gaulle's political ideas and guided the text through the enactment process. On 1 June 1958, de Gaulle became Prime Minister and was given emergency powers for six months by the National Assembly, fulfilling his desire for parliamentary legitimacy.\nDe Gaulle's cabinet received strong support from right-wing parties, split support from left of center parties, and strong opposition from the Communist Party. In the vote on 1 June 1958, 329 votes were cast in favor and 224 against, out of 593 deputies. On 28 September 1958, a referendum took place and 82.6 percent of those who voted supported the new constitution and the creation of the Fifth Republic. The colonies (Algeria was officially a part of France, not a colony) were given the choice between immediate independence and the new constitution. All African colonies voted for the new constitution and the replacement of the French Union by the French Community, except Guinea, which became the first French African colony to gain independence and immediately lost all French assistance.\n1958\u20131969: Return to power.\nIn the November 1958 election, Charles de Gaulle and his supporters (initially the \"Union pour la nouvelle R\u00e9publique - Union d\u00e9mocratique du travail\", then the \"Union des d\u00e9mocrates pour la Cinqui\u00e8me R\u00e9publique\", later still the \"Union des D\u00e9mocrates pour la R\u00e9publique\", UDR) won a comfortable majority. On 21 December, he was elected President of France; he was inaugurated in January 1959. As head of state, he became \"ex officio\" the Co-Prince of Andorra.\nDe Gaulle oversaw tough economic measures to revitalise the country, including the issuing of a new franc. Less than a year after taking office, he was confronted with national tragedy, after the Malpasset Dam in Var collapsed in early December, killing over 400. Internationally, he rebuffed both the United States and the Soviet Union, pushing for an independent France with its own nuclear weapons and strongly encouraging a \"Free Europe\", believing that a confederation of all European nations would restore the past glories of the great European empires.\nHe set about building Franco-German cooperation as the cornerstone of the European Economic Community (EEC), paying a state visit to West Germany in September 1962, the first to Germany by a French head of state since Napoleon. In January 1963, West Germany and France signed a treaty of friendship, the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Treaty. France also reduced its dollar reserves, trading them for gold from the United States, reducing American economic influence abroad.\nOn 23 November 1959, in a speech in Strasbourg, he announced his vision for Europe:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nYes, it is Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals, it is the whole of Europe, that will decide the destiny of the world.\nHis expression, \"Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals\", has often been cited throughout the history of European integration. His vision stood in contrast to the Atlanticism of the United States and Britain, preferring instead a Europe that would act as a third pole between the United States and the Soviet Union.\nAs the last chief of government of the Fourth Republic, de Gaulle made sure that the Treaty of Rome creating the European Economic Community was fully implemented, and that the British project of Free Trade Area was rejected, to the extent that he was sometimes considered as a \"Father of Europe\".\nAlgeria.\nUpon becoming president, de Gaulle was faced with the urgent task of ending the bloody and divisive war in Algeria. Although the military's near coup had contributed to his return to power, de Gaulle soon ordered all officers to quit the rebellious Committees of Public Safety. Such actions greatly angered the pieds-noirs and their military supporters.\nHe faced uprisings in Algeria by the pied-noirs and the French armed forces. On assuming the prime minister role in June 1958, he immediately went to Algeria, and neutralised the army there. For the long term he devised a plan to modernize Algeria's traditional economy, deescalated the war, and offered Algeria self-determination in 1959. A pied-noir revolt in 1960 failed, and another attempted coup failed in April 1961. French voters approved his course in a 1961 referendum on Algerian self-determination. De Gaulle arranged a cease-fire in Algeria with the March 1962 \u00c9vian Accords, legitimated by another referendum a month later. It gave victory to the FLN, which declared independence.\nPrime Minister Michel Debr\u00e9 resigned over the final settlement and was replaced with Georges Pompidou. France recognised Algerian independence on 3 July 1962, and a blanket amnesty law was belatedly voted in 1968, covering all crimes committed by the French army during the war. In just a few months in 1962, 900,000 \"Pied-Noirs\" left the country. After 5 July, the exodus accelerated in the wake of the French deaths during the Oran massacre of 1962.\nAssassination attempts.\nDe Gaulle was targeted for death by the Organisation arm\u00e9e secr\u00e8te (OAS), in retaliation for his Algerian initiatives. Several assassination attempts were made on him; the most famous occurred on 22 August 1962, when he and his wife narrowly escaped from an organized machine gun ambush on their Citro\u00ebn DS limousine. The attack was arranged by Colonel Jean-Marie Bastien-Thiry at Petit-Clamart. It is claimed that there were at least 30 assassination attempts against de Gaulle throughout his lifetime.\nDirect presidential elections.\nIn September 1962, de Gaulle sought a constitutional amendment to allow the president to be directly elected by the people and issued another referendum to this end. After a motion of censure voted by the parliament on 4 October 1962, de Gaulle dissolved the National Assembly and held new elections. The Gaullists won an increased majority.\nDe Gaulle's proposal to change the election procedure for the French presidency was approved at the referendum on 28 October 1962. Thereafter the president was to be elected by direct universal suffrage for the first time since Louis Napoleon in 1848.\nIn December 1965, de Gaulle returned as president for a second seven-year term.\n\"Thirty glorious years\".\nWith the Algerian conflict behind him, de Gaulle was able to achieve his two main objectives, the reform and development of the French economy, and the promotion of an independent foreign policy and a strong presence on the international stage. This was named by foreign observers the \"politics of grandeur\".\nIn the immediate post-war years France was in poor shape; wages remained at around half prewar levels, the winter of 1946\u20131947 did extensive damage to crops, leading to a reduction in the bread ration, hunger and disease remained rife and the black market continued to flourish. Germany was in an even worse position, but after 1948 things began to improve dramatically with the introduction of Marshall Aid\u2014large scale American financial assistance given to help rebuild European economies and infrastructure. This laid the foundations of a meticulously planned program of investments in energy, transport and heavy industry, overseen by the government of Prime Minister Georges Pompidou.\nAided by these projects, the French economy recorded growth rates unrivalled since the 19th century. In 1964, for the first time in nearly 100 years France's GDP overtook that of the United Kingdom for a time. This period is remembered in France as the peak of the \"Trente Glorieuses\" (\"Thirty Glorious Years\" of economic growth between 1945 and 1974).\nFourth nuclear power.\nAs early as April 1954, de Gaulle argued that France must have its own nuclear arsenal. Full-scale research began again in late 1954 when Prime Minister Pierre Mend\u00e8s France authorized a plan to develop the atomic bomb. France's independent Force de Frappe (strike force) came into being soon after de Gaulle's election with his authorization for the first nuclear test.\nWith the cancellation of Blue Streak, the US agreed to supply Britain with its Skybolt and later Polaris weapons systems, and in 1958, the two nations signed the Mutual Defence Agreement. Although at the time it was still a full member of NATO, France proceeded to develop its own independent nuclear technologies\u2014this would enable it to become a partner in any reprisals and would give it a voice in matters of atomic control.\nAfter six years of effort, on 13 February 1960, France became the world's fourth nuclear power when a high-powered nuclear device was exploded in the Sahara. In August 1963, France decided against signing the Partial Test Ban Treaty because it would have prohibited it from testing nuclear weapons above ground. France continued to carry out tests at the Algerian site until 1966, under an agreement with the newly independent Algeria. France's testing program then moved to the Mururoa and Fangataufa Atolls in the South Pacific.\nIn November 1967, an article by the French Chief of the General Staff (but inspired by de Gaulle) in the \"Revue de la D\u00e9fense Nationale\" caused international consternation. It was stated that the French nuclear force should be capable of firing \"in all directions\"\u2014thus including even America as a potential target. This surprising statement was intended as a declaration of French national independence and was in retaliation to a warning issued long ago by Dean Rusk that US missiles would be aimed at France if it attempted to employ atomic weapons outside an agreed plan. However, criticism of de Gaulle was growing over his tendency to act alone with little regard for the views of others.\nForeign policy.\nDe Gaulle hosted a superpower summit on 17 May 1960 for arms limitation talks and d\u00e9tente efforts in the wake of the 1960 U-2 incident between United States President Dwight Eisenhower, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, and United Kingdom Prime Minister Harold Macmillan. When Khrushchev condemned the United States U-2 flights, de Gaulle expressed to Khrushchev his disapproval of 18 near-simultaneous secret Soviet satellite overflights of French territory; Khrushchev denied knowledge of the overflights. Lieutenant General Vernon A. Walters was struck by de Gaulle's \"unconditional support\" of the United States during that \"crucial time\". De Gaulle then tried to revive the talks by inviting all the delegates to another conference at the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Palace to discuss the situation, but the summit ultimately dissolved in the wake of the U-2 incident.\nIn February 1966, France withdrew from the NATO Military Command Structure but remained within the organisation. De Gaulle wanted France to remain the master of the decisions affecting it; he also ordered all foreign military personnel to leave France within a year. This latter action, in particular, was poorly received in the US.\nDe Gaulle established a good relationship with West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer\u2014culminating in the Elysee Treaty in 1963\u2014and in the first few years of the Common Market, France's industrial exports to the other five members tripled and its farm export almost quadrupled. The franc became a solid, stable currency for the first time in half a century, and the economy mostly boomed. De Gaulle vetoed the British application to join the European Economic Community (EEC) in 1963, and again in June 1967. In June 1965, after France and the other five members could not agree, de Gaulle withdrew France's representatives from the EC. Their absence left the organisation essentially unable to run its affairs until the Luxembourg compromise was reached in January 1966. De Gaulle succeeded in influencing the decision-making mechanism written into the Treaty of Rome by insisting on solidarity founded on mutual understanding.\nIn January 1964, France was, after the UK, among the first of the major Western powers to open diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China (PRC). By recognizing Mao Zedong's government, de Gaulle signaled to both Washington and Moscow that France intended to deploy an independent foreign policy. The move was criticized in the United States as it seemed to seriously damage US policy of containment in Asia. De Gaulle justified this action by \"the weight of evidence and reason\", considering that China's demographic weight and geographic extent put it in a position to have a global leading role. De Gaulle also used this opportunity to arouse rivalry between the USSR and China. In September 1966, in a famous speech in Phnom Penh in Cambodia, he expressed France's disapproval of the US involvement in the Vietnam War, calling for a withdrawal.\nWith tension rising in the Middle East in 1967, de Gaulle declared an arms embargo against Israel on 2 June, just three days before the outbreak of the Six-Day War. This, however, did not affect spare parts for the French military hardware with which the Israeli armed forces were equipped. Under de Gaulle, following the independence of Algeria, France embarked on foreign policy more favorable to the Arab side. President de Gaulle's position in 1967 at the time of the Six-Day War played a part in France's new-found popularity in the Arab world. In his letter to David Ben-Gurion dated 9 January 1968, de Gaulle expressed conviction that Israel had ignored his warnings and overstepped the bounds of moderation by taking the territory of neighbouring countries by force, believing that it amounted to annexation, and considered withdrawing from these areas the best course of action.\nUnder de Gaulle's leadership, France supported the breakaway Republic of Biafra against the Nigerian government during the Nigerian Civil War. Although French arms helped to keep Biafra in action for the final 15 months of the civil war, its involvement was seen as insufficient and counterproductive. The Biafran chief of staff stated that the French \"did more harm than good by raising false hopes and by providing the British with an excuse to reinforce Nigeria.\" More generally, one of de Gaulle's priorities was maintaining and further expanding French economic and political power in its former colonies. This was not only done through official diplomacy and through the SDECE, but also through bridge figures such as de Gaulle's close confidant Jacques Foccart. The latter built up a network of informal relations with authoritarian leaders (most notably Omar Bongo, F\u00e9lix Houphou\u00ebt-Boigny and L\u00e9opold S\u00e9dar Senghor) throughout French-speaking Africa.\nIn July 1967, during a visit to Canada, de Gaulle shouted \"Vive le Qu\u00e9bec libre! Vive le Canada fran\u00e7ais! Et vive la France!\" (Long live free Quebec! Long live French Canada, and long live France!) to a large crowd from a balcony at Montreal's city hall; de Gaulle abruptly left Canada two days later. The speech was heavily criticized in both Canada and France, but was seen as a watershed moment by the Quebec sovereignty movement.\nMay 1968 and resignation.\nDe Gaulle's government was criticized within France, particularly for its heavy-handed style. While the written press and elections were free, and private stations such as Europe 1 were able to broadcast in French from abroad, the state's ORTF had a monopoly on television and radio. This monopoly meant that the government was in a position to directly influence broadcast news. In many respects, Gaullist France was conservative, Catholic, and there were few women in high-level political posts (in May 1968, the government's ministers were 100% male).\nThe mass demonstrations and strikes in France in May 1968 severely challenged De Gaulle's legitimacy. He and other government leaders feared that the country was on the brink of revolution or civil war. On 29 May, De Gaulle fled to Baden-Baden in Germany to meet with General Massu, head of the French military there, to discuss possible army intervention. De Gaulle returned to France after being assured of the military's support, in return for which De Gaulle agreed to amnesty for the 1961 coup plotters and OAS members.\nIn a private meeting discussing the students' and workers' demands for direct participation in business and government he coined the phrase \"\", which can be politely translated as 'reform yes, masquerade/chaos no'. It was a vernacular scatological pun meaning \"' ('shit-in-bed, no'). The term is now common parlance in French political commentary.\nBut de Gaulle offered to accept some of the reforms the demonstrators sought. He again considered a referendum to support his moves, but on 30 May, Pompidou persuaded him to dissolve parliament and hold new elections. The June 1968 elections were a major success for the Gaullists. His party won 352 of 487 seats, but de Gaulle remained personally unpopular.\nDe Gaulle resigned the presidency at noon, 28 April 1969, following the rejection of his proposed reform of the Senate and local governments in a nationwide referendum. Two months later Georges Pompidou was elected as his successor.\nLater life.\nRetirement.\nDe Gaulle retired once again to his nine-acre country estate, La Boisserie (\"The Woodland Glade\"), in Colombey-les-Deux-\u00c9glises, 120 miles southeast of Paris. There the General, who often described old age as a \"shipwreck\", continued his memoirs, dictated to his secretary from notes. To visitors, de Gaulle said, \"I will finish three books, if God grants me life.\" \"The Renewal\", the first of three planned volumes to be called \"Memoirs of Hope\", was quickly finished and immediately became the fastest seller in French publishing history.\nDeath.\nOn the evening of 9 November 1970, De Gaulle, who had generally enjoyed good health in his lifetime, died suddenly from an aneurysm while watching the news on television. His wife asked that she be allowed to inform her family before the news was released. De Gaulle's former prime minister and presidential successor Georges Pompidou, who was informed early the next day, announced the general's death on television, simply saying \"General de Gaulle is dead. France is a widow.\"\nDe Gaulle had insisted his funeral be held at Colombey, and that no presidents or ministers attend\u2014only his \"Compagnons de la Lib\u00e9ration\". Since a large number of foreign dignitaries wanted to honor de Gaulle, Pompidou arranged a separate memorial service at the Notre-Dame cathedral, to be held at the same time as the actual funeral.\nThe funeral on 12 November 1970 was the biggest such event in French history and a national mourning was declared. Thousands of guests attended, included Pompidou, U.S. president Richard Nixon, British prime minister Edward Heath and Prince Charles, UN secretary-general U Thant, Soviet statesman Nikolai Podgorny, Italian president Giuseppe Saragat, West German chancellor Willy Brandt and Queen Juliana of the Netherlands. The body was conveyed to the church on a turretless Panhard EBR and carried to his grave, next to his daughter Anne, by eight young men of Colombey. As the coffin was lowered into the ground, the bells of all the churches in France tolled, starting from Notre Dame and spreading out from there.\nDe Gaulle specified that his tombstone bear the simple inscription of his name and his years of birth and death.\nPersonal life.\nDe Gaulle married Yvonne Vendroux on 7 April 1921 in \u00c9glise Notre-Dame de Calais. They had three children: Philippe (1921\u20132024), \u00c9lisabeth (1924\u20132013), who married General Alain de Boissieu, and Anne (1928\u20131948). Anne had Down syndrome and died of pneumonia at the age of 20.\nDe Gaulle always had a particular love for his daughter Anne; one Colombey resident recalled how he used to walk with her hand-in-hand around the property, talking quietly about the things she understood.\nDe Gaulle had an older brother Xavier and sister Marie-Agnes, and two younger brothers, Jacques and Pierre.\nOne of de Gaulle's grandsons, also named Charles de Gaulle, was a member of the European Parliament from 1994 to 2004, his last tenure being for the far-right National Front. The younger Charles de Gaulle's move to the anti-Gaullist National Front was widely condemned by other family members. \"It was like hearing the Pope had converted to Islam\", one said. Another grandson, Jean de Gaulle, was a member of the French parliament for the centre-right UMP until his retirement in 2007.\nLegacy.\nReputation.\nDe Gaulle made 31 regional tours during his presidency, visiting every French department; for many small towns, the visit was an important moment in history. He enjoyed entering the welcoming crowds; an aide noted how often people said, \"he saw me\" or \"he touched me\", and another recalled how a mother begged de Gaulle for the king's touch on her baby. They, supporters, and opponents surmised that de Gaulle was a monarch-like figure for the French.\nHistorians have accorded Napoleon and de Gaulle the top-ranking status of French leaders in the 19th and 20th centuries. According to a 2005 survey, carried out in the context of the tenth anniversary of the death of Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, 35 percent of respondents said Mitterrand was the best French president ever, followed by Charles de Gaulle (30 percent) and Jacques Chirac (12 percent). Another poll by BVA four years later showed that 87% of French people regarded his presidency positively.\nStatues honouring de Gaulle have been erected in London, Warsaw, in Moscow, Bucharest and Quebec. The first Algerian president, Ahmed Ben Bella, said that de Gaulle was the \"military leader who brought us the hardest blows\" prior to Algerian independence, but \"saw further\" than other politicians, and had a \"universal dimension that is too often lacking in current leaders.\" Likewise, L\u00e9opold S\u00e9dar Senghor, the first president of Senegal, said that few Western leaders could boast of having risked their lives to grant a colony independence. De Gaulle was admired by the US President Richard Nixon; after a meeting at the Palace of Versailles just before the general left office, Nixon declared that \"He did not try to put on airs but an aura of majesty seemed to envelop him ... his performance\u2014and I do not use that word disparagingly\u2014was breathtaking.\" On arriving for his funeral, Nixon said of him, \"greatness knows no national boundaries\".\nIn 1990, President Mitterrand, de Gaulle's old political rival, presided over the celebrations to mark the 100th anniversary of his birth. Mitterrand, who once wrote a vitriolic critique of him called the \"Permanent Coup d'\u00c9tat\", quoted a recent opinion poll, saying, \"As General de Gaulle, he has entered the pantheon of great national heroes, where he ranks ahead of Napoleon and behind only Charlemagne.\" Under the influence of Jean-Pierre Chev\u00e8nement, the leader of CERES, the left-wing and souverainist faction of the Socialist Party, Mitterrand had, except on certain economic and social policies, rallied to much of Gaullism. Between the mid-1970s and mid-1990s there developed a left-right consensus, dubbed \"Gaullo-Mitterrandism\", behind the \"French status\" in NATO: i.e., outside the integrated military command.\nA number of commentators have been critical of his failure to prevent the massacres after Algerian independence, while others take the view that the struggle had been so long and savage that it was inevitable. The Australian historian Brian Crozier wrote, \"that he was able to part with Algeria without civil war was a great though negative achievement which in all probability would have been beyond the capacity of any other leader France possessed.\"\nDe Gaulle was an excellent manipulator of the media, as seen in his shrewd use of television to persuade around 80% of Metropolitan France to approve the new constitution for the Fifth Republic. He afterwards enjoyed massive approval ratings, and once said that \"every Frenchman is, has been or will be Gaullist\".\nDe Gaulle's views did not necessarily always reflect mainstream French public opinion. His vetos of the UK's entry into the European Economic Community (EEC) in 1963 and 1967 contradicts the decisive majority the French people returned in the 1972 referendum on the matter. His early influence in setting the parameters of the EEC can still be seen, most notably with the controversial Common Agricultural Policy.\nSome writers take the view that Pompidou was a more progressive and influential leader than de Gaulle because, though also a Gaullist, he was less autocratic and more interested in social reforms. Although he followed the main tenets of de Gaulle's foreign policy, he was keen to work towards warmer relations with the United States.\nIn 1968, shortly before leaving office, de Gaulle refused to devalue the Franc on grounds of national prestige, but upon taking over Pompidou reversed the decision almost immediately. During the financial crisis of 1968, France had to rely on American (and West German) financial aid to shore up the economy.\nPerry has written that the events of 1968 illustrated the brittleness of de Gaulle's rule. That he was taken by surprise is an indictment of his rule; he was too remote from real life and had no interest in the conditions under which ordinary French people lived. Problems like inadequate housing and social services had been ignored. The French greeted the news of his departure with some relief as the feeling had grown that he had outlived his usefulness. Perhaps he clung onto power too long, perhaps he should have retired in 1965 when he was still popular.\nBrian Crozier said \"the fame of de Gaulle outstrips his achievements, he chose to make repeated gestures of petulance and defiance that weakened the west without compensating advantages to France\"\nR\u00e9gis Debray called de Gaulle \"super-lucide\" and pointed out that virtually all of his predictions, such as the fall of communism, the reunification of Germany and the resurrection of 'old' Russia, came true after his death. Debray compared him with Napoleon ('the great political myth of the 19th century'), calling de Gaulle his 20th-century equivalent.\nWhile de Gaulle had many admirers, he was also one of the most hated and reviled men in modern French history.\nMemorial.\nA number of monuments have been built to commemorate de Gaulle. France's largest airport, located in Roissy, outside Paris, is named Charles de Gaulle Airport. France's nuclear-powered aircraft carrier is also named after him.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "51256", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51256", "title": "Public choice", "text": "Economic theory applied to political science\nPublic choice, or public choice theory, is \"the use of economic tools to deal with traditional problems of political science\". It includes the study of political behavior. In political science, it is the subset of positive political theory that studies self-interested agents (voters, politicians, bureaucrats) and their interactions, which can be represented in a number of ways\u2014using (for example) standard constrained utility maximization, game theory, or decision theory. It is the origin and intellectual foundation of contemporary work in political economics.\nIn popular use, \"public choice\" is often used as a shorthand for components of modern public choice theory that focus on how elected officials, bureaucrats, and other government agents' perceived self-interest can influence their decisions. Economist James M. Buchanan received the 1986 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences \"for his development of the contractual and constitutional bases for the theory of economic and political decision-making\".\nPublic choice analysis has roots in positive analysis (\"what is\") but is sometimes used for normative purposes (\"what ought to be\") to identify a problem or suggest improvements to constitutional rules (as in constitutional economics). But the normative economics of social decision-making is typically placed under the closely related field of social choice theory, which takes a mathematical approach to the aggregation of individual interests, welfare, or votes. Much early work had aspects of both, and both fields use the tools of economics and game theory. Since voter behavior influences public officials' behavior, public-choice theory often uses results from social-choice theory. General treatments of public choice may also be classified under public economics.\nBuilding upon economic theory, public choice has a few core tenets. One is that no decision is made by an aggregate whole. Rather, decisions are made by combined individual choices. A second is the use of markets in the political system. A third is the self-interested nature of everyone in a political system. But as Buchanan and Gordon Tullock argue, \"the ultimate defense of the economic-individualist behavioral assumption must be empirical [...] The only final test of a model lies in its ability to assist in understanding real phenomena\".\nBackground and development.\nHistory of social choice and public choice theory.\nA 19th-century precursor of modern public choice theory was the work of Swedish economist Knut Wicksell, which treated government as political exchange, a \"quid pro quo\", in formulating a benefit principle linking taxes and expenditures. American statesman and political theorist John C. Calhoun is also seen as a precursor to modern public choice theory. His writings on political economy anticipate the \"public choice revolution\" in modern economics and political science.\nSome subsequent economic analysis has been described as treating government as though it attempted \"to maximize some kind sort of welfare function for society\" and as distinct from characterizations of self-interested economic agents, such as those in business. This is a clear dichotomy, as one can be self-interested in one area but altruistic in another. By contrast, public choice theory models government as made up of officials who, besides pursuing the public interest, may act to benefit themselves, for example in the budget-maximizing model of bureaucracy, possibly at the cost of efficiency.\nModern public choice theory.\nModern public choice theory uses the basic assumptions, principles, and methods of microeconomics as analytical tools to study and portray the behavior of subjects in political markets and the operation of political markets. Public choice refers to the process of what public goods are provided, how they are provided and distributed, and the corresponding matching rules that are established. Public choice theory expects to study and influence people's public choice processes to maximize their social utility.\nModern public-choice theory, and especially election theory, has been dated to the work of Duncan Black, sometimes called \"the founding father of public choice\". In a series of papers from 1948, which culminated in \"The Theory of Committees and Elections\" (1958), Black outlined a program of unification toward a more general \"Theory of Economic and Political Choices\" based on common formal methods, developed underlying concepts of what became median voter theory, and rediscovered earlier work on voting theory. His work also included the possibility of entirely random outcomes in a voting structure, where the only determinant of an outcome is where a particular motion falls in a given sequence.\nKenneth J. Arrow's \"Social Choice and Individual Values\" (1951) influenced the theory of public choice and election theory. Building on Black's theory, Arrow concluded that in a non-dictatorial setting, no predictable outcome or preference order can be discerned for a set of possible distributions. Among other important works are Anthony Downs's \"An Economic Theory of Democracy\" (1957) and Mancur Olson's \"The Logic of Collective Action\" (1965), which was fundamental in beginning the study of special interests. In it, Olson raises questions about the nature of groups. Concentrated groups' (such as farmers') incentive to act in their own interest paired with a lack of organization of large groups (such as the public as a whole) often results in legislation that benefits a small group rather than the general public.\nJames M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock coauthored \"\" (1962), considered one of the landmarks in public choice and constitutional economics. The book's preface says it is \"about the \"political organization\"\" of a free society. But its methodology, conceptual apparatus, and analytics \"are derived, essentially, from the discipline that has as its subject the \"economic\" organization of such a society\". Buchanan and Tullock formulate a framework of constitutional decision-making and structures that divides decisions into two categories: constitutional decisions and political decisions. Constitutional decisions establish long-standing rules that rarely change and govern the political structure itself. Political decisions take place within and are governed by the structure. The book also focuses on positive-economic analysis of the development of constitutional democracy in an ethical context of consent. The consent takes the form of a compensation principle like Pareto efficiency for making a policy change and unanimity or at least no opposition as a point of departure for social choice.\nSomewhat later, probabilistic voting theory began to displace median voter theory in showing how to find Nash equilibria in multidimensional space. Peter Coughlin later formalized the theory further.\nConstitutional economics.\nConstitutional economics is a research program in economics and constitutionalism that has been described as extending beyond the definition of \"the economic analysis of constitutional law\" to explain the choice \"of alternative sets of legal-institutional-constitutional rules that constrain the choices and activities of economic and political agents\". This is distinct from explaining the choices of economic and political agents within those rules, a subject of \"orthodox\" economics.\nConstitutional economics studies the \"compatibility of effective economic decisions with the existing constitutional framework and the limitations or the favorable conditions created by that framework\". It has been characterized as a practical approach to applying the tools of economics to constitutional matters. For example, a major concern of every nation is the proper allocation of available economic and financial resources. The legal solution to this problem falls within the scope of constitutional economics.\nConstitutional economics takes into account the significant effects of political economic decisions as opposed to limiting analysis to economic relationships as functions of the dynamics of distribution of \"marketable\" goods and services. \"The political economist who seeks to offer normative advice, must, of necessity, concentrate on the process or structure within which political decisions are observed to be made. Existing constitutions, or structures or rules, are the subject of critical scrutiny\".\nDecision-making processes and the state.\nOne way to organize what public choice theorists study is to begin with the state's foundations. According to this procedure, the most fundamental subject is the origin of government. Although some work has been done on anarchy, autocracy, revolution, and even war, most study in this area is concerned with the fundamental problem of collectively choosing constitutional rules. Much of this is based on work by James M. Buchanan. It assumes a group of people who aim to form a government, then focuses on the problem of hiring the agents required to carry out government functions the members agree on.\nBureaucracy.\nAnother major sub-field is the study of bureaucracy. The usual model depicts top bureaucrats as chosen by the chief executive and legislature, depending on whether the democratic system is presidential or parliamentary. The typical image of a bureau chief is someone on a fixed salary concerned with pleasing whoever appointed them. But most bureaucrats are civil servants whose jobs and pay are protected by a civil service system against major changes by their bureau chiefs. This image is often compared with that of a business owner whose profit varies with the success of production and sales, who aims to maximize profit, and who can in an ideal system hire and fire employees at will. William Niskanen is generally considered the founder of public choice literature on bureaucracy.\nThe anthropological study of bureaucracy has mostly contributed to our understanding of how various institutions of governance operate, why they achieve the outcomes they do, and what their work cultures are. In this sense, the state and its various branches, including village councils and courts of law, have gotten special consideration. A focus has also been placed on non-state welfare and humanitarian organisations, ranging in size from tiny NGOs to significant supranational institutions like the United Nations.\n\"Expressive interests\" and democratic irrationality.\nAccording to Geoffrey Brennan and Loren Lomasky, democratic policy is biased to favor \"expressive interests\" and neglect practical and utilitarian considerations. Brennan and Lomasky distinguish between instrumental interests (any kind of practical benefit, monetary or non-monetary) and expressive interests (forms of expression like applause). According to them, the paradox of voting can be resolved by distinguishing between expressive and instrumental interests.\nThis argument has led some public choice scholars to claim that politics is plagued by irrationality. In articles in \"Econ Journal Watch\", economist Bryan Caplan contended that voter choices and government economic decisions are inherently irrational. Caplan's ideas are more fully developed in his 2007 book \"The Myth of the Rational Voter\". Countering Donald Wittman's arguments in \"The Myth of Democratic Failure\", Caplan claims that politics is biased in favor of irrational beliefs.\nAccording to Caplan, democracy effectively subsidizes irrational beliefs. Anyone who derives utility from potentially irrational policies like protectionism can receive private benefits while imposing the costs of such beliefs on the general public. If people bore the full costs of their \"irrational beliefs\" they would lobby for them optimally, taking into account both their instrumental consequences and their expressive appeal. Instead, democracy oversupplies policies based on irrational beliefs. Caplan defines rationality mainly in terms of mainstream price theory, arguing that mainstream economists oppose protectionism and government regulation more than the general population, and that more educated people are closer to economists on this score, even after controlling for confounding factors such as income, wealth or political affiliation. One criticism is that many economists do not share Caplan's views on the nature of public choice. But Caplan has data to support his position. Economists have in fact often been frustrated by public opposition to economic reasoning. As Sam Peltzman puts it: Economists know what steps would improve the efficiency of HSE [health, safety, and environmental] regulation, and they have not been bashful advocates of them. These steps include substituting markets in property rights, such as emission rights, for command and control\u00a0... The real problem lies deeper than any lack of reform proposals or failure to press them. It is our inability to understand their lack of political appeal.Public choice's application to government regulation was developed by George Stigler (1971) and Sam Peltzman (1976).\nSpecial interests.\nPublic choice theory is often used to explain how political decision-making results in outcomes that conflict with the general public's preferences. For example, many advocacy group and pork barrel projects are opposed by a majority of the populace, but it makes sense for politicians to support these projects. It may make them feel powerful and important, and can also benefit them financially by opening the door to future wealth as lobbyists. The project may be of interest to the politician's local constituency, increasing district votes or campaign contributions. The politician pays little or no cost for these benefits, as they are spending public money. Special-interest lobbyists are also behaving rationally. They can gain government favors worth millions or billions for relatively small investments. They risk losing to their competitors if they don't seek these favors. The taxpayer is also behaving rationally. The cost of defeating any one government giveaway is very high, while the benefits to the taxpayer are very small. Each citizen pays only a few pennies or a few dollars for any given government favor, while the costs of ending that favor would be many times higher.\nEveryone involved has rational incentives to do exactly what they are doing, even though the general public desires the opposite outcome. Costs are diffused while benefits are concentrated. The voices of vocal minorities with much to gain are heard over those of indifferent majorities with little to individually lose. But the notion that groups with concentrated interests dominate politics is incomplete because it is only one half of political equilibrium. Something must incite those preyed upon to resist even the best-organized concentrated interests. In his article on interest groups, Gary Becker identifies this countervailing force as the deadweight loss from predation. His views cap what has come to be known as the Chicago school of political economy, which has come into conflict with the so-called Virginia faction of public choice due to the former's assertion that politics will tend toward efficiency due to nonlinear deadweight losses and its claim that political efficiency renders policy advice irrelevant.\nWhile good government tends to be a pure public good for the mass of voters, there may be many advocacy groups with strong incentives to lobby the government to implement specific policies that would benefit them, potentially at the general public's expense. For example, lobbying by the sugar manufacturers might result in an inefficient subsidy for sugar production, either directly or by protectionist measures. The costs of such inefficient policies are dispersed over all citizens and thus unnoticeable to each. Meanwhile, the benefits go to a small special-interest group with a strong incentive to perpetuate the policy by further lobbying. Due to rational ignorance, the vast majority of voters are unaware of the effort; in fact, although voters may be aware of special-interest lobbying efforts, this may merely select for policies even harder for the general public to evaluate rather than improving their overall efficiency. Even if the public could evaluate policy proposals effectively, it would find it infeasible to engage in collective action in order to defend its diffuse interest. Therefore, theorists expect that numerous special interests will successfully lobby for various inefficient policies. In public choice theory, such inefficient government policies are called \"government failure\" \u2013 a term akin to \"market failure\" from earlier theoretical welfare economics.\nRent-seeking.\nA field closely related to public choice is the study of rent-seeking. This combines the study of a market economy with that of government and so could be seen as a new political economy. Its basic thesis is that when both a market economy and government are present, government agents may rent or sell their influence (i.e., vote) to those who wish to influence lawmaking. The government agent stands to benefit from support from the party seeking influence, while that party seeks to benefit by implementing public policy that benefits them. This essentially results in the capture and reallocation of benefits, wasting the benefit and any resources used from being put to productive use in society. This is because the party attempting to acquire the benefit will spend up to or more than the benefit accrued, resulting in a zero-sum or a negative sum gain. The real gain is the gain over the competition. This political action will then be used to keep competition out of the market due to lack of real or political capital.\nRent-seeking is broader than public choice in that it applies to autocracies as well as democracies and therefore is not directly concerned with collective decision-making. But public choice theory must account for the obvious pressure rent-seeking exerts on legislators, executives, bureaucrats, and even judges when analyzing collective decision-making rules and institutions. Moreover, the members of a collective planning a government would be wise to take prospective rent-seeking into account.\nAnother major claim is that much political activity is a form of rent-seeking that wastes resources. Gordon Tullock, Jagdish Bhagwati, and Anne Osborn Krueger have argued that rent-seeking has caused considerable waste.\nPolitical stance.\nFrom such results it is sometimes asserted that public choice theory has an anti-state tilt. But public choice theorists are ideologically diverse. Mancur Olson, for example, advocated a strong state and opposed political interest group lobbying. More generally, James Buchanan has suggested that public choice theory be interpreted as \"politics without romance\", a critical approach to a pervasive earlier notion of idealized politics set against market failure.\nThe British journalist Alistair Cooke, commenting on the Nobel Memorial Prize awarded to James M. Buchanan in 1986, reportedly summarized the public choice view of politicians by saying, \"Public choice embodies the homely but important truth that politicians are, after all, no less selfish than the rest of us\".\nRecognition.\nSeveral notable public choice scholars have been awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics, including Kenneth Arrow (1972), James M. Buchanan (1986), George Stigler (1982), Gary Becker (1992), Amartya Sen (1998), Vernon Smith (2002), and Elinor Ostrom (2009). Buchanan, Smith, and Ostrom were former presidents of the Public Choice Society.\nLimitations and critiques.\nBuchanan and Tullock outline methodological qualifications of the approach developed in their work \"The Calculus of Consent\":\n[E]ven if the model [with its rational self-interest assumptions] proves to be useful in explaining an important element of politics, it does not imply that all individuals act in accordance with the behavioral assumption made or that any one individual acts in this way at all times\u00a0... the theory of collective choice can explain only some undetermined fraction of collective action. However, so long as some part of all individual behavior\u00a0... is, in fact, motivated by utility maximization, and so long as the identification of the individual with the group does not extend to the point of making all individual utility functions identical, an economic-individualist model of political activity should be of some positive worth.\nSteven Pressman offers a critique of the public choice approach, arguing that public choice fails to explain political behavior in a number of central areas, including politicians\u2019 behavior and voting behavior. In the case of politicians' behavior, the public choice assumption that a politician's utility function is driven by greater political and economic power cannot account for various political phenomena. These include why politicians vote against their constituents' interests, why they advocate for higher taxation, fewer benefits, and smaller government, and why wealthy people seek office.\nAs for critiques concerning voter behavior, it is argued that public choice cannot explain why people vote due to limitations in rational choice theory. For example, from the viewpoint of rational choice theory, the expected gains of voting depend on (1) the benefit to the voter if their candidate wins and (2) the probability that one's vote will determine the election's outcome. Even in a tight election the probability that one's vote decides the outcome is estimated at effectively zero. This suggests that even if a voter expects gains from their candidate's success, the expected gains from voting are still near zero. When this is considered in combination with the multiple recognized costs of voting, such as the opportunity cost of foregone wages and transportation costs, a self-interested person is theoretically unlikely to vote at all. Pressman is not alone in his critique; other prominent public choice economists, including Anthony Downs in \"An Economic Theory of Democracy\", Morris P. Fiorina, and Gordon Tullock recognize that theorizing voting behavior is a major hurdle for the public choice approach.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51257", "revid": "5635510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51257", "title": "Peach", "text": "Type of fruit tree, or its fruit\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe peach (\"Prunus persica\") is a deciduous tree that bears edible juicy fruits with various characteristics. Most are simply called peaches, while the glossy-skinned, non-fuzzy varieties are called nectarines. Though from the same species, they are regarded commercially as different fruits.\nThe tree is regarded as handsome and is planted in gardens for its springtime blooms in addition to fruit production. It is relatively short lived, usually not exceeding twenty years of age. Peaches were first domesticated and cultivated in China during the Neolithic period. The specific name \"persica\" refers to its widespread cultivation in Persia (modern-day Iran), from where it was transplanted to Europe. It belongs to the genus \"Prunus\", which also includes the cherry, apricot, almond, and plum, and which is part of the rose family.\nThe peach is very popular; only the apple and pear have higher production amounts for temperate fruits. In 2023, China produced 65% of the world total of peaches and nectarines. Other leading countries, such as Spain, Turkey, Italy, the U.S., and Iran lag far behind China, with none producing more than 5% of the world total. The fruit is regarded as a symbol of longevity in several East Asian cultures.\nDescription.\nThe peach is a deciduous tree or tree like shrub that may very rarely grow to as much as tall, but is more typically with large specimens reaching . The spread of the crown is similar to the height, ranging from . They do not produce suckers or have thorns. The root system is deep, with the roots continuing to grow during the winter season.\nUnlike apples, the size of peach trees is not generally controlled by dwarfing rootstocks in commercial orchards. A great variety of growth habits have been selected including columnar, dwarf, spreading, and weeping. In order to have a single trunk, trees must pruned and likewise the branches have a tendancy to droop over time and must be trained to allow for access under the tree. \nThe bark on the trunk and branches is dark gray with horizontal lenticels. It becomes more scaly and rough as the tree becomes older. Twigs on peach trees have a smooth, hairless surface, the bark is usually red, but may be green on the sides not exposed to the sun. As they become older, branchlets weather to become gray in color. Twigs have true terminal buds at their ends.\nPeach leaves are oblong to lanceolate, having sides nearly parallel until tapering at end and base or shaped like the head of a spear. The widest portion of the leaf is midway or further towards the leaf tip. Each leaf folds along the central rib of the leaf and is often also curved, usually long and wide, though occasionally they may be shorter. The surface of the leaves is smooth and hairless, but the leaf stem sometimes has glands. The edges of the leaves have serrated edges with blunt teeth. The teeth have a reddish-brown gland at the tip. Leaves are attached to the twigs by petioles, leaf stems. They are strong and measure 1 to 2\u00a0cm. They can also have one or more extrafloral nectaries.\nFlowering.\nFlowers on peach trees are either solitary or in groups of two, usually blooming before the leaves begin to grow. They may range in shades from white to red, but having pink or red flowers 2\u20133.5\u00a0cm in width is typical of cultivars selected for their fruit. Trees grown as ornamentals also may have double flowers, semi-doubled flowers, or bicolored forms. Each flower has four or five petals and is somewhat cup-shaped with the petals curving to shelter the flower's center. Each flower will have 20 to 30 stamens and purple-red anthers at their ends. The single style is nearly as long as the stamens. The flowers are self-fertile and outcross at about 5%.\nThe bloom period is in the early spring, often cut short by frosts, in February, March, April, or May depending on location. In New Zealand and the southern hemisphere, blooming occurs in August to October.\nFruit.\nTrees can begin producing fruit in the two or three years after sprouting. Because of the hardness of the seed casing, peaches are called stone fruits like the others in the \"Prunus\" genus, but are more formally called drupes. Fruits range in color from greenish white to orange yellow, usually with a blush of red on the side of the fruit most exposed to the sun. Their shape varies widely from a flattened sphere resembling a doughnut, egg-shaped, or a slightly compressed sphere usually with a seam on one side. A normal diameter for a fruit is between , but sometimes may be as small as or as large as .\nThe flesh of the peach is quite variable in color from greenish-white to white to yellow to dark red. The texture can also differ from soft to stone hard.\nThe growth of the fruit is a double-sigmoid growth curve: a beginning quick period of development followed by a resting period of little growth, and then a second period of rapid maturation.\nThe seed of the peach is much larger and less round than the seeds of its closest fruit relatives. Unlike the pit of an almond, which is only pitted, the peach pit has a stony exterior which is both pitted and deeply furrowed.\nTaxonomy.\nThe peach tree was given the name \"Amygdalus persica\" by Carl Linnaeus in 1753 in his book Species plantarum. The accepted combination \"Prunus persica\" was published by August Batsch in 1801, though this was far from settled until the 20th century with many different placements of the peach and even divisions of nectarines and flat peaches into different species. The botanist Ulysses Prentiss Hedrick argued persuasively in 1917 that these differences are merely simple mutations and not species or even varieties beginning consensus towards the modern classification. This was supported by breeding experiments as early as 1906 showing the hairlessness of nectarines is a recessive trait, though sometimes alternative names continue to be used even in the 21st Century with \"Amygdalus persica\" being used as recently as 2003 in an authoritative scientific publication. More than 200 scientific names have been published that are considered synonyms of \"Prunus persica\" by Plants of the World Online (POWO). Though the majority of sources agree on its classification as \"Prunus persica\", there is division on the correct author citation for the name. Most sources, such as POWO, World Flora Online, and the Flora of North America give August Batsch credit. However, a few sources such as World Plants maintained by the botanist Michael Hassler instead credit Jonathan Stokes with priority dated to 1812.\n\"Prunus persica\" is classified in \"Prunus\" with other stone fruits within the rose family, Rosaceae. The further classification into a subgenus or section is disputed. The work of Alfred Rehder, published in 1940, has been widely used to group the species of \"Prunus\". Rehder based his system largely on that of Bernhard Adalbert Emil Koehne with the peach placed with the almond in subgenus \"Amygdalus\" because similarities in the rough and pitted stone. However, since 2000 studies of nuclear and chloroplast DNA have shown that the five subgenera accepted by Rehder are not more closely related to each other than to other species in \"Prunus\". In 2013 Shuo Shi and collaborators published research where they proposed it be part of subgenus \"Prunus\" together with the plums and cherries, but in a section named \"Persicae\", now corrected to \"Persica\". However, these groupings are not yet widely accepted.\nThe greatest genetic diversity in peaches is found in China, where it is generally agreed to have been domesticated. The species is often thought to be a cultigen, a taxon that has its origins in cultivation rather than as a wild species.\nThe closest relatives of the peach are the Chinese bush peach (\"Prunus kansuensis\"), Chinese wild peach (\"Prunus davidiana\"), the smooth stone peach (\"Prunus mira\"). Though Charles Darwin speculated that the peach might be a marvelous modification of the almond (\"Prunus amygdalus\"), research into the divergence of peach relatives shows this not to be the case. Quite the opposite the almond, while in the same genus, is confirmed to be a more distant relative.\nIn April 2010, an international consortium, the International Peach Genome Initiative, which includes researchers from the United States, Italy, Chile, Spain, and France, announced they had sequenced the peach tree genome (doubled haploid Lovell). In 2013 they published the peach genome sequence and related analyses. The sequence is composed of 227 million nucleotides arranged in eight pseudomolecules representing the eight peach chromosomes (2n = 16). In addition, 27,852 protein-coding genes and 28,689 protein-coding transcripts were predicted.\nParticular emphasis in this study is reserved for the analysis of the genetic diversity in peach germplasm and how it was shaped by human activities such as domestication and breeding. Major historical bottlenecks were found, one related to the putative original domestication that is supposed to have taken place in China about 4,000\u20135,000 years ago, the second is related to the western germplasm and is due to the early dissemination of the peach in Europe from China and the more recent breeding activities in the United States and Europe. These bottlenecks highlighted the substantial reduction of genetic diversity associated with domestication and breeding activities.\nThough not a separate grouping genetically, nectarines are regarded as different fruits commercially. The difference is the lack of fuzz, the trichomes, on the skin of the fruits. Research into the cause of this trait found the transcription factor gene \"PpeMYB25\" regulates the formation of trichomes on peach fruits. A mutation can cause a loss of function resulting in the changed fruit type.\nFossil record.\nFossil endocarps with characteristics indistinguishable from those of modern peaches have been recovered from late Pliocene deposits in Kunming, dating to 2.6 million years ago. In the absence of evidence that the plants were in other ways identical to the modern peach, the name \"Prunus kunmingensis\" has been assigned to these fossils. Genetic evidence supports a very early emergence of edibility in the wild ancestors of the peach.\nNames.\nThe genus name \"Prunus\" is from the Latin for plum. The specific name \"persica\" was given by Linnaeus because European botanists of the 1700s and 1800s continued to believe the Roman accounts of peaches originating in Persia to be correct.\nThe modern English word \u2013 and its cognates in many European languages such as the German and Finnish \u2013 also have Latin origins. In ancient Rome the peach was called or simply meaning 'Persian apple'. This became the Late Latin and in turn the medieval . In Old French it was variously the , , or . The first usage in England was as the surname \"Pecche\" in about 1184\u20131185. The French word was directly adopted into English to mean the fruit and spelled either \"pechis\" or \"peches\" around the year 1400. In 1605 the first known instance of the modern spelling of \"peach\" was published. Peach trees are also, less frequently, called \"common peaches\".\nThe various cultivars of peach with smooth-skinned fruits are called nectarines. This word was coined by English speakers, originally as an adjective meaning 'nectar-like', from \"nectar\" and the suffix \"-ine\", with the first use in print in 1611.\nDistribution.\nThe exact place of origin for the domestic peach is unknown. Based on archeology from the 2010s, East China near the Yangtze Delta has emerged as a likely candidate and contradicting the theory of domestication in Northwestern China. Many sources since the 1980s have listed North China as its likely place of origin. They are now naturalized in many other parts of Asia. It grows throughout eastern China and into Inner Mongolia. To the east they are found on the Korean Peninsula and in Japan. To the south they are also found in Vietnam and Laos. In the Indian subcontinent are reported in the Eastern Himalayas and nearby Assam province, but not Nepal, parts of central India, Pakistan, and the Western Himalayas. Westwards they are also an introduced species in Afghanistan, Iran, and all the countries of Central Asia. Transitioning to Europe they also grow in the North Caucasus, Transcaucasus, and Turkey.\nIn Europe, the peach trees are partly naturalized. In western Europe they are found in Portugal, Spain, France, Ireland, and the United Kingdom. In central Europe they are reported as escaped from cultivation in Germany, Hungary, and Switzerland and in Corsica, Sardinia, Italy, Cyprus, and Greece in the south. In the southeast they grow as introduced plants in Slovenia, Croatia, Romania, and Bulgaria. To the east they are found in parts of European Russia, Ukraine, and Crimea.\nThey also have escaped from cultivation in the African nations of Libya, Ethiopia, Kenya, South Africa, and the Cape Verde Islands off the northeast coast. Specific areas of South Africa include the biogeographic areas of the Northern Provinces, Orange Free State, and KwaZulu-Natal.\nIn North America, in addition to cultivation, peach saplings are often found growing anywhere pits have been discarded. Most of these feral trees are short lived, but some have established naturalized populations. Such escapes are reported in the Canadian provinces of Ontario and Nova Scotia. Trees outside of cultivation have been found in all of the United States east of the Mississippi excluding Minnesota, Vermont, and New Hampshire. In the northwest, they are found in Oregon and Idaho. In the Southwestern United States, they are to some extent naturalized from California to Texas, with the exception of Nevada. Similar occurrences are also found in the northwest of Mexico and El Salvador in Central America.\nIn South America, escapees are only reported from Ecuador and the northeast of Argentina.\nIn Australia, it is naturalized in the states of New South Wales, Queensland, Victoria, South Australia, and Western Australia. In New Zealand, it can be found as an escapee from cultivation on both the North Island and South Island, especially around Auckland, Christchurch, and in the Otago region. It is also naturalized on many oceanic islands including the Mariana Islands, Mauritius, Rodrigues, R\u00e9union, and Saint Helena.\nCultivation.\nHistory.\nAlthough its botanical name \"Prunus persica\" refers to Persia, peaches originated in China, where they have been cultivated since the Neolithic period. From the 1980s to the 2010s it was believed that cultivation started around 2000\u00a0BCE. In 2014 new research was published showing that domestication occurred as early as 6000\u00a0BCE in Zhejiang Province on the central east coast of China. The oldest archaeological peach stones are from the Kuahuqiao site near Hangzhou. Archaeologists point to the Yangtze River Valley as the place where the early selection for favorable peach varieties probably took place.\nA domesticated peach appeared very early in Japan, in 4700\u20134400\u00a0BCE, during the J\u014dmon period. It was already similar to modern cultivated forms, where the peach stones are significantly larger and more compressed than earlier stones. This domesticated type of peach was brought into Japan from China. Nevertheless, in China itself, this variety is currently attested only at a later date around 3300 to 2300\u00a0BCE.\nIn India, the peach first appeared sometime between 2500 and 1700\u00a0BCE, during the Harappan period in the Kashmir.\nIt is also found elsewhere in West Asia in ancient times. Peach cultivation reached Greece by 300\u00a0BCE. Alexander the Great is sometimes said to have introduced them into Greece after conquering Persia, but no historical evidence for this claim has been found. Peaches were, however, well known to the Romans in the first century\u00a0CE; the oldest known artistic representations of the fruit are in two fragments of wall paintings, dated to the first century\u00a0CE, in Herculaneum, preserved due to the Vesuvius eruption of 79\u00a0CE, and now held in the National Archaeological Museum in Naples. Archaeological finds show that peaches were cultivated widely in Roman northwestern Continental Europe, but production collapsed around the sixth century; some revival of production followed with the Carolingian Renaissance of the ninth century.\nAn article on peach tree cultivation in Spain is brought down in Ibn al-'Awwam's 12th-century agricultural work, \"Book on Agriculture\". The peach was brought to the Americas by Spanish explorers in the 16th century, and eventually made it to England and France in the 17th century, where it was a prized and expensive treat. Although Thomas Jefferson had peach trees at Monticello, American farmers did not begin commercial production until the 19th century in Maryland, Delaware, Georgia, South Carolina, and finally Virginia.\nThe Shanghai honey nectar peach was a key component of both the food culture and agrarian economy the area where the modern megacity of Shanghai stands. Peaches were the cornerstone of early Shanghai's garden culture. As modernization and westernization swept through the city the Shanghai honey nectar peach nearly disappeared completely. Much of modern Shanghai is built over these gardens and peach orchards.\nThe first European botanist to argue that the peach did not originate in Persia was Augustin Pyramus de Candolle in 1855. He argued on the basis of it not being mentioned by Xenophon in 401\u00a0BCE or by other early sources that it could not have arrived there much before it was imported to Rome in the 100s\u00a0BCE. An important western botanist to argue for a Chinese origin of the species was Ulysses Prentiss Hedrick in 1917. Chinese literature records the fruit for at least 1,000 years before its appearance in Europe.\nPeaches in the Americas.\nPeaches were introduced into the Americas in the 16th century by the Spanish. By 1580, peaches were being grown in Latin America and were cultivated by the remnants of the Inca Empire in Argentina.\nIn the United States the peach was soon adopted as a crop by American Indians. In the eastern U.S. the peach also became naturalized and abundant as a feral species. Peaches were being grown in Virginia as early as 1629. Peaches grown by Indians in Virginia were said to have been \"of greater variety and finer sorts\" than those of the English colonists. Also in 1629, peaches were listed as a crop in New Mexico. William Penn noted the existence of wild peaches in Pennsylvania in 1683. In fact, peaches may have already spread to the American Southeast by the early to mid 1600s, actively cultivated by indigenous communities such as the Muscogee before permanent Spanish settlement of the region.\nPeach plantations became an objective of American military campaigns against the Indians. In 1779, the Sullivan Expedition destroyed the livelihood of many of the Iroquois people of New York. Among the crops destroyed were plantations of peach trees. In 1864, Kit Carson led a successful U.S. army expedition to Canyon de Chelly in Arizona to destroy the livelihood of the Navajo. Carson destroyed thousands of peach trees. A soldier said they were the \"best peach trees I have ever seen in the country, every one of them bearing fruit.\" The Navajo signed a treaty with the US government in 1868 and were able to return to the canyon. They had saved peach pits and some trees resprouted from stumps and so by the 1870s and 1880s many peach orchards had been restored.\nGrowing conditions.\nPeaches are easiest to grow in dry, continental or temperate climates, with conditions of high humidity greatly increasing diseases and pests in subtropics and tropics. In addition the trees have a chilling requirement. Most cultivars require 600 to 1,000 hours of chilling at temperatures between . During the chilling period, key chemical reactions occur, but the plant appears dormant. Temperatures under are ineffective for fulfilling the chilling requirement. Once the chilling period is fulfilled, the plant enters a second type of dormancy, the quiescence period. During quiescence, buds break and grow when sufficient warm weather favorable to growth is accumulated. The chilling requirement is not satisfied in tropical or subtropical areas except at high altitudes with low-chill cultivars, some which require less than 100 hours of suitable temperatures.\nThe trees themselves can usually tolerate temperatures to around , although the following season's flower buds are usually killed at these temperatures, preventing a crop that summer. Flower bud death begins to occur between , depending on the cultivar and on the timing of the cold, with the buds becoming less cold tolerant in late winter. Another climate constraint is spring frost. The trees flower fairly early and the blossom is damaged or killed if temperatures drop below about . If the flowers are not fully open, though, they can tolerate a few degrees colder. The flowers are also vulnerable to temperatures higher than during the day.\nClimates with significant winter rainfall at temperatures below are also unsuitable for peach cultivation, as the rain promotes peach leaf curl, which is the most serious fungal disease for peaches. In practice, fungicides are extensively used for peach cultivation in such climates, with more than 1% of European peaches exceeding legal pesticide limits in 2013.\nFinally, summer heat is required to mature the crop, with mean temperatures of the hottest month between .\nPeach trees are grown in well draining soils as they are vulnerable to disease in wet soils. They are most productive in topsoils approximately with a sandy loam character.\nMost peach trees sold by nurseries are cultivars budded or grafted onto a suitable rootstock. Common rootstocks are 'Lovell Peach', 'Nemaguard Peach', \"Prunus besseyi\", and 'Citation'. The rootstock provides hardiness and budding is done to improve predictability of the fruit quality.\nTypical peach cultivars begin bearing fruit in their third year. Their lifespan in the U.S. varies by region; the University of California at Davis gives a lifespan of about 15 years while the University of Maine gives a lifespan of 7 years there.\nPeach trees need full sun, and a layout that allows good natural air flow to assist the thermal environment for the tree. Peaches are planted in early winter. During the growth season, they need a regular and reliable supply of water, with higher amounts just before harvest.\nPeaches need nitrogen-rich fertilizers more than other fruit trees. Without regular fertilizer supply, peach tree leaves start turning yellow or exhibit stunted growth. Blood meal, bone meal, and calcium ammonium nitrate are suitable fertilizers.\nThe flowers on a peach tree are typically thinned out because if the full number of peaches mature on a branch, they are undersized and lack flavor. Fruits are thinned midway in the season by commercial growers. Fresh peaches are easily bruised, so do not store well. They are most flavorful when they ripen on the tree and are eaten the day of harvest.\nThe peach tree can be grown in an espalier shape. The Baldassari palmette is a design created around 1950 used primarily for training peaches. In walled gardens constructed from stone or brick, which absorb and retain solar heat and then slowly release it, raising the temperature against the wall, peaches can be grown as espaliers against south-facing walls as far north as southeast Great Britain and southern Ireland.\nStorage.\nPeaches and nectarines are best stored at temperatures of 0\u00a0\u00b0C (32\u00a0\u00b0F) and in high humidity. They are highly perishable, so are typically consumed or canned within two weeks of harvest.\nPeaches are climacteric fruits and continue to ripen after being picked from the tree. However, though climacteric fruits continue to ripen nutritional quality may not improve after picking with studies showing Vitamin C content to be higher in peaches when ripened on the tree. Both ethylene and the plant hormone auxin are involved in regulating the ripening process. Though the ethylene antagonist 1-Methylcyclopropene can be used to delay the ripening of peaches its use negatively affects the arroma of the fruit.\nInsects.\nThe European earwig (\"Forficula auricularia\") can be a minor to significant pest of the peach fruit, particularly when they are tightly clustered or have splits in the skin. The earwigs feed on the fruit and dirty them with waste.\nThe larvae of many moth species are of concern to peach growers. Frequently noted are the peachtree borer (\"Synanthedon exitiosa\"), the peach twig borer (\"Anarsia lineatella\"), the yellow peach moth (\"Conogethes punctiferalis\"), the fruit tree leafroller (\"Archips argyrospila\"), oriental fruit moths (\"Grapholita molesta\"), and the lesser peachtree borer (\"Synanthedon pictipes\").\nOther moths include the well-marked cutworm (\"Abagrotis orbis\"), the climbing cutworm (\"Abagrotis barnesi\"), \"Lyonetia prunifoliella\", the grey dagger (\"Acronicta psi\"), ghost moth (\"Aenetus virescens\"), the march moth (\"Alsophila aescularia\"), fruit tree tortrix (\"Archips podanus\"), cherry fruit moth (\"Argyresthia pruniella\"), azalea leafminer \"Caloptilia zachrysa\", peach fruit moth (\"Carposina sasakii\"), apple leaf skeletonizer (\"Choreutis pariana\"), honeydew moth (\"Cryptoblabes gnidiella\"), plum fruit moth (\"Cydia funebrana\"), codling moth (\"Cydia pomonella\"), figure of eight (\"Diloba caeruleocephala\"), cherry bark tortrix (\"Enarmonia formosana\"), apple leaf roller (\"Epiphyas postvittana\"), brown-tail moth (\"Euproctis chrysorrhoea\"), the fruit tree borer (\"Maroga melanostigma\"), winter moth (\"Operophtera brumata\"), fruit-tree tortrix (\"Pandemis heparana\"), the wood groundling (\"Parachronistis albiceps\"), apple leaf miner \"Phyllonorycter crataegella\", lesser bud moth (\"Recurvaria nanella\"), and false codling moth (\"Thaumatotibia leucotreta\").\nThe tree is also a host plant for such species as the Japanese beetle (\"Popillia japonica\"), the shothole borer (\"Scolytus rugulosus\"), and plum curculio (\"Conotrachelus nenuphar\").\nGreen peach aphids (\"Myzus persicae\") can be a significant problem on peach trees. They overwinter as eggs on the trees and feed upon them in the spring before moving to other host species during the summer. Two scale insects can cause serious damage to peach trees, the white peach scale (\"Pseudaulacaspis pentagona\") and the San Jose scale (\"Comstockaspis perniciosa\").\nAt best it is poor nectar and pollen source for honey bees, with the double flowering varieties particularly noted for not producing any usable resources for bees. Some fruiting cultivars also produce no pollen and nectar flow is often impacted by early frosts.\nThough not native to North America, peach trees have become a host for caterpillars of the Eastern tiger swallowtail butterfly (\"Papilio glacucus\"). Though they are not a significant pest.\nDiseases.\nPeach trees are prone to a disease called leaf curl, which usually does not directly affect the fruit, but does reduce the crop yield by partially defoliating the tree. Several fungicides can be used to combat the disease, including Bordeaux mixture and other copper-based products (the University of California considers these organic treatments), ziram, chlorothalonil, and dodine. The fruit is susceptible to brown rot or a dark reddish spot.\nCultivars.\nHundreds of peach and nectarine cultivars are known. These are classified into two categories\u2014freestones and clingstones. Freestones are those whose flesh separates readily from the pit. Clingstones are those whose flesh clings tightly to the pit. Some cultivars are partially freestone and clingstone, so are called semifree. Freestone types are preferred for eating fresh, while clingstone types are for canning. The fruit flesh may be creamy white to deep yellow, to dark red; the hue and shade of the color depend on the cultivar. The genetic diversity of peach cultivars is highest in China with 495 recognized cultivars.\nPeach breeding has favored cultivars with more firmness, more red color, and shorter fuzz on the fruit surface. These characteristics ease shipping and supermarket sales by improving eye appeal. This selection process has not necessarily led to increased flavor, though. Peaches have a short shelf life, so commercial growers typically plant a mix of different cultivars to have fruit to ship all season long.\nNectarines.\nThe cultivars commonly called \"nectarines\" have a smooth skin. It is on occasion referred to as a \"shaved peach\" or \"fuzzless peach\", due to its lack of fuzz or short hairs. Though fuzzy peaches and nectarines are regarded commercially as different fruits, with nectarines often erroneously believed to be a crossbreed between peaches and plums, or a \"peach with a plum skin\", nectarines belong to the same species as peaches. Several genetic studies have concluded nectarines are produced due to a recessive allele, whereas a fuzzy peach skin is dominant.\nAs with peaches, nectarines can be white or yellow, and clingstone or freestone. On average, nectarines are slightly smaller and sweeter than peaches, but with much overlap. The lack of skin fuzz can make nectarine skins appear more reddish than those of peaches, contributing to the fruit's plum-like appearance.\nThe history of the nectarine is unclear; the first recorded mention in English is from 1611, but they had probably been grown much earlier within the native range of the peach in central and eastern Asia. A number of colonial-era newspaper articles make reference to nectarines being grown in the United States prior to the Revolutionary War. The 28 March 1768 edition of the \"New York Gazette\" (p.\u00a03), for example, mentions a farm in Jamaica, Long Island, New York, where nectarines were grown. Later, cultivars of higher quality with better shipping qualities were introduced to the United States by David Fairchild of the Department of Agriculture in 1906.\nPeacherines.\nPeacherines are claimed to be a cross between a peach and a nectarine; they are sometimes marketed in Australia and New Zealand. The linguist Louise Pound, in 1920, wrote that the term peacherine is an example of language stunt.\nFlat peaches.\nFlat peaches, or \"pan-tao\", have a flattened shape, in contrast to ordinary near-spherical peaches.\nOrnamentals.\nPeach trees are also grown for ornamental value in gardens, but trees specifically selected for this purpose have small, inedible fruits.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nProduction.\nIn 2023, world production of peaches (combined with nectarines for reporting) was 27.1 million tonnes, led by China with 65% of the total. Spain, the next most productive country, only produced about 5% of the total (table). Peaches rank third in total production of temperate fruits after the apple and pear.\nThe U.S. state of Georgia is known as the \"Peach State\" due to its significant production and shipping of peaches in the 1870s and 1880s, with the first export to New York occurring around 1853 and significant amounts being sold there by 1858. In 2014, Georgia was third in US peach production behind California and South Carolina. The largest peach producing countries in Latin America are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Mexico.\nNutrition.\nRaw peach flesh is 88% water, 10% carbohydrates, 1% protein, and contains negligible fat. A medium-sized raw peach, weighing , supplies 46 calories, and contains no micronutrients having a significant percentage of the Daily Value (DV, table). \nSucrose accounts for 57% of the sweetness of a raw peach, with glucose and fructose accounting for the remainder of sugars (table). The glycemic load of an average peach (120 grams) is 5, similar to other low-sugar fruits.\nA raw nectarine has a similar low nutrient content.\nPhytochemicals.\nTotal polyphenols in mg per 100\u00a0g of fresh weight were 14\u2013113 in white-flesh nectarines, 17\u201378 in yellow-flesh nectarines, 20\u2013113 in white-flesh peaches, and 16\u201393\u00a0mg per 100\u00a0g in yellow-flesh peaches. The major phenolic compounds identified in peach are chlorogenic acid, catechins and epicatechins, with other compounds, identified by HPLC, including gallic acid and ellagic acid. Rutin and isoquercetin are the primary flavonols found in clingstone peaches. The levels of flavonols and cyanidins are highest in the skins. Though phenols vary by cultivar and due to the growing conditions in a growing season. Red-fleshed peaches are rich in anthocyanins, especially red fleshed varieties and their skins. malvin glycosides in clingstone peaches.\nAs with many other members of the rose family, peach seeds contain cyanogenic glycosides, primarily amygdalin. Amygdalin decomposes into a sugar molecule,hydrogen cyanide gas, and benzaldehyde. Hydrogen cyanide poisons the action of a critical enzyme for the use of oxygen in cells, resulting in death in severe cases. While peach seeds are not the most toxic within the rose family (see bitter almond), large consumption of these chemicals from any source is potentially hazardous to animal and human health.\nPeach allergy or intolerance is a relatively common form of hypersensitivity to proteins contained in peaches and related fruits (such as almonds). Symptoms range from local effects (e.g. oral allergy syndrome, contact urticaria) to more severe systemic reactions, including anaphylaxis (e.g. urticaria, angioedema, gastrointestinal and respiratory symptoms). Adverse reactions are related to the \"freshness\" of the fruit: peeled or canned fruit may be tolerated.\nDue to their close relatedness, the kernel of a peach stone tastes similar to almond, and peach stones are used to make a cheap version of marzipan, known as persipan.\nAroma.\nThe attractive smell of a ripe peach has 110 different volatile molecules combined, including alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, esters, polyphenols and terpenoids. The proportions vary significantly between different cultivars of peach.\nIn culture.\nPeaches are not only a popular fruit, but also are symbolic in many cultural traditions, such as in art, paintings, and folk tales such as the Peaches of Immortality.\nChina.\nPeach blossoms are highly prized in Chinese culture. The ancient Chinese believed the peach to possess more vitality than any other tree because their blossoms appear before leaves sprout. When early rulers of China visited their territories, they were preceded by sorcerers armed with peach rods to protect them from spectral evils. On New Year's Eve, local magistrates would cut peach wood branches and place them over their doors to protect against evil influences. Peach wood was also used for the earliest known door gods during the Han. Another author writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Chinese also considered peach wood (\"t'ao-fu\", )\n protective against evil spirits, who held the peach in awe. In ancient China, peach-wood bows were used to shoot arrows in every direction in an effort to dispel evil. Peach-wood slips or carved pits served as amulets to protect a person's life, safety, and health.\nPeachwood seals or figurines guarded gates and doors, and, as one Han account recites, \"the buildings in the capital are made tranquil and pure; everywhere a good state of affairs prevails\". Writes the author, further:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Another aid in fighting evil spirits were peach-wood wands. The Li-chi (Han period) reported that the emperor went to the funeral of a minister escorted by a sorcerer carrying a peachwood wand to keep bad influences away. Since that time, peachwood wands have remained an important means of exorcism in China.\nSimilarly, peach trees would often be planted near the front door of a house to bring good fortune.\nPeach kernels, tao ren (), are a common ingredient used in traditional Chinese medicine to dispel blood stasis and unblock bowels.\nIn an orchard of flowering peach trees, Liu Bei, Guan Yu, and Zhang Fei took an oath of brotherhood in the opening chapter of the classic Chinese novel \"Romance of the Three Kingdoms\". Another peach orchard, in \"The Peach Blossom Spring\" by poet Tao Yuanming, is the setting of the favourite Chinese fable and a metaphor for utopias. A peach tree growing on a precipice was where the Taoist master Zhang Daoling tested his disciples.\nThe deity Sh\u00f2u X\u012bng (), a god of longevity, is usually depicted with a very large forehead and holding a staff in his left hand and a large peach in his right hand due its associations with a long life. A long-standing traditional birthday food for seniors is a symbolic longevity peach (sh\u00f2ut\u00e1o bao - \u5bff\u6843\u5305), a type of lotus seed bun shaped like a peach, frequent in Taiwan and Cantonese culture.\nThe term f\u0113nt\u00e1o (), which is variously translated as \"half-eaten peach\", \"divided peach\", or \"sharing a peach\", was first used by Han Fei, a Legalist philosopher, in his work \"Han Feizi\". From this story it became a byword for homosexuality. The book records the incident when courtier Mizi Xia bit into an especially delicious peach and gave the remainder to his lover, Duke Ling of Wei, as a gift so that he could taste it, as well.\nKorea.\nAs recorded by the traveller Isabella Bird in 1898, wands made of peach wood are used in parts of Korean shamanism. During the third part of an exorcism ritual for malevolent spirits a wand made of an eastern branch of a peach tree is used. Originating from Daoism, the peach is one of ten symbols of longevity used in Korean art.\nAn important piece of Korean art features the peach. \"Dream Journey to the Peach Blossom Land\" is the only existing signed and dated work by An Ky\u014fn. It depicts the imagined utopian Peach Blossom Land from a fable by the Chinese poet Tao Yuanming.\nJapan.\nThe world's sweetest peach is grown in Fukushima, Japan. The Guinness world record for the sweetest peach is currently held by a peach grown in Kanechika, Japan, with a sugar content of 22.2%. However, a fruit farm in rural Fukushima, Koji grew a much sweeter peach, with a Brix score of 32\u00b0. Degrees Brix measures the sugar content of the fruit, and is usually between 11 and 15 for a typical peach from a supermarket.\nMomotar\u014d, whose name literally means \"peach child\", is a folktale character named after the giant peach from which he was birthed.\nTwo traditional Japanese words for the color pink correspond to blossoming trees: one for peach blossoms (), and one for cherry blossoms ().\nVietnam.\nA Vietnamese mythic history states that in the spring of 1789, after marching to Ng\u1ecdc H\u1ed3i and then winning a great victory against invaders from the Qing dynasty of China, Emperor Quang Trung ordered a messenger to gallop to Ph\u00fa Xu\u00e2n citadel (now Hu\u1ebf) and deliver a flowering peach branch to the Empress Ng\u1ecdc H\u00e2n. This took place on the fifth day of the first lunar month, two days before the predicted end of the battle. The branch of peach flowers that was sent from the north to the centre of Vietnam was not only a message of victory from the Emperor to his consort, but also the start of a new spring of peace and happiness for all the Vietnamese people. In addition, since the land of Nh\u1eadt T\u00e2n had freely given that very branch of peach flowers to the Emperor, it became the loyal garden of his dynasty.\nThe protagonists of \"The Tale of Kieu\" fell in love by a peach tree, and in Vietnam, the blossoming peach flower is the signal of spring. Finally, peach bonsai trees are used as decoration during Vietnamese New Year (T\u1ebft) in northern Vietnam.\nEurope.\nMany famous artists have painted with peach fruits placed in prominence. Caravaggio, Vicenzo Campi, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Claude Monet, \u00c9douard Manet, Henri Fantin-Latour, Severin Roesen, Peter Paul Rubens, and Van Gogh are among the many influential artists who painted peaches and peach trees in various settings. Scholars suggest that many compositions are symbolic, some an effort to introduce realism. For example, Tresidder claims the artists of Renaissance symbolically used peach to represent heart, and a leaf attached to the fruit as the symbol for tongue, thereby implying speaking truth from one's heart; a ripe peach was also a symbol to imply a ripe state of good health. Caravaggio's paintings introduce realism by painting peach leaves that are molted, discolored, or in some cases have wormholes \u2013 conditions common in modern peach cultivation.\nIn literature, Roald Dahl deciding on using a peach in his children's fantasy novel \"James and the Giant Peach\" after considering many other fruits including an apple, pear, or cherry. He thought the flavor and flesh of the peach to be more exciting.\nUnited States.\nDespite it not being first or even second in peach production and the peach contributing far less than 1% of the state's agricultural production, the peach is strongly associated in American culture with the state of Georgia. However, the peach did not officially become the official fruit of Georgia until 1995. It was preceded by South Carolina, which named the peach its state fruit in 1984. They were joined in giving the peach an official state status by Delaware naming it the state flower in 1995 and designating peach pie as its official dessert in 2009. Alabama also named it the state tree fruit in 2006 in addition to the blackberry designated as the state fruit in 2004.\nThe peach was marketed by the Georgia Fruit Exchange and later the Georgia Peach Grower's Association as being particularly tasty and special from the 1910s to the 1960s. This also coincided with parts of Georgia wanting to distance itself from being, \"the home of slavery and lynching and Confederate memorials,\" in the words of Frank Smith Horne. The local movement to create a new county centred on Fort Valley to be named Peach County sponsored Peach Blossom Festivals from 1922 to 1926. They promoted a vision of a new progressive south that also ignored the black labor upon which the peach harvest, like that of cotton, depended. Though the acreage of has declined to just one twelfth of its 1925 peak, from 1935, Georgia has been nicknamed the \"Peach State\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNews sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWeb sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51258", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51258", "title": "Onion", "text": "Bulbous vegetable grown for food\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe onion (Allium cepa L.Tooltip Carl Linnaeus, from Latin ), also known as the bulb onion or common onion, is a vegetable that is the most widely cultivated species of the genus \"Allium\". The shallot is a botanical variety of the onion which was classified as a separate species until 2011. The onion's close relatives include garlic, scallion, leek, and chives.\nThe genus contains several other species variously called onions and cultivated for food, such as the Japanese bunching onion \"Allium fistulosum\", the tree onion \"Allium\"\u00a0\u00d7 \"proliferum\", and the Canada onion \"Allium canadense\". The name \"wild onion\" is applied to a number of \"Allium\" species, but \"A. cepa\" is exclusively known from cultivation. Its ancestral wild original form is not known, although escapes from cultivation have become established in some regions. The onion is most frequently a biennial or a perennial plant, but is usually treated as an annual and harvested in its first growing season.\nThe onion plant has a fan of hollow, bluish-green leaves, and its bulb at the base of the plant begins to swell when a certain day-length is reached. The bulbs are composed of shortened, compressed, underground stems surrounded by fleshy modified scale (leaves) that envelop a central bud at the tip of the stem. In the autumn (or in spring, in the case of overwintering onions), the foliage dies down and the outer layers of the bulb become more dry, and brittle. The crop is harvested and dried and the onions are ready for use or storage. The crop is prone to attack by a number of pests and diseases, particularly the onion fly, the onion eelworm, and various fungi which can cause rotting. Some varieties of \"A. cepa\", such as shallots and potato onions, produce multiple bulbs.\nOnions are cultivated and used around the world. As a food item, they are often served raw as a vegetable or part of a prepared savoury dish, but can be eaten cooked or used to make pickles or chutneys. They are pungent when chopped and contain certain chemical substances which may irritate the eyes.\nTaxonomy and etymology.\nThe onion plant (\"Allium cepa\"), also known as the bulb onion or common onion, is the most widely cultivated species of the genus \"Allium.\" It was first officially described by Carl Linnaeus in his 1753 work \"Species Plantarum\". Synonyms during its taxonomic history are:\n\"A. cepa\" is known exclusively from cultivation, but related wild species occur in Central Asia and Iran. The most closely related include \"A. vavilovii\" from Turkmenistan and \"A. asarense\" from Iran. The genus \"Allium\" contains other species variously called onions and cultivated for food, such as the Japanese bunching onion (\"A.\u00a0fistulosum\"), Egyptian onion (\"A. \u00a0\u00d7 proliferum\"), and Canada onion (\"A.\u00a0canadense\"). The vast majority of cultivars of \"A.\u00a0cepa\" belong to the common onion group (\"A.\u00a0cepa\"\u00a0var.\u00a0\"cepa\") and are usually referred to simply as onions. The Aggregatum Group of cultivars (\"A.\u00a0cepa\"\u00a0var.\u00a0\"aggregatum\") includes both shallots, formerly classed as a separate species, and potato onions. Related species include garlic, leek, and chives.\n\"Cepa\" is commonly accepted as Latin for \"onion\"; the generic name \"Allium\" is the classical Latin name for garlic. \nIt has an affinity with Spanish: \"cebolla\", Italian: \"cipolla\", Polish: \"cebula\", and the German \"Zwiebel\" (this last altered by folk etymology). The English word \"chive\" is from the Old French \"chive\" , in turn from \"cepa\".\nDescription.\nThe onion is a biennial plant but is usually grown as an annual. Modern varieties typically grow to a height of . The leaves are yellowish- to bluish green and grow alternately in a flattened, fan-shaped swathe. They are fleshy, hollow, and cylindrical, with one flattened side. They are at their broadest about a quarter of the way up, beyond which they taper to blunt tips. The base of each leaf is a flattened, usually white sheath that grows out of the basal plate of a bulb. From the underside of the plate, a bundle of fibrous roots extends for a short way into the soil. As the onion matures, food reserves accumulate in the leaf bases, and the bulb of the onion swells.\nIn the autumn, the leaves die back, and the outer scales of the bulb become dry and brittle, so the crop is normally harvested. If left in the soil over winter, the growing point in the middle of the bulb begins to develop in the spring. New leaves appear, and a long, stout, hollow stem expands, topped by a bract protecting a developing inflorescence. The inflorescence takes the form of a rounded umbel of white flowers with parts in sixes. The seeds are glossy black and triangular in cross-section. The average pH of an onion is around 5.5.\nHistory.\nHumans have grown and selectively bred onions in cultivation for at least 7,000 years. The geographic origin of the onion is uncertain; ancient records of onion use span both eastern and western Asia. Domestication likely took place in West or Central Asia. Onions have been variously described as having originated in Iran, western Pakistan and Central Asia.1 The onion species \"Allium fistulosum\" (spring onion, bunching onion) and \"Allium tuberosum\" (Chinese leek) were domesticated in China around 6000 BC alongside other vegetables, grains, and fruits.\nRecipes using onions and other \"Allium\" species were recorded in cuneiform script on clay tablets in ancient Mesopotamia, around 2000 BC; the tablets are held in Yale University's Babylonian collection. The Assyriologist and \"gourmet cook\" Jean Bottero stated this was \"a cuisine of striking richness, refinement, sophistication and artistry\". The onion is mentioned in the Hebrew Bible; evidence of onions in ancient Israel comes from Chalcolithic Nahal Mishmar and from Bronze Age Jericho.\nAncient Egyptians revered the onion bulb, viewing its spherical shape and concentric rings as symbols of eternal life. Onions were used in Egyptian burials, as evidenced by onion traces found in the eye sockets of Ramesses IV. Pliny the Elder of the first century AD wrote about the use of onions and cabbage in Pompeii. He documented Roman beliefs about the onion's ability to improve ocular ailments, aid in sleep, and heal everything from oral sores and toothaches to dog bites, lumbago, and even dysentery. Archaeologists unearthing Pompeii long after its 79 AD volcanic burial have found gardens resembling those in Pliny's detailed narratives. According to texts collected in the fifth/sixth century AD under the authorial aegis of \"Apicius\" (said to have been a gourmet), onions were used in many Roman recipes.\nIn the Age of Discovery, onions were taken to North America by the first European settlers in part of the Columbian exchange. They found close relatives of the plant such as \"Allium tricoccum\" readily available and widely used in Native American gastronomy. According to diaries kept by some of the first English colonists, the bulb onion was one of the first crops planted in North America by the Pilgrim fathers. Between 1883 and 1939, inventors in the United States patented 97 inventions meant to make onion-growing more efficient through automation.\nUses.\nCulinary.\nThree colour varieties of onions offer different possibilities for the cook: \nWhile the large, mature onion bulb is most often eaten, onions can be eaten at immature stages. Young plants may be harvested before bulbing occurs and used whole as spring onions or scallions. When an onion is harvested after bulbing has begun, but the onion is not yet mature, the plants are sometimes referred to as \"summer\" onions. Onions may be bred and grown to mature at smaller sizes, known as pearl, boiler, or pickler onions; these are not true pearl onions which are a different species. Pearl and boiler onions may be cooked as a vegetable rather than as an ingredient, while pickler onions are often preserved in vinegar as a long-lasting relish. Onions pickled in vinegar are eaten as a side serving with traditional pub food such as a ploughman's lunch.\nOnions are commonly chopped and used as an ingredient in various hearty warm dishes, and may be used as a main ingredient in their own right, for example in French onion soup, creamed onions, and onion chutney. They are versatile and can be baked, boiled, braised, grilled, fried, roasted, saut\u00e9ed, or eaten raw in salads. Onions are a major ingredient of some curries; the Persian-style dopiaza's name means \"double onion\", and it is used both in the dish's sour curry sauce and as a garnish. Onion powder is a seasoning made from finely ground, dehydrated onions; it is often included in seasoned salt and spice mixes.\nOther uses.\nOnions have particularly large cells that are easy to observe under low magnification. Forming a single layer of cells, the bulb epidermis is easy to separate for educational, experimental, and breeding purposes. Onions are therefore commonly used in science education to teach the use of a microscope for observing cell structure. Onion skins can be boiled to make an orange-brown dye.\nComposition.\nNutrients.\nMost onion cultivars are about 89% water, 9% carbohydrates (including 4% sugar and 2% dietary fibre), 1% protein, and negligible fat (table). Onions contain low amounts of essential nutrients and have an energy value of 166 kJ (40 kilocalories) in a 100\u00a0g (3.5\u00a0oz) amount. Onions contribute savoury flavour to dishes without contributing significant caloric content.\nPhytochemicals.\nOnion varieties vary widely in phytochemical content, particularly for polyphenols, with shallots having the highest level, six times the amount found in Vidalia onions. Yellow onions have the highest total flavonoid content, an amount 11 times higher than in white onions. Red onions have considerable content of anthocyanin pigments, with at least 25 different compounds identified representing 10% of total flavonoid content. Like garlic, onions can show an additional colour \u2013 pink-red \u2013 after cutting, an effect caused by reactions of amino acids with sulfur compounds. Onion polyphenols are under basic research to determine their possible biological properties in humans.\nAdverse effects and toxicity.\nSome people suffer from allergic reactions after handling onions. Symptoms can include contact dermatitis, intense itching, rhinoconjunctivitis, blurred vision, bronchial asthma, sweating, and anaphylaxis. Allergic reactions may not occur when eating cooked onions, possibly due to the denaturing of the proteins from cooking.\nEye irritation.\nFreshly cut onions can produce a stinging sensation in the eyes of people nearby and often uncontrollable tears. This is caused by the release of a volatile liquid, \"syn\"-propanethial-S-oxide and its aerosol, which stimulates nerves in the eye. This gas is produced by a chain of reactions which serve as a defence mechanism: chopping an onion causes damage to cells which releases enzymes called alliinases. These break down amino acid sulfoxides and generate sulfenic acids. A specific sulfenic acid, 1-propenesulfenic acid, is rapidly acted on by a second enzyme, the lacrimatory factor synthase (LFS), producing the \"syn\"-propanethial-S-oxide. This gas diffuses through the air and soon reaches the eyes, where it activates sensory neurons. Lacrimal glands produce tears to dilute and flush out the irritant. Eye irritation can be minimised by cutting onions under running water or submerged in a basin of water. Leaving the root end intact also reduces irritation as the onion base has a higher concentration of sulphur compounds than the rest of the bulb.\nThe amount of sulfenic acids and lacrimal factor released and the irritation effect differs among \"Allium\" species. In 2008, the New Zealand Institute for Crop and Food Research created \"no tears\" onions by genetic modification to prevent the synthesis of lachrymatory factor synthase in onions. One study suggests that consumers prefer the flavour of onions with lower LFS content. Since the process impedes sulfur ingestion by the plant, some find LFS\u2212 onions inferior in flavour.\nA method for efficiently differentiating LFS\u2212 and LFS+ onions has been developed based on mass spectrometry, with potential application in high-volume production; gas chromatography is also used to measure lachrymatory factor in onions. In early 2018, Bayer released the first crop yield of commercially available LFS-silenced onions under the name \"Sunions\". They were the product of 30 years of cross-breeding; genetic modification was not employed.\nGuinea hen weed and honey garlic contain a similar lachrymatory factor. Synthetic onion lachrymatory factor has been used in a study related to tear production, and has been proposed as a nonlethal deterrent against thieves and intruders.\nOther effects.\nOnions are toxic to animals including dogs, cats, and guinea pigs.\nOnions can accumulate heavy metals such as cadmium and lead, particularly when cultivated in contaminated soils. The European Union regulates the presence of these contaminants. Several studies monitoring onion crops have reported cadmium or lead concentrations that exceed regulatory limits.\nProducing onions.\nCultivation.\nOnions are best cultivated in fertile, well-drained soils. Sandy loams are good as they are low in sulphur, whereas clay-rich soils usually have high sulphur content and produce pungent bulbs. Onions require a high level of nutrients in the soil. Phosphorus is often present in sufficient quantities, but may be applied before planting because of its low level of availability in cold soils. Nitrogen and potash can be applied at regular intervals during the growing season, the last application of nitrogen being at least four weeks before harvesting.\nBulbing onions are day-length sensitive; their bulbs begin growing only after the number of daylight hours has surpassed some minimal quantity. Most traditional European onions are referred to as \"long-day\" onions, producing bulbs only after 14 hours or more of daylight occurs. Southern European and North African varieties are often known as \"intermediate-day\" types, requiring only 12\u201313 hours of daylight to stimulate bulb formation. \"Short-day\" onions, which have been developed in more recent times, are planted in mild-winter areas in the autumn and form bulbs in the early spring and require only 11\u201312 hours of daylight to stimulate bulb formation. Onions are a cool-weather crop and can be grown in USDA zones 3\u00a0to\u00a09. Hot temperatures or other stressful conditions cause them to \"bolt\", meaning that a flower stem begins to grow.\nOnions are grown from seeds or from partially grown bulbs called \"sets\" or starter bulbs. Onion seeds are short-lived and fresh seeds germinate more effectively when sown in shallow rows, or \"drills,\" with each drill 12\" to 18\" apart. In suitable climates, certain cultivars can be sown in late summer and autumn to overwinter in the ground and produce early crops the following year.\nOnion bulbs are produced by sowing seeds in a dense pattern in early summer, then harvested in the autumn when the bulbs are still small, followed by drying and storage. These bulbs are planted the following spring and grow into mature bulbs later in the growing season. Certain cultivars used for growing and storing bulbs may not have as good storage characteristics as those grown directly from seed.\nRoutine care during the growing season involves keeping the rows free of competing weeds, especially when the plants are young. The plants are shallow-rooted and do not need much water when established. Bulbing usually takes place after 12 to 18 weeks. The bulbs can be gathered when needed to eat fresh, but if stored, they are harvested after the leaves have died back naturally. In dry weather, they may be left on the surface of the soil for a few days for drying, then are placed in nets, roped into strings, or laid in layers in shallow boxes to be stored in a cool, well-ventilated place.\nPests and diseases.\nOnions suffer from several pests and diseases. The most serious for the home gardener are likely to be the onion fly, stem and bulb eelworm, white rot, and neck rot. Diseases affecting the foliage include rust and smut, downy mildew, and white tip disease. The bulbs may be affected by splitting, white rot, and neck rot. Shanking is a condition in which the central leaves turn yellow and the inner part of the bulb collapses into an unpleasant-smelling slime. Most of these disorders are best treated by removing and burning affected plants. The larvae of the onion leaf miner or leek moth (\"Acrolepiopsis assectella\") sometimes attack the foliage and may burrow down into the bulb.\nThe onion fly (\"Delia antiqua\") lays eggs on the leaves and stems and on the ground close to onion, shallot, leek, and garlic plants. The fly is attracted to the crop by the smell of damaged tissue and is liable to occur after thinning. Plants grown from sets are less prone to attack. The larvae tunnel into the bulbs and the foliage wilts and turns yellow. The bulbs are disfigured and rot, especially in wet weather. Control measures may include crop rotation, the use of seed dressings, early sowing or planting, and the removal of infested plants.\nThe onion eelworm (\"Ditylenchus dipsaci\"), a tiny parasitic soil-living nematode, causes swollen, distorted foliage. Young plants are killed and older ones produce soft bulbs. No cure is known and affected plants should be uprooted and burned. The site should not be used for growing onions again for several years and should also be avoided for growing carrots, parsnips, and beans, which are also susceptible to the eelworm.\nWhite rot of onions, leeks, and garlic is caused by the soil-borne fungus \"Sclerotium cepivorum\". As the roots rot, the foliage turns yellow and wilts. The bases of the bulbs are attacked and become covered by a fluffy white mass of mycelia, which later produces small, globular black structures called sclerotia. These resting structures remain in the soil to reinfect a future crop. No cure for this fungal disease exists, so affected plants should be removed and destroyed and the ground used for unrelated crops in subsequent years.\nNeck rot is a fungal disease affecting onions in storage. It is caused by \"Botrytis allii\", which attacks the neck and upper parts of the bulb, causing a grey mould to develop. The symptoms often first occur where the bulb has been damaged and spread down the affected scales. Large quantities of spores are produced and crust-like sclerotia may also develop. In time, a dry rot sets in and the bulb becomes a dry, mummified structure. This disease may be present throughout the growing period, but only manifests itself when the bulb is in storage. Antifungal seed dressings are available and the disease can be minimised by preventing physical damage to the bulbs at harvesting, careful drying and curing of the mature onions, and correct storage in a cool, dry place with plenty of circulating air.\nOnion oil is authorised for use in the European Union for use as a pesticide against carrot fly in umbelliferous crops (carrots, parsnips, parsley, celery, celeriac).\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nOnions are a widely cultivated vegetable crop, produced in the second largest quantity after tomatoes. In 2021, the top global producers of onions were China, India, the United States, and Turkey. In 2022, world production of onions and shallots (as green produce) was 5.0 million tonnes, led by China with 17% of the total, and Mali, Angola, and Japan as secondary producers.\nStorage.\nIn the home, cooking onions and sweet onions are best stored at room temperature, optimally in a single layer, in large mesh bags in a dry, cool, dark, well-ventilated location. In this environment, cooking onions have a shelf life of three to four weeks and sweet onions one to two weeks. Cooking onions will absorb odours from apples and pears. Additionally, they draw moisture from vegetables with which they are stored which may cause them to decay.\nSweet onions have a greater water and sugar content than cooking onions. This makes them sweeter and milder tasting, but reduces their shelf life. Sweet onions can be stored refrigerated; they have a shelf life of around one month. Irrespective of type, any cut pieces of onion are best tightly wrapped, stored away from other produce, and used within two to three days.\nVarieties.\nCommon onion group (var. \"cepa\").\nMost of the diversity within \"A. cepa\" occurs within this group, the most economically important \"Allium\" crop. Plants within this group form large single bulbs, and are grown from seed or seed-grown sets. The majority of cultivated varieties grown for dry bulbs, salad onions, and pickling onions belong to this group. The range of diversity found among these cultivars includes variation in photoperiod (length of day that triggers bulbing), storage life, flavour, and skin colour. \nAggregatum group (var. \"aggregatum\").\nThis group contains shallots and potato onions, also referred to as multiplier onions. The bulbs are smaller than those of common onions, and a single plant forms an aggregate cluster of several bulbs from a master. They are propagated almost exclusively from daughter bulbs, although reproduction from seed is possible. Shallots are the most important subgroup within this group and comprise the only cultivars cultivated commercially. They form aggregate clusters of small, narrowly ovoid to pear-shaped bulbs. Potato onions differ from shallots in forming larger bulbs with fewer bulbs per cluster, and having a flattened (onion-like) shape. Intermediate forms exist.\nI'itoi onion is a prolific multiplier onion cultivated in the Baboquivari Peak Wilderness, Arizona, area. This small-bulb type has a shallot-like flavour and is easy to grow and ideal for hot, dry climates. Bulbs are separated, and planted in the fall below the surface and apart. Bulbs will multiply into clumps and can be harvested throughout the cooler months. Tops die back in the heat of summer and may return with heavy rains; bulbs can remain in the ground or be harvested and stored in a cool dry place for planting in the fall. The plants rarely flower; propagation is by division.\nHybrids with \"A. cepa\" parentage.\nSome hybrids are cultivated that have \"A. cepa\" parentage, such as the diploid tree onion or Egyptian onion (\"A.\" \u00d7\"proliferum\"), and the triploid onion (\"A.\" \u00d7\"cornutum\").\nThe tree onion or Egyptian onion produces bulblets in the umbel instead of flowers, and is now known to be a hybrid of \"A. cepa\" and \"A. fistulosum\". It has previously been treated as a variety of \"A. cepa\", for example \"A. cepa\" var. \"proliferum\", \"A. cepa\" var. \"bulbiferum\", and \"A. cepa\" var. \"viviparum\". It has been grown for centuries in Japan and China for use as a salad onion.\nThe triploid onion is a hybrid species with three sets of chromosomes, two sets from \"A. cepa\" and the third set from an unknown parent. Various clones of the triploid onion are grown locally in different regions, such as 'Ljutika' in Croatia, and 'Pran', 'Poonch', and 'Srinagar' in the India-Kashmir region. 'Pran' is grown extensively in the northern Indian provinces of Jammu and Kashmir. There are very small genetic differences between 'Pran' and the Croatian clone 'Ljutika', implying a monophyletic origin for this species.\nSpring onions or salad onions may be grown from the Welsh onion (\"A. fistulosum\"), as well as from \"A. cepa\". Young plants of \"A. fistulosum\" and \"A. cepa\" look very similar, but may be distinguished by their leaves, which are circular in cross-section in \"A. fistulosum\" rather than flattened on one side.\nIn popular culture.\nThe name 'the Big Onion' was formerly used of New York City, before it became 'the Big Apple', and Chicago became 'the Big Onion'. The Chicago public radio station WBEZ named a series about the city's geography \"The Big Onion\"; it was explained that the nickname derived from the native American name for the city, which means a type of wild onion.\nThe 10th century Exeter Book, written in Old English, contains a riddle which seems to be about an onion, with sexual overtones. The \"wondrous creature, a joy to women\" stands \"in a bed\"; \"My column is erect and tall\"; a woman \"rubs me to redness\" but at once \"she feels my meeting\"; the riddle ends \"Wet will be that eye.\"\nIn the \"Odyssey\", Homer included the lines \"I saw the shining tunic about his skin, like the skin of a dried onion, so soft was it, and it shone in the sun\". R. Drew Griffith comments that the double comparison of the tunic that Penelope gave to the disguised Odysseus to onion and sun \"risks being funny\", and notes that Theopompus indeed found it \"ridiculous\". Griffith suggests that Homer included the onion because of its capacity to produce tears, hinting at Penelope's sorrow at Odysseus's long absence.\nOnion Johnnies were Breton farmers and agricultural labourers who travelled from Roscoff in Brittany, originally on foot and later on bicycles, selling strings of distinctive pink onions door to door in Britain.\nIn India, when the price of onions became very high in 2015, the \"Hindustan Times\" recorded that people shared many onion jokes, such as the punning (, \"take love, give me onions\").\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51259", "revid": "50811851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51259", "title": "Montgomery County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nMontgomery County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 49,532. The county seat is Fonda. The county was named in honor of Richard Montgomery, an American Revolutionary War general killed in 1775 at the Battle of Quebec. The county is part of the Mohawk Valley region of the state.\nThe county is part of the Albany-Schenectady-Troy combined statistical area.\nHistorically occupied by the Mohawk people, one of the original Five Nations of the Iroquois Confederacy, the county was created in 1772 during the period of British colonial rule as Tryon County. In 1784, after the Americans gained independence in the War, it was renamed Montgomery County for one of the heroes.\nMontgomery County comprises the Amsterdam, NY micropolitan statistical area. The county borders the north and south banks of the Mohawk River.\nHistory.\nThis area was occupied by the Mohawk for hundreds of years prior to European colonization. Many warriors allied with the British during the war. When the British lost, they ceded all the Iroquois territory of the Six Nations (the Tuscarora had joined the confederacy in the 18th century) to the United States, without consulting the tribes or bringing them into negotiation.\nIn 1784, following end of the American Revolutionary War, the European-American settlers renamed Tryon County as Montgomery County. This change was to honor the general, Richard Montgomery, who had captured several places in Canada and died in 1775 attempting to capture the city of Quebec during the Revolutionary War. It replaced the name that formerly honored the last provincial governor of New York.\nIn 1789, Ontario County was split off from Montgomery. The area of the new county was much larger than the present Ontario County, as it included the present Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, Livingston, Monroe, Niagara, Orleans, Steuben, Wyoming, Yates, and part of Schuyler and Wayne counties.\nIn 1791, Herkimer, Otsego, and Tioga counties were split off from Montgomery. In 1802, portions of Clinton, Herkimer, and Montgomery counties were combined to form St. Lawrence County. In 1816, Hamilton County was split off from Montgomery, but it did not have enough taxable inhabitants to be separately organized until 1847. In May 1836, the county seat was moved from Johnstown to Fonda, and in April 1838, Fulton County was split off, with Johnstown regaining that rank for the new Fulton County.\nIn 2012, Montgomery County voters approved a charter for government, making it the 21st county in New York state to do so. In 2013, Matthew L. Ossenfort was elected at-large as the first County Executive in the county's history. Ossenfort took office in 2014, the same year the charter went into effect. Under the terms of the charter, the Board of Supervisors was replaced by a nine-member County Legislature, with members elected from single-member districts. Thomas L. Quackenbush, one of the members, was elected as the first chairman of the new legislative body, which will be a circulating position.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.8%) is water.\nMontgomery County is located in the central part of the state, west of the city of Schenectady and northwest of Albany.\nAdjacent counties.\nThe Erie Canal runs through Montgomery County parallel to the Mohawk River, connecting to the Wood River to the west, which leads to Lake Ontario. Overall, the canal connected Great Lakes shipping with the Hudson River and the port of New York on the Atlantic Ocean. Several towns and villages developed along the canal, as it carried much trade and passenger traffic during its peak years. After the railroad was built through the state, along the same river plain, it superseded the canal, which was filled in some areas.\nAt the time of the canal's construction, Montgomery County was the only place where there was a break in the Appalachian Mountains. Called 'The Noses' because of canal construction, it became known as \"the gateway to the West\". In the mid-twentieth century, the NYS Thruway was constructed parallel to the former east\u2013west routes of the canal and railroad. Today the Erie Canal and its lock system is used primarily for recreational boat use among locals and tourists.\nMontgomery County is located in the heart of the state's Mohawk Valley region. Foothills of the Catskill Mountains dot the southern part of the county, while foothills of the Adirondack Mountains dot the north.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 50,208 people, 20,073 households, and 13,131 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 22,522 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 92.87% (83.8% Non-Hispanic; 9.07 White Hispanic) White, 1.15% African American, 0.25% Native American, 0.53% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 3.92% from other races, and 1.27% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 12.91% of the population. 19.0% identified as being of Italian, 15.9% German, 13.5% Polish, 9.8% Puerto Rican 9.1% Irish, 7.9% American and 6.4% English ancestry, according to Census 2010. 86.8% spoke English, 9.3% Spanish,1.8% Italian, and 1.1% Polish as their first language.\nThere were 20,038 households, out of which 29.40% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.00% were married couples living together, 11.60% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.60% were non-families. 29.50% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.90% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.42 and the average family size was 2.98.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 24.50% under the age of 18, 7.20% from 18 to 24, 26.30% from 25 to 44, 22.90% from 45 to 64, and 19.20% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 91.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.90 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $33,128, and the median income for a family was $40,688. Males had a median income of $31,818 versus $23,359 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,005. About 9.00% of families and 13.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.80% of those under age 18 and 9.89% of those age 65 or over.\nPolitics and government.\nIn 2012, voters approved a county charter under New York's municipal home rule law which established an independent county executive to head its executive branch and replace the board of supervisors with a nine-seat county legislature. Elections were held the next year and the county began operating under this charter on January 1, 2014. As of 2024, the legislature has 8 Republicans and 1 Democrat.\nCommunities.\nCities, villages, and census-designated places.\n\u2020 - County seat\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51260", "revid": "17794675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51260", "title": "Bulb", "text": "Short plant stem with fleshy leaves or leaf bases for food storage and water\nIn botany, a bulb is a short underground stem with fleshy leaves or leaf bases that function as food storage organs during dormancy. In gardening, plants with other kinds of storage organ are also called ornamental bulbous plants or just \"bulbs\".\nDescription.\nThe bulb's leaf bases, also known as scales, generally do not support leaves, but contain food reserves to enable the plant to survive adverse conditions. At the center of the bulb is a vegetative growing point or an unexpanded flowering shoot. The base is formed by a reduced stem, and plant growth occurs from this basal plate. Roots emerge from the underside of the base, and new stems and leaves from the upper side. Tunicate bulbs have dry, membranous outer scales that protect the continuous lamina of fleshy scales. Species in the genera \"Allium\", \"Hippeastrum\", \"Narcissus\", and \"Tulipa\" all have tunicate bulbs. Non-tunicate bulbs, such as \"Lilium\" and \"Fritillaria\" species, lack the protective tunic and have looser scales.\nBulbous plant species cycle through vegetative and reproductive growth stages; the bulb grows to flowering size during the vegetative stage and the plant flowers during the reproductive stage. Certain environmental conditions are needed to trigger the transition from one stage to the next, such as the shift from a cold winter to spring. Once the flowering period is over, the plant enters a foliage period of about six weeks during which time the plant absorbs nutrients from the soil and energy from the sun for setting flowers for the next year. Vegetative bulbs may be planted like seeds and will sprout into plants. Bulbs dug up before the foliage period is completed will not bloom the following year but then should flower normally in subsequent years.\nPlants that form bulbs.\nPlants that form underground storage organs, including bulbs as well as tubers and corms, are called \"geophytes\". Some epiphytic orchids (family Orchidaceae) form above-ground storage organs called \"pseudobulbs\", that superficially resemble bulbs.\nNearly all plants that form true bulbs are monocotyledons, and include:\nThe only eudicot plants that produce true bulbs are just a few species in the genus \"Oxalis\", such as \"Oxalis latifolia\".\nBulbil.\nA bulbil is a small bulb, and may also be called a bulblet, bulbet, or bulbel.\nSmall bulbs can develop or propagate a large bulb. If one or several moderate-sized bulbs form to replace the original bulb, they are called renewal bulbs. Increase bulbs are small bulbs that develop either on each of the leaves inside a bulb, or else on the end of small underground stems connected to the original bulb.\nSome lilies, such as the tiger lily \"Lilium lancifolium\", form small bulbs, called bulbils, in their leaf axils. Several members of the onion family, Alliaceae, including \"Allium sativum\" (garlic), form bulbils in their flower heads, sometimes as the flowers fade, or even instead of the flowers (which is a form of apomixis). The so-called tree onion (\"Allium\" \u00d7 \"proliferum\") forms small onions which are large enough for pickling.\nSome ferns, such as the hen-and-chicken fern, produce new plants at the tips of the fronds' pinnae that are sometimes referred to as bulbils.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51263", "revid": "1316298384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51263", "title": "Iaijutsu", "text": "Combative quick-draw sword technique\n is a combative quick-draw sword technique. This art of drawing the \"katana\" is one of the Japanese \"ko-ry\u016b\" martial art disciplines in the education of the classical warrior (\"bushi\").\nPurpose.\nIaijutsu is a combative sword-drawing art but not necessarily an aggressive art because iaijutsu is also a counterattack-oriented art. Iaijutsu technique may be used aggressively to wage a premeditated surprise attack against an unsuspecting enemy. The formulation of iaijutsu as a component system of classical bujutsu was made less for the dynamic situations of the battlefield than for the relatively static applications of the warrior's daily life off the field of battle.\nEtymology.\n\"Battojutsu\" is an older name for \"iaijutsu\". Historically, it is unclear when the term \"iaijutsu\" originated. It is also unclear when techniques to draw katana from the scabbard were first practiced as a dedicated form of exercise. The Japanese sword has existed since the Nara period (710\u2013794), where techniques to draw the sword have been practiced under other names than \"iaijutsu\". The term \"iaijutsu\" was first verified in connection with Iizasa Ch\u014disai Ienao (c. 1387 \u2013 c. 1488), founder of the school Tenshin Sh\u014dden Katori Shint\u014d-ry\u016b.\nHistory.\nArchaeological excavations dated the oldest sword in Japan from at least as early as second century B.C. The \"Kojiki\" (Record of Ancient Matters) and the \"Nihon Shoki\" (History of Japan), ancient texts on early Japanese history and myth that were compiled in the eighth century A.D., describe iron swords and swordsmanship that pre-date recorded history, attributed to the mythological age of the gods (kami).\nThe development of Japanese swordsmanship as a component system of classical bujutsu created by and for professional warriors (bushi), begins only with the invention and widespread use of the Japanese sword, the curved, single-cutting-edged long sword.\nIn its curved form, the sword is known to the Japanese as tachi in the eighth century. It evolved from and gained ascendancy over its straight-bladed prototype because years of battlefield experience proved that the curved form of sword was better suited to the needs of the bushi than the straight-bladed kind. Around the curved long sword the bushi built a mystique of fantastic dimensions, one that still influences Japanese culture today. The nature of the bushi's combative deployment, mounted as he was on horseback, required the classical warrior to reach out for his enemy, who might either be similarly mounted or otherwise ground-deployed.\nDuring the Kamakura period (1185\u20131333) the Japanese sword smiths achieved the highest level of technical excellence because the war between two influential families, the Minamoto and the Taira, made it possible to test and evaluate swords under the severest of conditions. By the end of the Kamakura period the tachi was superseded by a shorter weapon in a new form, called katana.\nIt was with the general widespread use of the curved sword mounted and worn as a katana that classical Japanese swordsmanship for infantry applications really begins. The earliest reliable documentation to prove that the bushi practiced swordsmanship in a systematic manner is dated in the 15th century. In this connection it is believed that kenjutsu, which deals with the art of swordsmanship as it is performed with an unsheathed sword, is the preceding form of iaijutsu.\nIaijutsu is extant today, but there also exists a modern form for drawing the Japanese sword called iaido, a term which first appeared in 1932.\nPostures.\nAccording to Donn F. Draeger, iaijutsu is a combative art and, therefore, the warrior considered only two starting positions in the execution of a sword-drawing technique:\nTwo other postures are not used in iaijutsu because they possessed technical issues that would place their users at a disadvantage:\nIt would be difficult for the swordsman using either of these two postures to go quickly into action in an emergency.\nKory\u016b Schools.\nSome of the Ry\u016b that still exist and include iaijutsu in their curriculum are listed below - these schools are \"kory\u016b\", or arts developed before the Meiji era:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51265", "revid": "50377361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51265", "title": "Kenjutsu", "text": "Japanese styles of swordsmanship\n is an umbrella term for all (\"ko-bud\u014d\") schools of Japanese swordsmanship, in particular those that predate the Meiji Restoration. Kenjutsu is a martial arts that more emphasizing in various real life sword combat scenario, rather than its modern adaptation, kendo, which is evolving more into some kind of modern sports with little targets, very few attacks pattern, and many rules. Some modern styles of kendo and iaido that were established in the 20th century also included modern forms of kenjutsu in their curriculum. Kenjutsu, which originated with the samurai class of feudal Japan, means \"methods, techniques, and the art of the Japanese sword\". This is opposed to kendo, which means \"the way of the sword\" and uses a bamboo sword (shinai) and protective armour (b\u014dgu).\nThe exact activities and conventions undertaken when practicing \"kenjutsu\" vary from school to school, where the word school here refers to the practice, methods, ethics, and metaphysics of a given tradition, yet commonly include practice of battlefield techniques without an opponent and techniques whereby two practitioners perform \"kata\" (featuring full contact strikes to the body in some styles and no body contact strikes permitted in others). Contact striking during kata is used for example in Ono Ha Itt\u014d-ry\u016b.\nAlthough kata training has always been the mainstay, in later periods, schools incorporated sparring under a variety of conditions, from using solid wooden \"bokut\u014d\" to the use of a bamboo sword (\"shinai\") and armor (\"b\u014dgu\"). In modern times sparring in Japanese martial art is more strongly associated with kendo and is mainly practiced by students or the police force. Although kendo is common in Japan, it is also practiced in other countries around the world.\nHistory.\nEarly development.\nIt is believed that the first iron swords were produced in Japan during the fourth century, utilizing technology introduced from China via the Korean Peninsula. Although swords held significant cultural and religious importance in ancient Japan, it was during the Heian period that the curved Japanese sword\u2014now internationally recognized as the katana\u2014was developed, marking their emergence as both practical weapons and symbolic objects. The oldest martial arts schools still in existence today originated during the Muromachi period (1336\u20131573), a time characterized by extended periods of inter-state warfare. Three major schools emerged during this period.\nThese schools form the ancestors for many descendent styles, for example, from Itt\u014d ry\u016b has branched Ono-ha Itt\u014d ry\u016b and Mizoguchi-ha Itt\u014d-ry\u016b (among many others).\nOn the island of Okinawa, the art of Udundi includes a unique style of both Kenjutsu and Iaijutsu. This is the only surviving sword system from Okinawa. It was the martial art of the noble Motobu family during the Ryukyu Kingdom.\nEdo period.\nDuring the Edo period (1603\u20131868), kenjutsu schools (\"ry\u016b\") proliferated, with more than 500 styles recorded. Training methods and equipment evolved significantly during this time. In the 19th century, the development of the bamboo practice sword (\"shinai\") and protective armor (\"b\u014dgu\") enabled practitioners to engage in full-speed sparring while minimizing the risk of serious injury. Prior to these innovations, kenjutsu training typically consisted of practicing fundamental techniques and paired \"kata\" using solid wooden swords (\"bokut\u014d\") or, in some cases, live blades.\nDecline.\nBeginning in 1868, the Meiji Restoration led to the breakup of the military class and the modernization of Japan along the lines of western industrial nations. As the \"samurai\" class was officially dissolved at this time, \"kenjutsu\" fell into decline, an unpopular reminder of the past. This decline continued for approximately 20 years, until rising national confidence led to an increase of the uptake of traditional sword arts again, particularly in the military and the police.\nIn 1886 the Japanese Police gathered together \"kata\" from a variety of \"kenjutsu\" schools into a standardised set for training purposes. This process of standardization of martial training continued when, in 1895, a body for martial arts in Japan, the Dai Nippon Butoku Kai, was established. Work on standardizing \"kenjutsu\" \"kata\" continued for years, with several groups involved until in 1912 an edict was released by the Dai Nippon Butoku Kai. This edict highlighted a lack of unity in teaching and introduced a standard core teaching curriculum to which the individual \"kenjutsu\" schools would add their distinctive techniques. This core curriculum, and its ten \"kata\" evolved into the modern martial art of \"kendo\". This point could be regarded as the end of the development of Kendo. Kata was provided for the unification of many schools to enable them to pass on the techniques and spirit of the Japanese sword.\nWeapons.\nOne of the more common training weapons is the wooden sword (\"bokut\u014d\" or \"bokken\"). For various reasons, many schools make use of very specifically designed \"bokut\u014d\", altering its shape, weight and length according to the style's specifications. For example, \"bokut\u014d\" used within Yagy\u016b Shinkage-ry\u016b are relatively thin and without a handguard in order to match the school's characteristic approach to combat. Alternatively, Kashima Shin-ry\u016b practitioners use a thicker than average \"bokut\u014d\" with no curvature and with a rather large hilt. This of course lends itself well to Kashima Shin-ry\u016b's distinct principles of combat.\nSome schools practice with \"fukuro\" \"shinai\" (a bamboo sword covered with leather or cloth) under circumstances where the student lacks the ability to safely control a \"bokut\u014d\" at full speed or as a general safety precaution. In fact, the \"fukuro shinai\" dates as far back as the 15th century.\n\"Nit\u014djutsu\".\nA distinguishing feature of many kenjutsu syllabi is the use of a paired katana or \"dait\u014d\" and wakizashi or \"sh\u014dt\u014d,\" commonly referred to as . Styles that teach it are called ; contrast .\nThe most famous exponent of \"nit\u014djutsu\" was Miyamoto Musashi (1584 \u2013 1645), the founder of Hy\u014dh\u014d Niten Ichi-ry\u016b, who advocates it in \"The Book of Five Rings\". \"Nit\u014djutsu\" is not however unique to Hyoho Niten Ichi-ry\u016b, nor was \"nit\u014djutsu\" the creation of Musashi. Both Tenshin Sh\u014dden Katori Shinto-ry\u016b were founded in the early Muromachi period (ca. 1447), and Tatsumi-ryu founded Eish\u014d period (1504\u20131521), contain extensive two-sword curricula while also preceding the establishment of Musashi's school.\nNotable historical Japanese practitioners.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51269", "revid": "38104346", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51269", "title": "Unit 101", "text": "Former special forces unit of the Israel Defense Forces\nMilitary unit\nCommando Unit 101 () was a sayeret (commando) unit of the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF), founded and commanded by Ariel Sharon on orders from Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion in August 1953. They were armed with non-standard weapons and tasked with carrying out retribution operations across the state's borders\u2014in particular, establishing small unit maneuvers, activation and insertion tactics.\nMembers of the unit were recruited only from agricultural kibbutzim and moshavim. Membership in the unit was by invitation only, and any new member had to be voted on by all existing members before they were accepted.\nThe unit was merged into the 890th Paratroop Battalion during January 1954, on orders of General Moshe Dayan, Chief of Staff, because he wanted their experience and spirit to be spread among all infantry units of IDF starting with the paratroopers. They are considered to have had a significant influence on the development of subsequent Israeli infantry-oriented units.\nBackground.\nFollowing the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, Israel was faced with cross-border raids and infiltrations by Arab militants and non-militants respectively. Many of these were small scale infiltrations that consisted of unarmed Palestinian refugees attempting to rejoin their families and of smugglers bringing in contraband for Israeli markets.&lt;ref name=\"UNS/636\"&gt;'No one would deny that the Israel authorities would be justified, and are justified, in using strong measures to check (infiltration), in so far as damage to property or loss of life results. But not everyone who crosses the armistice demarcation line does so with criminal intent. Acts of violence are indeed committed, but as the volume of illegal crossings of the demarcation line is so considerable, if one is to judge from the available statistics, it seems probable that \"many crossings are carried out by persons\u2014sometimes, I understand, even by children\u2014with no criminal object in view\". 'England's ambassador to the UN http:// 9 November 1953&lt;/ref&gt; These were later followed with attacks launched by refugees often motivated by economic reasons, but they were quickly adopted by the military of the neighboring Arab states, who organized them into semi-formal brigades which mounted larger scale operations from 1954 onwards. According to Israel, about 9,000 attacks were launched from 1949 to 1956, resulting in hundreds of Israeli civilian casualties.\nAt the same time the IDF was ill-prepared to respond to these raids. The Palmach, its three best combat units of the 1948 war, had been disbanded at Ben-Gurion's instruction. Many experienced officers had left the army after the war, and Israeli society had undergone a difficult period of impoverishment. As a result, the IDF did not have any units capable of effective reprisal, and did not perform well in offensive operations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Palestinians must learn that they will pay a high price for Israeli lives.\u2014\u200a\nAs a response to this problem the IDF formed Unit 30 in 1951\u2014a secret unit that belonged to the IDF Southern Command. Their purpose was to execute retribution missions while operating in compact and well-trained teams. Unfortunately for the IDF the officers lacked the required training and executed their duties poorly, leading to the unit's disbandment in 1952.\nOne of Sharon's final operations before leaving the army in 1952 was the semi-successful Operation Bin Nun Alef into Jordan. During the operation he suffered serious injuries, after which Sharon had recommended to the General Staff that an elite force, trained in commando tactics, be set up for reprisal operations. After a series of unsuccessful retribution infiltrations by existing IDF units, Ben Gurion pressed Chief of Staff Mordechai Maklef to establish such a special forces unit in the summer of 1953. This was Israel's first, and reservist Ariel Sharon was recalled to duty.\nSharon was given the rank of Major and chosen to command the company-sized unit, with Shlomo Baum as deputy in command. The unit was to consist of 50 men, most of them former Tzanhanim and Unit 30 personnel. They were armed with non-standard weapons and tasked with carrying out special reprisals across the state's borders\u2014mainly establishing small unit maneuvers, activation and insertion tactics that are utilized even today.\nThe new unit began a hard process of day and night training. Some of their exercises frequently took them across the border, as enemy engagement was seen as the best preparation. The recruits went on forced marches and undertook weapons and sabotage training at their base camp at Sataf, a depopulated Arab village just west of Jerusalem.\nIn addition to the unit's tactical variation, they were also unique in two ways:\nOriginally T'zanhanim (, \"Paratroopers\") company's officers were the biggest opposition against the creation of Unit 101. The reason for this was simply that they didn't want another competitor for retaliation missions. Before the formation of Unit 101 only they undertook these missions. One of the unit's tactical commanders was Meir Har-Zion, who was later awarded the rank of an officer solely for his conduct in battle. The tactics of Unit 101 was politically very effective and soon the fighters simply could not keep up with the attrition.\nThis meant that the attacks on Israel decreased and the political objective of Unit 101 was accomplished. The creation of Unit 101 was a major landmark in the Israeli Special Forces history. Beside the Sayeret Matkal, they are considered to be the unit with the most influence on the Israeli infantry oriented units including both special and conventional units.\nRecruitment.\nMembers of the unit were recruited exclusively from agricultural kibbutzim and moshavim, with the view that only those who were raised as farmers on the land had the spirit to defend it. Membership in the unit was by invitation only, and any new member had to be voted on by all existing members before they were accepted.\nOperations.\nPalestinian refugee camp.\nAccording to Yoav Gelber, after one month of training a patrol of Unit 101 infiltrated into the Gaza Strip as an exercise. Some sources estimate that a result of the infiltration was 20 killed Arabs. Unit 101 suffered two wounded soldiers. The raid was heavily condemned by foreign observers, who called it \"an appalling case of deliberate mass murder\", and was publicly criticized in the Israeli cabinet by at least one minister.\nQibya massacre.\nTwo months later, in October, the unit was involved in the raid into the village of Qibya in the northern West Bank, then a part of Jordan. During this operation that inflicted heavy damage on the Arab Legion forces in Qibya 42 villagers were killed, and 15 wounded. According to United Nations observers, bullet-riddled bodies near the doorways and multiple bullet hits on the doors of the demolished houses indicated that the inhabitants may have remained inside until their homes were blown up over them.\nThe international outcry caused by the operation required a formal reply by Israel. The Israelis denied responsibility, claiming that Israeli settlers or a local kibbutz had carried out the raid on their own initiative.\nDisbandment.\nAfter realizing the huge success of Unit 101, the Chief of Staff, General Moshe Dayan decided that the experience gained by it must be shared with all IDF infantry units starting with the Paratroopers Battalion 890. This was done by merging the two together under the command of Ariel Sharon who was then promoted to the rank of Lt. Colonel. After the merger and the addition of a Nachal Mutznach (\"airborne Nachal\") battalion, the combined outfit turned into a brigade size unit, named Brigade 202 (now the 35th Paratroopers Brigade). Sharon became the commander of the merged brigade which was now composed of two battalions\u2014890 and 88 and a few months later joined by reserve battalion 771 which included ex-101 members together with reserve paratroopers and Nachal paratroopers.\nThe merge with Tzanhanim company was actually ironic since their officers were originally the biggest opposition against the creation of Unit 101. This was because they didn't want a competitor for retaliation missions. Before the formation of Unit 101 only they undertook these missions.\nOperating within the brigade, they carried out a large-scale attack on the Egyptian army positions in the Gaza strip during February 1955. Sharon personally led the raid, codenamed Operation Black Arrow. It resulted in 42 Egyptian soldiers killed and 36 wounded, versus 8 Israeli dead. The newly formed brigade did most of the Israeli special forces operations during the remainder of the 1950s.\nEgyptian shock over the magnitude of their losses is often cited as one of the catalysts for the Soviet-Egyptian arms deal that opened the Middle East to the Soviet Union. Up to 20 such attacks were carried out between 1955 and 1956, culminating in the Qalqilya Police raid of October 1956. This particular raid targeted a position of the Jordanian Arab Legion in one of the old British police forts, during which 18 Israeli soldiers and up to a hundred Legionnaires were killed.\nDuring the end of the 1950s the IDF realized that they were lacking a small SF unit, since the Tzanhanim company had turned into an infantry brigade. That is the main reason why Avraham Arnan formed the Sayeret Matkal in 1958. In various ways the Sayeret Matkal combined the operational experience gathered by Unit 101 and utilised the structure of the British Special Air Service. After losing their special forces title, the Tzanhanim company formed its own SF unit\u2014the Sayeret Tzanhanim in October 1958.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51270", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51270", "title": "Prince-bishop", "text": "Bishop who also rules a principality\nA prince-bishop is a bishop who is also the civil ruler of some secular principality and sovereignty, as opposed to \"Prince of the Church\" itself, a title associated with cardinals. Since 1951, the sole extant prince-bishop has been the Bishop of Urgell, Catalonia, who has remained \"ex officio\" one of two co-princes of Andorra, along with the French president.\nOverview.\nIn the West, with the decline of imperial power from the 4th century onwards in the face of the barbarian invasions, sometimes Christian bishops of cities took the place of the Roman commander, made secular decisions for the city and led their own troops when necessary. Later relations between a prince-bishop and the burghers were invariably not cordial. As cities demanded charters from emperors, kings, or their prince-bishops and declared themselves independent of the secular territorial magnates, friction intensified between burghers and bishops. The principality or prince-bishopric (Hochstift) ruled politically by a prince-bishop could wholly or largely have overlapped with his diocesan jurisdiction, but some parts of his diocese, even the city of his residence, could have been exempt from his civil rule, obtaining the status of free imperial city. If the episcopal see was an archbishopric, the correct term was prince-archbishop; the equivalent in the regular (monastic) clergy was prince-abbot. A prince-bishop was usually considered an elected monarch. With the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806, the title finally became defunct in the Confederation of the Rhine. However, in respect to the lands of the former Holy Roman Empire outside of French control, such as the Habsburg Monarchy, including Austria proper (Salzburg, Seckau), the Lands of the Bohemian Crown (the bulk of Olomouc and parts of Breslau), as well as in respect to the parts of the 1795-partitioned Polish state, including those forming part of the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria or those acquired by the Kingdom of Prussia, the position continued in some cases nominally and was sometimes transformed into a new, titular type, initially recognized by the German Empire and Austria-Hungary until their demise, with the title ultimately abolished altogether by the pope in 1951.\nThe sole exception is the Bishop of Urgell, Catalonia, who no longer has any secular rights in Spain, but remains \"ex officio\" one of two co-princes of Andorra, along with the French head of state (currently its President), and thus the last extant prince-bishop.\nIn the Byzantine Empire, the still autocratic Emperors passed general legal measures assigning all bishops certain rights and duties in the secular administration of their dioceses, possibly as part of a development to put the Eastern Church in the service of the Empire, with its Ecumenical Patriarch almost reduced to the Emperor's minister of religious affairs.. The institution of prince-bishop was revived in the Orthodox Church in the modern times during the existence of the Prince-Bishopric of Montenegro.\nHistory.\nHoly Roman Empire.\nBishops had been involved in the government of the Frankish realm and subsequent Carolingian Empire frequently as the clerical member of a duo of envoys styled , but that was an individual mandate, not attached to the see. Prince-bishoprics were most common in the feudally fragmented Holy Roman Empire, where many were formally awarded the rank of an Imperial Prince , granting them the immediate power over a certain territory and a representation in the Imperial Diet ().\nThe stem duchies of the German Kingdom inside the Empire had strong and powerful dukes (originally, war-rulers), always looking out more for their duchy's \"national interest\" than for the Empire's. In turn the first Ottonian (Saxon) king Henry the Fowler and more so his son, Emperor Otto I, intended to weaken the power of the dukes by granting loyal bishops Imperial lands and vest them with privileges. Unlike dukes they could not pass hereditary titles and lands to any descendants. Instead the Emperors reserved the implementation of the bishops of their proprietary church for themselves, defying the fact that according to canon law they were part of the transnational Catholic Church. This met with increasing opposition by the Popes, culminating in the fierce Investiture Controversy of 1076. Nevertheless, the Emperors continued to grant major territories to the most important (arch)bishops. The immediate territory attached to the episcopal see then became a prince-diocese or (arch)bishopric (). The German term was often used to denote the form of secular authority held by bishops ruling a prince-bishopric with being used for prince-archbishoprics.\nEmperor Charles IV by the Golden Bull of 1356 confirmed the privileged status of the Prince-Archbishoprics of Mainz, Cologne and Trier as members of the electoral college. At the eve of the Protestant Reformation, the Imperial states comprised 53 ecclesiastical principalities. They were finally secularized in the 1803 German Mediatization upon the territorial losses to France in the Treaty of Lun\u00e9ville, except for the Mainz prince-archbishop and German archchancellor Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg, who continued to rule as Prince of Aschaffenburg and Regensburg. With the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806, the title finally became defunct in the successor Confederation of the Rhine.\nNo less than three of the (originally only seven) prince-electors, the highest order of (comparable in rank with the French pairs), were prince-archbishops, each holding the title of Archchancellor (the only arch-office amongst them) for a part of the Empire; given the higher importance of an electorate, their principalities were known as (\"electoral principality\") rather than prince-archbishopric.\nThe suffragan-bishoprics of Gurk (established 1070), (1216), (1218), and Lavant (1225) sometimes used the title, but never held any territory. However, all bishops' princely titles were abolished by the pope in 1951.\nThe Patriarchate of Aquileia (1077\u20131433) was conquered by Venice in 1420 and officially incorporated after the 1445 Council of Florence.\nIn Brescia Bishop Notingus was made count of Brescia in 844.\nIn the Bishopric of Belley, Saint Anthelm of Belley was granted by Emperor Frederick I, but submitted temporal authorities to the Duchy of Savoy in 1401.\nThe Bishopric of Sion (, ) was from 999 a classic example of unified secular and diocesan authority. It progressively lost its powers since the Renaissance, and was finally replaced by the Republic of the Seven Tithings in 1634.\nState of the Teutonic Order.\nUpon the incorporation of the Livonian Brothers of the Sword in 1237, the territory of the Order's State largely corresponded with the Diocese of Riga. Bishop Albert of Riga in 1207 had received the lands of Livonia as an Imperial fief from the hands of German king Philip of Swabia, he however had to come to terms with the Brothers of the Sword. At the behest of Pope Innocent III the \"Terra Mariana\" confederation was established, whereby Albert had to cede large parts of the episcopal territory to the Livonian Order. Albert proceeded tactically in the conflict between the Papacy and Emperor Frederick II: in 1225 he reached the acknowledgement of his status as a Prince-Bishop of the Empire, though the Roman Curia insisted on the fact that the Christianized Baltic territories were solely under the suzerainty of the Holy See. By the 1234 Bull of Rieti, Pope Gregory IX stated that all lands acquired by the Teutonic Knights were no subject of any conveyancing by the Emperor.\nWithin this larger conflict, the continued dualism of the autonomous Riga prince-bishop and the Teutonic Knights led to a lengthy friction. Around 1245 the Papal legate William of Modena reached a compromise: though incorporated into the Order's State, the archdiocese and its suffragan bishoprics were acknowledged with their autonomous ecclesiastical territories by the Teutonic Knights. The bishops pursued the conferment of the princely title by the Holy Roman Emperor to stress their sovereignty. In the original Prussian lands of the Teutonic Order, Willam of Modena established the suffragan bishoprics of Culm, Pomesania, Samland and Warmia. From the late 13th century onwards, the appointed Warmia bishops were no longer members of the Teutonic Knights, a special status confirmed by the bestowal of the princely title by Emperor Charles IV in 1356.\nKingdom of Poland and Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.\nThree bishoprics were initially parts of the Kingdom of Poland and its offshoots before being subsequently incorporated into the Holy Roman Empire, namely the bishoprics of Wolin/Kamie\u0144 (Wollin/Cammin) (1140-1181), Lubusz (Lebus) (1125-1372) and Wroc\u0142aw (Breslau) (1201-1335/1348), with the latter two of them continuing, however, as suffragan to the Polish archbishopric of Gniezno for many years later (until 1424 in the case of Lebus and until 1821 in the case of Breslau). On the other hand, the Prince Bishopric of Warmia was obtained by Poland following the Second Peace of Thorn.\nEngland.\nDurham.\nThe bishops of Durham, while not sovereign, held extensive rights usually reserved to the English, and later British, monarch within the county palatine of Durham. In 1075 Walcher, the bishop of Durham, was allowed to purchase the earldom of Northumbria; this marked the beginning of the bishops' temporal powers, which expanded during the Middle Ages before being gradually curbed from the sixteenth century onwards. Except for a brief period of suppression during the English Civil War, the bishopric retained some temporal powers until it was abolished by the Durham (County Palatine) Act 1836, when its powers returned to the Crown. The last institution of the palatinate, its court of chancery, was abolished in 1974.\nFrance.\nFrom the tenth century civil wars on, many bishops took over the powers of the local count, as authorised by the king. For example, at Chalons-sur-Marne the bishop ruled the lands around the town, while the Archbishop of Rheims demarcated his territory with five fortresses of Courville, Cormicy, Betheneville, Sept-Saulx and Chaumuzy.\nA number of French bishops did hold a noble title, with a tiny territory usually about their seat; it was often a princely title, especially Count but also Prince or Baron, including actual seigneurial authority and rights. Indeed, six of the twelve original Pairies (the royal vassals awarded with the highest precedence at Court) were episcopal: the Archbishop of Reims, the Bishop of Langres, and the Bishop of Laon held a ducal title, the bishops of Beauvais, Chal\u00f4ns, and Noyon had comital status. They were later joined by the Archbishop of Paris, who was awarded a ducal title, but with precedence over the others. \nFrance also counted a number of prince-bishops formerly within the Holy Roman Empire such those of Besan\u00e7on, Cambrai, Strasbourg, Metz, Toul, Verdun, and Belley. The bishops of Arles, Embrun, and Grenoble also qualify as princes of episcopal cities. The bishop of Viviers was Count of Viviers and Prince de Donz\u00e8re. The bishop of Sisteron was also Prince de Lurs, the title of count was held by the Archbishop of Lyons, and the bishops of Gap, Saint-Paul-Trois-Ch\u00e2teaux, Vienne and Die were Seigneurs of their cities.\nNever part of the empire were Lisieux, Cahors, Chalon-sur-Sa\u00f4ne, L\u00e9on, Dol and Vabres whose bishops were also counts. Ajaccio was Count of Frasso. The bishops of Sarlat, Saint-Malo (Baron de Beignon) and of Lu\u00e7on were Barons and Tulle was Viscount of the city. The bishop of Mende was governor and count, Puy held the title Count of Velay, Quimper was Seigneur of the city and Comte de Cornouailles, Valence was Seigneur and Count of the city. Montpellier's bishop was Count of Mauguio and Montferrand, Marquis of Marquerose and Baron of Sauve, Durfort, Salevoise, and Brissac. The bishop of Saint-Claude was Seigneur of all the lands of Saint-Claude. The bishops of Digne (Seigneur and Baron), Pamiers (co-Seigneur), Albi, Lectoure, Saint-Brieuc, Saint-Papoul, Saint-Pons, and Uz\u00e8s were Seigneurs of the cities.\nPortugal.\nFrom 1472 to 1967, the bishop of Coimbra held the comital title of Count of Arganil, being thus called \"bishop-count\" (). The use of the comital title declined during the 20th century since Portugal has become a republic and nobility privileges have ceased to be officially recognized, and was ultimately discontinued.\nMontenegro.\nThe bishops of Cetinje, who took as the Prince-Bishops of Montenegro the place of the earlier secular (Grand) Voivodes in 1516, had a unique position of Slavonic, Orthodox prince-bishops of Montenegro under Ottoman suzerainty. It was eventually secularized and became ruled by hereditary princes and ultimately Kings of Montenegro in 1852, as reflected in their styles:\nContemporary.\nThe Bishop of Urgell, Catalonia, who no longer has any secular rights in Spain, remains \"ex officio\" one of two co-princes of Andorra, along with the French head of state (currently its President)\nModern informal usage.\nThe term has been used by Episcopalians in North America to describe modern bishops with commanding personalities usually of previous generations. One such individual was Bishop Horace W. B. Donegan of whom Episcopal suffragan bishop Robert E. Terwilliger said \"We often say that Bishop Donegan is the last prince bishop of the church because in his graciousness, in his presence, in his total lack of any crisis of identity, we have seen what a bishop is; and we know that it is a kind of royalty in Christ.\"\nAnglican Archbishop Robert Duncan expressed his view that the pastoral changes \"in the 1970s was a revolution in reaction to those prince bishops \u2013 they had all this authority, they had all this power.\" So systems such as the Commission on Ministry system in the Episcopal Church \"was to replace an individual's authority with a committee's authority.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51271", "revid": "36418353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51271", "title": "Louis XVI", "text": "King of France from 1774 to 1792\nLouis XVI (Louis-Auguste; ; 23 August 1754 \u2013 21 January 1793) was the last king of France before the fall of the monarchy during the French Revolution. The son of Louis, Dauphin of France (son and heir-apparent of King Louis XV), and Maria Josepha of Saxony, Louis became the new Dauphin when his father died in 1765. In 1770, he married Marie Antoinette. He became King of France and Navarre on his grandfather's death on 10 May 1774, and reigned until the abolition of the monarchy on 21 September 1792. From 1791 onwards, he used the style of king of the French.\nThe first part of Louis XVI's reign was marked by attempts to reform the French government in accordance with Enlightenment ideas. These included efforts to increase tolerance toward non-Catholics as well as abolishing the death penalty for deserters. The French nobility reacted to the proposed reforms with hostility, and successfully opposed their implementation. Louis implemented deregulation of the grain market, advocated by his economic liberal minister Turgot, but it resulted in an increase in bread prices. In periods of bad harvests, it led to food scarcity which, during a particularly bad harvest in 1775, prompted the masses to revolt. From 1776, Louis XVI actively supported the North American colonists, who were seeking their independence from Great Britain, which was realised in the Treaty of Paris (1783). The ensuing debt and financial crisis contributed to the unpopularity of the \"ancien r\u00e9gime\". \nThis led to the convening of the Estates General of 1789. Discontent among France's middle and lower classes intensified opposition to the French aristocracy and the absolute monarchy led by Louis XVI and his wife, Marie Antoinette. Tensions progressively rose, punctuated by violent riots such as the storming of the Bastille, which forced Louis to recognize the legislative authority of the National Assembly.\nLouis's indecisiveness and conservatism toward the demands of the Estates led many to despise him as the embodiment of \"ancien r\u00e9gime\" tyranny, and his popularity deteriorated progressively. His unsuccessful flight to Varennes in June 1791 seemed to confirm suspicions that the king hoped for foreign intervention to restore his power, deeply undermining his legitimacy. Four months later, the constitutional monarchy was declared, and the replacement of the monarchy and with a republic became an ever-increasing possibility. The growth of anti-clericalism among revolutionaries resulted in the abolition of the \"d\u00eeme\" (religious land tax) and several government policies aimed at the dechristianization of France.\nWith the outbreak of civil and international war, Louis XVI was arrested during the Insurrection of 10 August 1792. One month later, the monarchy was abolished and the French First Republic was proclaimed on 21 September 1792. The former king became a desacralized French citizen, addressed as \"Citoyen\" (Citizen) Louis Capet in reference to his ancestor Hugh Capet. Louis was tried by the National Convention (self-instituted as a tribunal for the occasion), found guilty of high treason, and executed by guillotine on 21 January 1793. Louis XVI's death brought an end to more than a thousand years of continuous French monarchy. Both of his sons died in childhood, before the Bourbon Restoration; his only child to reach adulthood, Marie Th\u00e9r\u00e8se, was released to her Austrian relatives in exchange for French prisoners of war, eventually dying childless in 1851.\nChildhood.\n\"Louis-Auguste de France\", who was given the title Duke of Berry at birth, was born in the Palace of Versailles on 23 August 1754. One of seven children, he was the second surviving son of Louis, the Dauphin of France and the grandson of Louis XV and of his consort, Maria Leszczy\u0144ska. His mother was Marie-Jos\u00e8phe of Saxony, the daughter of Augustus III, Prince-elector of Saxony and King of Poland and Archduchess Maria Josepha of Austria.\nLouis-Auguste was overlooked by his parents who favored his older brother, Louis, Duke of Burgundy, who was regarded as bright and handsome but died at the age of nine in 1761. Louis-Auguste, a strong and healthy boy but very shy, excelled in his studies and had a strong taste for Latin, history, geography, and astronomy and became fluent in Italian and English. His tutors in mathematics and physics had high praises for his work. Le Blonde, his mathematics instructor, wrote that the prince's studies were \"proofs of [his] intelligence and the excellence of [his] judgement,\" though flattery was to be expected when addressing a prince. Louis-Auguste's apparent mathematical skills are corroborated by his enjoyment of cartography, which would have required an understanding of scale and projections. He also enjoyed physical activities such as hunting with his grandfather and rough play with his younger brothers, Louis-Stanislas, Count of Provence, and Charles-Philipe, Count of Artois. From an early age, Louis-Auguste was encouraged in another of his interests, locksmithing, which was seen as a useful pursuit for a child.\nWhen his father died of tuberculosis on 20 December 1765, the eleven-year-old Louis-Auguste became the new Dauphin. His mother never recovered from the loss of her husband and died on 13 March 1767, also from tuberculosis. The strict and conservative education he received from Paul Fran\u00e7ois de Quelen de la Vauguyon, \"gouverneur des Enfants de France\" (governor of the Children of France), from 1760 until his marriage in 1770, did not prepare him for the throne that he was to inherit in 1774 after the death of his grandfather, Louis XV. Throughout his education, Louis-Auguste received a mixture of studies particular to religion, morality, and humanities. His instructors may have also had a good hand in shaping Louis-Auguste into the indecisive king that he became. Abb\u00e9 Berthier, his instructor, taught him that timidity was a value in strong monarchs, and Abb\u00e9 Soldini, his confessor, instructed him not to let people read his mind.\nMarriage and family life.\nOn 19 April 1770, at the age of fifteen, Louis XVI married the fourteen-year-old Archduchess Maria Antonia of Austria, his second cousin once removed and the youngest daughter of Holy Roman Emperor Francis I and Empress Maria Theresa.\nThis marriage was met with hostility from the French public. France's alliance with its traditional enemy Austria had pulled the country into the disastrous Seven Years' War, in which it was defeated by the British and the Prussians, both in Europe and in North America. By the time that Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette were married, the French people generally disliked the Austrian alliance, and Marie Antoinette was seen as an unwelcome foreigner. For the young couple, the marriage was initially amiable but distant. Louis XVI's shyness and, among other factors, the young age and inexperience of the newlyweds (who were near total strangers to each other: they had met only two days before their wedding) meant that the fifteen-year-old bridegroom failed to consummate the union with his fourteen-year-old bride. His fear of being manipulated by her for Austrian purposes caused him to behave coldly towards her in public. Correspondence between Marie Antoinette's mother and Austria's French ambassador Florimond Claude, Comte de Mercy-Argenteau express a desire for Marie Antoinette to exercise authority in the French court and to encourage Louis XVI to dedicate more attention to his role as prince. To their disappointment, however, the princess did not seem overly interested in \"serious affairs\". Over time, the couple became closer, though while their marriage was reportedly consummated in July 1773, it did not actually happen until 1777.\nThe couple's failure to produce children for several years placed a strain upon their marriage, exacerbated by the publication of obscene pamphlets (\"libelles\") mocking their infertility. One such pamphlet questioned, \"Can the King do it? Can't the King do it?\".\nThe couple's initial failure to have children aroused contemporary debate that has continued among historians. One suggestion is that Louis XVI suffered from a physical dysfunction, most often thought to be phimosis, a suggestion first made in late 1772 by the royal doctors. Adherents of this view suggest that he was circumcised (a common treatment for phimosis) to relieve the condition seven years after their marriage. Louis XVI's doctors were not in favour of the surgery \u2013 the operation was delicate and traumatic, and capable of doing \"as much harm as good\" to an adult man. The argument for phimosis and a resulting operation is mostly seen to originate from Stefan Zweig's 1932 biography of Marie Antoinette.\nMost modern historians doubt that Louis XVI had surgery. As 1777, the Prussian envoy, Baron Goltz, reported that Louis XVI had definitely declined the operation. Louis XVI was frequently declared to be perfectly capable of sexual intercourse, as confirmed by Marie Antoinette's brother Joseph II; and during the time he was supposed to have had the operation, his journal records him hunting almost every day, which would not have been possible for weeks after circumcision. The couple's sexual problems are now attributed to other factors. Antonia Fraser's biography of Marie Antoinette discusses Joseph II's letter on the matter to one of his brothers after he visited Versailles in 1777. Joseph describes in frank detail Louis XVI's sexual inadequacy and Marie Antoinette's lack of interest. Joseph described the couple as \"complete fumblers\"; however, with Joseph's advice, Louis XVI began to apply himself more effectively, and in the third week of March 1778 Marie Antoinette became pregnant.\nEventually, the royal couple had four children. According to Jeanne-Louise-Henriette Campan, Marie Antoinette's lady-in-waiting, the queen also suffered two miscarriages. The first, in 1779, a few months after the birth of her first child, is mentioned by Empress Maria Theresa in a July letter to her daughter. Madame Campan states that Louis XVI spent an entire morning consoling his wife at her bedside, and swore everyone to secrecy. Marie Antoinette suffered a second miscarriage on the night of 2\u20133 November 1783.\nTheir live-born children were:\nIn addition to his biological children, Louis XVI also adopted six children: \"Armand\" Francois-Michel Gagn\u00e9 (c.\u20091771\u20131792), a poor orphan adopted in 1776; Jean Amilcar (c.\u20091781\u20131796), a Senegalese slave boy given to the queen by Stanislas de Boufflers in 1787, freed, baptized, adopted and placed in a pension; Ernestine Lambriquet (1778\u20131813), daughter of two servants at the palace, who was raised as the playmate of his daughter and whom he adopted after the death of her mother in 1788; and finally \"Zoe\" Jeanne Louise Victoire (born in 1787), who was adopted in 1790 along with her two older sisters after the death of her parents, an usher and his wife in service of the king.\nOf these adoptees, only Armand, Ernestine and Zoe actually lived with the royal family: Jean Amilcar, along with the elder siblings of Zoe and Armand who were also formally foster children of the royal couple, lived at the queen's expense until her imprisonment, which proved fatal for at least Amilcar, who was evicted from his boarding school, and reportedly starved to death on the street. Armand and Zoe had a position which was more similar to that of Ernestine: Armand lived at court with the king and queen until the outbreak of the revolution, when he left them because of his republican sympathies, and Zoe was chosen to be the playmate of the Dauphin, just as Ernestine had once been selected as the playmate of Marie Th\u00e9r\u00e8se, and sent away to her sisters in a convent boarding school before the Flight to Varennes in 1791.\nAbsolute monarch of France (1774\u20131789).\nWhen Louis XVI ascended to the throne in 1774, he was nineteen years old. He had an enormous responsibility, as the government was deeply in debt, and resentment of despotic monarchy was on the rise. His predecessor, his grandfather Louis XV, had been widely hated by the time of his death. The public remembered him as an irresponsible man who spent his time womanizing rather than managing his kingdom. Furthermore, the monarchy had poured money into a series of unsuccessful foreign military campaigns, leaving France in financial difficulty. The young Louis XVI felt woefully unqualified to resolve the situation.\nAs king, Louis XVI focused primarily on religious freedom and foreign policy. Although raised as the Dauphin since 1765, he lacked firmness and decisiveness. His desire to be loved by his people is evident in the prefaces of many of his edicts that would often explain the nature and good intention of his actions as benefiting the people, such as reinstating the . When questioned about his decision, he said, \"It may be considered politically unwise, but it seems to me to be the general wish and I want to be loved.\" In spite of his indecisiveness, Louis XVI was determined to be a good king, stating that he \"must always consult public opinion; it is never wrong.\" He, therefore, appointed an experienced advisor, Jean-Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Ph\u00e9lypeaux, Count of Maurepas who, until his death in 1781, would take charge of many important ministerial functions.\nAmong the major events of Louis XVI's reign was his signing of the Edict of Versailles, also known as the Edict of Tolerance, on 7 November 1787, which was registered in the Parlement of Paris on 29 January 1788. Granting non-Roman Catholics \u2013 Huguenots and Lutherans, as well as Jews \u2013 civil and legal status in France and the legal right to practice their faiths, this edict effectively nullified the Edict of Fontainebleau that had been law for 102 years. The Edict of Versailles did not legally proclaim freedom of religion in France \u2013 this took two more years, with the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789 \u2013 however, it was an important step in eliminating religious tensions and it officially ended religious persecution within his realm.\nEconomic policies.\nRadical financial reforms by Anne Robert Jacques Turgot and Guillaume-Chr\u00e9tien de Lamoignon de Malesherbes angered the nobles and were blocked by the \"parlements\" who insisted that the King did not have the legal right to levy new taxes. So, in 1776, Turgot was dismissed and Malesherbes resigned, to be replaced by Jacques Necker. Necker supported the American Revolution, and he carried out a policy of taking out large international loans instead of raising taxes. He attempted to gain public favor in 1781 by publishing the first ever accounting of the French Crown's expenses and accounts, the \"Compte-rendu au Roi\". This misleading publication led the people of France to believe the kingdom ran a modest surplus. When this policy of hiding and ignoring the kingdom's financial woes failed miserably, Louis dismissed and replaced him in 1783 with Charles Alexandre de Calonne, who increased public spending to \"buy\" the country's way out of debt. Again this failed, so Louis convoked the Assembly of Notables in 1787 to discuss a revolutionary new fiscal reform proposed by Calonne. When the nobles were informed of the true extent of the debt, they were shocked and rejected the plan.\nAfter this, Louis XVI and his new Controller-General of Finances, \u00c9tienne-Charles de Lom\u00e9nie de Brienne, tried to simply force the Parlement of Paris to register the new laws and fiscal reforms. Upon the refusal of the members of the \"Parlement\", Louis XVI tried to use his absolute power to subjugate them by every means: enforcing in many occasions the registration of his reforms via \"Lit de justice\" (6 August 1787, 19 November 1787, and 8 May 1788), exiling all \"Parlement\" magistrates to Troyes as a punishment on 15 August 1787, prohibiting six members from attending parliamentary sessions on 19 November, arresting two very important members of the \"Parlement\", who opposed his reforms, on 6 May 1788, and even dissolving and depriving of all power the \"Parlement\", replacing it with a plenary court, on 8 May 1788. The failure of these measures and displays of royal power is attributable to three decisive factors. First, the majority of the population stood in favor of the \"Parlement\" against the King, and thus continuously rebelled against him. Second, the royal treasury was financially destitute to a crippling degree, leaving it incapable of sustaining its own imposed reforms. Third, although the King enjoyed as much absolute power as his predecessors, he lacked the personal authority crucial for absolutism to function properly. Now unpopular with both the commoners and the aristocracy, Louis XVI was therefore only very briefly able to impose his decisions and reforms, for periods ranging from 2 to 4 months, before having to revoke them.\nAs authority dissipated from him and reforms were clearly becoming unavoidable, there were increasingly loud calls for him to convoke the Estates General, which had not met since 1614 (at the beginning of the reign of Louis XIII). As a last-ditch attempt to get new monetary reforms approved, Louis XVI convoked the Estates General on 8 August 1788, setting the date of their opening on 1 May 1789. With the convocation of the Estates General, as in many other instances during his reign, Louis XVI placed his reputation and public image in the hands of those who were perhaps not as sensitive to the desires of the French population as he was. Because it had been so long since the Estates General had been convened, there was some debate as to which procedures should be followed. Ultimately, the Parlement of Paris agreed that \"all traditional observances should be carefully maintained to avoid the impression that the Estates General could make things up as it went along.\" Under this decision, the King agreed to retain many of the traditions which had been the norm in 1614 and prior convocations of the Estates General, but which were intolerable to a Third Estate (the bourgeoisie) buoyed by recent proclamations of equality. For example, the First and Second Estates (the clergy and nobility respectively) proceeded into the assembly wearing their finest garments, while the Third Estate was required to wear plain, oppressively somber black, an act of alienation that Louis XVI would likely have not condoned. He seemed to regard the deputies of the Estates General with respect: in a wave of self-important patriotism, members of the Estates refused to remove their hats in the King's presence, so Louis removed his to them.\nThis convocation was one of the events that transformed the general economic and political \"malaise\" of the country into the French Revolution. In June 1789, the Third Estate unilaterally declared itself the National Assembly. Louis XVI's attempts to control it resulted in the Tennis Court Oath (\"serment du jeu de paume\"), on 20 June, the declaration of the National Constituent Assembly on 9 July, and eventually to the storming of the Bastille on 14 July, which started the French Revolution. Within three short months, the majority of the King's executive authority had been transferred to the elected representatives of the Nation.\nRoyal spending.\nThe Menus-Plaisirs du Roi was under the direction of Papillon de la Fert\u00e9 and he gave details in his journal about the costs of the performances over the years 1756\u20131780 in three different palaces. The wedding in 1771 was especially costly. The performance of Castor et Pollux in 1779 when he was visited by his brother-in-law, Joseph II, involved more than 500 people.\nRoyal household spending in 1788 was 13% of total state expenses (excluding interest on debts).\nForeign policy.\nFrench involvement in the Seven Years' War had left Louis XVI a disastrous inheritance. Britain's victories had seen them capture most of France's colonial territories. While some were returned to France at the Treaty of Paris (1763), almost all of New France was ceded to the British, or to France's Spanish allies to compensate them for losses to the British.\nThis had led to a strategy amongst the French leadership of seeking to rebuild the French military in order to fight a war of revenge against Britain, in which it was hoped the lost colonies could be recovered. France still maintained a strong influence in the West Indies, and in India maintained five trading posts, leaving opportunities for disputes and power-play with Great Britain.\nConcerning the American Revolution and Europe.\nIn the spring of 1776, Charles Gravier, comte de Vergennes, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, saw an opportunity to humiliate France's long-standing enemy, Great Britain, and to recover territory lost during the Seven Years' War, by supporting the American Revolution. In the same year Louis was persuaded by Pierre Beaumarchais to send supplies, ammunition, and guns to the rebels secretly. Early in 1778 he signed a formal Treaty of Alliance, and later that year France went to war with Britain. In deciding in favor of war, despite France's large financial problems, the King was materially influenced by alarmist reports after the Battle of Saratoga, which suggested that Britain was preparing to make huge concessions to the Thirteen Colonies and then, allied with them, to strike at French and Spanish possessions in the West Indies. Spain and the Netherlands soon joined the French in an anti-British coalition. After 1778, Great Britain switched its focus to the West Indies, as defending the sugar islands was considered more important than trying to recover the Thirteen Colonies. France and Spain planned to invade the British Isles themselves with the Armada of 1779, but the operation never went ahead.\nFrance's initial military assistance to the American rebels was a disappointment, with defeats at Rhode Island and Savannah. In 1780, France sent Jean-Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, comte de Rochambeau and Fran\u00e7ois Joseph Paul de Grasse to help the Americans, along with large land and naval forces. The French expeditionary force arrived in North America in July 1780. The appearance of French fleets in the Caribbean was followed by the capture of a number of the sugar islands, including Tobago and Grenada. In October 1781, the French naval blockade was instrumental in forcing a British army under Cornwallis to surrender at the Siege of Yorktown. When news of this reached London in March 1782, the North ministry fell and Great Britain immediately sued for peace terms; however, France delayed the end of the war until September 1783 in the hope of overrunning more British colonies in India and the West Indies.Great Britain recognized the independence of the Thirteen Colonies as the United States of America, and the French war ministry rebuilt its army. However, the British defeated the main French fleet in 1782 at the Battle of the Saintes and successfully defended Jamaica and Gibraltar. France gained little from the Treaty of Paris (1783) that ended the war, except the colonies of Tobago and Senegal. Louis XVI was wholly disappointed in his aims of recovering Canada, India, and other islands in the West Indies from Britain, as they were too well defended and the Royal Navy made any attempted invasion of mainland Britain impossible. The war cost 1,066\u00a0million livres, financed by new loans at high interest (with no new taxes). Necker concealed the crisis from the public by explaining only that ordinary revenues exceeded ordinary expenses, and not mentioning the loans. After he was forced from office in 1781, new taxes were levied.\nThis intervention in America was not possible without France adopting a neutral position in European affairs to avoid being drawn into a continental war which would be simply a repetition of the French policy mistakes in the Seven Years' War. Vergennes, supported by King Louis, refused to go to war to support Austria in the War of the Bavarian Succession in 1778, when the Queen's brother Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor tried to partition Bavaria over a disputed inheritance. Vergennes and Maurepas refused to support the Austrian position, but the intervention of Marie Antoinette in favor of Austria obliged France to adopt a position more favorable to Austria, which in the Treaty of Teschen was able to get in compensation the Innviertel, a territory whose population numbered around 100,000 persons. However, this intervention was a disaster for the image of the Queen, who was named \"l'Autrichienne\" (a pun in French meaning \"Austrian\", but the \"chienne\" suffix can mean \"bitch\") on account of it.\nConcerning Asia.\nLouis XVI hoped to use the American Revolutionary War as an opportunity to expel the British from India. In 1782, he sealed an alliance with the Peshwa Madhavrao II. As a consequence, the Marquis de Bussy-Castelnau moved his troops to the Isle de France (now Mauritius) and later contributed to the French effort in India in 1783. Pierre Andr\u00e9 de Suffren became the ally of Hyder Ali in the Second Anglo-Mysore War against the British East India Company from 1782 to 1783, engaging the Royal Navy along the coasts of India and Ceylon.\nFrance also intervened in Cochinchina following Pierre Pigneau de Behaine's intervention to obtain military aid. A France-Cochinchina alliance was signed through the Treaty of Versailles of 1787, between Louis XVI and Prince Nguy\u1ec5n \u00c1nh.\nLouis XVI also encouraged major voyages of exploration. In 1785, he appointed Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Galaup, comte de Lap\u00e9rouse to lead a sailing expedition around the world (La P\u00e9rouse and his fleet disappeared after leaving Botany Bay in March 1788. Louis is recorded as having asked, on the morning of his execution, \"Any news of La P\u00e9rouse?\".).\nRevolutionary constitutional reign (1789\u20131792).\nThere is a lack of scholarship on the subject of Louis XVI's time as a constitutional monarch, though it was a significant length of time. The reason as to why many biographers have not elaborated extensively on this time in the king's life is due to the uncertainty surrounding his actions during this period, as Louis XVI's declaration that was left behind in the Tuileries stated that he regarded his actions during his constitutional reign as provisional; he reflected that his \"palace was a prison\". This time period was exemplary in its demonstration of an institution's deliberation while in their last standing moments.\nLouis XVI's time in his previous palace came to an end on 5 October 1789, when an angry mob of Parisian working men and women was incited by revolutionaries and marched on the Palace of Versailles, where the royal family lived. At dawn, they infiltrated the palace and attempted to kill the queen, who was associated with a frivolous lifestyle that symbolized much that was despised about the \"ancien r\u00e9gime\". After the situation had been defused by La Fayette, head of the National Guard, the king and his family were brought by the crowd to the Tuileries Palace in Paris, the reasoning being that the King would be more accountable to the people if he lived among them in Paris.\nThe Revolution's principles of popular sovereignty, though central to democratic principles of later eras, marked a decisive break from the centuries-old principle of divine right that was at the heart of the French monarchy. As a result, the Revolution was opposed by many of the rural people of France and by all the governments of France's neighbors. Still, within the city of Paris and amongst the philosophers of the time, many of which were members of the National Assembly, the monarchy had next to no support. As the Revolution became more radical and the masses more uncontrollable, several of the Revolution's leading figures began to doubt its benefits. Some, like Honor\u00e9 Mirabeau, secretly plotted with the Crown to restore its power in a new constitutional form.\nBeginning in 1791, Armand Marc, comte de Montmorin, Minister of Foreign Affairs, started to organize covert resistance to the revolutionary forces. Thus, the funds of the \"Liste Civile\", voted annually by the National Assembly, were partially assigned to secret expenses in order to preserve the monarchy. Arnault Laporte, who was in charge of the civil list, collaborated with both Montmorin and Mirabeau. After the sudden death of Mirabeau, Maximilien Radix de Sainte-Foix, a noted financier, took his place. In effect, he headed a secret council of advisers to Louis XVI, which tried to preserve the monarchy; these schemes proved unsuccessful, and were exposed later when the armoire de fer was discovered. Regarding the financial difficulties facing France, the Assembly created the Comit\u00e9 des Finances, and while Louis XVI attempted to declare his concern and interest in remedying the economic situations, inclusively offering to melt crown silver as a dramatic measure, it appeared to the public that the King did not understand that such statements no longer held the same meaning as they did before and that doing such a thing could not restore the economy of a country.\nMirabeau's death on 7 April, and Louis XVI's indecision, fatally weakened negotiations between the Crown and moderate politicians. The Third Estate leaders also had no desire in turning back or remaining moderate after their hard efforts to change the politics of the time, and so the plans for a constitutional monarchy did not last long. On one hand, Louis was nowhere near as reactionary as his brothers, the Count of Provence and the Count of Artois, and he repeatedly sent messages to them requesting a halt to their attempts to launch counter-coups. This was often done through his secretly nominated regent, Cardinal \u00c9tienne Charles de Lom\u00e9nie de Brienne. On the other hand, Louis was alienated from the new democratic government both by its negative reaction to the traditional role of the monarch and in its treatment of him and his family. He was particularly irked by being kept essentially as a prisoner in the Tuileries, and by the refusal of the new regime to allow him to have confessors and priests of his choice rather than 'constitutional priests' pledged to the state and not the Roman Catholic Church.\nFlight to Varennes (1791).\nOn 21 June 1791, Louis XVI attempted to flee secretly with his family from Paris to the royalist fortress town of Montm\u00e9dy on the northeastern border of France, where he would join the \"\u00e9migr\u00e9s\" and be protected by Austria. The voyage was planned by the Swedish nobleman, and often assumed secret lover of Queen Marie Antoinette, Axel von Fersen.\nWhile the National Assembly worked painstakingly towards a constitution, Louis and Marie-Antoinette were involved in plans of their own. Louis had appointed Louis Auguste Le Tonnelier de Breteuil to act as plenipotentiary, dealing with other foreign heads of state in an attempt to bring about a counter-revolution. Louis himself held reservations against depending on foreign assistance. Like his mother and father, he thought that the Austrians were treacherous and the Prussians were overly ambitious. As tensions in Paris rose and he was pressured to accept measures from the Assembly against his will, Louis XVI and the Queen plotted to secretly escape from Paris. Beyond escape, they hoped to raise an \"armed congress\" with the help of the \"\u00e9migr\u00e9s\", as well as assistance from other nations with which they could return and, in essence, recapture France. This degree of planning reveals Louis's political determination, but it was for this determined plot that he was eventually convicted of high treason. He left behind (on his bed) a 16-page written manifesto, \"D\u00e9claration du roi, adress\u00e9e \u00e0 tous les Fran\u00e7ois, \u00e0 sa sortie de Paris\" (rediscovered in the US in 2009), traditionally known as the \"Testament politique de Louis XVI\" (\"Political Testament of Louis XVI\"), commenting on his feelings about the Revolution, criticizing some of its consequences, without rejecting its major reforms, such as the abolition of the orders and civil equality.\nThe National Assembly was quick to decide to publish the theory that the King had been kidnapped, thus avoiding any challenge to the Constitution, which was then nearing completion, while at the same time ordering that the carriage be placed under arrest. It was a deliberately deceptive choice, since Louis XVI had left a manifesto in plain view, assuming and justifying the escape. La Fayette decided to censor the text. Letters were sent throughout the country to stop the royal carriage.\nLouis's indecision, many delays, and misunderstanding of France were responsible for the failure of the escape. Within 24 hours, the royal family was arrested at Varennes-en-Argonne shortly after Jean-Baptiste Drouet, who recognised the king from his profile on a 50 livres \"assignat\" (paper money), had given the alert. Louis XVI and his family were taken back to Paris where they arrived on 25 June. Viewed suspiciously as traitors, they were placed under tight house arrest upon their return to the Tuileries.\nAt the individual level, the failure of the escape plans was due to a series of misadventures, delays, misinterpretations, and poor judgments. In a wider perspective, the failure was attributable to the king's indecision\u2014he repeatedly postponed the schedule, allowing for smaller problems to become severe. Furthermore, he totally misunderstood the political situation. He thought only a small number of radicals in Paris were promoting a revolution that the people as a whole rejected. He thought, mistakenly, that he was beloved by his subjects. The King's flight in the short term was traumatic for France, inciting a wave of emotions that ranged from anxiety to violence to panic. The realization that the King had repudiated the Revolution was a shock for people who until then had seen him as a good king who governed as a manifestation of God's will. Many suspected the King of collaborating with the Austrians, due to Marie Antoinette's family ties and the fact that the monarchs had clearly been heading for the Austrian border. War now seemed imminent, and the King seemed to have been politically involved with France's traditional enemies, who were still widely hated despite recent cooperation. Many citizens felt betrayed, and as a result, Republicanism now burst out of the coffee houses and became a dominating philosophy of the rapidly radicalized French Revolution.\nIntervention by foreign powers.\nThe other monarchies of Europe looked with concern upon the developments in France, and considered whether they should intervene, either in support of Louis or to take advantage of the chaos in France. The key figure was Marie Antoinette's brother, Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor. Initially, he had looked on the Revolution with equanimity. However, he became more and more disturbed as it became more and more radical. Despite this, he still hoped to avoid war.\nOn 27 August, Leopold and Frederick William II of Prussia, in consultation with \"\u00e9migr\u00e9s\" French nobles, issued the Declaration of Pillnitz, which declared the interest of the monarchs of Europe in the well-being of Louis and his family, and threatened vague but severe consequences if anything should befall them. Although Leopold saw the Pillnitz Declaration as an easy way to appear concerned about the developments in France without committing any soldiers or finances to change them, the revolutionary leaders in Paris viewed it fearfully as a dangerous foreign attempt to undermine France's sovereignty.\nIn addition to the ideological differences between France and the monarchical powers of Europe, there were continuing disputes over the status of Austrian estates in Alsace, and the concern of members of the National Constituent Assembly about the agitation of \"\u00e9migr\u00e9s\" nobles abroad, especially in the Austrian Netherlands and the minor states of the Holy Roman Empire.\nIn the end, the Legislative Assembly, supported by Louis XVI, declared war on Austria (\"the King of Bohemia and Hungary\") first, voting for war on 20 April 1792, after a long list of grievances was presented to it by the foreign minister, Charles Fran\u00e7ois Dumouriez. Dumouriez prepared an immediate invasion of the Austrian Netherlands, where he expected the local population to rise against Austrian rule. However, the Revolution had thoroughly disorganised the army, and the forces raised were insufficient for the invasion. The soldiers fled at the first sign of battle and, in one case, on 28 April 1792, murdered their general, Irish-born Th\u00e9obald Dillon, whom they accused of treason.\nWhile the revolutionary government frantically raised fresh troops and reorganised its armies, a Prussian-Austrian army under Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick assembled at Koblenz on the Rhine. In July, the invasion began, with Brunswick's army easily taking the fortresses of Longwy and Verdun. The duke then issued on 25 July a proclamation called the Brunswick Manifesto, written by Louis's \u00e9migr\u00e9 cousin, Louis Joseph, Prince of Cond\u00e9, declaring the intent of the Austrians and Prussians to restore the King to his full powers and to treat any person or town who opposed them as rebels to be condemned to death by martial law.\nContrary to its intended purpose of strengthening Louis XVI's position against the revolutionaries, the Brunswick Manifesto greatly undermined his already highly tenuous position. It was taken by many to be the final proof of collusion between the King and foreign powers in a conspiracy against his own country. The anger of the populace boiled over on 10 August when an armed mob \u2013 with the backing of a new municipal government of Paris that came to be known as the \"Insurrectional\" Paris Commune \u2013 marched upon and invaded the Tuileries Palace. The royal family took shelter with the Legislative Assembly.\nImprisonment, execution and burial (1792\u20131793).\nLouis was officially arrested on 13 August 1792 and sent to the Temple, an ancient fortress in Paris that was used as a prison. On 21 September, the National Assembly declared France to be a republic, and abolished the monarchy. Louis was stripped of all of his titles and honors, and from this date was known as \"Citoyen Louis Capet.\"\nThe Girondins were partial to keeping the deposed king under arrest, both as a hostage and a guarantee for the future. Members of the Commune and the most radical deputies, who would soon form the group known as the Mountain, argued for Louis's immediate execution. The legal background of many of the deputies made it difficult for a great number of them to accept an execution without the due process of law, and it was voted that the deposed monarch be tried before the National Convention, the organ that housed the representatives of the sovereign people. In many ways, the former king's trial represented the trial of the monarchy by the Revolution. It was seen as if with the death of one came the life of the other. The historian Jules Michelet later argued that the death of the former king led to the acceptance of violence as a tool for happiness. He said, \"If we accept the proposition that one person can be sacrificed for the happiness of the many, it will soon be demonstrated that two or three or more could also be sacrificed for the happiness of the many. Little by little, we will find reasons for sacrificing the many for the happiness of the many, and we will think it was a bargain.\"\nTwo events led up to the trial for Louis XVI. First, after the Battle of Valmy on 22 September 1792, General Dumouriez negotiated with the Prussians who evacuated France. Louis could no longer be considered a hostage or as leverage in negotiations with the invading forces. Second, in November 1792, the \"armoire de fer\" (iron chest) incident took place at the Tuileries Palace, when the existence of the hidden safe in the king's bedroom containing compromising documents and correspondence, was revealed by Fran\u00e7ois Gamain, the Versailles locksmith who had installed it. Gamain went to Paris on 20 November and told Jean-Marie Roland, Girondin Minister of the Interior, who ordered it opened. The resulting scandal served to discredit the King. Following these two events the Girondins could no longer keep the King from trial.\nOn 11 December, among crowded and silent streets, the deposed king was brought from the Temple to stand before the National Convention and hear his indictment, an accusation of high treason and crimes against the State. On 26 December, his counsel, Raymond Des\u00e8ze, delivered Louis's response to the charges, with the assistance of Fran\u00e7ois Tronchet and Guillaume-Chr\u00e9tien de Lamoignon de Malesherbes. Before the trial started and Louis mounted his defense to the convention, he told his lawyers that he knew he would be found guilty and be killed, but to prepare and act as though they could win. He was resigned to and accepted his fate before the verdict was determined, but he was willing to fight to be remembered as a good king for his people.\nThe convention would be voting on three questions: first, is Louis guilty; second, whatever the decision, should there be an appeal to the people; and third, if found guilty, what punishment should Louis suffer? The order of the voting on each question was a compromise within the Jacobin movement between the Girondins and the Mountain; neither were satisfied but both accepted.\nOn 15 January 1793, the convention, composed of 721 deputies, voted on the verdict. Given the overwhelming evidence of Louis's collusion with the invaders, the verdict was a foregone conclusion \u2013 with 693 deputies voting guilty, none for acquittal, with 23 abstaining. The next day, a roll-call vote was carried out to decide upon the fate of the former king, and the result was uncomfortably close for such a dramatic decision. 288 of the deputies voted against death and for some other alternative, mainly some means of imprisonment or exile. 72 of the deputies voted for the death penalty, but subject to several delaying conditions and reservations. The voting took a total of 36 hours. 361 of the deputies voted for Louis's immediate execution. Louis was condemned to death by a majority of one vote. Philippe \u00c9galit\u00e9, formerly the Duke of Orl\u00e9ans and Louis's cousin, voted for Louis's execution, a cause of much future bitterness among French monarchists; he would himself be guillotined on the same scaffold, \"Place de la R\u00e9volution\", before the end of the same year, on 6 November 1793.\nThe next day, a motion to grant Louis XVI reprieve from the death sentence was voted down: 310 of the deputies requested mercy, but 380 voted for the immediate execution of the death penalty. This decision would be final. Malesherbes wanted to break the news to Louis and bitterly lamented the verdict, but Louis told him he would see him again in a happier life and he would regret leaving a friend like Malesherbes behind. The last thing Louis said to him was that he needed to control his tears because all eyes would be upon him.\nOn 21 January 1793, Louis XVI, at age 38, was beheaded by guillotine on the \"Place de la R\u00e9volution\". As Louis XVI mounted the scaffold, he appeared dignified and resigned. He delivered a short speech in which he pardoned \"...those who are the cause of my death... \". He then declared himself innocent of the crimes of which he was accused, praying that his blood would not fall back on France. Many accounts suggest Louis XVI's desire to say more, but Antoine Joseph Santerre, a general in the National Guard, halted the speech by ordering a drum roll. The former king was then quickly beheaded. Some accounts of Louis's beheading indicate that the blade did not sever his neck entirely the first time. There are also accounts of a blood-curdling scream issuing from Louis after the blade fell but this is unlikely, since the blade severed Louis's spine. The executioner, Charles-Henri Sanson, testified that the former king had bravely met his fate.\nImmediately after his execution, Louis XVI's corpse was transported in a cart to the nearby Madeleine cemetery, located \"rue d'Anjou\", where those guillotined at the \"Place de la R\u00e9volution\" were buried in mass graves. Before his burial, a short religious service was held in the Madeleine church (destroyed in 1799) by two priests who had sworn allegiance to the Civil Constitution of the Clergy. Afterward, Louis XVI, his severed head placed between his feet, was buried in an unmarked grave, with quicklime spread over his body. The Madeleine cemetery was closed in 1794. In 1815, Louis XVIII had the remains of his brother Louis XVI and of his sister-in-law Marie Antoinette transferred and buried in the Basilica of St Denis, the Royal necropolis of the Kings and Queens of France. Between 1816 and 1826, a commemorative monument, the \"Chapelle expiatoire\", was erected at the location of the former cemetery and church.\nAs Louis's blood dripped onto the ground, several onlookers ran forward to dip their handkerchiefs in it. This account was proven true in 2012 after a DNA comparison linked blood thought to be from Louis XVI's beheading to DNA taken from tissue samples originating from what was long thought to be the mummified head of his ancestor, Henry IV of France. The blood sample was taken from a squash gourd carved to commemorate the heroes of the French Revolution that had, according to legend, been used to house one of the handkerchiefs dipped in Louis's blood.\nLegacy.\nReputation.\nThe 19th-century historian Jules Michelet attributed the restoration of the French monarchy to the sympathy that had been engendered by the execution of Louis XVI. Michelet's \"Histoire de la R\u00e9volution Fran\u00e7aise\" and Alphonse de Lamartine's \"Histoire des Girondins\", in particular, showed the marks of the feelings aroused by the revolution's regicide. The two writers did not share the same sociopolitical vision, but they agreed that, even though the monarchy was rightly ended in 1792, the lives of the royal family should have been spared. Lack of compassion at that moment contributed to a radicalization of revolutionary violence and to greater divisiveness among Frenchmen. For the 20th century novelist Albert Camus the execution signaled the end of the role of God in history, for which he mourned. For the 20th century philosopher Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Lyotard the regicide was the starting point of all French thought, the memory of which acts as a reminder that French modernity began under the sign of a crime.\nLouis's daughter, Marie-Th\u00e9r\u00e8se-Charlotte, the future Duchess of Angoul\u00eame, survived the French Revolution, and she lobbied in Rome energetically for the canonization of her father as a saint of the Catholic Church. Despite his signing of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, Louis had been described as a martyr by Pope Pius VI in 1793. In 1820, however, a memorandum of the Sacred Congregation of Rites in Rome, declaring the impossibility of proving that Louis had been executed for religious rather than political reasons, put an end to hopes of canonization.\nOther commemorations of Louis XVI include:\nIn film and television.\nKing Louis XVI has been portrayed in numerous films. In \"Captain of the Guard\" (1930), he is played by Stuart Holmes. In \"Marie Antoinette\" (1938), he was played by Robert Morley. Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Balmer portrayed him in the 1989 two-part miniseries \"La R\u00e9volution fran\u00e7aise\". More recently, he was depicted in the 2006 film \"Marie Antoinette\" by Jason Schwartzman. In Sacha Guitry's \"Si Versailles m'\u00e9tait cont\u00e9\", Louis was portrayed by one of the film's producers, Gilbert Bokanowski, using the alias Gilbert Boka. Several portrayals have upheld the image of a bumbling, almost foolish king, such as that by Jacques Morel in the 1956 French film \"Marie-Antoinette reine de France\" and that by Terence Budd in the \"Lady Oscar\" live action film. In the 1989 series La R\u00e9volution fran\u00e7aise, Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Balmer played Louis as an intelligent, but ultimately ineffective ruler overwhelmed by events. In \"Start the Revolution Without Me\", Louis XVI is portrayed by Hugh Griffith as a laughable cuckold. Mel Brooks played a comic version of Louis XVI in \"The History of the World Part 1\", portraying him as a libertine who has such distaste for the peasantry he uses them as targets in skeet shooting. In the 1996 film \"Ridicule\", Urbain Cancelier plays Louis.\nIn the 2024 6 part Apple TV+ series Franklin Tom Pezier performs the role. In the ongoing PBS series Marie Antoinette (2022-) Louis XVI is portrayed by Louis Cunningham.\nIn literature.\nLouis XVI has been the subject of novels as well, including two of the alternate histories anthologized in \"If It Had Happened Otherwise\" (1931): \"If Drouet's Cart Had Stuck\" by Hilaire Belloc and \"If Louis XVI Had Had an Atom of Firmness\" by Andr\u00e9 Maurois, which tell very different stories but both imagine Louis surviving and still reigning in the early 19th century. Louis appears in the children's book \"Ben and Me\" by Robert Lawson but does not appear in the 1953 animated short film based on the same book.\nAncestry.\nMaarten Larmuseau et al. (2013) tested the Y-DNA of three living members of the House of Bourbon, one descending from Louis XIII of France via King Louis Philippe I, and two from Louis XIV via Philip V of Spain, and concluded that all three men share the same STR haplotype and belonged to haplogroup R1b (R-M343). The three individuals were further assigned to sub-haplogroup R1b1b2a1a1b* (R-Z381*). These results contradicted an earlier DNA analysis of a handkerchief dipped in the presumptive blood of Louis XVI after his execution performed by Laluez-Fo et al. (2010).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51272", "revid": "18779361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51272", "title": "Guillotine", "text": "Apparatus designed for carrying out executions by beheading\nA guillotine ( ) is an apparatus designed for effectively carrying out executions by beheading. The device consists of a tall, upright frame with a weighted and angled blade suspended at the top. The condemned person is secured with a pillory at the bottom of the frame, holding the position of the neck directly below the blade. The blade is then released, swiftly and forcefully decapitating the victim with a single, clean pass; the head falls into a basket or other receptacle below.\nThe guillotine is best known for its use in France, particularly during the French Revolution (1789-1799), where the revolution's supporters celebrated it as the people's avenger and the revolution's opponents vilified it as the pre-eminent symbol of the violence of the Reign of Terror. While the name \"guillotine\" dates from this period, similar devices had been in use elsewhere in Europe over several centuries. Use of an oblique blade and the pillory-like restraint device set this type of guillotine apart from others. Display of severed heads had long been one of the most common ways European sovereigns exhibited their power to their subjects.\nThe design of the guillotine was intended to make capital punishment more reliable and less painful in accordance with new Enlightenment ideas of human rights. Prior to use of the guillotine, France had inflicted manual beheading and a variety of methods of execution, many of which were more gruesome and required a high level of precision and skill to carry out successfully.\nAfter its adoption, the device remained France's standard method of judicial execution until the abolition of capital punishment in 1981. The last person to be executed by a government via guillotine was Hamida Djandoubi, a Tunisian murderer, on 10 September 1977 in France.\nHistory.\nPrecursors.\nThe use of beheading machines in Europe long predates such use during the French Revolution in 1792. An early example of the principle is found in the Old French \"High History of the Holy Grail\", dated to about 1210. Although the device is imaginary, its function is clear. The text says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Halifax Gibbet in 16th century England was a wooden structure consisting of two wooden uprights, capped by a horizontal beam, of a total height of . The blade was an axe head weighing 3.5\u00a0kg (7.7\u00a0lb), attached to the bottom of a massive wooden block that slid up and down in grooves in the uprights. This device was mounted on a large square platform high. It is not known when the Halifax Gibbet was first used; the first recorded execution in Halifax dates from 1280, but that execution may have been by sword, axe, or gibbet. The machine remained in use until Oliver Cromwell forbade capital punishment for petty theft.\nA Hans Weiditz (1495\u20131537) woodcut illustration from the 1532 edition of Petrarch's \"De remediis utriusque fortunae\", or \"Remedies for Both Good and Bad Fortune\" shows a device similar to the Halifax Gibbet in the background being used for an execution.\n\"Holinshed's Chronicles\" of 1577 included a picture of \"The execution of Murcod Ballagh near Merton in Ireland in 1307\" showing a similar execution machine, suggesting its early use in Ireland.\nThe Maiden was constructed in 1564 for the Provost and Magistrates of Edinburgh, Scotland and was in use from April 1565 to 1710. One of those executed was James Douglas, 4th Earl of Morton, in 1581, and a 1644 publication began circulating the legend that Morton himself commissioned the Maiden after he had seen the Halifax Gibbet. The Maiden was readily dismantled for storage and transport, and it is now on display in the National Museum of Scotland.\nFrance.\nEtymology.\nFor a period of time after its invention, the guillotine was called a \"louisette\", named after its inventor Antoine Louis. However, it was later named after French physician and Freemason Joseph-Ignace Guillotin, who proposed on 10 October 1789 the use of a special device to carry out executions in France in a more humane manner. A death penalty opponent, he was displeased with the breaking wheel and other common, more grisly methods of execution and sought to persuade King Louis XVI to implement a less painful alternative. While not the device's inventor, Guillotin's name ultimately became an eponym for it. Contrary to popular myth, Guillotin did not die by guillotine but rather by natural causes.\nInvention.\nFrench surgeon and physiologist Antoine Louis and German engineer Tobias Schmidt built a prototype for the guillotine. According to a memoir written by the grandson of Charles-Henri Sanson, Louis XVI suggested the use of a straight, angled blade instead of a curved one.\nIntroduction in France.\nOn 10 October 1789, physician Joseph-Ignace Guillotin proposed to the National Assembly that capital punishment should always take the form of decapitation \"by means of a simple mechanism\".\nSensing the growing discontent, Louis XVI banned the use of the breaking wheel. In 1791, as the French Revolution progressed, the National Assembly researched a new method to be used on all condemned people regardless of class, consistent with the idea that the purpose of capital punishment was simply to end life rather than to inflict unnecessary pain.\nA committee formed under Antoine Louis, physician to the King and Secretary to the Academy of Surgery. Guillotin was also on the committee. The group was influenced by beheading devices used elsewhere in Europe, such as the Italian Mannaia (or Mannaja, which had been used since Roman times), the Scottish Maiden, and the Halifax Gibbet (3.5\u00a0kg). While many of these prior instruments crushed the neck or used blunt force to take off a head, a number of them also used a crescent blade to behead and a hinged two-part yoke to immobilize the victim's neck.\nLaquiante, an officer of the Strasbourg criminal court, designed a beheading machine and employed Tobias Schmidt, a German engineer and harpsichord maker, to construct a prototype. Antoine Louis is also credited with the design of the prototype. France's official executioner, Charles-Henri Sanson, claimed in his memoirs that King Louis XVI, an amateur locksmith, recommended that the device employ an oblique blade rather than a crescent one, lest the blade not be able to cut through all necks; the neck of the king, who himself died by guillotine years later, was offered up discreetly as an example. The first execution by guillotine was performed on a highwayman, Nicolas Jacques Pelletier, on 25 April 1792 in front of what is now Place de l'H\u00f4tel de Ville, the city hall of Paris. All citizens condemned to die were from then on executed there, until the scaffold was moved on 21 August to the Place du Carrousel.\nThe machine was judged successful because it was considered a humane form of execution in contrast with more cruel methods used in the pre-revolutionary \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\". In France, before the invention of the guillotine, members of the nobility were beheaded with a sword or an axe, which often took two or more blows to kill the condemned. The condemned or their families would sometimes pay the executioner to ensure that the blade was sharp in order to achieve a quick and relatively painless death. Commoners were usually hanged, which could take many minutes.\nIn the early phase of the French Revolution, before the guillotine's adoption, the slogan \"\u00c0 la lanterne\" (lit.\u2009'To the lamp post!') symbolized popular justice in revolutionary France. The revolutionary radicals hanged officials and aristocrats from street lanterns and also employed more gruesome methods of execution, such as the wheel or burning at the stake.\nHaving only one method of civil execution for all regardless of class was also seen as an expression of equality among citizens. The guillotine was then the only civil legal execution method in France until abolition of the death penalty in 1981, apart from certain crimes against the security of the state, or for the death sentences passed by military courts, which entailed execution by firing squad.\nReign of Terror.\nLouis Collenot d'Angremont was a royalist famed for having been the first guillotined for his political ideas, on 21 August 1792. Before and during the Reign of Terror (between September 1793 and July 1794) about 17,000 people were guillotined, including former Queen Marie Antoinette who was executed at the guillotine on October 16, 1793; her husband Louis Capet (former King Louis XVI) was guillotined on January 21, 1793. Towards the end of the Terror in 1794, revolutionary leaders such as Georges Danton, Saint-Just and Maximilien Robespierre were sent to the guillotine. Most of the time, executions in Paris were carried out in the Place de la Revolution (former Place Louis XV and current Place de la Concorde); the guillotine stood in the corner near the H\u00f4tel Crillon where the City of Brest Statue can be found today. The machine was moved several times, to the Place de la Nation and the Place de la Bastille, but returned, particularly for the execution of the King and for Robespierre.\nFor a time, executions by guillotine attracted great crowds of spectators, with vendors selling programs listing the names of the condemned. Moreover, the guillotine symbolized revolutionary ideals: equality in death equivalent to equality before the law; open and demonstrable revolutionary justice; and the destruction of privilege under the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\", which used separate forms of execution for nobility and commoners. The Parisian \"sans-culottes\", then the popular public face of lower-class patriotic radicalism, thus considered the guillotine a positive force for revolutionary progress.\nResumption of use.\nAfter the French Revolution, executions resumed in the city centre. On 4 February 1832, the guillotine was moved behind the Church of Saint-Jacques-de-la-Boucherie, before being moved again, to the Grande Roquette prison, on 29 November 1851.\nIn the late 1840s, the Tussaud brothers Joseph and Francis, gathering relics for Madame Tussauds wax museum, visited the aged Henry-Cl\u00e9ment Sanson, grandson of the executioner Charles-Henri Sanson, from whom they obtained parts, the knife and lunette, of one of the original guillotines used during the Reign of Terror. The executioner had \"pawned his guillotine, and got into woeful trouble for alleged trafficking in municipal property\".\nOn 6 August 1909, the guillotine was used at the junction of the Boulevard Arago and the Rue de la Sant\u00e9, behind the La Sant\u00e9 Prison.\nThe last public guillotining in France was of Eugen Weidmann, who was convicted of six murders. He was beheaded on 17 June 1939 outside the prison Saint-Pierre, rue Andre Mignot 5 at Versailles, which is now the Tribunal Judiciaire de Versailles. The proceedings caused \"disgusting\" and \"unruly\" behaviour among spectators. The \u201chysterical behavior\u201d by spectators was so scandalous that French president Albert Lebrun immediately banned all future public executions.\nMarie-Louise Giraud (17 November 1903 \u2013 30 July 1943) was one of the last women to be executed in France. Giraud was convicted in Vichy France and was guillotined for having performed 27 abortions in the Cherbourg area on 30 July 1943. Her story was dramatized in the 1988 film \"Story of Women\" directed by Claude Chabrol.\nThe guillotine remained the official method of execution in France until the death penalty was abolished in 1981. The final three guillotinings in France before its abolition were those of child-murderers Christian Ranucci (on 28 July 1976) in Marseille, J\u00e9r\u00f4me Carrein (on 23 June 1977) in Douai and torturer\u2013murderer Hamida Djandoubi (on 10 September 1977) in Marseille. Djandoubi's death was the last time that the guillotine was used for an execution by any government.\nOverseas departments and regions of France.\nIn the Western Hemisphere, the guillotine saw only limited use. The only recorded guillotine execution in North America north of the Caribbean took place on the French island of St. Pierre in 1889, of Joseph N\u00e9el, with a guillotine brought in from Martinique.\nIn the Caribbean, it was used rarely in Guadeloupe and Martinique; its last use in the region was at Fort-de-France in 1965. In South America, the guillotine was only used in French Guiana, where about 150 people were beheaded between 1850 and 1945: most of them were convicts exiled from France and incarcerated within the \"bagne\", or penal colonies.\nWithin the Southern Hemisphere, it worked in New Caledonia (which had a bagne too until the end of the 19th century) and at least twice in Tahiti.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, the guillotine is known as \"Fallbeil\" (\"falling axe\") or \"K\u00f6pfmaschine\" (\"beheading machine\") and was used in various German states from the 19th century onwards, becoming the preferred method of execution in Napoleonic times in many parts of the country. The guillotine, axe and the firing squad were the legal methods of execution during the era of the German Empire (1871\u20131918) and the subsequent Weimar Republic (1919\u20131933).\nThe original German guillotines resembled the French Berger 1872 model, but they eventually evolved into sturdier and more effective machines. Built primarily of metal instead of wood, these new guillotines had heavier blades than their French predecessors and thus could use shorter uprights as well. Officials could also conduct multiple executions faster, thanks to a more effective blade recovery system and the eventual removal of the tilting board (bascule). Those deemed likely to struggle were backed slowly into the device from behind a curtain to prevent them from seeing it prior to the execution. A metal screen covered the blade as well in order to conceal it from the sight of the condemned.\nNazi Germany used the guillotine between 1933 and 1945 to execute 16,500 prisoners, 10,000 of them in 1944 and 1945 alone. Notable political victims executed by the guillotine under the Nazi government included Marinus van der Lubbe, a Dutch communist blamed for the Reichstag fire and executed by guillotine in January 1934. The Nazi government also guillotined Sophie Scholl, who was convicted of high treason after distributing anti-Nazi pamphlets at the University of Munich with her brother Hans, and other members of the German student resistance group, the White Rose.\nThe penultimate time the guillotine was used in West Germany was in the execution of Richard Schuh, on 18 February 1949, at six o'clock in the morning, in the courtyard of the prison at 18 Doblerstra\u00dfe in T\u00fcbingen. The last time it was used in West Germany was for the execution of two convicted murderers, 29-year-old Robert Amelung and 39-year-old Peter Steinhauer, who were guillotined in Hamburg on 9 May 1949. It was last used in East Germany in September 1967 when the murderers Paul Beirau and G\u00fcnter Herzfeld were executed. The Stasi used the guillotine in East Germany between 1950 and 1966 for secret executions.\nElsewhere.\nA number of countries, primarily in Europe, continued to employ this method of execution into the 19th and 20th centuries, but they ceased to use it before France did in 1977.\nIn Antwerp, Belgium, the last person to be beheaded was Francis Kol. Convicted of robbery and murder, he received his punishment on 8 May 1856. During the period from 19 March 1798 to 30 March 1856, there were 19 beheadings in Antwerp.\nIn Utrecht, the Netherlands, the first person to be beheaded was Anthony van Benthem, a criminal confined in a mental institution. He killed a cellmate after being called a sodomite. He was executed at Paardenveld on 27 July 1811. Back then, the Netherlands was part of the French Empire, Utrecht being in the Zuyderz\u00e9e department.\nIn Switzerland, it was used for the last time by the canton of Obwalden in the execution of murderer Hans Vollenweider in 1940.\nIn Greece, the guillotine (along with the firing squad) was introduced as a method of execution in 1834; it was last used in 1913.\nIn Sweden, beheading became the mandatory method of execution in 1866. The guillotine replaced manual beheading in 1903, and it was used only once, in the execution of murderer Alfred Ander in 1910 at L\u00e5ngholmen Prison, Stockholm. Ander was also the last person to be executed in Sweden before capital punishment was abolished there in 1921.\nIn South Vietnam, after the Di\u1ec7m regime enacted the 10/59 Decree in 1959, mobile special military courts were dispatched to the countryside in order to intimidate the rural population; they used guillotines, which had belonged to the former French colonial power, in order to carry out death sentences on the spot. One such guillotine is still on show at the War Remnants Museum in Ho Chi Minh City.\nIn the United States in 1996, Georgia State Representative Doug Teper unsuccessfully sponsored a bill to replace that state's electric chair with the guillotine.\nIn recent years, a limited number of individuals have killed themselves using self-constructed guillotines.\nControversy.\nEver since the guillotine's first use, there has been debate as to whether the guillotine provided as swift and painless a death as Guillotin had hoped. With previous methods of execution that were intended to be painful, few expressed concern about the level of suffering that they inflicted. However, because the guillotine was designed to be more humane, the issue of whether the condemned experiences pain has been examined thoroughly and remains controversial. Some eyewitness accounts of guillotine executions suggest that awareness may persist momentarily after decapitation, but there is no scientific consensus on the matter.\nLiving heads.\nGabriel Beaurieux, a physician who observed the head of executed prisoner Henri Languille, wrote on 28 June 1905:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Here, then, is what I was able to note immediately after the decapitation: the eyelids and lips of the guillotined man worked in irregularly rhythmic contractions for about five or six seconds. This phenomenon has been remarked by all those finding themselves in the same conditions as myself for observing what happens after the severing of the neck ...\nI waited for several seconds. The spasmodic movements ceased. [...] It was then that I called in a strong, sharp voice: \"Languille!\" I saw the eyelids slowly lift up, without any spasmodic contractions\u00a0\u2013 I insist advisedly on this peculiarity\u00a0\u2013 but with an even movement, quite distinct and normal, such as happens in everyday life, with people awakened or torn from their thoughts.\nNext Languille's eyes very definitely fixed themselves on mine and the pupils focused themselves. I was not, then, dealing with the sort of vague dull look without any expression, that can be observed any day in dying people to whom one speaks: I was dealing with undeniably living eyes which were looking at me. After several seconds, the eyelids closed again [...].\nIt was at that point that I called out again and, once more, without any spasm, slowly, the eyelids lifted and undeniably living eyes fixed themselves on mine with perhaps even more penetration than the first time. Then there was a further closing of the eyelids, but now less complete. I attempted the effect of a third call; there was no further movement\u00a0\u2013 and the eyes took on the glazed look which they have in the dead.\nNames for the guillotine.\nDuring the span of its usage, the French guillotine has gone by many names, some of which include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51273", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51273", "title": "Rabbi", "text": "Teacher of Torah and spiritual leader in Judaism\nA rabbi (; , ) is a spiritual leader or religious teacher in Judaism. A person becomes a rabbi by being ordained by another rabbi\u2014known as \"semikhah\"\u2014following a course of study of Jewish history and texts, including the Tanakh, \"Midrash\", Mishnah, Tosefta, Talmud, \"Halakha\", and rabbinic commentaries thereon. The basic form of the rabbi developed between the Second Temple (167 BCE\u201373 CE)\u2014being heavily influenced by the Pharisees\u2014and Rabbinic periods (70\u2013640 CE), when learned teachers\u2014overlapping with the \"Tannaim\", \"Amoraim\", \"Savoraim\", and early \"Geonim\"\u2014assembled to codify Judaism's written and oral laws. The title \"rabbi\" was first used in the first century CE. In more recent centuries, the duties of a rabbi became increasingly influenced by the duties of the Protestant Christian minister, hence the title \"pulpit rabbis.\" Further, in 19th-century Germany and the United States, rabbinical activities such as delivering sermons, pastoral counseling, and representing the community to the outside all increased in importance.\nWithin the various Jewish denominations, there are different requirements for rabbinic ordination, and differences in opinion regarding who is recognized as a rabbi. Non-Orthodox movements, including Conservative Judaism, Reform Judaism, Reconstructionist Judaism, and Jewish Renewal, have set their requirements for \"semikhah\" based on what they consider halakhic reasons (as in Conservative Judaism) and ethical reasons (as in Reform and Reconstructionist) Judaism).\nEtymology and pronunciation.\nThe word comes from the Mishnaic Hebrew construct , meaning 'Master [Name]'; the standard Hebrew noun is 'master'. is also used as a title for rabbis, as are ('our master') and ('the master'). A derived term is .\nThe Hebrew root in turn derives from the Semitic root &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e8-\u05d1-\u05d1\u200e (R-B-B), which in Biblical Aramaic means 'great' in many senses, including 'revered', but appears primarily as a prefix in construct forms. Although the usage 'many' (as 1 Kings 18:25, ) 'the majority', 'the multitude' occurs for the assembly of the community in the Dead Sea Scrolls, there's no evidence to support an association of this use with the later title \"rabbi\". The root is cognate to Arabic , meaning 'lord' (generally used when talking about God, but also about temporal lords), and to the Syriac word .\nSome communities, especially Sephardic and Yemenite Jews, historically pronounced the title ; this pronunciation competed with and in Ashkenaz until the modern period.\nHistorical overview.\n\"Rabbi\" is not an occupation found in the Hebrew Bible, and ancient generations did not apply related titles such as \"rabban\", \"rabbi\", or \"rav\" for either the Babylonian sages or the sages in Israel. For example, Hillel I and Shammai (the religious leaders of the early first century) had no rabbinic title prefixed to their names. The titles \"rabban\" and \"rabbi\" are first mentioned in Jewish literature in the Mishnah. \"Rabban\" was first used for Rabban Gamaliel the Elder, Rabban Simeon ben Gamliel (his son), and Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai, all of whom were patriarchs or presidents of the Sanhedrin in the first century. Early recipients of the title \"rabbi\" include Rabbi Zadok and Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob, beginning in the time of the disciples of Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai. The title \"Rabbi\" (the Greek transliteration of ) occurs in the Christian books of Matthew, Mark, and John in the New Testament, in which it is used\u2014sometimes negatively\u2014in reference to the \"Scribes and Pharisees\" as well as to Jesus.\nAccording to some, the title \"rabbi\" or \"rabban\" was first used after 70 CE to refer to Yohanan ben Zakkai and his students, and references in Rabbinic texts and the New Testament to rabbis earlier in the 1st century are anachronisms or retroactive honorifics. Other scholars believe that the term \"rabbi\" was a well-known informal title by the beginning of the first century CE, and thus that the Jewish and Christian references to rabbis reflect the titles used in this period.\nThe governments of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah were based on a system that included the Jewish kings; the Jewish prophets; the legal authority of the high court of Jerusalem, the Great Sanhedrin; and the ritual authority of the priesthood (). Members of the Sanhedrin had to receive their ordination through an unbroken line of transmission from Moses; however, instead of being called \"rabbis\", they were referred to as \"priests\" or \"scribes\", like Ezra, who is called in the Hebrew Bible \"Ezra the priest-scribe, a scholar in matters concerning GOD's commandments and laws to Israel\"(Ezra 7:11, \"Revised JPS Edition\"). \"Rabbi\" as a title does not appear in the Hebrew Bible, though later Rabbinic sources occasionally use it as a title for wise biblical figures, as in tractate Pirkei Avot 6:3.\nWith the destruction of the two Temples in Jerusalem, the end of the Jewish monarchy, the decline of the dual institutions of prophets and the priesthood, and the later failure of the Bar Kokhba revolt, the focus of scholarly and spiritual leadership within the Jewish people shifted to the sages of the Great Sanhedrin (). The Great Sanhedrin was composed of the earliest group of \"rabbis\" in the contemporary sense of the word, in large part because they began the formulation and explication of what became known as Judaism's Oral Torah (). The Oral Torah was eventually codified in the Mishnah, Talmud, and subsequent Rabbinic scholarship, leading to what is known as Rabbinic Judaism.\nTalmudic period.\nThe traditional explanation is that from the 1st to 5th centuries, the title \"rabbi\" was given to those sages of the Land of Israel who received formal ordination (\"semikhah\"), while the lesser title \"rav\" was given to sages who taught in the Talmudic Academies in Babylonia, as ordination could not be performed outside the Land of Israel. Sherira Gaon summarized the relationship between these titles as follows: \"Rabbi is greater than Rav, Rabban is greater than Rabbi, [and] one's name is greater than Rabban\". However, some modern scholars argue that \"rabbi\" and \"rav\" are the same title, pronounced differently due to variations in dialect.\nAfter the suppression of the Jewish Patriarchate and Sanhedrin by Theodosius II in 425, there could no longer be formal ordination in the traditional sense. Like the Babylonian sages, a recognised scholar could be called \"Rav\" or \"Hakham\" (, 'Wise [one]'). The transmission of learning from teacher to disciple remained of tremendous importance, but there was no formal rabbinic qualification.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the early Middle Ages, \"rabbi\" was not a formal title, but was used as a term of respect for Jews of great scholarship and reputation. After the emergence of Karaite Judaism, Jews who remained within the purview of normative\u2014i.e., Rabbinic Judaism\u2014became known as \"rabbanites\". Initially, communities might have had a religious judge appointed by the central \"geonate\", often possessing a certification known as \"pitka dedayanuta\" or bearing the title \"chaver\" (short for \"chaver besanhedrin hagedolah\", used in Israel) or \"aluf\" (used in Babylonia). By the 11th century, as the geonate weakened it was common for Jewish communities to elect a local spiritual authority. In the 11th\u201312th century, some local rabbinic authorities in Spain received formal certification known as \"ketav masmich\" or \"ketav minui\" in preparation for their leadership role. Maimonides ruled that every congregation is obliged to appoint a preacher and scholar to admonish the community and teach Torah, and the social institution he describes is the germ of the modern congregational rabbinate.\nUntil the mid-14th-century Black Death pandemic, Ashkenazi communities typically made religious decisions by consensus of scholars on a council, rather than the decision of a single authority. In the 14th century, the concept arose of a single person who served as the religious authority for a particular area (the \"mara de'atra\"). Formal ordination is first recorded among Ashkenazim with Meir ben Baruch Halevi (late 14th century), who issued the formal title \"Moreinu\" (our teacher) to scholars. However, it likely existed somewhat earlier. By the 15th century, this formal ordination, known as \"semicha\", had become a requirement to be recognized as a rabbi. Initially, some Sephardic communities objected to such formal ordination, but over time they too adopted the system.\n18th\u201319th centuries.\nA dramatic change in rabbinic functions occurred with Jewish emancipation. Tasks that were once the primary focus for rabbis, such as settling disputes by presiding over a Jewish court, became less prominent, while other tasks that had been secondary, such as delivering sermons, increased in importance.\nIn 19th-century Germany and the United States, the duties of the rabbi in some respects became increasingly similar to the duties of other clergy, such as the Protestant Christian minister, and the title \"pulpit rabbis\" arose to describe this phenomenon. Sermons, pastoral counseling, and representing the congregation to the community all increased in importance. Non-Orthodox rabbis, on a day-to-day business basis, now spend more time on these functions than they do teaching or answering questions on Jewish law and philosophy. Within the Modern Orthodox community, many rabbis still mainly deal with teaching and questions of Jewish law, but many are increasingly dealing with these same pastoral functions.\nTraditionally, rabbis have never been an intermediary between God and humans; this idea was considered outside the bounds of Jewish theology. Unlike spiritual leaders in many other faiths, they are not considered imbued with special powers or abilities.\nFunctions.\nRabbis serve the Jewish community. Hence, their functions vary as the community's needs vary over time and place.\nStudy and teaching.\nRabbis have always been the main links in the chain of transmission (\"masorah\", ) of Torah throughout the generations of Jews. Learning from and studying previous generations' rabbinical leaders and thinkers, offering new insight (\"hidushim\", ), and teaching the public have always been primary functions of the rabbinate. Torah study is a rabbi's lifelong undertaking that does not end with ordination. A rabbi is expected to set aside time daily for study. A rabbi who does not constantly replenish their store of Torah learning will lack the knowledge, inspiration, and mastery of \"Halakha\" (Jewish law) and traditions required to perform all other rabbinic functions.\nOnce acquired, Torah must be passed on, given its status in Deuteronomy 33:4 as \"the heritage of the congregation of Jacob\". Teaching by rabbis occurs in many venues\u2014elementary (\"cheder\", ) schools and intermediate (\"yeshivah\", ) and advanced (\"kollel\", ) learning institutions, but also the public and community squares outside of learning institutions. In many synagogues, the rabbi will give a short class (\"shiur\", ) to those who attend morning and/or evening services. The sermon is another form of public education, often integrating Bible passages with a contemporary ethical message, and no Jewish meal or celebration is complete without the rabbi's \"d'var Torah\" ()\u2014a short exposition of verses of Jewish literature related to a given discussion.\nApart from face-to-face instruction, rabbis have composed an extensive body of literature over the millennia of Jewish history, dealing with all aspects of the Jewish tradition. Jewish commentaries on the Bible, \"Halakha\" and halakhic commentaries, \"responsa\", mystical and ethical tracts, and collections of sermons are examples of common genres of rabbinic literature.\nAdjudicating.\nBefore Jewish emancipation, rulers delegated discipline and dispute settlement within the Jewish community (\"kahal\", ) to the Jewish community. If a dispute, domestic or commercial, a tort, or a petty crime, involved only Jewish residents, then it could be settled in the town's Jewish court (\"beit din\", ) according to Jewish law. The community's rabbi, with his extensive knowledge of \"Halakha\", was expected to preside as \"Av Beit Din\" (), although lay assessors might join him in judgment. The judgments were enforced with fines and various degrees of communal excommunication (\"herem\", ) when necessary.\nAfter emancipation, Jews turned to civil courts for dispute resolution as citizens of their respective countries. Today, rabbinical courts remain active under the auspices of each Jewish denomination for religious matters, such as conversion and divorce, as well as for civil matters when the parties (voluntarily) elect to have rabbinical judges serve as their arbitrators. In Israel, there are rabbinical courts for matters of personal status.\nLegislating.\nDuring the era of Jewish self-government, some problems in the community were considered regional or universal and could not be solved by a rabbi acting alone. Rabbinical synods were convened for concerted action, calling together the prominent rabbis of the region to debate solutions and enact binding regulations (\"takkanot\", ) for their communities. The regulations involved matters as diverse as dowries and matrimonial law; relations with gentiles; utilizing civil courts; the handling of orphaned children; anti-counterfeiting measures; and hiring schoolteachers. The most famous of these ordinances is ascribed to Rabbeinu Gershom, and was probably enacted in a rabbinic synod he convened in c.\u20091000 CE. The ordinance, still in effect today, prohibits polygamy among Jews in the West.\nIn the contemporary era, rabbis from all major Jewish religious movements\u2014Conservative, Modern Orthodox, Reform, Reconstructionist, Hasidic, and Haredi\u2014have enacted \"takkanot\" both in the State of Israel and throughout the Jewish diaspora. In Israel, where the Chief Rabbinate holds exclusive governmental authority over matters of personal status and formally recognizes only Orthodoxy, enactments by non\u2011Orthodox movements lack official standing. Today, most congregational rabbis are members of a national rabbinic organization related to their movement, and there is often an association of local rabbis in their city. When these bodies debate local and national questions, they function in a manner that is similar to the rabbinic synods of the past.\nReligious supervision.\nThe Jewish community requires a number of religious institutions for daily life, and it falls to rabbis, with their knowledge of Jewish law, to supervise them to ensure they operate according to Jewish law. Examples are the regulation of butchery (\"shekhita\", ); Jewish dietary laws in local shops and institutions (\"kashrut\", ); the community's ritual bath (\"mikveh\", ); the community's elementary school (\"cheder\"); the Shabbat boundaries, or \"eruvim\" (); and the synagogue's \"chevra kadisha\" (). In the modern era, rabbis who specialize in this type of supervision may find full-time employment as a \"mashgiach\" (), and some of these functions are now performed by national organizations, such as the Orthodox Union, which has a kosher certification agency.\nRabbinical counseling.\nIn addition to answering questions about Jewish law and rituals, a congregational rabbi is often sought for pastoral counseling on personal matters by congregants, as well as for general pastoral care. Much of a modern rabbi's time is devoted to pastoral work, including visiting the sick ()\u2014a \"mitzvah\" () in Judaism\u2014and officiating at lifecycle occasions like deaths and births. In the pre-modern era, rabbis had no special training in counseling, relying instead on personal qualities of empathy and caring. These factors continue to inform rabbinical counseling in the modern era. However, many rabbinical seminaries offer, if not mandate, formal training and coursework in psychology (e.g., counseling psychology) and pastoral counseling as part of the ordination curriculum and may offer internships in counseling and social services for rabbinical students. Among Hasidic Jews, turning to the community's \"rebbe\" for advice on personal matters is common.\nLeading prayer.\nTraditionally, rabbis were not tasked with leading Jewish prayer services. There is no requirement that a rabbi be present for public prayer. The Jewish liturgy is fixed and printed in \"siddurim\" (); the vocal portions are chanted by a cantor (\"hazzan\"), and the Torah portion is read by a trained reader (\"ba\u2019al koreh\", ). Before the modern era, the rabbis were present; they were typically seated in front near the Torah ark, and as a matter of respect, the pace at which the rabbi recited their prayers set the pace of the service. If halakhic questions arose about the prayer service, the rabbi would answer them.\nIn modern synagogues, the rabbi is more active in leading prayer services. In some synagogues, it is permitted for the rabbi to select passages from the prayer book for public reading, omit some passages for brevity, and add special prayers to the service. The rabbi may also lead the congregation in responsive reading, announce page numbers, and comment on the liturgy occasionally. At Shabbat and holiday services, the congregational rabbi may deliver a sermon before or after the Torah is read.\nCelebrating life's events.\n\"Halakha\" does not require the presence of a rabbi at a marriage, \"bar or bat mitzvah\", \"brit milah\" (circumcision), funeral or house of mourning, or the unveiling of a monument at a cemetery. At the same time, Jewish law has prescribed requirements for every event and ritual. It therefore became customary for rabbis to be present and lead the community in celebration and mourning. In the modern era, it is virtually obligatory to have the rabbi's participation at these events, and ministering to the congregation in these settings has become a major aspect of the modern rabbinate. Jewish divorce, which requires a \"beit din\", will always have rabbis in attendance.\nConducting charity.\nThe synagogue has been a place where \"tzedakah\" () is collected every weekday after services and then distributed to the needy before \"Shabbatot\" () and holidays. However, most synagogues now suggest that congregants support the synagogue via an annual dues payment, usually collected monthly. It was not the rabbi who collected these sums; that task was assigned to the shammash (, 'helper'), wardens of charity, and charitable associations. Still, the rabbi's task was to teach that charity is a core Jewish value. The rabbi did this by preaching, teaching, and by leading by example\u2014hosting poor out-of-town yeshiva students at the home table and offering Jewish travelers a kosher meal. Maimonides formulated a ladder of eight degrees of charity, starting with reluctant giving and ending with teaching someone a trade. Rabbi Israel Salanter (1809\u20131883) was once asked, \"How do you provide for your spiritual needs?\" He answered, \"By providing for someone else's physical needs.\" Today, Jewish federations and foundations collect and distribute most charity within the Jewish community. However, the rabbi retains the task of teaching the value of charity and often participates personally in appeals for the synagogue and for national and international causes.\nRole-modeling.\nThe rabbi serves as a role model for the congregation through their conduct and deportment. Congregation members are keen observers of their rabbi's personality traits, family life, professional conduct, leisure activities, and how they treat others. Rabbis are aware of this and, in the best case, deliberately model their conduct to represent Jewish values to the community and outsiders.\nThis aspect of the rabbinate, setting an example for the public, has a direct application in Jewish law. The way the greatest rabbis and Torah scholars conduct themselves can become a precedent in Jewish law, known as \"ma'aseh\" (, 'act'). For example, based on reports of what rabbis did in the Talmud, Maimonides ruled that one engaged in public affairs should not break off their duties to recite certain prayers.\nJewish outreach.\nSome rabbis, if not synagogues, program and guide activities designed to reach Jews unaffiliated with Judaism or lapsed in their observances. These include \"beginners' services\" wherein the Jewish liturgy is shortened and explained, and \"Shabbatons\", wherein unaffiliated Jews are hosted by an observant family during Shabbat to experience the day in a religious setting and to learn about its rituals and customs. Outreach is a defining feature of Chabad Judaism, with designated buildings\u2014often actual houses\u2014in many cities worldwide having Chabad houses for centralized outreach activities to unaffiliated Jews and prospective converts in the community. Chabad employs rabbis (who, in Chabad Judaism, must be male) and their families to staff Chabad houses and conduct Chabad programming. In addition to Chabad Judaism, the Conservative, Modern Orthodox, and Reform movements also have formal \"kiruv\" () programs.\nConversions.\nMost rabbis occasionally encounter non-Jewish individuals seeking information about Judaism or wishing to explore conversion to Judaism. This may happen when one member of a couple wishing to marry is seeking conversion, or on other occasions when intermarriage is not involved. Based on the rabbi's training and assessment of the person's motivations and goals, the rabbi's approach may range from discouragement of the potential convert to mentoring and directing to a conversion class, in accordance with the policy on conversion of the rabbi's movement. At least one rabbi will serve on the \"beit din\" that performs a conversion. There are no rabbis serving as \"Jewish missionaries\" per se; there is no parallel in Judaism to the proselytizing of other faiths.\nMatch-making.\nIn periods when match-making was common, rabbis were key to finding partners for their congregants in the community. Rabbis were well-acquainted with their community members, particularly the young unmarried men attending their yeshivas. Parents did not hesitate to consult the rabbi for suitable matches. Today, in Orthodox circles in which socializing among the sexes is uncommon, this practice continues, and in all branches of Judaism, a rabbi who can help in this arena will not hesitate to do so.\nSynagogue administration.\nThe modern synagogue is a non-profit religious corporation run by a board of directors elected by the members. However, board members are not present on a day-to-day basis. In most synagogues, the rabbi administers the synagogue, supervises personnel, manages the physical plant, reviews (if not writes) the newsletter, and interacts with the brotherhood, the sisterhood, and the youth organizations. Very large synagogues may employ a separate administrator or assistant rabbi to perform some or all of these functions.\nChaplaincy.\nRabbis go into the field wherever members of the Jewish community may be found. This is most noticeable in the military services and university campuses where some rabbis serve as Jewish chaplains full-time. All branches of the U. S. military have Jewish chaplains in their ranks, and rabbis serve in the Israel Defense Forces. The Hillel Foundation provides rabbis and Jewish services on 550 campuses, while Chabad operates Jewish centers with a rabbi near 150 college campuses. Local rabbis perform other chaplaincy functions on a part-time basis in hospitals, senior homes, and prisons. Worthy of mention are the rabbis who accompanied Jews to concentration camps during the Nazi era; in dire circumstances, they continued to provide rabbinic services, such as ritual observance, advice, and counseling, to the victims of Nazi persecution, whenever it was possible to do so. \nCommunity engagement.\nAs leaders of the Jewish community, many rabbis devote a portion of their time to activities in the public arena, especially where Jewish interests are at stake. They dialogue with public officials and community groups, interact with school boards, advocate for and against legislation, engage in public debates, write newspaper columns, appear in the media, and march in parades and demonstrations with others to show support for causes. The extent and tenor of these activities are dictated by the rabbi's conscience and social and political leanings as informed by Jewish values.\nDefending Judaism.\nRabbis are often called upon to defend the Jewish faith. During the Middle Ages, the Catholic Church arranged a series of public disputations between rabbis and priests that were intended to \"disprove\" the Jewish faith and condemn its religious texts, including the Talmud. The rabbis acquitted themselves well in debate with their superior understanding of Jewish texts, and mass conversions to Christianity did not take place. However, following these disputations, local rulers, at the Catholic Church's behest, consigned cartloads of precious Hebrew manuscripts to the flames. Today, rabbis are involved in countering the activities of missionaries aimed at converting Jews to other religions, explaining, for example, that one cannot be of the Jewish faith while believing in either the Christian God or the Christian messiah.\nInterfaith activities.\nSome rabbis engage in interfaith dialogue with clergy of other faiths. They may host student groups from the religious schools of other faiths and participate in interfaith services. They will view these activities as a means of deepening understanding and reducing misconceptions in a diverse society. Other rabbis, especially those affiliated with Orthodox Judaism, will generally not participate in interfaith dialogues about theology. They will, however, engage in discussions with the clergy of other faiths about matters of mutual social concern.\nCommunity rabbinate.\nThere is a segment of the rabbinate that does not engage in rabbinic functions on a daily basis, except perhaps to study. Because rabbinic ordination (\"semikhah\") has the features of a post-graduate academic degree, some study to receive ordination but then follow a different career in secular business, education, or the professions. These rabbis may be asked from time to time to perform a rabbinic function on an ad hoc and voluntary basis (e.g., to conduct a marriage ceremony or answer a religious question). At other times, they act as regular members of the Jewish community. No negative attitudes attach to rabbis who do not practice the profession. They are likely admired in their communities for their decision to spend years engaged in advanced Torah study for its own sake.\nCompensation.\nIn antiquity, those who performed rabbinic functions, such as judging a case or teaching Torah to students, did not receive compensation for their services. Being a rabbi was not a full-time profession, and those who served had other occupations to support themselves and their families, such as woodchopper, sandal-maker, carpenter, water-carrier, farmer, or tanner. A respected scholar, Rabbi Zadok (1st century CE), said \"never to use the Torah as a spade for digging,\" which was understood to mean that one should never use one's Torah knowledge for an inappropriate purpose such as earning a fee. Still, as honored community members, Torah sages were allowed a series of privileges and exemptions that somewhat alleviated their financial burdens. These included such things as tax exemption from communal levies, marketplace priority (first in, first out regarding their trade), receiving personal services from their students (\"shimush talmedei hakhamim\", ), silent business partnerships with wealthy merchants, and a substitute fee to replace their lost earnings when they had to leave work to perform a rabbinic function (\"sekhar battalah\", ).\nDuring the period of the \"Geonim\" (c.\u2009650\u20131050 CE), opinions on compensation shifted. It was deemed inappropriate for the leaders of the Jewish community to appear in the marketplace as laborers or vendors of merchandise, and leading a Jewish community was becoming a full-time occupation. Under these conditions, the \"Geonim\" collected taxes and donations at home and abroad to fund their schools (\"yeshivot\") and paid salaries to the Jewish community's teachers, officials, and judges, whom they appointed. Maimonides, who supported himself as a physician, reasserted the traditional view of offering rabbinic service to the Jewish community without compensation. It remains the ideal, but circumstances have changed. Jewish communities required full-time rabbis, and the rabbis preferred to spend their days studying and teaching Torah rather than working at a secular trade.\nBy the fifteenth century, it was the norm for Jewish communities to compensate their rabbis. However, the rabbi's contract might refer to a \"suspension fee\" (\"sekhar battalah\") rather than a salary, as if he were relinquishing a salary from secular employment. The size of salaries varied, depending on the size of the community served, with rabbis in large cities being well-compensated while rabbis in small towns might receive a small stipend. Rabbis were able to supplement their rabbinic incomes by engaging in and accepting fees for associated functions such as serving as the community's scribe, notary, and archivist, teaching in the elementary school or yeshivah, publishing books, arbitrating civil litigations, or even serving as a matchmaker.\nWith the formation of rabbinical seminaries starting in the nineteenth century, the rabbinate experienced a degree of professionalization still underway. An ordained graduate of a rabbinical seminary that is affiliated with one of the modern branches of Judaism, Reform, Conservative, Reconstructionist, or Modern Orthodox, has become able to find employment\u2014whether as a congregational rabbi, teacher, chaplain, campus Hillel director, camp director, social worker or administrator\u2014through the placement office of their seminary. Like any modern professional, ordained graduates negotiate the terms of employment with potential employers and sign a contract specifying duties, duration of service, salary, benefits, pension, and the like. A rabbi's salary and benefits have become similar to those of other modern professionals, such as lawyers and accountants, with comparable levels of post-graduate education. It is also possible to engage in the rabbinate part-time (e.g., at a synagogue with a small membership); the rabbi's salary will be proportionate to the services rendered and they are likely to have additional employment outside the synagogue.\nAuthority.\nThe practical basis for rabbinic authority involves accepting the rabbi and their scholarly credentials. In practical terms, Jewish communities and individuals commonly proffer allegiance to the authority of the rabbi they have chosen. Such a rabbinic leader is sometimes called the \"mara d'atra\" (). Jewish individuals may acknowledge the authority of others but will defer legal decisions to the \"mara d'atra\".\nThe rabbi derives authority from achievements within a meritocratic system. Rabbis' authority is neither nominal nor spiritual, based on credentials. Typically, the rabbi receives an institutional stamp of approval. This authority allows them to engage in the halakhic process and make legal prescriptions.\nThe same pattern is true within broader communities, ranging from Hasidic communities to rabbinical or congregational organizations. There will be a formal or de facto structure for rabbinic authority responsible for the community members. However, Hasidic communities do not have a rabbi; they instead have a Rebbe, who plays a similar role but is thought to have a special connection to God. The Rebbe's authority is based on a spiritual connection to God, and they are venerated differently from rabbis.\nHonor.\nAccording to the Talmud, citing Leviticus 19:32, it is a \"mitzvah\" to honor rabbis, Torah scholars, and older people. One should stand in their presence and address them with respect. Kohanim (priests) are required to honor rabbis and Torah scholars like the general public. However, if one is more learned than the rabbi or the scholar, there is no need to stand. The spouse of a Torah scholar must also be shown deference. It is also a commandment for teachers and rabbis to honor their students. Rabbis and Torah scholars have the authority to place individuals who insult them under a \"herem\" (excommunication) to ensure discipline within the Jewish community.\nOrdination.\nClassical ordination.\nThe first recorded examples of ordination are Moses transmitting his authority to Joshua, as well as the 70 elders. Similarly, Elijah transmitted his authority to Elisha.\nAccording to Pirkei Avot, ordination was transmitted without interruption from Moses to Joshua, to the elders, to the prophets, to the Great Assembly, to the \"Zugot\", and to the \"Tannaim\". The chain of \"semikhah\" was probably lost in the 4th or 5th century CE, though possibly as late as the 12th century. According to Maimonides (12th century), if it were possible to gather the greatest sages of the generation, a reconstituted court could confer classic \"semikhah\". Since then, a number of modern attempts to revive the Sanhedrin have been made. No such attempt has been accepted as valid among a consensus of rabbis or persisted for longer than about a century.\nContemporary ordination.\nSince the end of classical ordination, other forms of ordination have developed, which use much of the same terminology but have lesser significance in Jewish law. Nowadays, a rabbinical student is awarded \"semikhah\" after completing a \"yeshiva\" or modern rabbinical seminary program. The exact course of study varies by denomination, but most are in the range of 3\u20136 years. The programs all include Talmud study, the codes of \"Halakha\", and the responsa literature to a greater or lesser extent, depending on the branch of Judaism. In addition to rabbinical literature, modern seminaries offer courses in pastoral subjects, including counseling, education, comparative religion, and sermon delivery. There is no unifying authority over all movements of Judaism that either supervises rabbinic education or records ordinations; each branch of Judaism regulates the ordination of the rabbis affiliated with it.\nThe most common formula used on a certificate\u2014without punctuation\u2014of \"semikhah\" is \"yoreh yoreh\" (). Most rabbis hold this qualification; they are sometimes called a \"moreh hora'ah\" (). A more advanced form of \"semikhah\" is \"yadin yadin\" (). The latter enables the recipient to serve as a judge on a rabbinical court and adjudicate cases of monetary law, among other responsibilities. The recipient of this ordination can be formally addressed as a \"dayan\" (; pl.\u2009\"dayanim\") and also retain the title of rabbi. Only a small percentage of rabbis earn the \"yadin yadin\" ordination. Although not strictly necessary, many Orthodox rabbis hold that a \"beit din\" should be made up of \"dayanim\" with this ordination.\nOrthodox and Modern Orthodox Judaism.\nAn Orthodox \"semikhah\" requires the successful completion of a program encompassing Jewish law and responsa, in accordance with longstanding tradition. Orthodox rabbis typically study at a \"yeshiva\", which provides training in general Torah scholarship; increasingly, Orthodox rabbis further train at a \"kollel\". Both \"yeshiva\"s and \"kollel\"s are forms of rabbinical schools or academies. In both cases, the programs are typically post-undergraduate, lasting an average of two years, and usually follow at least four years of intensive \"yeshiva\" study, which involves rigorous religious and Talmudic learning.\nIn achieving \"semikhah\", rabbinical students work to gain knowledge in specific and relevant Talmudic \"sugyas\" and their development by the \"Rishonim \"and \"Acharonim\" (early and late medieval commentators), leading to their application in \"Halakha\"\u2014particularly as traced by the \"Arba'ah Turim\". Building on this is the study of those sections of the \"Shulchan Aruch\"\u2014together with its main commentaries\u2014that pertain to daily-life questions (such as the laws of keeping kosher, Shabbat, and the laws of family purity). An element of \"shimush\" (\"apprenticeship\") is often also required.\nReligious Zionist and Modern Orthodox rabbinical students, such as those at the Hesder \"yeshiva\"s and Yeshiva University, respectively, also formally study \"hashkafa\" (i.e., the major elements of Jewish philosophy and theology) and its application to contemporary questions. Their study proceeds systematically through the Rabbinic literature; other students will have studied these works independently.\nThe entrance requirements for an Orthodox \"yeshiva\" include a strong background within Jewish law, liturgy, Talmudic study, and attendant languages (e.g., Hebrew, Aramaic, and, in some cases, Yiddish). Specifically, students are expected to have acquired analytic skills and wide breadth in Talmud scholarship before commencing their rabbinic studies. At the same time, since rabbinical studies typically build upon other \"yeshiva\" studies, those who seek \"semikhah\" are generally not required to have completed a university education. Exceptions exist, such as Yeshiva University, which requires all rabbinical students to complete an undergraduate degree before entering the program and a master's degree or equivalent before ordination.\nHistorically, women were not permitted to become Orthodox rabbis. Starting in 2009, some Modern Orthodox institutions began ordaining women with the title of \"Maharat\" (, an abbreviation of ); later, \"Rabbi\" and \"Rabbah\" () were bestowed, as well. This is currently a contested issue for many Orthodox institutions, leading some to seek alternate clerical titles and roles for women (e.g., Toanot Rabniyot and Yoetzet Halacha).\nWhile some Haredi Jewish (including Hasidic Jewish) \"yeshiva\"s do grant official ordination to many students wishing to become rabbis, most of the students within the yeshivas engage in Torah and Talmud study without the goal of becoming rabbis or holding official positions. The curriculum for obtaining ordination as rabbis for Haredi scholars is the same as described above for all Orthodox students seeking to hold the official title of \"Rabbi\".\nWithin the Hasidic community, the positions of spiritual leadership are dynastically transmitted within established families, usually from fathers to sons, while a small number of students obtain official ordination to become \"dayanim\" on religious courts, \"poskim\" (), as well as teachers in the Hasidic schools. The same is true for the non-Hasidic Litvish \"yeshiva\"s that are controlled by dynastically transmitted \"roshei yeshiva\" (), and the majority of students will not become rabbis (even after many years of post-graduate \"kollel\" study).\nSome \"yeshiva\"s, such as Yeshivas Rabbeinu Yisrael Meir HaKohen and Yeshivas Ner Yisroel in Baltimore, Maryland, may encourage their students to obtain \"semikhah\" and serve as rabbis who teach in other \"yeshiva\"s or Hebrew day schools. Other \"yeshiva\"s, such as Yeshiva Rabbi Chaim Berlin (Brooklyn, New York) or the Mirrer Yeshiva (in Brooklyn and Jerusalem), do not have an official \"semikhah\" to train rabbis. Rather, they provide \"semikhah\" on an \"as needed\" basis if and when one of their senior students is offered a rabbinical position but only with the approval of their \"roshei yeshiva\".\nHaredi Jews will often prefer using Hebrew terms for rabbinic titles, including \"Rav\" (denoting \"rabbi\"), \"HaRav\" (\"the Rabbi\"), \"Moreinu HaRav\" (\"our Teacher, the Rabbi\"), \"Moreinu\" (\"our Teacher\"), \"Moreinu VeRabeinu HaRav\" (\"our Teacher and our Rabbi, the Rabbi\"), \"Moreinu VeRabeinu\" (\"our Teacher and our Rabbi\"), \"Rosh Yeshiva\" (\"[the] Head [of the] Yeshiva\"), \"Rosh HaYeshiva\" (\"Head [of] the Yeshiva\"), \"Mashgiach\" (for \"mashgiach ruchani\"; \"spiritual supervisor\"), \"Mora DeAsra\" (\"Teacher [of] the place\"), \"HaGaon\" (\"the Genius\"), \"Rebbe\" (\"Rabbi\"), \"HaTzadik\" (\"the Righteous One\"), \"ADMOR\" (\"Adoneinu Moreinu VeRabeinu\"; \"our Master, our Teacher, and our Rabbi\"), or \"Reb\", which is a shortened form of \"rebbe\" that can be used by, or applied to, any married Jewish male as the situation applies.\nA \"rebbetzin\" (a Yiddish usage common among Ashkenazim) or a \"rabbanit\" (in Hebrew and used among Sephardim) is the official \"title\" used for, or by, the wife of any Orthodox, Haredi, or Hasidic rabbi. \"Rebbetzin\" may also be used as an equivalent of \"Reb\" and is sometimes abbreviated as such, as well.\nNon-Orthodox Judaism.\nConservative Judaism.\nConservative Judaism confers \"semikhah\" after the completion of a program in the codes of Jewish law and responsa in keeping with Jewish tradition. In addition to knowledge and mastery of the study of Talmud and Halakha, Conservative \"semikhah\" also requires that its rabbinical students receive intensive training in Tanakh, classical biblical commentaries, biblical criticism, Midrash, Kabbalah, and Hasidut (, '[works on] piety') the historical development of Judaism from antiquity to modernity, Jewish ethics, the halakhic methodology of Conservative responsa, classical and modern works of Jewish theology and philosophy, synagogue administration, pastoral care, chaplaincy, non-profit management, and navigating the modern world in a Jewish context. Entrance requirements to Conservative rabbinical study centers include a background within Jewish law and liturgy, familiarity with Rabbinic literature, Talmud, etc., ritual observance according to Conservative \"Halakha\", and the completion of an undergraduate university degree. In accordance with national collegiate accreditation requirements, Conservative rabbinical students earn a Master of Arts in Rabbinic Literature in addition to receiving ordination.\nSee \nReform Judaism.\nIn Reform Judaism, rabbinic studies are mandated in pastoral care, the historical development of Judaism, and academic biblical criticism, in addition to the study of traditional rabbinic texts. Rabbinical students are also required to gain practical rabbinic experience by working at a congregation as a rabbinic intern during each year of study, starting from the first year. All Reform seminaries ordain women and openly LGBTQ people as rabbis and \"hazzan\"s.\nSee \nSeminaries unaffiliated with main denominations.\nThere are numerous possibilities for receiving rabbinic ordination in addition to seminaries maintained by the large Jewish denominations. These are the Academy for Jewish Religion in New York City, AJR in California, ALEPH, the Jewish Renewal movement's online program, Hebrew College in Boston, and Hebrew Seminary in Illinois. The structure and curriculum of these are essentially the same as those at other non-Orthodox \"yeshiva\"s.\nMore recently established are several non-traditional, and nondenominational (also called \"transdenominational\" or \"postdenominational\") seminaries. These grant \"semikhah\" with lesser requirements in terms of time and a modified curriculum, generally focusing on leadership and pastoral roles. These are Jewish Spiritual Leaders Institute, Rabbinical Seminary International, Pluralistic Rabbinical Seminary, and Ateret Tzvi. The Mesifta Adath Wolkowisk is aimed at community professionals with significant knowledge and experience, and provides a tailored curriculum to each candidate.\nInterdenominational recognition.\nHistorically and until the present, recognition of a rabbi relates to a community's perception of the rabbi's competence to interpret Jewish law and act as a teacher on central matters within Judaism. More broadly speaking, it is also an issue of being a worthy successor to a sacred legacy. As a result, there have always been greater or lesser disputes about the legitimacy and authority of rabbis. Historical examples include Rabbinic Judaism's disputes with Samaritanism and Karaite Judaism. The divisions between Jewish denominations may have their most pronounced manifestation in whether rabbis from one denomination recognize the legitimacy or authority of rabbis in another.\nAs a general rule within Orthodox Judaism and among some in Conservative Judaism, rabbis are reluctant to accept the authority of other rabbis whose halakhic standards are not as strict as their own. In some cases, this leads to an outright rejection of the legitimacy of other rabbis; in others, a rabbi may be recognized as a spiritual leader of a particular community but may not be accepted as a credible authority on Jewish law.\nThe Orthodox rabbinical establishment rejects the validity of Conservative, Reform, and Reconstructionist rabbis on the grounds that their movements' teachings violate traditional Jewish tenets. Some Modern Orthodox rabbis are respectful toward non-Orthodox rabbis and focus on commonalities even as they disagree on the interpretation of some areas of \"Halakha\" (with Conservative rabbis) or the authority of \"Halakha\" (with Reform and Reconstructionist rabbis).\nConservative rabbis accept the legitimacy of Orthodox rabbis, though they are often critical of Orthodox positions. Although they would rarely look to Reform or Reconstructionist rabbis for halakhic decisions, they accept the legitimacy of these rabbis' religious leadership.\nReform and Reconstructionist rabbis, on the premise that all the main movements are legitimate expressions of Judaism, will accept the legitimacy of other rabbis' leadership. However, they will not accept their views on Jewish law, since Reform and Reconstructionists reject \"Halakha\" as binding.\nThese debates cause great problems for the recognition of Jewish marriages, conversions, and other life decisions that are touched by Jewish law. Orthodox rabbis do not recognize conversions by non-Orthodox rabbis. Conservative rabbis recognise all conversions done according to \"Halakha\". Finally, the North American Reform and Reconstructionists recognize the Jewishness of patrilineal Jews\u2014under certain circumstances\u2014as a valid claim towards Judaism. In contrast, Conservative and Orthodox maintain the position expressed in the Talmud and halakhic literature that one can be a Jew only through matrilineality (i.e., being born to a Jewish mother) or through formal conversion to Judaism.\nWomen rabbis.\nWith few rare exceptions, Jewish women have historically been excluded from serving as rabbis. This changed in the 1970s; coinciding with the shift in American society involving second-wave feminism, the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion began ordaining women as rabbis. Today, Jewish women serve as rabbis within all progressive branches of Judaism. In contrast, in Orthodox Judaism, women rabbis are a contested matter. However, many communities allow alternate clerical roles for women, such as \"Yoetzet Halacha\". A variety of modern titles have been coined for female rabbis in Orthodox Judaism, including \"Rabbah\" &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;(\u05e8\u05d1\u05d4)\u200e, \"Rabbanit\" &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;(\u05e8\u05d1\u05e0\u05d9\u05ea)\u200e, and \"Maharat\" &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;(\u05de\u05d4\u05e8\"\u05ea)\u200e.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51274", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51274", "title": "Airliners", "text": ""}
{"id": "51275", "revid": "1020372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51275", "title": "Kenneth Horne", "text": "English comedian and businessman (1907\u20131969)\nCharles Kenneth Horne (27 February 1907\u00a0\u2013 14 February 1969) was an English comedian and businessman. He is perhaps best remembered for his work on three BBC Radio series: \"Much-Binding-in-the-Marsh\" (1944\u20131954), \"Beyond Our Ken\" (1958\u20131964) and \"Round the Horne\" (1965\u20131968).\nThe son of a clergyman who was also a politician, Horne had a burgeoning business career with Triplex Safety Glass, which was interrupted by service with the Royal Air Force during the Second World War. While serving in a barrage balloon unit, he was asked to broadcast as a quizmaster on the BBC radio show \"Ack-Ack, Beer-Beer\". The experience brought him into contact with the more established entertainer Richard Murdoch, and the two wrote and starred in the comedy series \"Much-Binding-in-the-Marsh\". After demobilisation Horne returned to his business career, and kept his broadcasting as a sideline. His career in industry flourished, and he later became the chairman and managing director of toy manufacturers Chad Valley.\nIn 1958 Horne suffered a stroke and gave up his business dealings to concentrate on his entertainment work. He was the anchor figure in \"Beyond Our Ken\", which also featured Kenneth Williams, Hugh Paddick, Betty Marsden and Bill Pertwee. When the programme came to an end in 1964, the same cast recorded four series of the comedy \"Round the Horne\".\nBefore the planned fifth series of \"Round the Horne\" began recording, Horne died of a heart attack while hosting the annual Guild of Television Producers' and Directors' Awards; \"Round the Horne\" could not continue without him and was withdrawn. The series has been regularly re-broadcast since his death. A 2002 BBC radio survey to find listeners' favourite British comedian placed Horne third, behind Tony Hancock and Spike Milligan.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nKenneth Horne was born Charles Kenneth Horne on 27 February 1907 at Ampthill Square, London. He was the seventh and youngest child of Silvester Horne and his wife, Katherine Maria \"n\u00e9e\" Cozens-Hardy. Katherine's father was Herbert Cozens-Hardy, the Liberal MP for North Norfolk who became the Master of the Rolls in 1907 and Baron Cozens-Hardy on 1 July 1914. Silvester, a powerful orator, was a leading light in the Congregationalist movement, as minister at the Whitefield's Tabernacle, Tottenham Court Road from 1903 and, from 1910, chairman of the Congregational Union of England and Wales. Between 1910 and 1914 he was the Liberal Member of Parliament (MP) for Ipswich.\nBy 1913 Silvester was suffering from continual poor health. He resigned his position at the tabernacle on medical advice in January 1914, and intended to resign his parliamentary seat. On a speaking tour of the US and Canada he lectured at Yale University, and then travelled to Toronto; as the ferry he took entered harbour, he collapsed and died, aged 49; Horne was aged seven at the time. From September that year Horne attended St George's School, Harpenden as a boarder\u2014the seventh of the Horne children to attend the school. Although he was not strong academically, he developed into a good sportsman, representing the school in rugby and cricket, and during the summer holidays took part in the Public Schoolboys Lawn Tennis Championship at Queen's Club; in his final appearance in 1925 he was knocked out by the future Wimbledon finalist Bunny Austin.\nHorne enrolled at the London School of Economics in October 1925, where his tutors included Hugh Dalton and Stephen Leacock; he was dissatisfied with his time at the university and called Leacock \"one of the most boring lecturers I ever came across\". During the general strike in 1926 volunteers were asked to enlist at the Organisation for the Maintenance of Supplies to take over the essential services; Horne joined, and spent two days driving a London bus before the strike was called off. Through the influence and generosity of an uncle, Austin Pilkington of the Pilkington glassmaking family of St Helens, he was able to enrol at Magdalene College, Cambridge, in October 1926. He committed himself to the sporting side of life and represented the college at rugby, and in the relay team alongside the future Olympic gold medallist Lord Burghley. He also played tennis for the university, partnering Bunny Austin. Distracted by his athletic exploits, he neglected his studies and was sent down in December 1927.\nAustin Pilkington was aggrieved at Horne's failure to make the most of the opportunity he had provided, and decided against offering the young man a post in the family firm. Despite the disappointment, through his contacts within the industry, he secured for the young Horne an interview with the Triplex Safety Glass Company at King's Norton, a district of Birmingham. Horne's sporting record commended him to the manager of the Triplex factory, and he was taken on as a management trainee on a modest salary. In September 1930, despite his unimpressive finances, he married Lady Mary Pelham-Clinton-Hope, daughter of the 8th Duke of Newcastle. The marriage was happy at first, but had broken down by 1932. Mary applied for an annulment in November 1932; she declared the reason was \"the incapacity of the respondent [Charles Kenneth Horne] to consummate the marriage\", which was dissolved in 1933, although the two remained on friendly terms thereafter.\nWhen Horne's first marriage was dissolved, he was sought out by a former girlfriend, Joan Burgess, daughter of a neighbour at King's Norton. Unlike his first wife, she had much in common with him, including a liking for squash, tennis, golf and dancing. A month before her 21st birthday they were married, in September 1936. Joan became pregnant soon after the wedding, and in July 1937 a baby boy was delivered; he was stillborn.\nService in the RAF.\nIn 1938 Horne enlisted in the Auxiliary Air Force on a part-time training scheme. He was commissioned as an acting pilot officer in No. 911 (County of Warwick) Squadron, a barrage balloon unit in Sutton Coldfield, and was called up into the RAF full-time on the outbreak of war. In the initial months of the conflict\u2014the Phoney War\u2014Horne's duties were undemanding, and he formed a concert party from his friends and colleagues. In November 1940 he was promoted to flight lieutenant, and to squadron leader a year later. In early 1942, the BBC producer Bill McLurg asked whether the RAF station at which Horne was based could put on an edition of his programme \"Ack-Ack, Beer-Beer\". Horne was ordered to put on the show, and he made his broadcasting debut on 16 April 1942, as the compere. Although the standard of the talent on the show was not high, McLurg was impressed with Horne's presentation, especially the way he hosted the programme's quiz; he invited Horne to be the programme's regular quizmaster, a role the latter fulfilled on over fifty \"Ack-Ack, Beer-Beer\" quizzes over the next two years. In January 1943 he became one of the show's regular comperes and presented the entire show for the first time.\nIn March 1943 Horne was posted to the Air Ministry in London, with the acting rank of wing commander. On 26 April 1944 he was promoted to the war substantive rank of squadron leader. Continuing to broadcast on \"Ack-Ack, Beer-Beer\", he also began to write sketches for the programme, and make broadcasts on other shows, including the Overseas Recorded Broadcasting Service (ORBS), to be transmitted to British forces in the Middle East. His work with ORBS brought him into contact with Flight Lieutenant Richard Murdoch, who he jokingly introduced in one broadcast as \"the station commander of Much-Binding-in-the-Marsh\"; with a great deal in common in their backgrounds and a similar sense of humour, the pair quickly formed a friendship. Horne informed Murdoch of a squadron leader vacancy in his section at the Ministry, and Murdoch became his colleague. Murdoch, a professional actor and entertainer for 12 years before the war, recognised Horne's talent as a performer, and used his contacts to secure him more broadcasting work.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter Horne has been on holiday:Murdoch: But sir, honestly you are looking sunburned, all except the top of your head.Horne: Well Murdoch, it was pretty hot on the beach in Bermuda so I kept my bowler on most of the time.Murdoch: Very wise of you sir.\u00a0...You are looking sunburned. Are you like that all over?Horne: \"(pause)\" There's one little place that you really must see when you go to Bermuda, Murdoch...\n\"Much-Binding-in-the-Marsh\", 1949\n\"Ack-Ack, Beer-Beer\" came to an end in February 1944 when the BBC decided to direct their programming at the general armed forces, rather than the barrage balloon crews. A month later Horne and Murdoch had expanded the idea of the remote and fictitious Royal Air Force station, Much-Binding-in-the-Marsh. The pair took the idea to the BBC producer Leslie Bridgemont who was responsible for the show \"Merry-go-Round\", which featured, in weekly rotation, shows based on the Army, Navy and RAF. Bridgemont included a \"Much-Binding-in-the-Marsh\" section in \"Merry-go-Round\" on 31 March 1944; Horne played \"an officer so dim that even the other officers noticed\", with Murdoch as his harassed second-in-command and Sam Costa as an \"amiable chump who always got things wrong\".\nDuring 1944 Horne met and fell in love with Marjorie Thomas, a war widow with a young daughter. He was divorced in early 1945, and he and Thomas were married in November that year, three months after he had been demobilised.\nPostwar, a double career: 1945\u20131958.\nOn his return to civilian life, Horne resumed working at Triplex, and was promoted to the position of sales director. Despite his subsequent joint career in broadcasting and business, his commercial activities always took precedence. He declared that his work on radio was only a hobby, and that he would give it up before his business career. He combined his two roles by working full-time, and writing scripts with Murdoch at weekends.\n\"Much-Binding-in-the-Marsh\" had gained sufficient popularity over its run of 20 \"Merry-go-Round\" episodes to be given its own 39-week series beginning in January 1947. With the coming of peace, the supposed RAF station became a civil airport, and the show continued much as before, written by and starring Horne and Murdoch, with Sam Costa. Maurice Denham\u2014described by Murdoch as a vocal chameleon\u2014joined the cast and played over 60 roles. The programme became popular, with audiences of 20 million, and ran for four series until September 1950.\nIn March 1948 Horne appeared with Murdoch in six episodes of the BBC Television comedy series \"Kaleidoscope\". In June that year he and Murdoch again appeared on television in a one-off sitcom, \"At Home\", which they wrote. The following year Horne began his connection with \"Twenty Questions\", an association that lasted, on-and-off, for 20 years. By the fourth series of \"Much-Binding\" in 1950, the listener figures had declined to a level that concerned the BBC and they decided against a fifth series. Rather than wait to see what other offers of work would come in from the Corporation, Horne and Murdoch signed the comedy to a 35-programme series on Radio Luxembourg between October 1950 and June 1951. The programme was poorly received on the commercial channel: Murdoch observed that \"it wasn't really a great success\u2014even my mother said it was rotten, and she was my greatest fan\". After one series, the show returned to the BBC in 1951\u20131952, although renamed as \"Over to You\". Murdoch and Horne again appeared together, in April 1952, on \"Desert Island Discs\".\nIn 1954, after nine years in his senior position at Triplex, and 27 years at the company, Horne accepted the position of managing director of the British Industries Fair, a government-backed organisation promoting British goods worldwide; he took up his position in July 1955. Much of the work involved liaising with foreign buyers and delegations, and he accompanied the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh on visits to the annual fair. In 1956 the government withdrew its funding and the BIF closed. Horne received several attractive job offers, and chose the post of chairman and managing director of the toy manufacturers Chad Valley, where he was a success. In September that year he and Murdoch appeared in a one-off television programme \"Show for the Telly\".\nIn January 1957 Horne appeared as the compere on the popular Saturday evening comedy and music radio show \"Variety Playhouse\", initially for a run of four months, but soon extended until the end of June. He also began to write a weekly column for the women's magazine \"She\", and to appear in an increasing number of other programmes. After his work on \"Variety Playhouse\" had finished, he and the programme's writers Eric Merriman and Barry Took prepared a script for a pilot episode of a new show, \"Beyond Our Ken\". The show, in which Horne was joined by Kenneth Williams, Ron Moody, Hugh Paddick and Betty Marsden, was broadcast in October 1957.\nA single career: 1958\u20131969.\nThe pilot episode of \"Beyond Our Ken\" was well received by the BBC, and they commissioned a series to start in April 1958. On 27 February that year\u2014his 51st birthday\u2014Horne suffered a debilitating stroke and was totally paralysed down his left-hand side and lost the power of speech. He underwent a course of intensive physiotherapy and was able to return home after two weeks. His voice returned when, during heavy massage on his left thigh, a sharp pain led to him shouting \"You bugger!\" at the physiotherapist. His doctor told him that the stroke was caused by the stress of combining a full-time business post with his broadcasting work. He also told Horne that when he had recovered he would never be fit enough to continue as before. Horne considered that it was not the physical problem of combining his two careers, but the mental strain of problems in his business life; accordingly he decided to give up commerce and concentrate on a career in entertainment. Because of the stroke, plans for \"Beyond Our Ken\" were suspended.\nIn April 1958 Horne eased himself back into broadcasting as chairman of \"Twenty Questions\". This evidence of his recovery was sufficient for the BBC to begin recording \"Beyond Our Ken\" in June, in preparation for the broadcast of the first series between July and November. \"Beyond Our Ken\" was written around the imperturbable establishment figure of Horne, while the other performers played a \"spectrum of characters never before heard on the radio\", including the exaggeratedly upper class Rodney and Charles, the genteel pensioners Ambrose and Felicity, the cook Fanny Haddock\u2014a parody of popular TV cook Fanny Cradock\u2014and the gardener Arthur Fallowfield. The first episode was not well received by a sample audience, but the BBC decided to back Horne and his team, and the initial six-week contract was extended to 21 weeks. Before the series came to an end, a second had been commissioned to run the following year. After the first series Moody was succeeded by Bill Pertwee; Took left after the second series, leaving Merriman to write the remaining programmes on his own.\nThe second series of \"Beyond Our Ken\" followed in 1959; a third in 1960. Horne also continued his work in television, hosting his own series, \"Trader Horne\", and appearing on a number of other programmes. In April 1961 he made his second appearance on \"Desert Island Discs\", this time unaccompanied by Murdoch. In October that year\u2014three weeks after the fifth series of \"Beyond Our Ken\" began recording\u2014Horne appeared as the anchorman on a new BBC television series, \"Let's Imagine\", a discussion programme which ran for 20 editions over 18 months. He was the subject of \"This Is Your Life\" in February 1962, hosted by Eamonn Andrews, in which guests included friends and colleagues from his connections in business and entertainment. In June 1963 he began \"Ken's Column\", a series of 15-minute one-man programmes for Anglia Television.\nThe seventh series of \"Beyond Our Ken\" finished in February 1964, with an average audience of ten million listeners per programme. In September that year Horne returned from holiday and was scheduled to appear in a number of programmes; Eric Merriman objected to Horne's activities, saying that Horne had been made into a star by the writer, and that \"no other comedy series should be allowed to use him\". When the BBC refused to withdraw Horne from the second programme, \"Down with Women\", Merriman resigned from writing \"Beyond Our Ken\" and the show came to an end. After some pressure from Horne to keep the remainder of the team together, the BBC commissioned a replacement series, \"Round the Horne\", on similar lines. They turned to one of the original writers of \"Beyond Our Ken\", Barry Took and his new writing partner, Marty Feldman. Horne remained the genial and unflappable focal figure, and the writers invented several new and eccentric characters to revolve round him. They included J. Peasemold Gruntfuttock, the walking slum; the No\u00ebl Coward parodies Charles and Fiona; the incompetent villain Dr. Chou En Ginsberg; the folk singer Rambling Syd Rumpo and the \"outrageously camp\" Julian and Sandy. The resulting programme was described by radio historians Andy Foster and Steve Furst as \"one of the seminal comedies to come out of the BBC\", while \"The Spectator\" described it as \"one of the great radio successes\". The first series of \"Round the Horne\", consisting of 16 episodes, ran from March to June 1965. Horne's role was to provide \"the perfect foil to the inspired lunacy happening all around him\":\nOn 7 October 1966, at the age of 59, Horne suffered a major heart attack. He was much weakened, and was unfit to work for three months. As a result, he did not appear in the \"Round the Horne\" Christmas special. He returned to work in January 1967 to record the third series.\n\"Round the Horne\" ran to four series, broadcast in successive years, and finished in June 1968. Three weeks after the fourth series finished, the first episode of \"Horne A'Plenty\" was broadcast on ITV. In a sketch show format, and with Barry Took as script editor (and later producer), this was an attempt to translate the spirit of \"Round the Horne\" to television, although with different actors supporting Horne: Graham Stark, for example, substituted for Kenneth Williams and Sheila Steafel for Betty Marsden. The first six-part series ran from 22 June to 27 July 1968, the second (by which time ABC had become Thames Television) from 27 November to 1 January 1969.\nDeath and tributes.\nBecause of his heart condition, Horne had been prescribed an anticoagulant, but had stopped taking it on the advice of a faith healer. Horne died of a heart attack on 14 February 1969, while hosting the annual Guild of Television Producers' and Directors' Awards at the Dorchester hotel in London. Presenting the awards was Earl Mountbatten of Burma; an award had gone to Barry Took and Marty Feldman for their TV series \"Marty\", and Horne had just urged viewers to tune into the fifth series of \"Round the Horne\" (which was due to start on 16 March) when he fell from the podium. The televised recording of the event omitted the incident, with announcer Michael Aspel explaining, \"Mr Horne was taken ill at this point and has since died.\" A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields in March that year.\nAfter his death, Horne was eulogised in \"The Times\" as \"a master of the scandalous double-meaning delivered with shining innocence\", while \"The Sunday Mirror\" called him \"one of the few personalities who bridged the generation gap\" and \"perhaps the last of the truly great radio comics.\" In the December 1970 issue of \"The Listener\", Barry Took recalled \"Round the Horne\" and said of its star:\nHe was an unselfish performer, but it was still always \"his\" show. You just knew it. A Martian would have known it. His warmth tempered the sharpness of the writing\u00a0... To say that everyone loved him sounds like every obituary ever written\u00a0\u2013 nonetheless it's true\u00a0... Horne was one of the few great men I have met, and his generosity of spirit and gesture have, in my experience, never been surpassed. I mourn him still.\nOn hearing the news Kenneth Williams wrote in his diary that \"I loved that man. His unselfish nature, his kindness, tolerance and gentleness were an example to everyone\". In \"The Sunday Times\" in February 1969, Paul Jennings wrote of him: \"If I ever knew a gentleman, it was Kenneth Horne.\u00a0... He gave you his whole attention, his whole courtesy. And what a courtesy it was!\u00a0... I knew him in the context of panel games, to which his marvellous unforced humour, spontaneous but beautifully timed, always added sparkle.\"\nTechnique.\nHorne's friend, Barry Took, considered that \"Horne's rich, fruity voice and warm patrician manner made him the ideal link man and that, coupled with a mischievous sense of humour, ensured that any programme in which he was involved was the better for his presence\". Horne attributed his voice and delivery \"to 'the Grace of God', his grandfather Lord Cozens-Hardy, the former Master of the Rolls, and the hard training of being 'a jovial chap among the golf and motoring fraternity'.\"\nThe obituarist for \"The Times\" highlighted Horne's \"remarkably skilful but very personal comic technique\" of playing \"a friendly good-natured old buffer who was simply doing his best, apparently lost in wonder, at the glossier, more spectacular talents of those among whom he found himself\". The media analysts Frank Krutnik and Steve Neale see a similar role, and consider that \"Horne functioned, like [Jack] Benny, [Fred] Allen and [Tommy] Handley before him, as a 'stooge' rather than a joke-wielder, frequently switching roles between announcer and in-sketch performer\".\nIn \"Round the Horne\", as well as acting as link man, Horne also played other character roles in the film and melodrama spoofs, but always sounded exactly like Kenneth Horne. Referring to his ability with voices, he commented that \"between them Betty, Ken W., Hugh and Bill Pertwee can provide at least 100 voices, and if you take me into account the figure leaps to 101.\" Williams reported that Horne had a card index mind, \"in which there seemed to be stored every funny voice, every dialect, every comedy trick, which he knew that each member of the cast was capable of\", and would suggest a change in approach if a line did not work during rehearsals.\nGraham Ball, writing in the \"Sunday Express\" observed that Horne \"didn't tell jokes in the usual manner, didn't have a catchphrase and never resorted to blue comedy\". Ball also identified that Horne's \"stage character, that of a slightly bufferish English gent, was adored by middle- and working-class audiences alike. His humour was original, almost underplayed, but the effortless delivery and uncanny timing concealed an almost anarchic sense of mischief.\"\nLegacy.\nBy 24 February 1969 it had been decided that \"Round the Horne\" could not continue without its star. As a result, the scripts for Series Five (which Horne had jokingly suggested should be subtitled 'The First All-Nude Radio Show') were hastily adapted into a new series for Kenneth Williams called \"Stop Messing About\", which ran for two series but was widely judged a failure and discontinued in 1970. On the first day of recording the new show, Williams wrote in his diary that \"I miss [Horne] dreadfully. I could weep for all that \"goodness\" gone from our atmosphere at the show\".\nA successful stage show called \"Round the Horne\u00a0... Revisited\" opened in London in October 2003, compiled by Series Four co-writer Brian Cooke from original scripts. It ran until April 2005, and also generated three nationwide tours and a BBC television film. On 27 February 2007 (Horne's centenary), BBC Radio 4 broadcast a half-hour documentary tribute entitled \"Sound the Horne\", hosted by Jimmy Carr. The following year, on 18 September, another Radio 4 documentary was broadcast; called \"Thoroughly Modest Mollie\", this focused on Horne's frequent ghost-writer, Mollie Millest. A new show, devised by Barry Took's widow Lyn, called \"Round the Horne \u2013 Unseen and Uncut\", toured in 2008 and 2009. In 2009 an unbroadcast pilot script written by Horne and Millest in 1966 was produced by the same Radio 4 team. Called \"Twice Ken is Plenty\" and intended as a two-man showcase for Horne and Kenneth Williams, it was broadcast on 1 September 2009.\nHorne has been the subject of two biographies, Norman Hackforth's \"Solo for Horne\" in 1976 and Barry Johnston's \"Round Mr Horne: The Life of Kenneth Horne\" in 2006. In 1998 Ernie Wise unveiled a blue plaque to Horne at BBC Broadcasting House. Editions of \"Beyond Our Ken\" and \"Round the Horne\" are regularly broadcast on the digital radio service BBC Radio 4 Extra, and by 2006 over half a million copies of tapes and CDs of \"Round the Horne\" had been sold by the BBC. In a 2002 survey conducted by the BBC to find listeners' favourite British comedian, Horne appeared third, behind Tony Hancock and Spike Milligan.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51276", "revid": "1107392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51276", "title": "Marty Feldman", "text": "British actor and comedian (1934\u20131982)\nMartin Alan Feldman (8 July 1934\u00a0\u2013 2 December 1982) was a British actor, comedian and writer. He was known for his prominent, misaligned eyes.\nHe initially gained prominence as a writer with Barry Took on the ITV sitcom \"Bootsie and Snudge\" and the BBC Radio comedy programme \"Round the Horne\". He became known as a performer on \"At Last the 1948 Show\" (co-writing the Four Yorkshiremen sketch, which Monty Python would later perform) and \"Marty\", the latter winning him two British Academy Television Awards, including Best Entertainment Performance in 1969.\nFeldman went on to appear in films such as \"The Bed Sitting Room\" and \"Every Home Should Have One\", the latter being one of the most popular comedies at the British box office in 1970. In 1971, he starred in the comedy-variety sketch series for ATV called \"The Marty Feldman Comedy Machine\". In 1974, he appeared as Igor in Mel Brooks' \"Young Frankenstein\", for which he received the first Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor. He died in 1982 of a heart attack while filming \"Yellowbeard\" in Mexico City.\nEarly life.\nFeldman was born on 8 July 1934 in Canning Town, east London, the son of Cecilia (n\u00e9e Crook) and Myer Feldman, a gown manufacturer. His parents were Ukrainian Jewish immigrants from Kyiv. He recalled his childhood as \"solitary\" especially during his years of evacuation to the countryside during the Second World War.\nFeldman suffered from thyroid disease and developed Graves' ophthalmopathy, causing his eyes to protrude and become misaligned. A childhood injury, a car crash, a boating accident and reconstructive eye surgery may also have contributed to his appearance. He later described his appearance as a factor in his career success: \"If I aspired to be Robert Redford, I'd have my eyes straightened and my nose fixed and end up like every other lousy actor, with two lines on \"Kojak.\" But this way, I'm a novelty.\"\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nLeaving school at the minimum age of 15, Feldman worked at the Dreamland funfair in Margate, but had dreams of a career as a jazz trumpeter, and performed in the first group in which tenor saxophonist Tubby Hayes was a member. Feldman joked that he was \"the world's worst trumpet player.\" By the age of 20, he had decided to pursue a career as a comedian.\nAlthough his early performing career was undistinguished, Feldman became part of a comedy act\u2014Morris, Marty and Mitch\u2014who made their first television appearance on the BBC series \"Showcase\" in April 1955. Later in the decade, Feldman worked on the scripts for \"Educating Archie\" in both its radio and television incarnations, with Ronald Chesney and later, Ronald Wolfe.\nIn 1954, Feldman met Barry Took while both were working as performers, and with Took, he eventually formed an enduring writing partnership which lasted until 1974. They wrote a few episodes of \"The Army Game\" (1960) and the bulk of \"Bootsie and Snudge\" (1960\u201362), both situation comedies made by Granada Television for the ITV network. For BBC Radio they wrote \"Round the Horne\" (1964\u201367), their best-remembered comedy series, which starred Kenneth Horne and Kenneth Williams. (The last series of \"Round the Horne,\" in 1968, was written by others.) This work placed Feldman and Took 'in the front rank of comedy writers', according to Denis Norden.\nFeldman then became the chief writer and script editor on \"The Frost Report\" (1966\u201367). With John Law, he co-wrote the much-shown \"Class\" sketch, in which John Cleese, Ronnie Barker and Ronnie Corbett faced the audience, with their descending order of height, suggesting their relative social status as upper class (Cleese), middle class (Barker) and working class (Corbett).\nAscent.\nThe television sketch comedy series \"At Last the 1948 Show\" raised Feldman's profile as a performer. The other three participants (future Monty Python members Graham Chapman and John Cleese; and future star of \"The Goodies\" Tim Brooke-Taylor) needed a fourth cast member, and had Feldman in mind. In a sketch broadcast on 1 March 1967, Feldman's character harassed a patient shop assistant (played by Cleese) regarding a series of fictitious books, achieving success with \"Ethel the Aardvark Goes Quantity Surveying\". His character in \"At Last the 1948 Show\" was often called Mr. Pest, according to Cleese. Feldman was co-author\u2014along with Chapman, Cleese and Brooke-Taylor\u2014of the sketch \"Four Yorkshiremen\", which was written for \"At Last the 1948 Show\", later adapted by Monty Python for their stage performances.\nFeldman was given his own series on the BBC, \"Marty\", in 1968; it featured Brooke-Taylor, John Junkin and Roland MacLeod, with Cleese as one of the writers. Feldman won two BAFTA awards. The second series in 1969 was retitled \"It's Marty\" (this title being retained for the DVD release of the series).\n\"Marty\" proved popular enough with an international audience (the first series winning the Golden Rose Award at Montreux) to launch a film career. Feldman's first feature film role was in \"Every Home Should Have One\" (1970).\nAfter 1970.\n\"The Marty Feldman Comedy Machine\" (1971\u201372) was a television series co-produced by Associated Television (ATV) in the UK and the American Broadcasting Company, produced at ATV's Elstree Studios, near London. This vehicle lasted for just one series.\nIn 1974, Dennis Main Wilson produced a short BBC sketch series for Feldman titled \"Marty Back Together Again\"\u2014a reference to reports about the star's health\u2014but it never captured the impact of the earlier series.\nOn film, in Mel Brooks' \"Young Frankenstein\" (1974), Feldman played Igor (pronounced \"EYE-gore\", a comic response to Gene Wilder's claim that 'it's pronounced FRONK-en-steen'). Many lines in \"Young Frankenstein\" were improvised. Wilder said he had Feldman in mind when he wrote the part.\nFeldman's performances on American television included \"The Dean Martin Show\".\nIn 1976, Feldman ventured into Italian cinema, starring with Dayle Haddon in the sex comedy \"40 Gradi All'Ombra del Lenzuolo\" \"(Sex with a Smile\"). He later appeared in \"The Adventure of Sherlock Holmes' Smarter Brother\" and Brooks' \"Silent Movie\", as well as directing and starring in \"The Last Remake of Beau Geste\". He also guest-starred in \"Arabian Nights\", an episode of \"The Muppet Show\" in which he was teamed up with several \"Sesame Street\" characters, especially Cookie Monster, with whom he shared a playful cameo comparing their eyes side by side.\nRecording career.\nDuring the course of his career, Feldman recorded two albums, \"Marty\" (1968) and \"I Feel a Song Going Off\" (1969), re-released in 1971 as \"The Crazy World of Marty Feldman\". The songs on his second album were written by Denis King, John Junkin and Bill Solly (a writer for Max Bygraves and \"The Two Ronnies\"). It was later released as a CD in 2007.\nPersonal life.\nFrom January 1959 until his death in 1982, Feldman was married to Lauretta Sullivan, with whom he had two children. She died in 2010, at the age of 74, in Studio City, Los Angeles. Feldman's peers have reported, in a number of biographies, that he was highly attractive to women in spite of his unconventional facial appearance. He spent time in jazz clubs, as he found a parallel between 'riffing' in a comedy partnership and the improvisation of jazz.\nPolitically, Feldman was described as an \"avowed socialist\", telling one interviewer, \"I'm a socialist by conviction, if not by lifestyle\", and another, \"I'm a socialist from way back, but in order to pay my back taxes I have to live in America to earn enough money to pay the back tax I owe to the socialist government that I voted in.\" He later joked that when a Labour cabinet minister said to him, \"Of course you vote Labour\", Feldman replied, \"No, I don't, because I'm a socialist!\" Nevertheless, he generally did not seriously discuss politics in public, and once stated: \"I feel it would be presumptuous for me to make any statements about American politics because I'm a guest here.\" \nAn exception was during a promotional tour for \"The Last Remake of Beau Geste,\" when he denounced the campaign led by Anita Bryant against homosexuality. Another exception was after the murder of his friend John Lennon. Feldman subsequently became an anti-gun advocate in the US, even wearing an anti-gun t-shirt and hat pin during his appearance on the late night TV show \"Fridays\".\nIn 1971, Feldman gave evidence in favour of the defendants in the obscenity trial for \"Oz\" magazine. He chose not to swear on the Bible, but to affirm. Throughout his testimony, he mocked the judge after it was implied that Feldman had no religion because he was not Christian.\nFeldman was a lacto-ovo vegetarian. In a 1979 interview, when asked how long he had practised this, he stated: \"I was about five and a half or six when I converted; I'm forty-three now, so it's been approximately thirty-eight years.\"\nFeldman wrote an autobiography, \"Eye Marty: The Newly Discovered Autobiography of a Comic Genius\", which was brought to light following Lauretta's death. It was published in 2012 with a foreword by Eric Idle.\nDeath.\nFeldman was a heavy cigarette smoker for most of his life, often smoking four or five packs daily. He died of a heart attack in a hotel room in Mexico City on 2 December 1982 at age 48 during the making of the film \"Yellowbeard\"; the film was subsequently dedicated to him. According to an editor's note in Feldman's posthumously published autobiography, Graham Chapman was with him at the time of his death.\nHis funeral was held on 6 December 1982, in the Hollywood Hills, where eulogies were given and the services were \"tinged with laughter and jazz music\". The 20-minute service was attended by about 100 relatives and friends, including fellow comedians Cheech Marin, Dom DeLuise and Mel Brooks.\nFeldman is buried in the Garden of Heritage at Forest Lawn \u2013 Hollywood Hills Cemetery, California, near the graves of Stan Laurel and Buster Keaton, two comics he idolized.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51278", "revid": "43944218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51278", "title": "Albuquerque, New Mexico", "text": "City in New Mexico, United States\nAlbuquerque, also known as ABQ, Burque, Duke City, or the Q, is the most populous city in the U.S. state of New Mexico, and the county seat of Bernalillo County. Founded in 1706 as \"\" by Santa Fe de Nuevo M\u00e9xico governor Francisco Cuervo y Vald\u00e9s, and named in honor of Francisco Fern\u00e1ndez de la Cueva, 10th Duke of Alburquerque and Viceroy of New Spain, it was an outpost on El Camino Real, linking Mexico City to the northernmost territories of New Spain.\nLocated in the Albuquerque Basin, the city is flanked by the Sandia Mountains to the east and the West Mesa to the west, with the Rio Grande and its bosque flowing north-to-south through the middle. According to the 2020 census, Albuquerque had 564,559 residents, making it the 32nd most populous city in the U.S. and the fourth largest in the Southwest. The Albuquerque metropolitan area had 955,000 residents in 2023, and forms part of the Albuquerque\u2013Santa Fe\u2013Los Alamos combined statistical area, which had a population of 1,162,523.\nAlbuquerque is a hub for technology, fine arts, and mass media. It hosts New Mexico's primary international airport,\nAlbuquerque International Sunport, and the state's flagship and largest university, the University of New Mexico. The U.S. federal government has a strong presence through Sandia National Laboratories, one of three laboratories of the National Nuclear Security Administration, and Kirtland Air Force Base, the largest installation in the Air Force Global Strike Command.\nAlbuquerque is home to several historic landmarks, including over 160 sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Notable annual events include the Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta, the largest balloon festival in the world, the Gathering of Nations, the largest powwow in North America, and the New Mexico State Fair. Albuquerque is also known for its restaurant scene, which features both New Mexican and global cuisine, and as a center of New Mexican music and architecture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nPetroglyphs carved into basalt in the western part of the city bear testimony to a Native American presence in the area dating back many centuries. These are preserved in the Petroglyph National Monument.\nThe Tanoan and Keresan peoples had lived along the Rio Grande for centuries before European colonists arrived in the area that developed as Albuquerque. By the 1500s, there were around 20 Tiwa pueblos along a stretch of river from present-day Algodones to the Rio Puerco confluence south of Belen. Of these, 12 or 13 were densely clustered near present-day Bernalillo, and the remainder were spread out to the south.\nTwo Tiwa pueblos lie on the outskirts of present-day Albuquerque. Both have been continuously inhabited for many centuries: Sandia Pueblo was founded in the 14th century, and Pueblo of Isleta is documented in written records since the early 17th century. It was then chosen as the site of the San Agust\u00edn de la Isleta Mission, a Catholic mission.\nThe historic Navajo, Apache, and Comanche peoples were likely to have set camps in the Albuquerque area, as there is evidence of trade and cultural exchange among the different Native American groups going back centuries before European arrival.\nAlbuquerque was founded in 1706 as an outpost as \"La Villa de Alburquerque\" by Francisco Cuervo y Vald\u00e9s in the provincial kingdom of Santa Fe de Nuevo M\u00e9xico. The settlement was named after the original town of Viceroy Francisco Fern\u00e1ndez de la Cueva, 10th duke of Alburquerque, who was from Alburquerque, Badajoz in southwest Spain.\nAlbuquerque developed primarily for farming and sheep herds. It was a strategically located trading and military outpost along the Camino Real. It served other Tiquex and Hispano towns settled in the area, such as Barelas, Corrales, Isleta Pueblo, Los Ranchos, and Sandia Pueblo.\nAfter gaining independence in 1821, Mexico established a military presence here. The town of Alburquerque was built in the traditional Spanish villa pattern: a central plaza surrounded by government buildings, homes, and a church. This central plaza area has been preserved and is open to the public as a cultural area and center of commerce. It is referred to as \"Old Town Albuquerque\" or simply \"Old Town\". Historically it was sometimes referred to as \"La Placita\" (\"Little Plaza\" in Spanish). On the north side of Old Town Plaza is San Felipe de Neri Church. Built in 1793, it is one of the oldest surviving buildings in the city.\nAfter the New Mexico Territory became a part of the United States in the mid-19th century, a federal garrison and quartermaster depot, the Post of Albuquerque, were established here, operating from 1846 to 1867. In \"Beyond the Mississippi\" (1867), Albert D. Richardson, traveling to California via coach, passed through Albuquerque in late October 1859\u2014its population was 3,000 at the time\u2014and described it as \"one of the richest and pleasantest towns, with a Spanish cathedral and other buildings more than two hundred years old.\"\nDuring the Civil War, Albuquerque was occupied for a month in February 1862 by Confederate troops under General Henry Hopkins Sibley. He soon afterward advanced with his main body into northern New Mexico. During his retreat from Union troops into Texas, he made a stand on April 8, 1862, and fought the Battle of Albuquerque against a detachment of Union soldiers commanded by Colonel Edward R. S. Canby. This daylong engagement at long range led to few casualties. The residents of Albuquerque aided the Republican Union to rid the city of the occupying Confederate troops.\nWhen the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad arrived in 1880, it bypassed the Plaza, locating the passenger depot and railyards about 2\u00a0miles\u00a0(3\u00a0km) east in what quickly became known as New Albuquerque or New Town. The railway company built a hospital for its workers that was later used as a juvenile psychiatric facility. It has since been converted to a hotel.\nMany American merchants, mountain men, and settlers slowly filtered into Albuquerque, creating a major mercantile commercial center in Downtown Albuquerque. From this commercial center on July 4, 1882, Park Van Tassel became the first to fly a balloon in Albuquerque with a landing at Old Town. This was the first balloon flight in the New Mexico Territory.\nDue to a rising rate of violent crime, gunman Milt Yarberry was appointed the town's first marshal that year. New Albuquerque was incorporated as a town in 1885, with Henry N. Jaffa its first mayor. It was incorporated as a city in 1891.\nOld Town remained a separate community until the 1920s, when it was absorbed by Albuquerque. Old Albuquerque High School, the city's first public high school, was established in 1879. Congregation Albert, a Reform synagogue established in 1897, by Henry N. Jaffa, who was also the city's first mayor, is the oldest continuing Jewish organization in the city.\nBy 1900, Albuquerque boasted a population of 8,000 and all the modern amenities, including an electric street railway connecting Old Town, New Town, and the recently established University of New Mexico campus on the East Mesa. In 1902, the Alvarado Hotel was built adjacent to the new passenger depot, and it remained a famous symbol of the city for decades. Outdated, it was razed in 1970 and the site was converted to a parking lot.\nIn 2002, the Alvarado Transportation Center was built on the site in a style resembling the old landmark. The large metro station functions as the downtown headquarters for the city's transit department. It also is an intermodal hub for local buses, Greyhound buses, Amtrak passenger trains, and the Rail Runner commuter rail line.\nIn the early days of transcontinental air service, Albuquerque was an important stop on many transcontinental air routes, earning it the nickname \"Crossroads of the Southwest\".\nDuring the early 20th century, New Mexico's dry climate attracted many tuberculosis patients to the city in search of a cure; this was before penicillin was found to be effective. Several sanitaria were developed on the West Mesa for TB patients. Presbyterian Hospital and St. Joseph Hospital, two of the largest hospitals in the Southwest, had their beginnings during this period. Influential New Deal\u2013era governor Clyde Tingley and famed Southwestern architect John Gaw Meem were among those who came to New Mexico seeking recovery from TB.\nThe first travelers on Route\u00a066 appeared in Albuquerque in 1926. Soon dozens of motels, restaurants, and gift shops sprouted along the roadside. Route\u00a066 originally ran through the city on a north\u2013south alignment along Fourth Street. In 1937 it was realigned along Central Avenue, a more direct east\u2013west route. The intersection of Fourth and Central downtown was the principal crossroads of the city for decades. The majority of the surviving structures from the Route\u00a066 era are on Central, though there are also some on Fourth. Signs between Bernalillo and Los Lunas along the old route now have brown, historical highway markers denoting it as \"Pre-1937 Route\u00a066.\"\nThe establishment of Kirtland Air Force Base in 1939, Sandia Base in the early 1940s, and Sandia National Laboratories in 1949, would make Albuquerque a key player of the Atomic Age. Meanwhile, the city continued to expand outward into the Northeast Heights, reaching a population of 201,189 by 1960 per the U.S. Census.\nBy 1990, it was 384,736 and in 2007 it was 518,271. In June 2007, Albuquerque was listed as the sixth fastest-growing city in the United States. In 1990, the U.S. Census Bureau reported Albuquerque's population as 34.5% Hispanic and 58.3% non-Hispanic white.\nOn April 11, 1950, a USAF B-29 bomber carrying a nuclear weapon crashed into a mountain near Manzano Base. On May 22, 1957, a B-36 accidentally dropped a Mark 17 nuclear bomb 4.5 miles from the control tower while landing at Kirtland Air Force Base. Only the conventional trigger detonated, as the bomb was unarmed. These incidents were not reported as they were classified as secret for decades.\nFollowing the end of World War II, population shifts as well as suburban development, urban sprawl and gentrification, Albuquerque's downtown entered a period of decline. Many historic buildings were razed in the 1960s and 1970s to make way for new plazas, high-rises, and parking lots as part of the city's urban renewal phase. As of 2010[ [update]], only recently has Downtown Albuquerque come to regain much of its urban character, mainly through the construction of many new loft apartment buildings and the renovation of historic structures such as the KiMo Theater.\nDuring the 21st century, Albuquerque's population has continued to grow rapidly. The population of the city proper was estimated at 564,559 in 2020, 528,497 in 2009, and 448,607 in the 2000 census. During 2005 and 2006, the city celebrated its tricentennial with a diverse program of cultural events.\nThe passage of the Planned Growth Strategy in 2002\u20132004 was the community's strongest effort to create a framework for a more balanced and sustainable approach to urban growth.\nUrban sprawl is limited on three sides\u2014by the Sandia Pueblo to the north, the Isleta Pueblo and Kirtland Air Force Base to the south, and the Sandia Mountains to the east. Suburban growth continues at a strong pace to the west, beyond the Petroglyph National Monument, once thought to be a natural boundary to sprawl development.\nBecause of less-costly land and lower taxes, much of the growth in the metropolitan area is taking place outside of the city of Albuquerque itself. In Rio Rancho to the northwest, the communities east of the mountains, and the incorporated parts of Valencia County, population growth rates approach twice that of Albuquerque. The primary cities in Valencia County are Los Lunas and Belen, both of which are home to growing industrial complexes and new residential subdivisions. The mountain towns of Tijeras, Edgewood, and Moriarty, while close enough to Albuquerque to be considered suburbs, have experienced much less growth compared to Rio Rancho, Bernalillo, Los Lunas, and Belen. Limited water supply and rugged terrain are the main limiting factors for development in these towns. The Mid Region Council of Governments (MRCOG), which includes constituents from throughout the Albuquerque area, was formed to ensure that these governments along the middle Rio Grande would be able to meet the needs of their rapidly rising populations. MRCOG's cornerstone project is currently the New Mexico Rail Runner Express.\nGeography.\nAlbuquerque is located in north-central New Mexico. To its east are the Sandia\u2013Manzano Mountains. The Rio Grande flows north to south through its center, while the West Mesa and Petroglyph National Monument make up the western part of the city. Albuquerque has one of the highest elevations of any major city in the U.S., ranging from above sea level near the Rio Grande to over in the foothill areas of Sandia Heights and Glenwood Hills. The civic apex is found in an undeveloped area within the Albuquerque Open Space; there, the terrain rises to an elevation of approximately , and the metropolitan area's highest point is Sandia Crest at an altitude of .\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, Albuquerque has a total area of , of which is land and , or 0.96%, is water.\nAlbuquerque lies within the fertile Rio Grande Valley with its Bosque forest, in the center of the Albuquerque Basin, flanked on the eastern side by the Sandia Mountains and to the west by the West Mesa. Located in central New Mexico, the city also has noticeable influences from the adjacent Colorado Plateau semi-desert, New Mexico Mountains forested with juniper and pine, and Southwest plateaus and plains steppe ecoregions, depending on where one is located.\nLandforms and drainage.\nAlbuquerque has one of the highest and most varied elevations of any major city in the United States, though the effects of this are greatly tempered by its southwesterly continental position. The elevation of the city ranges from 4,949\u00a0feet\u00a0(1,508\u00a0m) above sea level near the Rio Grande (in the Valley) to 6,165\u00a0feet\u00a0(1,879\u00a0m) in the foothill areas of Sandia Heights. At the Albuquerque International Sunport, the elevation is 5,355\u00a0feet\u00a0(1,632\u00a0m) above sea level.\nThe Rio Grande is classified, like the Nile, as an \"exotic\" river. The New Mexico portion of the Rio Grande lies within the Rio Grande Rift Valley, bordered by a system of faults, including those that lifted up the adjacent Sandia and Manzano Mountains, while lowering the area where the life-sustaining Rio Grande now flows.\nGeology and ecology.\nAlbuquerque lies in the Albuquerque Basin, a portion of the Rio Grande rift.\nThe Sandia Mountains are the predominant geographic feature visible in Albuquerque. \"Sand\u00eda\" is Spanish for \"watermelon\", and is popularly believed to be a reference to the brilliant pink and green coloration of the mountains at sunset. The pink is due to large exposures of granodiorite cliffs, and the green is due to large swaths of conifer forests. However, Robert Julyan notes in \"The Place Names of New Mexico\", \"the most likely explanation is the one believed by the Sandia Pueblo Indians: the Spaniards, when they encountered the Pueblo in 1540, called it Sandia, because they thought the squash growing there were watermelons, and the name Sandia soon was transferred to the mountains east of the pueblo.\" He also notes that the Sandia Pueblo Indians call the mountain \"Bien Mur\", \"Big Mountain.\"\nAlbuquerque lies at the northern edge of the Chihuahuan Desert transitioning into the Colorado Plateau. The Sandia Mountains represent the northern edge of the Arizona/New Mexico Mountains ecoregion.\nThe environments of Albuquerque include the Rio Grande bosque, (floodplain cottonwood forest), arid scrub, and mesas that turn into the Sandia foothills in the east. The Rio Grande's bosque has been significantly reduced and its natural flood cycle disrupted by dams built further upstream. A corridor of bosque surrounding the river within the city has been preserved as Rio Grande Valley State Park.\nA few remaining natural arroyos provide riparian habitat within the city, though natural arroyos draining into the Rio Grande have largely been replaced with concrete channels. After a series of floods in the 1950s, passage of the \"Arroyo Flood Control Act of 1963\" provided for the construction of a series of concrete diversion channels. The network of channels was built by the Army Corps of Engineers during the 1960s and early 1970s.\nIconic urban wildlife includes the roadrunner, Gunnison's prairie dog, coyote, and New Mexico whiptail lizard. The bosque is a popular destination for wildlife viewing, with opportunities to see porcupines and sandhill cranes in the winter. Cooper's hawks are common in city parks.\nIconic vegetation in town varies by the terrain and soil type; in much of Albuquerque that includes the Rio Grande cottonwood, Gooding's and coyote willow, Arizona walnut, and alkali sacaton in the bosque; on the edges of the Rio Grande floodplain some remaining New Mexico olive, screwbean mesquite, and lead plant occur. tree cholla, various prickly pear and yucca, chamisa, and oneseed juniper occur in upland areas as part of the desert grassland plant community, within a cover of arid grasses including black grama and purple three awn, mostly east of I-25 and above the west mesa's volcanic escarpment. West of the Rio Grande but below the escarpment, the mesa sand scrub plant community includes sand sagebrush, broom dalea, fourwing saltbush, and sandy soil-adapted grasses including various dropseed and indian ricegrass; some stands of mariola, beebrush, threeleaf sumac, littleleaf sumac, and blackspine prickly pear grow along or near the volcanic escarpment. The foothill open space at the eastern border of the city limits also features Sonoran scrub oak, with gray oak and some Colorado pi\u00f1on trees in more mesic locations. Desert willow is a native tree along some arroyos, and they are now commonly planted throughout the city; western honey mesquite and netleaf hackberry occur in small numbers beyond developed areas, as do remaining stands of creosote bush on the southern edge of the city. Tumbleweeds are a common weed in disturbed areas, and are used by Albuquerque's flood control authority, to make an annual holiday snowman adjacent to their headquarters building, near the \"Big-I\" interchange near the city's center.\nCityscape.\nQuadrants.\nAlbuquerque is geographically divided into four unequal quadrants that are officially part of mailing addresses, placed immediately after the street name. They are Northeast (NE), Northwest (NW), Southeast (SE), and Southwest (SW). Albuquerque's official quadrant system uses Central Ave for the north\u2013south division and the railroad tracks for the east\u2013west division. I-25 and I-40 are also sometimes used informally to divide the city into quadrants.\nNortheast.\nThis quadrant has been experiencing a housing expansion since the late 1950s. It abuts the base of the Sandia Mountains and contains portions of the foothills neighborhoods, which are significantly higher in elevation than the rest of the city. Running from Central Ave and the Railrunner tracks to the Sandia Peak Aerial Tram, this is the largest quadrant both geographically and by population. Martineztown, the Maxwell Museum of Anthropology, University of New Mexico, the Uptown area, which includes three shopping malls (Coronado Center, ABQ Uptown, and Winrock Town Center), Hoffmantown, Journal Center, and Cliff's Amusement Park are all in this quadrant.\nSome of the most affluent neighborhoods in the city are here, including: High Desert, Tanoan, Sandia Heights, and North Albuquerque Acres. Parts of Sandia Heights and North Albuquerque Acres are outside the city limits proper. A few houses in the farthest reach of this quadrant lie in the Cibola National Forest, just over the line into Sandoval County.\nNorthwest.\nThis quadrant contains historic Old Town Albuquerque, which dates to the 18th century, as well as the Indian Pueblo Cultural Center. The area has a mixture of commercial districts and low to high-income neighborhoods. Northwest Albuquerque includes the largest section of Downtown, Rio Grande Nature Center State Park and the Bosque (\"woodlands\"), Petroglyph National Monument, Double Eagle II Airport, the Paradise Hills neighborhood, Taylor Ranch, and Cottonwood Mall.\nThis quadrant also contains the North Valley settlement, outside the city limits, which has some expensive homes and small ranches along the Rio Grande. The city of Albuquerque engulfs the village of Los Ranchos de Albuquerque. A small portion of the rapidly developing area on the west side of the river south of the Petroglyphs, known as the \"West Mesa\" or \"Westside\", consisting primarily of traditional residential subdivisions, also extends into this quadrant. The city proper is bordered on the north by the North Valley, the village of Corrales, and the city of Rio Rancho.\nSoutheast.\nKirtland Air Force Base, Sandia National Laboratories, Sandia Science &amp; Technology Park, the MaxQ commercial campus, Albuquerque International Sunport, American Society of Radiologic Technologists, Central New Mexico Community College, UNM South Campus, Presbyterian Hospital, VA Medical Center, Duke City BMX, University Stadium, Rio Grande Credit Union Field at Isotopes Park, The Pit, Mesa del Sol, Isleta Amphitheater, Netflix Studios, Isleta Resort &amp; Casino, the National Museum of Nuclear Science &amp; History, New Mexico Veterans Memorial, and Talin Market are all located in the Southeast quadrant of Albuquerque.\nThe Four Hills neighborhoods are located in and around the foothills on the outskirts of Southeast Albuquerque. The vast newer subdivision of Volterra lies west of the Four Hills area. Popular urban neighborhoods that can be found in Southeast Albuquerque include Nob Hill, Ridgecrest, Parkland Hills, Hyder Park, and University Heights.\nSouthwest.\nTraditionally consisting of agricultural and rural areas and suburban neighborhoods, the Southwest quadrant comprises the south-end of Downtown Albuquerque, the Barelas neighborhood, the rapidly growing west side, and the community of South Valley, New Mexico, often called \"The South Valley\". The quadrant extends all the way to the Isleta Indian Reservation. Newer suburban subdivisions on the West Mesa near the southwestern city limits join homes of older construction, some dating as far back as the 1940s. This quadrant includes the old communities of Atrisco, Los Padillas, Huning Castle, Kinney, Westgate, Westside, Alamosa, Mountainview, and Pajarito. The Bosque (\"woodlands\"), the National Hispanic Cultural Center, the Rio Grande Zoo, and Tingley Beach are also here.\nA new adopted development plan, the Santolina Master Plan, will extend development on the west side past 118th Street SW to the edge of the Rio Puerco Valley and house 100,000 by 2050.\nClimate.\nAlbuquerque's climate is classified as a cold semi-arid climate (\"BSk\") according to one interpretation of the century-old K\u00f6ppen climate classification system, while in the post-2000 Biota of North America Program and the U.S. Geological Survey describe it as warm temperate semi-desert.\nAlbuquerque is located near the crossroads of several ecoregions. According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the city is located in the southeastern edge of the Arizona/New Mexico Plateau, with the Arizona/New Mexico Mountains ecoregion defining the adjacent Sandia-Manzano mountains, including the foothills in the eastern edges of the city limits, above Juan Tabo Boulevard. Though the city lies at the northern edge of the Chihuahuan Desert transitioning into the Colorado Plateau, much of Albuquerque area west of the Sandia Mountains shares similar temperatures, aridity, yearly precipitation patterns, and natural vegetation more with that of the Chihuahuan Desert, namely the desert grassland and sand scrub plant communities.\nThe eastern portion of the greater Albuquerque area is known as the East Mountain area, and it is within the Southwestern Tablelands, sometimes considered a southern extension of the central high plains or northeast New Mexico highlands. To the north is the Southern Rockies ecoregion in the Jemez Mountains.\nThe average annual precipitation is less than half of evaporation supporting an arid climate (\"BWk\"), according to a more recent application of the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system using over a century of climatology, with no month's daily mean temperature averaging below freezing. The climate is mild compared to many parts of the continent farther north or east, protected by mountains and surrounding highlands. However, due to the city's high elevation, low temperatures in winter often dip below freezing. Varied terrain and elevations within the city and outlying areas cause daily temperature differentials to vary. The daily mean temperatures in December and January, the coldest months, are above freezing at at the 5,310-foot elevation Albuquerque International Airport station, representative of much of the city, and at the 5,994-foot elevation Albuquerque Foothills NE station.\nAlbuquerque's climate is usually sunny and dry, with an average of 3,415 sunshine hours per year. Brilliant sunshine defines the region, averaging 278\u00a0days a year; periods of variably mid and high-level cloudiness temper the sun, mostly during the cooler months. Extended cloudiness lasting longer than two or three days is rare.\nWinter typically consists of cool days and cold nights, except following passage of the strongest cold fronts and arctic airmasses when daytime temperatures remain colder than average; overnight temperatures tend to fall below freezing between about 12 am and 9 am in the city, except during colder airmasses, plus colder spots of the valley and most of the East Mountain areas. December, the coolest month, averages ; the median or normal coolest temperature of the year is , while the average or mean is about . It is typical for daily low temperatures in much of December to mid-February to be below freezing, with a long-term average of 93 days per year falling to or below freezing, and two days failing to rise above freezing. Winter is the second driest season in much of Albuquerque, and while rain makes up more of the season's precipitation than snow, December is the snowiest month on average\nBy March, stronger winds occur on many afternoons, as temperatures warm with the change to spring weather patterns and storm systems pass to the north. Spring can occasionally bring unsettled weather with rain or even light accumulations of snowfall, into early April, though spring is often the driest part of the year in Albuquerque. Late March and April tend to experience many days with the wind blowing at , and afternoon gusts can produce periods of blowing sand and dust. In May, the winds tend to subside as a summer-like airmass begins to occur, with a regularity of higher temperatures. The warming and drying trend continues into June by mid-June, temperatures can exceed for a brief period.\nSummer is lengthy and very warm to hot, but except for midday through evening, they are tolerable for most people because of low humidity and air movement. The exception is usually during the New Mexico monsoon, especially in July and August, when the dewpoint and relative humidity remain higher. 2.6 days of or warmer highs occur annually on average, mostly in June and July and rarely in August due in part to the monsoon; an average of 64 days experience or warmer highs. Despite the rarity of such heat, 28 days with highs at or above occurred in the summer of 1980 at Albuquerque's Sunport. In mid-September, the monsoon begins to weaken. Portions of the valley and West Mesa locations experience more high temperatures above and as part of normal or extreme weather each summer.\nAutumn is generally cool in the mornings and nights but sees less rain than summer, though the weather can be more unsettled closer to winter, as colder airmasses and weather patterns build in from the north and northwest with more frequency. Some years, a storm in November may cause a snow accumulation of one to two inches.\nPrecipitation averages per year. On average, January is the driest month, while July and August are the wettest months, as a result of shower and thunderstorm activity produced by the monsoon prevalent over the Southwestern United States. Most rain occurs during the late summer monsoon season, typically starting in early June and ending in mid-September.\nAlbuquerque averages of snow per winter, and experiences several accumulating snow events each season. Locations in the Northeast Heights and foothills tend to receive more snowfall due to each region's higher elevation and proximity to the mountains. East Mountain communities average more snow and at times not usually experienced in the city. The metro area was one of several in the region experiencing a severe winter storm on December 28\u201330, 2006, with locations in the Albuquerque area receiving between of snow. More recently, a major winter storm in late February 2015 dropped up to a foot (30\u00a0cm) of snow on most of the city. Such large snowfalls are rare occurrences during the period of record, and they greatly impact traffic movement and the workforce due to their rarity.\nThe mountains and highlands east of the city create a rain shadow effect from moist Gulf airmasses moving towards the area, due to the drying of air descending the west side of the mountains into much of Albuquerque; the Sandia Mountains tend to lift any available moisture, enhancing precipitation to about annually. Traveling west, north, and east of Albuquerque, one quickly rises in elevation, leaving the sheltering effect of the valley to enter a noticeably cooler and slightly wetter environment. One such area is considered part of Albuquerque Metropolitan Area, commonly called the East Mountain area, is covered in woodlands of juniper and pi\u00f1on trees, a common trait of southwestern uplands and the southern Rocky Mountains.\nAlbuquerque's growing season averages 208 days, which is the total consecutive days of low temperature above between the last spring freeze and first fall freeze, based on 1991 to 2020 climatology at the Sunport. The growing season can vary depending on local terrain or the year, and is shorter in colder locales of the valley, foothills, and especially the East Mountains; Sandia Park averages a growing season of 152 days.\nHydrology.\nAlbuquerque's drinking water comes from a combination of Rio Grande water (river water diverted from the Colorado River basin through the San Juan\u2013Chama Project) and a delicate aquifer that has been described as an \"underground Lake Superior\". The Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority (ABCWUA) has developed a water resources management strategy that pursues conservation and the direct extraction of water from the Rio Grande for the development of a stable underground aquifer in the future.\nThe aquifer of the Rio Puerco is too saline to be cost-effectively used for drinking. Much of the rainwater Albuquerque receives does not recharge its aquifer. It is diverted through a network of paved channels and arroyos, and empties into the Rio Grande.\nOf the per year of the water in the upper Colorado River basin entitled to municipalities in New Mexico by the Upper Colorado River Basin Compact, Albuquerque owns 48,200. The water is delivered to the Rio Grande by the San Juan\u2013Chama Project. The project's construction was initiated by legislation signed by President John F. Kennedy in 1962, and was completed in 1971. This diversion project transports water under the continental divide from Navajo Lake to Lake Heron on the Rio Chama, a tributary of the Rio Grande. In the past much of this water was resold to downstream owners in Texas. These arrangements ended in 2008 with the completion of the ABCWUA's Drinking Water Supply Project.\nThe ABCWUA's Drinking Water Supply Project uses a system of adjustable-height dams to skim water from the Rio Grande into sluices that lead to water treatment facilities for direct conversion to potable water. Some water is allowed to flow through central Albuquerque, mostly to protect the endangered Rio Grande silvery minnow. Treated effluent water is recycled into the Rio Grande south of the city. The ABCWUA expects river water to comprise up to seventy percent of its water budget in 2060. Groundwater will constitute the remainder. One of the policies of the ABCWUA's strategy is the acquisition of additional river water. \nDemographics.\nResidents of the city are known as \"Burque\u00f1os\" (masculine grammatical gender) or \"Burque\u00f1as\" (feminine grammatical gender), or more rarely as simply \"Albuquerqueans\". The Spanish terms are from Chicano slang (Cal\u00f3). \"Burque\u00f1o\" is also sometimes used as an adjective for anything related to that city, or to specifically refer to someone who identifies with the Burque\u00f1os New Mexico prison gang, or one of the barrios within Albuquerque. Burque\u00f1os often speak New Mexican Spanish and Western American English.\nAccording to the 2020 U.S. census, there were 564,559 people and 229,701 households in Albuquerque. The population density was , making Albuquerque one of the least densely populated large cities in the U.S.\nIn 2020, the racial makeup of the city (including Latinos in the racial counts) was 60.3% White, 4.5% Native American, 3.1% Black or African American, 3% Asian, 0.1% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, and 9.2% Multiracial (two or more races). About half of all residents (47.7%) were Hispanic or Latino, of any race while non-Hispanic whites accounted for 37.7%.\n2020 census.\nIn 2010, about one-third of Albuquerque households (33.3%) had children under the age of 18, 43.6% were married couples living together, 12.9% had a female with no husband present, and 38.5% were non-families; 30.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size was 3.02.\nIn 2010, the age distribution was 24.5% under 18, 10.6% from 18 to 24, 30.9% from 25 to 44, 21.9% from 45 to 64, and 12.0% who were 65\u00a0or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.8 males.\nIn 2010, the median income for a household in the city was $38,272, and the median income for a family was $46,979. Males had a median income of $34,208 versus $26,397 for females. The per capita income for the city was $20,884. About 10.0% of families and 13.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.4% of those under age 18 and 8.5% of those age 65 or over.\nThe Albuquerque metropolitan area had 923,630 residents in July 2020. The area includes Rio Rancho, Bernalillo, Placitas, Zia Pueblo, Los Lunas, Belen, South Valley, Bosque Farms, Jemez Pueblo, Cuba, and part of Laguna Pueblo. This metro is part of the larger Albuquerque\u2013Santa Fe\u2013Los Alamos combined statistical area (CSA), with a population of 1,171,991 as of 2016. The CSA constitutes the southernmost point of the Southern Rocky Mountain Front megalopolis, with a population of 5,467,633 according to the 2010 United States census, including other major Rocky Mountain region cities such as Cheyenne, Wyoming; Denver, Colorado; and Colorado Springs, Colorado.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOf the residents of Albuquerque who are religious, the majority of them are Christian. Reflecting its long history as a Spanish city, Catholicism is the largest denomination; Catholics are served by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Santa Fe, whose administrative center is located in Albuquerque. Collectively, other Christian churches and organizations, such as the Eastern Orthodox Church and Oriental Orthodoxy, among others, make up the second largest group. Baptists form the third largest Christian group, followed by Latter Day Saints, Pentecostals, Methodists, Presbyterians, Lutherans and Episcopalians.\nJudaism is the second-largest non-Christian religion in Albuquerque; Congregation Albert, a Reform synagogue established in 1897, is the oldest extant Jewish organization in New Mexico. Islam is the next largest minority religion, with an estimated 3,000 to 5,000 adherents, representing 85% of the state's Muslim population. The Islamic Center of New Mexico is the largest mosque in Albuquerque, hosting daily prayers and activities for both Muslims and non-Muslims.\nThe Albuquerque Sikh Gurudwara and Guru Nanak Gurdwara Albuquerque serve the city's Sikh population, while the main Hindu organizations are the Hindu Temple Society of New Mexico and Gayatri Temple. There are several Buddhist temples and centers throughout the city, representing different movements and schools, such as Zen and Soka Gakki.\nHomelessness.\nLike many major American cities, Albuquerque struggles with homelessness, which has become more visible since the 2000s. According to Rock at Noon Day, a homeless services center, there were an estimated 4,000 to 4,500 homeless people living in the Albuquerque metropolitan area in 2019, with millennials and elderly accounting for the fastest growing segments. Albuquerque Public Schools spokeswoman Monica Armenta said the number of homeless children enrolled in district schools (meaning children from families that have no permanent address) has consistently ranged from 3,200 to 3,500. The Coordinated Entry System, a centralized citywide system used to track and fill supportive housing openings when they become available, shows that about 5,000 households experienced homelessness in 2018. Homelessness is particularly concentrated around Downtown, and also in the International District off Central Avenue, which suffers from chronic urban decay and drug use.\nArts and culture.\nAlbuquerque hosts the International Balloon Fiesta, the world's largest gathering of hot-air balloons, taking place every October at Balloon Fiesta Park, with its 47-acre launch field. Another large venue is Expo New Mexico, where other annual events are held, such as North America's largest pow wow at the Gathering of Nations, as well as the New Mexico State Fair. Other major venues throughout the metropolitan area include the National Hispanic Cultural Center, the University of New Mexico's Popejoy Hall, Santa Ana Star Center, and Isleta Amphitheater. Old Town Albuquerque's Plaza, Hotel, and San Felipe de Neri Church hosts traditional fiestas and events such as weddings, also near Old Town are the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science, Albuquerque Museum of Art and History, Indian Pueblo Cultural Center, Explora, American International Rattlesnake Museum, and Albuquerque Biological Park. Other notable museums in Albuquerque include the National Museum of Nuclear Science &amp; History and the Anderson-Abruzzo Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta Museum and more can be found . Located in Downtown Albuquerque are historic theaters such as the KiMo Theater, which is located across the street from the New Mexico Holocaust &amp; Intolerance Museum, and the Albuquerque Little Theater. Near the Civic Plaza is the Al Hurricane Pavilion and Albuquerque Convention Center with its Kiva Auditorium. Due to its population size, the metropolitan area regularly receives most national and international music concerts, Broadway shows, and other large traveling events, as well as New Mexico music, and other local music performances.\nSandia Peak Ski Area, adjacent to Albuquerque, provides both winter and summer recreation in the Sandia Mountains. It features Sandia Peak Tramway, the world's second-longest passenger aerial tramway, and the longest in the Americas. It stretches from the northeast edge of the city to Sandia Peak, the summit of the ski resort, and has the world's third-longest single span. Elevation at the summit is roughly above sea level, or \"ten-three\".\nMedia and entertainment.\nAlbuquerque is a hub for production studios, including Albuquerque Studios, which is one of the primary production hubs for Netflix. Several major motion pictures and television shows have been filmed and produced in Albuquerque, including scenes from \"Walt Disney Presents\" Elfego Baca, \"The Muppet Movie\", the \"Breaking Bad\" franchise, \"The Avengers\", \"A Million Ways to Die in the West\", \"In Plain Sight\", \"Speechless\", \"Daybreak\", \"Just Getting Started\", \"Stranger Things\" season 4, \"Pluribus\". NBCUniversal also has a sizable and expanding presence in the city, as do independent multimedia franchise studios.\nNumerous works of fiction take place, either fully or in part, in the Albuquerque metropolitan area. These include \"Albuquerque\" (a 1948 Western), \"Bless Me, Ultima\", \"The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly\", \"Breaking Bad\" (along with its spin-offs \"Better Call Saul\" and \"\"), \"Pluribus\", \"High School Musical,\" and Coyote vs. Acme. The city is referenced in Billy Mize's 1967 album \"Lights of Albuquerque\", Jim Glaser's 1986 song \"The Lights of Albuquerque\", Neil Young's song \"Albuquerque\", and \"Weird\" Al Yankovic's song \"Albuquerque\". The city is referenced in \"Hungry, Hungry Homer\", the 15th episode of the twelfth season of \"The Simpsons\", which features Albuquerque as the location where the owners of the Springfield Isotopes baseball team wish to relocate; the episode inspired the name of the real Albuquerque Isotopes Minor League team. Many Bugs Bunny cartoon shorts feature Bugs traveling around the world by burrowing underground. Ending up in the wrong place, Bugs consults a map, complaining, \"I knew I should have taken that left turn at Albuquerque.\" Failure to do so can somehow result in Bugs ending up thousands of miles off-course. (Bugs first uses that line in 1945's \"Herr Meets Hare\".)\nThe city is served by one major newspaper, the \"Albuquerque Journal\", which, along with \"Albuquerque the Magazine\", is distributed throughout the Southwestern United States and catalogued by the Library of Congress. \"The Journal\" is New Mexico's most widely circulated newspaper, and used to compete with \"The Albuquerque Tribune\" until 2008; today \"The Journal\" competes with \"The Santa Fe New Mexican\" and \"Las Cruces Sun-News\". The Albuquerque metropolitan area itself has other local periodicals, \"Valencia County News-Bulletin\", \"Rio Rancho Observer\", \"Corrales Comment\", and the student newspapers of \"The Lobo\" at University of New Mexico and \"CNM Chronicle\" at Central New Mexico Community College.\nAlbuquerque is also home to numerous radio and television stations that serve the metropolitan and outlying rural areas. Albuquerque is home to eighteen broadcast television stations, including KOB, KRQE, KOAT-TV, and KLUZ-TV, although most households are served by direct cable network connections. Comcast Cable nearly has a monopoly on terrestrial cable service in the city, but not throughout the entire Albuquerque-Santa Fe media market, which is ranked as the 48th largest television market in the United States, Comcast shares the metropolitan market with Cable One, Unite Private Networks, and various satellite and wireless providers.\nChristian media outlets in the city include Trinity Broadcasting Network which owns the KNAT-TV signal, and independent Christian broadcasting exists on KAZQ. Each of the Albuquerque metropolitan area's megachurches have media presence with broadcasts of their sermons, those include Legacy, Calvary, and Sagebrush. Christian radio is found on FM and AM through KLYT, KSVA, KDAZ, KFLQ, and KKIM.\nRadio and music.\nOne of the longest running AM broadcasts in the United States is an ABC News Radio station called KKOB (AM). The first officially licensed FM radio broadcast in Albuquerque was KANW which mostly broadcasts the New Mexico music genre and NPR programming.\nPerformers such as Al Hurricane, Al Hurricane Jr, Lorenzo Antonio, and Sparx popularized New Mexico's Hispano and Native American folk genre by blending it with rockabilly, jazz, Western, Norte\u00f1o, Latin pop, and rock music. Then mayor Richard J. Berry named the center stage of Albuquerque Plaza the \"Al Hurricane Pavilion\". Regional folk and country music continues to be played on local radio, such as the New Mexico music genre\u2013specific KANW, as well as KNMM on Saturdays, country radio stations KRST \"92.1\" and KBQI \"The Big-I 107.9\", along with KBQI's classic country \"98.1 The Bull\", and Regional Mexican radio on KLVO \"Radio Lobo 97.7\".\nOther forms of American popular music are represented on FM radio: contemporary hit radio is featured on KOBQ. During the 1990s, the urban contemporary music radio format had two major stations, on \"KISS 97.3\" KKSS and \"WILD 106\" KDLW. KISS 97.3 still exists today, though WILD has changed to a variety of formats. In the 2000s modern rock stations focusing on alternative rock, nu metal, and adult contemporary music became popular in the city, including the FM station KPEK \"100.3 The Peak\". During this time, contemporary Christian music garnered success with KLYT, branded as M88 in its earlier days, due to the crossover of Christian rock and Christian hip hop with popular music.\nMusic groups based in Albuquerque include A Hawk and A Hacksaw, Beirut, The Echoing Green, The Eyeliners, Hazeldine, Leiahdorus, Oliver Riot, Scared of Chaka, and The Shins.\nTalk radio has several outlets in the Albuquerque area. Including a public radio station run by The University of New Mexico KUNM-FM, for conservative talk radio there is KIVA \"The Rock of Talk\" owned by Eddy Aragon, and KKOB has a Cumulus Media station affiliated with ABC News Radio. As for sports radio there is KNML \"The Sports Animal\" and KQTM \"The Team\".\nFood and agriculture.\nAs a large and multicultural city, Albuquerque is home to a variety of global cuisines, in addition to local New Mexican cuisine. receive statewide attention, with several becoming chains; the city hosts the headquarters of Blake's Lotaburger, Little Anita's, Twisters, Dion's, Boba Tea Company, and Sadie's, most of which offer New Mexican fare.\nAs the focus of the Middle Rio Grande Conservancy District, the city is punctuated by agricultural acequias that contrast with the otherwise heavily urban settings. Crops such as New Mexico chile are grown along the entire Rio Grande; the red or green chile pepper is a staple of New Mexican cuisine and widely available in restaurants, including national fast-food chains. Likewise, the Albuquerque metro is a major contributor to the Middle Rio Grande Valley AVA, where New Mexico wine is produced at several vineyards; the river also provides trade access to the Mesilla Valley to the south (containing Las Cruces, New Mexico and El Paso, Texas), with its own wine offerings, and the adjacent Hatch Valley, which is well known for its New Mexico chile peppers. Albuquerque also has a burgeoning brewery scene.\nInternational Balloon Fiesta.\nThe Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta takes place at Balloon Fiesta Park the first week of October. Although the global COVID-19 forced the cancellation of the 2020 event, The Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta successfully returned in 2021. It is one of Albuquerque's biggest attractions. Hundreds of hot-air balloons are seen every day, and there is live music, arts and crafts, and food.\nArchitecture.\nThe original architecture of \"La Villa de Albuquerque\" is referred to as the Territorial Style, it was revitalized as the Territorial Revival architecture. Architect John Gaw Meem is often credited with this revival.\nJohn Gaw Meem is also credited with developing and popularizing the Pueblo Revival style, which was based in Santa Fe but received an important Albuquerque commission in 1933 as the architect of the University of New Mexico. He retained this commission for the next quarter-century and developed the university's distinctive Southwest style. Meem also designed the Cathedral Church of St. John in 1950.\nPueblo Deco architecture was derived from Pueblo and Territorial styles meeting the Art Deco movement, and it is richly featured in downtown Albuquerque. Albuquerque boasts a unique nighttime cityscape, personified in the lights of Albuquerque, a common motif in art and song. The city lights twinkle and glitter from views on Nine Mile Hill, it was among Elvis Presley's favorite views. Route\u00a066 era neon signs, and LED style versions of the neon-style are common throughout the city. Many building exteriors are illuminated in vibrant colors such as green and blue. The Wells Fargo Building is illuminated green. The DoubleTree Hotel changes colors nightly, and the Compass Bank building is illuminated blue. The rotunda of the county courthouse is illuminated yellow, while the tops of the Bank of Albuquerque and the Bank of the West are illuminated reddish-yellow. Due to the nature of the soil in the Rio Grande Valley, the skyline is lower than might be expected in a city of comparable size elsewhere, and it was used to highlight the low-lying architecture of heritage Pueblo and Hispano architectural styles.\nAlbuquerque has expanded greatly in area since the mid-1940s. During those years of expansion, the planning of the newer areas has considered that people drive rather than walk. The pre-1940s parts of Albuquerque are quite different in style and scale from the post-1940s areas. The older areas include the North Valley, the South Valley, various neighborhoods near downtown, and Corrales. The newer areas generally feature four- to six-lane roads in a 1\u00a0mile\u00a0(1.61\u00a0km) grid. Each 1\u00a0square mile\u00a0(2.59\u00a0km2) is divided into four neighborhoods by smaller roads set 0.5\u00a0miles\u00a0(0.8\u00a0km) between major roads. When driving along major roads in the newer sections of Albuquerque, one sees strip malls, signs, and cinderblock walls. The upside of this planning style is that neighborhoods are shielded from the worst of the noise and lights on the major roads.\nLibraries.\nThe Albuquerque Bernalillo County Library system consists of nineteen libraries to serve the city, including the Main Library, Special Collections branch (Old Main Library), and Ernie Pyle branch, which is located in the former home of noted war correspondent Ernie Pyle. The Old Main Library was the first library of Albuquerque and from 1901 until 1948 it was the only public library. The original library was donated to the state by Joshua and Sarah Raynolds. After suffering some fire damage in 1923 the city decided it was time to construct a building for the library to be moved to, however, by 1970 even after additions were made the population and library needs had outgrown the building for its use as a main library and it was turned into Special Collections. The Old Main Library was recognized as a landmark in September 1979.\nIt was not until 1974 with the movement of the South Valley Library into a new building that the Bernalillo built and administered a public library. Not long after, in 1986, the Bernalillo and Albuquerque government decided that joint powers would work best to serve the needs of the community and created the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Library System.\nParks and recreation.\nThe Bosque is a major outdoors area in the city; it has numerous hiking and biking trails. The Sandia\u2013Manzano Mountains and West Mesa also have many hiking trails, such as La Luz Trail and Petroglyph National Monument. According to the Trust for Public Land, Albuquerque has 291 public parks as of 2017, most of which are administered by the city Parks and Recreation Department. The total amount of parkland is 42.9 square miles (111 km2), or about 23% of the city's total area\u2014one of the highest percentages among large cities in the U.S. About 82% of city residents live within walking distance of a park.\nThe Albuquerque Biological Park manages the ABQ BioPark Botanic Garden, ABQ BioPark Aquarium, Tingley Beach, and ABQ BioPark Zoo. Amusement parks in the city include Cliff's Amusement Park and Hinkle Family Fun Center; there was formerly The Beach waterpark, which became a vacant lot on Desert Surf Circle for several years, until Topgolf made a driving range in the lot.\nThere are numerous golf courses in the city area; Arroyo Del Oso Golf Course, Isleta Eagle Golf Course, Ladera Golf Course, Los Altos Golf Course, Paa-Ko Ridge Golf Club, Paradise Hills Golf Course, Puerto del Sol Golf Course, Sandia Golf Club, Santa Ana Golf Club, Twin Warriors Golf Club, and University of New Mexico's Championship Golf Course.\nTraditional arts.\nAlbuquerque is home to over 300 other visual arts, music, dance, literary, film, ethnic, and craft organizations, museums, festivals and associations, and the state's capital Santa Fe is known for being a major arts city. One of the major art events in the state is the summertime New Mexico Arts and Crafts Fair, a nonprofit show exclusively for New Mexico artists and held annually in Albuquerque since 1961.\nSports.\nThe Albuquerque Isotopes are a minor league affiliate of the Colorado Rockies, having derived their name from \"The Simpsons\" season 12 episode \"Hungry, Hungry Homer\", which involves the Springfield Isotopes baseball team considering relocating to Albuquerque.\nOn June 6, 2018, the USL Championship division announced its latest soccer expansion club with New Mexico United, who play their home matches at Rio Grande Credit Union Field at Isotopes Park.\nHaving been home to boxing mainstays Brenda Burnside, Bob Foster, and Johnny Tapia, Albuquerque later became home to Jackson Wink MMA gym. Several MMA world champions and fighters, including Holly Holm and Jon Jones, train in that facility. The PGA of America offers Albuquerque golf tournaments with Sun Country Golf House, including the Sun Country PGA Championship and the New Mexico Open which have been hosted in the metropolitan area several times. Roller sports are finding a home in Albuquerque as they hosted USARS Championships in 2015, and are home to Roller hockey, and Roller Derby teams.\nWhile no longer operating in an official capacity, the defunct Albuquerque Dukes minor league baseball team still has a major following, and the Major League Baseball organization is aware of the team's continued popularity. The Isotopes sometimes hold a Dukes Retro Night where they wear Dukes uniforms, and The Duke mascot continues to be an icon of the city.\nGovernment and politics.\nAlbuquerque is a charter city, exercising home rule as opposed to being directly governed by state law. Its charter was adopted in 1917 and has been amended several times, most notably in 1974, when the municipal government was changed from a commission-manager system to its current mayor\u2013council system. Under this arrangement, power is divided between a mayor who serves as chief executive, and a nine-member council that holds legislative authority. The current mayor is Tim Keller, who was elected in 2017.\nThe mayor of Albuquerque holds a full-time paid position and is directly elected for four-year terms. Members of the Albuquerque City Council serve part-time, paid positions and are elected from their nine respective districts for four-year terms, with four or five councilors elected every two years. Elections for mayor and councilor are nonpartisan. Each December, a new council president and vice-president are chosen by and among council members.\nThe city council has the power to adopt all ordinances, resolutions, or other legislation. It meets twice a month in the Vincent E. Griego Council Chambers of the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government Center. Ordinances and resolutions passed by the council are presented to the mayor for his approval; if the mayor vetoes an item, the council can override the veto by a two-thirds vote of councilors. Each year, the mayor submits a city budget proposal for the next year to the council by April 1, and the council acts on the proposal within the next 60\u00a0days.\nAlbuquerque's judicial system consists of the Bernalillo County Metropolitan Court, which serves other municipalities and unincorporated areas in the county; the main Metropolitan Courthouse is located in downtown Judges serve in nineteen divisions and are subject to partisan elections by county voters every four years.\nThe Albuquerque Police Department (APD) is the chief law enforcement entity within city limits; the unincorporated area of Bernalillo County is policed primarily by the Bernalillo County Sheriff's Department. With approximately 1,000 sworn officers, APD is the largest municipal police department in New Mexico; in September 2008, it was the 49th largest police department in the country, according to the U.S. Department of Justice.\nAlbuquerque serves as the county seat of Bernalillo County. The City of Albuquerque and Bernalillo County share some social services, and have created a joint city-county commission called the Albuquerque Bernalillo County Government Commission (ABCGC). In 1986, the City of Albuquerque and Bernalillo County governments entered the joint powers agreement that created the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Library System. The Bernalillo County Metropolitan Detention Center opened in 2003 and was jointly managed by the City of Albuquerque and Bernalillo County until 2006, and fully managed by Bernalillo County from 2006 to present.\nEconomy.\nAlbuquerque is New Mexico's leading economic center, accounting for half the state's economic activity. The city's economy is highly diversified, centering on science, medicine, technology, commerce, education, media entertainment, and culture (particularly fine arts); construction, film production, and retail trade have seen the most robust growth since 2020.\nAlbuquerque is the center of the New Mexico Technology Corridor, a concentration of institutions engaged in scientific research and development, which in turn forms part of the larger Rio Grande Technology Corridor that stretches from southern Colorado to southwestern Texas. Major nodes within the corridor include federal installations such as Kirtland Air Force Base, Los Alamos National Laboratory, and Sandia National Laboratories; private healthcare facilities such as Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute and Presbyterian Health Services; academic institutions such as the University of New Mexico and Central New Mexico Community College; and private companies such as Intel (which has a fabrication site in neighboring Rio Rancho), Facebook (with a data center in Los Lunas), Northrop Grumman, passive solar energy company Zomeworks, and Tempur-Pedic. The city was also the founding location of MITS and Microsoft.\nBeginning with the Manhattan Project in the 1940s, federal labs such as Los Alamos, Sandia, and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory have cooperated on multidisciplinary research in the region; contractors for these facilities bring highly educated workers and researchers to an otherwise relatively isolated area, many of whom establish or work with local tech companies. The federal government spends roughly $4 billion annually in research and development in and around Albuquerque. Pursuant to the CHIPS and Science Act\u2014federal legislation aimed at expanding domestic semiconductor manufacturing, research and development of new technology, and workforce training\u2014the U.S. Department of Energy announced plans to construct a new 100,000-square-foot technology incubator for companies, academia, and national laboratories, as well as a new platform for facilitating the development of tech startups among minority communities.\nThe governments of Albuquerque and New Mexico have sought to attract more private investment into technology startups. The bioscience sector has experienced particularly robust growth, beginning with the 2013 opening of a BioScience Center in Uptown Albuquerque, which was the state's first private incubator for biotechnology startups; since then, New Mexico-based scientists have formed roughly 150 bioscience startups, many of which are based in the Albuquerque metropolitan area. In 2017, the state-funded Bioscience Authority was established to help promote local industry development, particularly through public-private partnerships; the following year, pharmaceutical company Curia built two large facilities in Albuquerque, and in fall 2022 broke ground on a $100 million expansion of its local operations.\nFilm studios have a major presence throughout New Mexico; Netflix maintains a major production hub at Albuquerque Studios. There are numerous shopping centers and malls within the city, including ABQ Uptown, Coronado, Cottonwood, Nob Hill, and Winrock. Outside city limits but surrounded by the city is a horse racing track and casino called The Downs Casino and Racetrack, and the pueblos surrounding the city feature resort casinos, including Sandia Resort, Santa Ana Star, Isleta Resort, and Laguna Pueblo's Route 66 Resort.\nEducation.\nAlbuquerque is home to the University of New Mexico, the largest university in the state and the flagship of the state public university system. Central New Mexico Community College is a county-funded junior college serving new high school graduates and adults returning to school.\nAlbuquerque hosts several programs and nonprofit schools of higher learning, including Southwest University of Visual Arts, Trinity Southwest University, the University of St. Francis College of Nursing and Allied Health Department of Physician Assistant Studies, and the St. Norbert College Master of Theological Studies program. Southwestern Indian Polytechnic Institute (SIPI) is in an unincorporated area adjacent to Albuquerque. The Ayurvedic Institute, one of the first Ayurveda colleges specializing in Ayurvedic medicine outside India, was established in 1984. Other state and nonprofit institutions of higher learning have moved some programs into Albuquerque; these include New Mexico State University, Highlands University, Lewis University, Wayland Baptist University, and Webster University. Several for-profit technical schools including Brookline College, Pima Medical Institute, Carrington College, National American University, Grand Canyon University, the University of Phoenix and several barber/beauty colleges have established their presence in the area.\nAlbuquerque Public Schools (APS) is the school district covering all of Albuquerque. Schools within APS include both public and charter entities. Numerous accredited private preparatory schools also serve Albuquerque students. These include various pre-high school religious (Christian, Jewish, Islamic) affiliates and Montessori schools, as well as Menaul School, Albuquerque Academy, St. Pius X High School, Sandia Preparatory School, the Bosque School, Evangel Christian Academy, Hope Christian School, Hope Connection School, Shepherd Lutheran School, Temple Baptist Academy, and Victory Christian. Accredited private schools serving students with special education needs in Albuquerque include: Desert Hills, Pathways Academy, and Presbyterian Ear Institute Oral School. The New Mexico School for the Deaf runs a preschool for children with hearing impairments in Albuquerque.\nInfrastructure.\nSince the city's founding, it has continued to be included on travel and trade routes including the historic El Camino Real, Santa Fe Railway (ATSF), Interstate\u00a025 (I-40), I-40, New Mexico State Road 45, and Albuquerque International Sunport. Albuquerque is the second largest city in the United States (after Phoenix) to have at least two Interstate Highways, but no three-digit Interstates.\nTransportation.\nMain highways.\nSome of the main highways in the metro area include:\nThe interchange between I-40 and I-25 is known as the \"Big I\". Originally built in 1966, it was rebuilt in 2002. The Big I is the only five-level stack interchange in the state of New Mexico.\nBridges.\nThere are six road bridges that cross the Rio Grande and serve the municipality on at least one end if not both. The eastern approaches of the northernmost three all pass through adjacent unincorporated areas, the Village of Los Ranchos de Albuquerque, or the North Valley. In downstream order they are:\nTwo more bridges serve urbanized areas contiguous to the city's perforated southern boundary.\nRail.\nThe state owns most of the city's rail infrastructure which is used by a commuter rail system, long-distance passenger trains, and the freight trains of the BNSF Railway.\nFreight service.\nBNSF Railway operates a small yard operation out of Abajo yard, located just south of the C\u00e9sar E. Ch\u00e1vez Ave. overpass and the New Mexico Rail Runner Express yards. Most freight traffic through the Central New Mexico region is processed via a much larger hub in nearby Belen, New Mexico.\nIntercity rail.\nAmtrak's Southwest Chief, which travels between Chicago and Los Angeles, serves the Albuquerque area daily with one stop in each direction at the Alvarado Transportation Center in downtown.\nIntercity Bus Services.\nGreyhound Lines and FlixBus offer intercity transportation services to the Albuquerque Metro Area as well as transportation to other cities around the United States.\nCommuter rail.\nThe New Mexico Rail Runner Express, a commuter rail line, began service between Sandoval County and Albuquerque in July 2006 using an existing BNSF right-of-way which was purchased by New Mexico in 2005. Service expanded to Valencia County in December 2006 and to Santa Fe on December 17, 2008. Rail Runner now connects Santa Fe, Sandoval, Bernalillo, and Valencia Counties with thirteen station stops, including three stops within Albuquerque.\nThe trains connect Albuquerque to downtown Santa Fe with eight roundtrips per weekday. The section of the line running south to Belen is served less frequently.\nLocal mass transit.\nThe primary mass transit system is ABQ RIDE, which operates a variety of bus routes throughout the city, including the Albuquerque Rapid Transit (ART) express bus service. The central nexus for public transportation is the Alvarado Transportation System, which connects ABQ RIDE to Amtrak, Greyhound Lines, and the New Mexico Rail Runner Express commuter rail.\nIn 2011, the City of Albuquerque commissioned a study to develop a bus rapid transit system through the Central Avenue corridor, which accounted for 44% of all bus riders in ABQ RIDE. Construction began in 2017 on Albuquerque Rapid Transit (ART), including dedicated bus lanes between Coors and Louisiana Boulevards. ART opened for service in November 2019 and was free to use until January 1, 2020.\nAlbuquerque was one of two cities in New Mexico to have had an electric street railway; its horse-drawn streetcar lines were electrified in the early 20th century. The Albuquerque Traction Company assumed operation of the system in 1905, and it grew to its maximum length of over the next ten years, connecting destinations such as Old Town to the west and the University of New Mexico to the east with the town's urban center near the former Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe Railway depot. The Albuquerque Traction Company failed financially in 1915 and the City Electric Company was formed in its place. Despite traffic booms during the First World War, and unaided by lawsuits attempting to force the streetcar company to pay for paving, that system also failed later in 1927, leaving the streetcar's \"motorettes\" unemployed.\nIn 2006, under Mayor Martin Chavez, Albuquerque planned a \"fast track\" development of a \"Modern Streetcar\" project, which would run mostly in the southeast quadrant on Central Avenue and Yale Boulevard. Funding for the $270 million system failed amid vocal opposition from some residents.\nBicycle transit.\nAlbuquerque has a well-developed network of trails, bicycle routes, and paths totaling over 400 miles. A 2021 study by Walk Score ranked it 26th out of 130 U.S. cities in bike friendliness, based on indicators such infrastructure, terrain, and connectivity. In 2009, Albuquerque opened its first Bicycle Boulevard on Silver Avenue. In 2015, the city adopted the \"Bikeway &amp; Trails Facility Plan\" to invest in its bicycle infrastructure, including improving and expanding the existing system, adding new routes, and establishing bike sharing programs.\nWalkability.\nA 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Albuquerque as the 28th-most walkable of the fifty largest U.S. cities, indicating below average performance in metrics such as access to public transit and proximity to people or amenities. A follow-up study a decade later ranked the city 73rd out of 130 cities nationwide, with a walkability score of 42.6 compared to an average of 48, classifying it as \"car-dependent\".\nAirports.\nAlbuquerque is served primarily by the Albuquerque International Sunport, located southeast of the city's central business district. It is the largest airport in New Mexico and the state's sole international airport, serving over 5 million passengers per year. The city owns and operates the much smaller Double Eagle II Airport, which is primarily used for air ambulances, corporate flights, military flights, charter flights, aviation training, and private flights.\nUtilities.\nEnergy.\nPNM Resources, New Mexico's largest electricity provider, is based in Albuquerque. They serve about 487,000 electricity customers statewide. In September 2021, PNM entered final merger talks with Avangrid, the U.S. subsidiary of Spanish power giant Iberdrola. New Mexico Gas Company, a subsidiary of Canadian utility company Emera, provides natural gas services to more than 540,000 customers in the state, including the Albuquerque metro area.\nSanitation.\nThe Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority is responsible for the delivery of drinking water and the treatment of wastewater. Trash and recycling in the city are managed by the City of Albuquerque Solid Waste Management Department.\nSouth Side Water Reclamation Plant.\nHealthcare.\nAlbuquerque is the medical hub of New Mexico, hosting numerous medical centers. The University of New Mexico Hospital is the largest hospital in New Mexico with 628 licensed beds and is the primary teaching hospital for the University of New Mexico School of Medicine, the state's only medical school. It provides a large residency training program in the state, one of many; a children's hospital, burn center, and level I pediatric and adult trauma centers, as well as a certified advanced primary stroke center and the largest collection of adult and pediatric specialty and subspecialty programs in the state. Albuquerque's other largest hospitals are Presbyterian Hospital (Presbyterian Healthcare Services) with 543 licensed beds, Raymond G. Murphy VA Medical Center (Veterans Health Administration) with 298 beds, and Lovelace Medical Center (Lovelace Health System) with 263 beds. Smaller specialty hospitals include the Heart Hospital of New Mexico and Lovelace Women's Hospital.\nSister cities.\nAlbuquerque has 11 sister cities, as designated by Sister Cities International:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51282", "revid": "46803305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51282", "title": "Maluku Islands", "text": "Region and archipelago in eastern Indonesia\nThe Maluku Islands ( ; , ) or the Moluccas ( ; ) are an archipelago in the eastern part of Indonesia. Tectonically they are located on the Halmahera Plate within the Molucca Sea Collision Zone. Geographically located in West Melanesia, the Moluccas have been considered a geographical and cultural intersection of Asia and Oceania.\nThe islands were known as the Spice Islands because of the nutmeg, mace, and cloves that were exclusively found there, the presence of which sparked European colonial interests in the 16th century.\nThe Maluku Islands formed a single province from Indonesian independence until 1999, when they were split into two provinces. A new province, North Maluku, incorporates the area between Morotai and Sula, with the arc of islands from Buru and Seram to Wetar remaining within the existing Maluku Province. North Maluku is predominantly Muslim, and its capital is Sofifi on Halmahera island. Maluku province has a larger Christian population, and its capital is Ambon. Though originally Melanesian, many island populations, especially in the Banda Islands, were massacred in the 17th century during the Dutch\u2013Portuguese War, also known as the Spice War. A second influx of immigrants primarily from Java began in the early 20th century under the Dutch and continues in the Indonesian era, which has also caused a lot of controversy as the transmigrant programs are thought to be a contributing factor to the Maluku Riots. Historical maritime exchanges between the Maluku Islands and neighbouring archipelagos included Philippine-built boats and tools, which Filipino craftsmen made using durable techniques that were prized across island fleets.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of the word \"Maluku\" is unclear and has been a matter of debate for many experts.\nThe first recorded word that can be identified with \"Maluku\" comes from Nagarakertagama, an Old Javanese eulogy of 1365. Canto 14 stanza 5 mentioned \"Maloko\", which Pigeaud identified with Ternate or Moluccas.\nA theory holds that \"Maluku\" comes from the phrase \"Moloko Kie Raha\" or \"Moloku Kie Raha\". In the Ternate language, \"raha\" means \"four\", while \"kie\" here means \"mountain\". \"Kie raha\" or \"four mountains\" refers to Ternate, Tidore, Bacan, and Jailolo (the name \"Jailolo\" has been used in the past to refer to Halmahera island), all of which have their \"kolano\" (a local title for kings rooted in Panji tales).\nIt is unclear what the meaning of \"Moloko\" or \"Moloku\" is. One possible meaning is in Ternate language, it meant \"to hold or grasp\", in which case \"Moloko Kie Raha\" could be understood to mean \"Confederation of the Four Mountains\". Another possibility is that the word originates from the word \"maloko\", which is a combination of the particle \"ma-\" and the root \"loko\" in North Halmahera languages means the variety of words relating to the location of mountains, in which case \"Maloko Kie Raha\" in the phrase \"Ternate se Tidore, Moti se Mara \"Maloko Kie Raha\"\" means \"Ternate, Tidore, Moti, and Mara the place of the four mountains\" or with the shifting of pronunciation of \"loko\" towards \"luku\", means \"Ternate, Tidore, Moti, and Mara the world of the four mountains\".\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nAustralo-Melanesians were the first people to inhabit the islands at least 40,000 years ago. A later migration of Austronesian speakers arrived around 2000 BC.\nArchaeological finds in Ternate include a Parvati statue with lotus flowers on the bottom, which indicate the statue is from the Majapahit era and indicate the early period of Hinduism and Buddhism. Other archaeological finds showed possible Arab merchants began to arrive in the fourteenth century, bringing Islam. The conversion to Islam occurred in many islands, especially in the centres of trade, while aboriginal animism persisted in the hinterlands and more isolated islands. Archaeological evidence here relies largely on the occurrence of pigs' teeth, as evidence of pork eating or abstinence therefrom.\nRemnants of Majapahit expeditions were also found in oral as well as archaeological sites. A story from Letvuan on the island of Kai Kecil tells of a Balinese envoy of Gajah Mada by the name of Kasdev, his wife Dit Ratngil, and eight of their children. Archaeological sites of ancient tombs found in Sorbay Bay, south of Letvuan, seem to support the story, as well as some cultural practices of Kei of Balinese origin. Other archaeological finds in the Kei Islands include a Shiva statue from the island of Kei Besar.\nAn oral story reports of a 14th-century Majapahit expedition to Negeri Ema, Ambon Island, by an envoy named Nyi Mas Kenang Eko Sutarmi alongside 22 people among her retinue and a spear-bearer trying to form an alliance and trading relationship with Negeri Ema's leader by the name of \"Kapitan\" Ading Adang Anaan Tanahatuila. The meeting was facilitated by \"Malessy\" Soa Lisa Maitimu; however, it failed to reach an agreement. As Sutarmi failed, she decided to stay in exile while her retinues settled and married locals of Ema, and her spear bearer settled on the coast but was killed later by Gunung Maut troops. Archaeological finds relating to this expedition include a water source with Sun symbols with nine rays, and heirlooms of spears and Totobuang kept by the Maitimu family and village office of Negeri Ema, alongside many potteries.\nPortuguese.\nIn August 1511 the Portuguese conquered the city-state of Malacca. The most significant lasting effects of the Portuguese presence were the disruption and reorganization of the Southeast Asian trade, and in eastern Indonesia\u2014including Maluku\u2014the introduction of Christianity.\nOne Portuguese diary noted, \"It is over thirty years since they became Moors\".\nAfonso de Albuquerque learned of the route to the Banda Islands and other 'Spice Islands', and sent an exploratory expedition of three vessels under the command of Ant\u00f3nio de Abreu, Sim\u00e3o Afonso Bisigudo, and Francisco Serr\u00e3o. On the return trip, Serr\u00e3o was shipwrecked at Hitu island (northern Ambon) in 1512. There he established ties with the local ruler who was impressed with his martial skills. The rulers of the competing island states of Ternate and Tidore also sought Portuguese assistance and the newcomers were welcomed in the area as buyers of supplies and spices during a lull in the regional trade due to the temporary disruption of Javanese and Malay sailings to the area following the 1511 conflict in Malacca. The spice trade soon revived but the Portuguese would not be able to fully monopolize or disrupt this trade.\nAllying himself with Ternate's ruler, Serr\u00e3o constructed a fortress on that tiny island and served as the head of a mercenary band of Portuguese seamen under the service of one of the two local feuding sultans who controlled most of the spice trade. Both Serr\u00e3o and Ferdinand Magellan, however, perished before they could meet one another. The Portuguese first landed in Ambon in 1513, but it only became the new centre for their activities in Maluku following the expulsion from Ternate. European power in the region was weak and Ternate became an expanding, fiercely Islamic, and anti-European state; the Portuguese-Ternate wars raged throughout the reigns of Sultan Baab Ullah (r. 1570\u20131583) and his son Sultan Saidi Berkat (r. 1583\u20131606).\nFollowing Portuguese missionary work, there have been large Christian communities in eastern Indonesia through to contemporary times, which has contributed to a sense of shared interest with Europeans, particularly among the Ambonese.\nDutch.\nThe Dutch arrived in 1599 and competed with the Portuguese in the area for trade. The Dutch East India Company in the course of Dutch\u2013Portuguese War allied with the Sultan of Ternate and conquered Ambon and Tidore in 1605, expelling the Portuguese. A Spanish counterattack from the Philippines restored Iberian rule in parts of North Maluku up to 1663. However, the Dutch monopolized the production and trade of spices through a ruthless policy. This included the genocidal conquest of the nutmeg-producing Banda Islands in 1621, the elimination of the English in Ambon in 1623, and the subordination of Ternate and Tidore in the 1650s. An anticolonial resistance movement led by a Tidore prince, the Nuku Rebellion, engulfed large parts of Maluku and Papua in 1780\u20131810 and co-opted the British. During the French Revolutionary Wars and again in the Napoleonic Wars, British forces captured the islands in 1796\u20131801 and 1810, respectively, and held them until 1817. In that time they uprooted many of the spice trees for transplantation throughout the British Empire.\nAfter Indonesian independence.\nWith the declaration of a single republic of Indonesia in 1950 to replace the federal state, a Republic of South Maluku (Republik Maluku Selatan, RMS) was declared and attempted to secede, led by Chris Soumokil (former Supreme Prosecutor of the Eastern Indonesia state) and supported by the Moluccan members of the Netherlands KNIL special troops. This movement was defeated by the Indonesian army and by special agreement with the Netherlands the Moluccan troops were ordered to move to the Netherlands. Decades later, descendants of these Moluccan KNIL soldiers participated in the 1975 Dutch train hostage crisis, the 1977 Dutch train hijacking, and the 1977 Dutch school hostage crisis to bring attention to their plight for an independent Republic of South Maluku.\nMaluku is one of the first provinces of Indonesia, proclaimed in 1945 and lasting until 1999 when the Maluku Utara and Halmahera Tengah Regencies were split off as a separate province of North Maluku. Its capital used to be Ternate, on a small island to the west of the large island of Halmahera, but has been moved to Sofifi on Halmahera itself. The capital of the remaining part of Maluku province remains at Ambon.\n1999\u20132003 inter-communal conflict.\nReligious and ethnic conflict erupted across the islands in January 1999. The subsequent 18 months were characterized by fighting between local groups of Muslims and Christians against jihadist groups from Java and the Indonesian military backing them leading to the destruction of thousands of houses, the displacement of approximately 500,000 people, the loss of thousands of lives, and the segregation of Muslims and Christians.\nGeography.\nThe Maluku Islands have a total area of , 90% of which is sea. There are an estimated 1027 islands. The largest two islands, Halmahera and Seram, are sparsely populated, while the most developed, Ambon and Ternate, are small.\nThe majority of the islands are forested and mountainous. The Tanimbar Islands are dry and hilly, while the Aru Islands are flat and swampy. Mount Binaiya () on Seram is the highest mountain. Several islands, such as Ternate () and the TNS islands, are volcanoes emerging from the sea with villages sited around their coasts. There have been over 70 serious volcanic eruptions in the last 500 years and earthquakes are common.\nGeology.\nThe geology of the Maluku Islands shares much similar history, characteristics, and processes with the neighbouring Nusa Tenggara region. There is a long history of geological study of these regions since Indonesian colonial times; however, the geological formation and progression are not fully understood, and theories of the island's geological evolution have changed extensively in recent decades. The Maluku Islands comprise some of the most geologically complex and active regions in the world, resulting from their position at the meeting point of four geological plates and two continental blocks.\nEcology.\nBiogeographically, all of the islands apart from the Aru group lie in Wallacea, the region between the Sunda Shelf (part of the Asia block), and the Arafura Shelf (part of the Australian block). More specifically, they lie between Weber's Line and Lydekker's Line and thus have a fauna that is rather more Australasian than Asian. Malukan biodiversity and its distribution are affected by various tectonic activities; most of the islands are geologically young, being from 1 million to 15 million years old, and have never been attached to the larger landmasses. The Maluku islands differ from other areas in Indonesia; they contain some of the country's smallest islands, coral island reefs scattered through some of the deepest seas in the world, and no large islands such as Java or Sumatra. Flora and fauna immigration between islands is thus restricted, leading to a high rate of endemic biota evolving.\nThe ecology of the Maluku Islands has fascinated naturalists for centuries; Alfred Wallace's book, \"The Malay Archipelago\", was the first significant study of the area's natural history and remains an important resource for studying Indonesian biodiversity. Maluku is the subject of two major historical works of natural history by Georg Eberhard Rumphius: the \"Herbarium Amboinense\" and the \"Amboinsche Rariteitkamer\".\nRainforest covered most of northern and central Maluku, which, on the smaller islands has been replaced by plantations, including the region's endemic cloves and nutmeg. The Tanimbar Islands and other southeastern islands are arid and sparsely vegetated, much like nearby Timor. In 1997 the Manusela National Park, and in 2004, the Aketajawe-Lolobata National Park, were established, for the protection of endangered species.\nNocturnal marsupials, such as cuscus and bandicoots, make up the majority of the mammal species and introduced mammals include Malayan civets and feral pigs. Bird species include approximately 100 endemics with the greatest variety on the large islands of Halmahera and Seram. North Maluku has two species of endemic birds of paradise. Uniquely among the Maluku Islands, the Aru Islands have a purely Papuan fauna including kangaroos, cassowaries, and birds of paradise.\nWhile many ecological problems affect both small islands and large landmasses, small islands suffer their particular problems. Development pressures on small islands are increasing, although their effects are not always anticipated. Although Indonesia is richly endowed with natural resources, the resources of the small islands of Maluku are limited and specialised; furthermore, human resources, in particular, are limited.\nGeneral observations about small islands that can be applied to the Maluku Islands include:\nClimate.\nCentral and southern Maluku Islands experience the dry monsoon between October and March and the wet monsoon from May to August, which is the reverse of the rest of Indonesia. The dry monsoon's average maximum temperature is while the wet's average maximum is . Northern Maluku has its wet monsoon from December to March in line with the rest of Indonesia. Each island group has its climatic variations, and the larger islands tend to have drier coastal lowlands and their mountainous hinterlands are wetter.\nDemographics.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation.\nThe population of Maluku Province in 2020 was 1,848,923 and that of North Maluku Province was 1,282,937. Hence the total population of the Maluku Islands as a region in 2020 was 3,131,860.\nEthnic groups.\nA long history of trade and seafaring has resulted in a high degree of mixed ancestry in Malukans. Austronesian peoples added to the native Melanesian population around 2000\u00a0BCE. Melanesian features are strongest in the islands of Kei and Aru and amongst the interior people of the islands Seram and Buru. Later added to this Austronesian-Melanesian mix were some Indian and Arab strain. More recent arrivals include Bugis trader settlers from Sulawesi and Javanese transmigrants.\nLanguages.\nOver 130 languages were once spoken across the islands; however, many have now switched to the creoles of Ternate and Ambonese, the lingua franca of northern and southern Maluku, respectively.\nGovernment and politics.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe Maluku Islands are divided into two provinces: Maluku and North Maluku.\nEconomy.\nCloves and nutmeg are still cultivated, as are cocoa, coffee and fruit. Fishing is a big industry across the islands but particularly around Halmahera and Bacan. The Aru Islands produce pearls, and Seram exports lobsters. Logging is a significant industry on the larger islands with Seram producing ironwood and teak and ebony are produced on Buru.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51283", "revid": "47326910", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51283", "title": "Maluku", "text": "Maluku may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51284", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51284", "title": "Molucca", "text": ""}
{"id": "51285", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51285", "title": "Moluccas", "text": ""}
{"id": "51287", "revid": "2943446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51287", "title": "Spice Islands (disambiguation)", "text": "The Spice Islands, now known as the Maluku Islands, are an archipelago in the eastern part of Indonesia.\nSpice Island, Island of Spice, or Spice Isle may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51288", "revid": "50432136", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51288", "title": "Translation memory", "text": "Segmented database to aid translators\nA translation memory (TM) is a database that stores \"segments\", which can be sentences, paragraphs or sentence-like units (headings, titles or elements in a list) that have previously been translated, in order to aid human translators. The translation memory stores the source text and its corresponding translation in language pairs called \"translation units\". Individual words are handled by terminology bases and are not within the domain of TM.\nSoftware programs that use translation memories are sometimes known as translation memory managers (TMM) or translation memory systems (TM systems, not to be confused with a translation management system (TMS), which is another type of software focused on managing the process of translation).\nTranslation memories are typically used in conjunction with a dedicated computer-assisted translation (CAT) tool, word processing program, terminology management systems, multilingual dictionary, or even raw machine translation output.\nResearch indicates that many companies producing multilingual documentation are using translation memory systems. In a survey of language professionals in 2006, 82.5% out of 874 replies confirmed the use of a TM. Usage of TM correlated with text type characterised by technical terms and simple sentence structure (technical, to a lesser degree marketing and financial), computing skills, and repetitiveness of content.\nUsing TMs.\nThe program breaks the source text (the text to be translated) into segments, looks for matches between segments and the source half of previously translated source-target pairs stored in a translation memory, and presents such matching pairs as translation full and partial matches. The translator can accept a match, replace it with a fresh translation, or modify it to match the source. In the last two cases, the new or modified translation goes into the database.\nSome translation memory systems search for 100% matches only, i.e. they can only retrieve segments of text that match entries in the database exactly, while others employ fuzzy matching algorithms to retrieve similar segments, which are presented to the translator with differences flagged. Typical translation memory systems only search for text in the source segment.\nThe flexibility and robustness of the matching algorithm largely determine the performance of the translation memory, although for some applications the recall rate of exact matches can be high enough to justify the 100%-match approach.\nSegments where no match is found will have to be translated by the translator manually. These newly translated segments are stored in the database where they can be used for future translations as well as repetitions of that segment in the current text.\nTranslation memories work best on texts which are highly repetitive, such as technical manuals. They are also helpful for translating incremental changes in a previously translated document, corresponding, for example, to minor changes in a new version of a user manual. Traditionally, translation memories have not been considered appropriate for literary or creative texts, for the simple reason that there is so little repetition in the language used. However, others find them of value even for non-repetitive texts, because the database resources created have value for concordance searches to determine appropriate usage of terms, for quality assurance (no empty segments), and the simplification of the review process (source and target segment are always displayed together while translators have to work with two documents in a traditional review environment).\nMain benefits.\nTranslation memory managers are most suitable for translating technical documentation and documents containing specialized vocabularies. Their benefits include:\nMain obstacles.\nThe main problems hindering wider use of translation memory managers include:\nEffects on quality.\nThe use of TM systems might have an effect on the quality of the texts translated. Its main effect is clearly related to the so-called \"error propagation\": if the translation for a particular segment is incorrect, it is in fact more likely that the incorrect translation will be reused the next time the same source text, or a similar source text, is translated, thereby perpetuating the error. Traditionally, two main effects on the quality of translated texts have been described: the \"sentence-salad\" effect (B\u00e9dard 2000; cited in O'Hagan 2009: 50) and the \"peep-hole\" effect (Heyn 1998). The first refers to a lack of coherence at the text level when a text is translated using sentences from a TM which have been translated by different translators with different styles. According to the latter, translators may adapt their style to the use of TM system in order for these not to contain intratextual references, so that the segments can be better reused in future texts, thus affecting cohesion and readability (O'Hagan 2009).\nThere is a potential, and, if present, probably an unconscious effect on the translated text. Different languages use different sequences for the logical elements within a sentence and a translator presented with a multiple clause sentence that is half translated is less likely to completely rebuild a sentence. Consistent empirical evidences (Mart\u00edn-Mor 2011) show that translators will most likely modify the structure of a multiple clause sentence when working with a text processor rather than with a TM system.\nThere is also a potential for the translator to deal with the text mechanically sentence-by-sentence, instead of focusing on how each sentence relates to those around it and to the text as a whole. Researchers (Dragsted 2004) have identified this effect, which relates to the automatic segmentation feature of these programs, but it does not necessarily have a negative effect on the quality of translations.\nThese effects are closely related to training rather than inherent to the tool. According to Mart\u00edn-Mor (2011), the use of TM systems does have an effect on the quality of the translated texts, especially on novices, but experienced translators are able to avoid it. Pym (2013) reminds that \"translators using TM/MT tend to revise each segment as they go along, allowing little time for a final revision of the whole text at the end\", which might be the ultimate cause of some of the effects described here.\nFunctions.\nThe following is a summary of the main functions of a translation memory.\nOffline functions.\nImport.\nThis function is used to transfer a text and its translation from a text file to the TM. Import can be done from a \"raw format\", in which an external source text is available for importing into a TM along with its translation. Sometimes the texts have to be reprocessed by the user. There is another format that can be used to import: the \"native format\". This format is the one that uses the TM to save translation memories in a file.\nAnalysis.\nThe process of analysis involves the following steps:\n It is very important to recognize punctuation correctly in order to distinguish between for example a full stop at the end of a sentence and a full stop in an abbreviation. Thus, mark-up is a kind of pre-editing. Usually, materials which have been processed through translators' aid programs contain mark-up, as the translation stage is embedded in a multilingual document production line. Other special text elements may be set off by mark-up. There are special elements which do not need to be translated, such as proper names and codes, while others may need to be converted to native format.\n The base form reduction is used to prepare lists of words and a text for automatic retrieval of terms from a term bank. On the other hand, syntactic parsing may be used to extract multi-word terms or phraseology from a source text. So parsing is used to normalise word order variation of phraseology, this is which words can form a phrase.\n Its purpose is to choose the most useful translation units. Segmentation is like a type of parsing. It is done monolingually using superficial parsing and alignment is based on segmentation. If the translators correct the segmentations manually, later versions of the document will not find matches against the TM based on the corrected segmentation because the program will repeat its own errors. Translators usually proceed sentence by sentence, although the translation of one sentence may depend on the translation of the surrounding ones.\n It is the task of defining translation correspondences between source and target texts. There should be feedback from alignment to segmentation and a good alignment algorithm should be able to correct initial segmentation.\n It can have as input a previous dictionary. Moreover, when extracting unknown terms, it can use parsing based on text statistics. These are used to estimate the amount of work involved in a translation job. This is very useful for planning and scheduling the work. Translation statistics usually count the words and estimate the amount of repetition in the text.\nExport.\nExport transfers the text from the TM into an external text file. Import and export should be inverses.\nOnline functions.\nWhen translating, one of the main purposes of the TM is to retrieve the most useful matches in the memory so that the translator can choose the best one. The TM must show both the source and target text pointing out the identities and differences.\nRetrieval.\nSeveral different types of matches can be retrieved from a TM.\nUpdating.\nA TM is updated with a new translation when it has been accepted by the translator. As always in updating a database, there is the question what to do with the previous contents of the database. A TM can be modified by changing or deleting entries in the TM. Some systems allow translators to save multiple translations of the same source segment.\nAutomatic translation.\nTranslation memory tools often provide automatic retrieval and substitution.\nNetworking.\nNetworking enables a group of translators to translate a text together faster than if each was working in isolation, because sentences and phrases translated by one translator are available to the others. Moreover, if translation memories are shared before the final translation, there is an opportunity for mistakes by one translator to be corrected by other team members.\nText memory.\n\"Text memory\" is the basis of the proposed Lisa OSCAR xml:tm standard. Text memory comprises author memory and translation memory.\nTranslation memory.\nThe unique identifiers are remembered during translation so that the target language document is 'exactly' aligned at the text unit level. If the source document is subsequently modified, then those text units that have not changed can be directly transferred to the new target version of the document without the need for any translator interaction. This is the concept of 'exact' or 'perfect' matching to the translation memory. xml:tm can also provide mechanisms for in-document leveraged and fuzzy matching.\nHistory.\n1970s is the infancy stage for TM systems in which scholars carried on a preliminary round of exploratory discussions. The original idea for TM systems is often attributed to Martin Kay's \"Proper Place\" paper, but the details of it are not fully given. In this paper, it has shown the basic concept of the storing system: \"The translator might start by issuing a command causing the system to display anything in the store that might be relevant to ... Before going on, he can examine past and future fragments of text that contain similar material\". This observation from Kay was actually influenced by the suggestion of Peter Arthern that translators can use similar, already translated documents online. In his 1978 article he gave fully demonstration of what we call TM systems today: Any new text would be typed into a word processing station, and as it was being typed, the system would check this text against the earlier texts stored in its memory, together with its translation into all the other official languages [of the European Community]. ... One advantage over machine translation proper would be that all the passages so retrieved would be grammatically correct. In effect, we should be operating an electronic 'cut and stick' process which would, according to my calculations, save at least 15 per cent of the time which translators now employ in effectively producing translations.\nThe idea was incorporated from ALPS (Automated Language Processing Systems) Tools first developed by researcher from Brigham Young University, and at that time the idea of TM systems was mixed with a tool called \"Repetitions Processing\" which only aimed to find matched strings. Only after a long time, did the concept of so-called translation memory come into being.\nThe real exploratory stage of TM systems would be 1980s. One of the first implementations of TM system appeared in Sadler and Vendelmans' Bilingual Knowledge Bank. A Bilingual Knowledge Bank is a syntactically and referentially structured pair of corpora, one being a translation of the other, in which translation units are cross-coded between the corpora. The aim of Bilingual Knowledge Bank is to develop a corpus-based general-purpose knowledge source for applications in machine translation and computer-aided translation (Sadler &amp; Vendelman, 1987). Another important step was made by Brian Harris with his \"Bi-text\". He has defined the bi-text as \"a single text in two dimensions\" (1988), the source and target texts related by the activity of the translator through translation units which made a similar echoes with Sadler's Bilingual Knowledge Bank. And in Harris's work he proposed something like TM system without using this name: a database of paired translations, searchable either by individual word, or by \"whole translation unit\", in the latter case the search being allowed to retrieve similar rather than identical units.\nTM technology only became commercially available on a wide scale in the late 1990s, through the efforts made by several engineers and translators. Of note is the first TM tool called Trados (SDL Trados nowadays). In this tool, when opening the source file and applying the translation memory so that any \"100% matches\" (identical matches) or \"fuzzy matches\" (similar, but not identical matches) within the text are instantly extracted and placed within the target file. Then, the \"matches\" suggested by the translation memory can be either accepted or overridden with new alternatives. If a translation unit is manually updated, then it is stored within the translation memory for future use as well as for repetition in the current text. In a similar way, all segments in the target file without a \"match\" would be translated manually and then automatically added to the translation memory.\nIn the 2000s, online translation services began incorporating TM. Machine translation services like Google Translate, as well as professional and \"hybrid\" translation services provided by sites like Gengo and Ackuna, incorporate databases of TM data supplied by translators and volunteers to make more efficient connections between languages provide faster translation services to end-users.\nRecent trends.\nOne recent development is the concept of 'text memory' in contrast to translation memory. This is also the basis of the proposed LISA OSCAR standard. Text memory within xml:tm comprises 'author memory' and 'translation memory'. Author memory is used to keep track of changes during the authoring cycle. Translation memory uses the information from author memory to implement translation memory matching. Although primarily targeted at XML documents, xml:tm can be used on any document that can be converted to XLIFF format.\nSecond-generation translation memories.\nMuch more powerful than first-generation TM systems, they include a linguistic analysis engine, use chunk technology to break down segments into intelligent terminological groups, and automatically generate specific glossaries.\nRelated standards.\nTMX.\nTranslation Memory eXchange (TMX) is a standard that enables the interchange of translation memories between translation suppliers. TMX has been adopted by the translation community as the best way of importing and exporting translation memories. The current version is 1.4b - it allows for the recreation of the original source and target documents from the TMX data.\nTBX.\nTermBase eXchange. This LISA standard, which was revised and republished as ISO 30042, allows for the interchange of terminology data including detailed lexical information. The framework for TBX is provided by three ISO standards: ISO 12620, ISO 12200 and ISO 16642. ISO 12620 provides an inventory of well-defined \"data categories\" with standardized names that function as data element types or as predefined values. ISO 12200 (also known as MARTIF) provides the basis for the core structure of TBX. ISO 16642 (also known as Terminological Markup Framework) includes a structural meta-model for Terminology Markup Languages in general.\nUTX.\nUniversal Terminology eXchange (UTX) format is a standard specifically designed to be used for user dictionaries of machine translation, but it can be used for general, human-readable glossaries. The purpose of UTX is to accelerate dictionary sharing and reuse by its extremely simple and practical specification.\nSRX.\nSegmentation Rules eXchange (SRX) is intended to enhance the TMX standard so that translation memory data that is exchanged between applications can be used more effectively. The ability to specify the segmentation rules that were used in the previous translation may increase the leveraging that can be achieved.\nGMX.\nGILT Metrics. GILT stands for (Globalization, Internationalization, Localization, and Translation). The GILT Metrics standard comprises three parts: GMX-V for volume metrics, GMX-C for complexity metrics and GMX-Q for quality metrics. The proposed GILT Metrics standard is tasked with quantifying the workload and quality requirements for any given GILT task.\nOLIF.\nOpen Lexicon Interchange Format. OLIF is an open, XML-compliant standard for the exchange of terminological and lexical data. Although originally intended as a means for the exchange of lexical data between proprietary machine translation lexicons, it has evolved into a more general standard for terminology exchange.\nXLIFF.\nXML Localisation Interchange File Format (XLIFF) is intended to provide a single interchange file format that can be understood by any localization provider. XLIFF is the preferred way of exchanging data in XML format in the translation industry.\nTransWS.\nTranslation Web Services. TransWS specifies the calls needed to use Web services for the submission and retrieval of files and messages relating to localization projects. It is intended as a detailed framework for the automation of much of the current localization process by the use of Web Services.\nxml:tm.\nThe xml:tm (XML-based Text Memory) approach to translation memory is based on the concept of text memory which comprises author and translation memory. xml:tm has been donated to Lisa OSCAR by XML-INTL.\nPO.\nGettext Portable Object format. Though often not regarded as a translation memory format, Gettext PO files are bilingual files that are also used in translation memory processes in the same way translation memories are used. Typically, a PO translation memory system will consist of various separate files in a directory tree structure. Common tools that work with PO files include the GNU Gettext Tools and the Translate Toolkit. Several tools and programs also exist that edit PO files as if they are mere source text files.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51289", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51289", "title": "Israel Defence Force", "text": ""}
{"id": "51290", "revid": "34477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51290", "title": "Israeli defence force", "text": ""}
{"id": "51291", "revid": "34477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51291", "title": "Israeli Defence Forces", "text": ""}
{"id": "51292", "revid": "34477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51292", "title": "Israeli defence forces", "text": ""}
{"id": "51294", "revid": "42927844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51294", "title": "Mohamed Farrah Aidid", "text": "Somali warlord and military faction leader (1934\u20131996)\nMohamed Farrah Hasan Garad ( ; ; 15 December 1934 \u2013 1 August 1996), popularly known as General Aidid or Aideed, was a Somali military officer, diplomat, and warlord.\nEducated in both Rome and Moscow, he began his career during the 1950s serving as a police chief in the Italian ruled United Nations trusteeship security forces. Following Somalia's independence in 1960, Aidid became an officer in the Somali National Army. He eventually rose to the rank of Brigadier general and commanded military forces during the 1977\u201378 Ogaden War and the 1982\u201383 Border War. From 1984 to 1989, he was the ambassador to India for the Somali Democratic Republic. \nIn 1989, as the Somali Rebellion against President Siad Barre was escalating, Aidid became a major leader within the rebel United Somali Congress (USC), and soon after the rebel faction coalition the Somali National Alliance (SNA). Along with other armed opposition groups in early 1991, he succeeded in toppling President Barre's 22 year old regime, leading to the full outbreak of the civil war. Aidid possessed aspirations for presidency of the new Somali government, and sought alliances and unions with other politico-military organizations in order to form a national government.\nFollowing the 5 June 1993 clash that resulted in the death of dozens of UNOSOM II troops, the SNA\u2014and by extension, Aidid\u2014were blamed, causing him to become one of the first wanted men of the United Nations. After the US-led 12 July 1993 Bloody Monday raid, which resulted in the death of many eminent members of his Habr Gidr clan, Aidid began deliberately targeting American troops for the first time. President Bill Clinton responded by implementing Operation Gothic Serpent, and deploying Delta Force and Task Force Ranger to capture him. The high American casualty rate of the ensuing Battle of Mogadishu on 3\u20134 October 1993, led UNOSOM to cease its four month long mission. In December 1993, the U.S. Army flew Aidid to Addis Ababa to engage in peace talks.\nDuring a battle in Mogadishu between his militia and the forces of his former ally Osman Ali Atto, Aidid was fatally wounded by a sniper and later died on 2 August 1996.\nEarly years.\nAidid was born in 1934 in Beledweyne, Italian Somaliland. He is from the Habar Gidir subclan of the greater Hawiye clan. During the era of the British Military Administration he moved to Galkayo in the Mudug region to stay with a cousin, a policeman who would teach Aidid to both type and speak in Italian.\nSoon after, during the period of the Italian ruled United Nations trusteeship which began in 1950, a young Aidid enlisted in the \"Corpo di Polizia della Somalia\" (Police Corps of Somalia) and in 1954 was sent to Italy to be trained at an infantry school in Rome, after which he was appointed to work under several high ranking Somali police officers. In 1958, Aidid would serve as Chief of Police in Banaadir Province, and the following year he returned to Italy to receive further education. He was also a member of the Somali Youth League (SYL), the leading political group advocating for Somalia\u2019s independence. According to Aidid, he and other officers debated with Italian administrators who opposed forming a Somali military, arguing the United Nations would provide security for the nation. Aidid argued with Italian UN officials that the Ethiopian Empire posed a serious threat and Somalia needed its own armed forces.\nIn 1960, Somalia gained independence and Aidid joined the newly formed Somali National Army. He was promoted to lieutenant and became aide-de-camp of Maj. Gen. Daud Abdulle Hirsi, the first commander of the Somali National Army. Aidid first gained combat experience commanding Somali army troops during the escalating border skirmishes against the Ethiopian Imperial Army that preceded the 1964 Ethiopian\u2013Somali War. Requiring more formal training and having been recognized as a highly qualified officer, he was later selected to study advanced post graduate military science at the Frunze Military Academy (\u0412\u043e\u0435\u043d\u043d\u0430\u044f \u0430\u043a\u0430\u0434\u0435\u043c\u0438\u044f \u0438\u043c. \u041c. \u0412. \u0424\u0440\u0443\u043d\u0437\u0435) in the Soviet Union for three years, an elite institution reserved for the most qualified officers of the Warsaw Pact armies and their allies.\nOctober 1969 Coup d'\u00e9tat and imprisonment.\nIn 1969, a few days after the assassination of Somalia's President Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, a military junta known as the Supreme Revolutionary Council (SRC), led by Major General Mohamed Siad Barre, would take advantage of the disarray and stage a bloodless coup d'\u00e9tat on the democratically elected Somali government. At the time Aidid was serving as Lieutenant Colonel in the army with 26th Division in Hargeisa. He was also the Head of Operations for the Central and Northern Regions of Somalia. After the assassination, he was relieved of his duties and was recalled to Mogadishu to lead the troops guarding the burial of the deceased President. By November 1969, he had quickly fallen under suspicion by high ranking members of the Supreme Revolutionary Council, including Barre. Without trial, he was subsequently detained in Mandera Prison along with Colonel Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed for nearly six years. Aidid and Yusuf were both widely regarded to be politically ambitious officers, and potential figureheads in a future coup attempt. Aidid claimed that his imprisonment was a result of encouraging President Barre to transfer power over from the Somali military to civilian technocrats.\nReturn to military service.\nAidid was eventually released in October 1975, and he returned to service in the Somali National Army to take part in the 1977-1978 Ogaden War against Ethiopia. During the war, he was promoted to brigadier general and became an aide-de-camp to President Mohammed Siad Barre. Headquartered in Hargeisa, Brig Gen Aidid and Maj Gen Gallel would command the 26th Division on the Dire Dawa Front. In one of the final Somali offensive actions of the war, SNA brigades under Aidid's command attacked Ethiopian forces holding the strategic Addis Ababa\u2013Djibouti Railway in March 1978, aiming to delay and divert the enemy as the rest of the army withdrew. His forces seized a significant section of the rail line, destroyed parts of it, and held their positions for as long as it was tenable. According to Aidid, several Soviet Armed Forces military experts embedded with the Ethiopian/Cuban army\u2014who had previously worked with him in Somalia\u2014shifted their focus from the withdrawing SNA to his brigades upon recognizing his presence on the Dire Dawa front.\nFollowing the Ogaden War, having served with distinction, Aidid worked as a presidential staffer to Barre before being appointed intelligence minister. He was highly critical of how Barre handled the SNA withdrawal from the Ogaden and later charged that the president failed \"[to] give promotions or medals to those who fought heroically\". Aidid claimed this and other issues caused resentment in the armed forces. Under pressure from President Barre, Aidid gave a written guarantee in 1978 that Col Abdullahi Yusuf would not attempt a coup d'eat. Yusuf would go on to break the pledge in a failed coup attempt and escaped to Ethiopia. Aidid was left stranded but was rescued by a high ranking ally in the regime, and was consequently saved from any punishment. \nDuring the 1982 war with Ethiopia, Aidid, serving under General Yusuf Ahmed Salhan, was a top Somali National Army commander, leading the defense of central Somalia\u2019s border regions against Ethiopian military offensives.\nSomali Rebellion and Civil War.\nIn 1979, Barre had appointed Aidid to parliament, but in 1984, after perceiving him as a potential rival, sent him away to India by making Aidid the ambassador for Somalia. \nHe would use his time in the country to frequently attend lectures at the University of Delhi and, with the aid of Indian lecturers at the University of Delhi, completed three books (\"A Vision of Somalia\", \"The Preferred Future Development in Somalia\", and \"Somalia from the Dawn of Human Civilization to Today\").\nUnited Somali Congress.\nBy the late 1980s, Barre's regime had become increasingly unpopular. The State took an increasingly hard line, and insurgencies, encouraged by Ethiopia's communist Derg administration, sprang up across the country. Being a member of the Hawiye clan, a high ranking government official and an experienced soldier, Aidid was deemed a natural choice for helping lead the military campaign for the United Somali Congress against the regime, and he was soon persuaded to leave New Delhi and return to Somalia.\nAidid defected from the embassy to India in 1989 and then left the country to join the growing opposition against the Barre regime. Following his defection, he had received an invitation from Ethiopian President Mengistu Haile-Mariam, who would go on to give Aidid permission to create and run a USC military operation from Ethiopian soil. From base camps near the Somali-Ethiopian border, he began directing the final military offensive of the newly formed United Somali Congress to seize Mogadishu and topple the regime.\nThe USC was at that time split into three factions: USC-Rome, USC-Mogadishu, later followed by USC-Ethiopia; as neither the first two former locations were a suitable launching pad to topple the Barre regime. Ali Mahdi Mohamed, an influential member of the congress who would later become Aidid's prime rival, opposed Aidid's involvement in the USC and supported the Rome faction of the Congress, who also resented Aidid. The first serious signs of fractures within the USC came in June 1990, when Mahdi and the USC-Rome faction rejected the election of Aidid to chairman of the USC, disputing the validity of the vote. That same month Aidid would go on to form a military alliance with the northern Somali National Movement (SNM) and the Somali Patriotic Movement (SPM). In October 1990, the SNM, SPM and USC would sign an agreement to hold no peace talks until the complete and total overthrow of the Barre regime. They further agreed to form a provisional government following Barres removal, and then to hold elections.\nBy November 1990, the news of Gen. Aidid's USC forces overrunning President Siad Barres 21st army in the Mudug, Galgudud and Hiran regions convinced many that a war in Mogadishu was imminent, leading the civilian population of the city to begin rapidly arming itself. This, combined with actions of other rebel organizations, eventually led to the full outbreak of the Somali civil war, the gradual breakup of the Somali Armed Forces, and the toppling of the Barre regime in Mogadishu on 26 January 1991. Following the power vacuum left by the fall of Barre, the situation in Somalia began to rapidly spiral out of control, and rebel factions subsequently began to fight for control of the remnants of the Somali state. Most notably, the split between the two main factions of the United Somali Congress (USC), led by Aidid and his rival Ali Mahdi, would result in serious fighting and vast swathes of Mogadishu would consequently destroyed as both factions attempted to exert control over the city.\nBoth Ali Mahdi and Aidid claimed to lead national unity governments, and each vied to lead the reconstruction of the Somali state.\nSomali National Alliance.\nAidid's wing of the USC would morph into the Somalia National Alliance (SNA) or USC/SNA. During the spring and summer of 1992, Former President Siad Barres army attempted to retake Mogadishu, but successful joint defence and counterattack by Aidid's USC wing, the Somali Patriotic Movement (SPM), the Somali Southern National Movement (SSNM) and Somali Democratic Movement (SDM) (all united under the banner of the Somali Liberation Army) to push the last remnants of Barres troops out of southern Somalia into Kenya on 16 June 1992 would lead to the formation of the political union known as the Somali National Alliance. This absorption of different political organizations was critical to Aidid\u2019s approach to taking the presidency.\nAs leader of the Somali National Alliance, Aidid, with presidential aspirations, expressed the goal of using the SNA as a base for working toward forming a national reconciliation government and claimed to also be aiming for an eventual multi-party democracy. To this end Aidid required and sought political agreements with the only two remaining major factions, the Somali National Movement (SNM) and Somali Salvation Democratic Front (SSDF), to leave his main rival Ali Mahdi Mohamed isolated in an enclave in North Mogadishu.\nAidid's grip on power in the SNA was fragile, as his ability to impose decisions on the organization was limited. A council of elders held decision making power for most significant issues and elections were held that threatened Aidid's chairmanship.\nUnited Nations Intervention.\nIn April 1992 the United Nations intervened in Somalia, creating UNOSOM I. United Nations Security Council Resolution 794 was unanimously passed on 3 December 1992, which approved a coalition led by the United States. Forming the Unified Task Force (UNITAF), the alliance was given the task of assuring security until humanitarian efforts were transferred to the UN.\nAidid initially publicly opposed the deployment of United Nations forces to Somalia, but eventually relented. He and UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros Ghali both despised one another. Before being Secretary-General, Boutros Ghali had been an Egyptian diplomat that had supported President Siad Barre against the USC in the late 80s and early 90s. At Atto's urging, Aidid decided to welcome the deployment of American military forces under UNITAF (Operation Restore Hope) in December 1992, in part because Atto had close ties to U.S. embassy officials in Nairobi, Kenya and the American oil company Conoco. In January 1993, Special Representative of the UN in Somalia, Ismat Kittani, requested that Aidid come to the Addis Ababa Peace Conference set to be held in March.\nUNOSOM II.\nIn early May 1993, Gen. Aidid and Col. Abdullahi Yusuf of the Somali Salvation Democratic Front (SSDF) agreed to convene a peace conference for central Somalia. In light of recent conflict between the two, the initiative was seen as a major step towards halting the Somali Civil War. Gen. Aidid, having initiated the talks with Col. Yusuf, considered himself the conference chair, setting the agenda. Beginning 9 May, elder delegations from their respective clans, Habr Gidr and Majerteen, met. While Aidid and Yusuf aimed for a central Somalia-focused conference, they clashed with UNOSOM, which aimed to include other regions and replace Aidid's chairmanship with Abdullah Osman, a staunch critic of Aidid. As the conference began, Aidid sought assistance from UNOSOM ambassador Lansana Kouyate, who proposed air transport and accommodation for delegates. However, he was recalled and replaced by April Glaspie, following which UNOSOM retracted its offer. Aidid resorted to private aircraft to transport delegates. Following the incident, Aidid publicly rebuked the United Nations on Radio Mogadishu for interference in Somali internal affairs.\nAidid invited Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Adm. Johnathan Howe to open the conference, which was refused. The differences between Aidid and the UN proved to be too great, and the conference proceeded without the United Nations participation. On 2 June 1993 the conference between Gen. Aidid and Col. Abdullahi Yusuf successfully concluded. Admiral Howe would be invited to witness the peace agreement, but again declined. The Galkacyo peace accord successfully ended large scale conflict in the Galgadud and Mudug regions of Somalia.\nConflict with American and UN forces.\nThe contention between the Somali National Alliance and UNOSOM from this point forward would begin to manifest in anti-UNOSOM propaganda broadcast from SNA controlled Radio Mogadishu. The broadcasts were viewed as a threat to the operation and that station was searched, sparking the 5 June 1993 battle and the start of UNOSOM II military operations against the Somali National Alliance. The UNOSOM offensive had significant negative political consequences for the intervention as widely alienated the Somali people, strengthened political support for Aidid, and led to growing criticism of the operation internationally. As a result numerous UNOSOM II contingents began to increasingly push for a more conciliatory and diplomatic approach with the SNA. Each major armed confrontation with between UNOSOM II forces and the SNA was noted to have the inadvertent effect of increasing Aidid's stature with the Somali public.\nAfter the October 1993 Battle of Mogadishu, US President Bill Clinton defended American policy in Somalia but admitted that it had been a mistake for American forces to be drawn into the decision to \"personalize the conflict\" to Aidid. He reappointed the former Special Envoy for Somalia Robert B. Oakley to signal the administration's return to focusing on political reconciliation. According to U.S. Army Brig. General Ed Wheeler, \"Clinton finally realized Aidid was more than merely the head of some equivalent Los Angeles street gang.\" Clinton signaled he was prepared to ignore the UNSCR 837 and include Aidid in talks for a peaceful settlement. The U.S. Army flew Aidid to Addis Ababa on a military aircraft in December 1993 for peace talks. He arrived at the Mogadishu airport in an American armored vehicle guarded by American forces and his own Somali National Alliance before being flown to Ethiopia. Some of the US military units assigned to Aidid's security detail had lost soldiers in the Battle of Mogadishu. In early 1994 he attended the Pan African Congress held in the Ugandan capital, Kampala, where he was reportedly greeted with a standing ovation. \nAfter the cessation of hostilities between the SNA and UNOSOM, Special Representative Lansana Kouyate (replacing Adm. Johnathan Howe) successfully launched an initiative to normalize relations in March 1994. Numerous points of contention between the respective organizations were discussed at length and understandings were reached, facilitating the normalization of the relationship between the UN and the SNA. That same year the UNOSOM forces began withdrawing, completing the process by 1995. The withdrawal of UNOSOM forces weakened Aidid's prominence within the SNA, as the war had served to unify the alliance around a common foreign enemy.\nPresidency declaration.\nAidid subsequently declared himself President of Somalia in June 1995. However, his declaration received no international recognition, as his rival Ali Mahdi Muhammad had already been elected interim president at a conference in 1991 in Djibouti and recognized as such by the international community.\nDeath.\nOn 24 July 1996, Aidid and his men clashed with the forces of former allies Ali Mahdi Muhammad and Osman Ali Atto. Atto was a former supporter and financier of Aidid, and of the same subclan. Atto is alleged to have masterminded the defeat of Aidid. Aidid suffered a gunshot wound in the ensuing battle. He later died from a heart attack on 2 August 1996, either during or after surgery to treat his injuries.\nFamily.\nDuring the lead up to the civil war, Aidid's wife Khadiga Gurhan sought asylum in Canada in 1989, taking their four children with her. Local media shortly afterwards alleged that she had returned to Somalia for a five-month stay while still receiving welfare payments. Gurhan admitted in an interview to collecting welfare and having briefly travelled to Somalia in late 1991. However, it was later brought to light that she had been granted landed immigrant status in June 1991, thereby making her a legal resident of Canada. Additionally, Aidid's rival, Barre, had been overthrown in January of that year. This altogether ensured that Gurhan's five-month trip would not have undermined her initial 1989 claim of refugee status. An official probe by Canadian immigration officials into the allegations also concluded that she had obtained her landing papers through normal legal processes.\nHussein Mohamed Farrah, son of Aidid, emigrated to the United States when he was 17 years old. Staying 16 years in the country, he eventually became a naturalized citizen and later a United States Marine who served in Somalia. Two days after his father's death, the Somali National Alliance declared Farrah as the new president, although he too was not internationally recognised.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51298", "revid": "49855342", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51298", "title": "Aaron Copland", "text": "American composer and conductor (1900\u20131990)\nAaron Copland ( ; November 14, 1900\u00a0\u2013 December 2, 1990) was an American composer, critic, writer, teacher, pianist, and conductor of his own and other American music. Copland was referred to by his peers and critics as the \"Dean of American Music\". The open, slowly changing harmonies in much of his music are typical of what many consider the sound of American music, evoking the vast American landscape and pioneer spirit. He is best known for the works he wrote in the 1930s and 1940s in a deliberately accessible style often referred to as \"populist\" and which he called his \"vernacular\" style. Works in this vein include the ballets \"Appalachian Spring\", \"Billy the Kid\" and \"Rodeo\", his \"Fanfare for the Common Man\" and Third Symphony. In addition to his ballets and orchestral works, he produced music in many other genres, including chamber music, vocal works, opera, and film scores.\nAfter some initial studies with composer Rubin Goldmark, Copland traveled to Paris, where he first studied with Isidor Philipp and Paul Vidal, then with noted pedagogue Nadia Boulanger. He studied three years with Boulanger, whose eclectic approach to music inspired his own broad taste. Determined upon his return to the U.S. to make his way as a full-time composer, Copland gave lecture-recitals, wrote works on commission and did some teaching and writing. But he found that composing orchestral music in a modernist style, which he had adopted while studying abroad, was unprofitable, particularly in light of the Great Depression. He shifted in the mid-1930s to a more accessible musical style that mirrored the German idea of (\"music for use\"), music that could serve utilitarian and artistic purposes. During the Depression years, he traveled extensively to Europe, Africa, and Mexico, formed an important friendship with Mexican composer Carlos Ch\u00e1vez, and began composing his signature works.\nDuring the late 1940s, Copland became aware that Stravinsky and other fellow composers had begun to study Arnold Schoenberg's use of twelve-tone (serial) techniques. After he had been exposed to the works of French composer Pierre Boulez, he incorporated serial techniques into his \"Piano Quartet\" (1950), \"Piano Fantasy\" (1957), \"Connotations\" for orchestra (1961), and \"Inscape\" for orchestra (1967). Unlike Schoenberg, Copland used his tone rows in much the same fashion as his tonal material\u2014as sources for melodies and harmonies, rather than as complete statements in their own right, except for crucial events from a structural point of view. From the 1960s onward, Copland's activities turned more from composing to conducting. He became a frequent guest conductor of orchestras in the U.S. and the UK and made a series of recordings of his music, primarily for Columbia Records.\nLife.\nEarly years.\nAaron Copland was born in Brooklyn, New York, on November 14, 1900. He was the youngest of five children in a Conservative Jewish immigrant family of Lithuanian origin. While emigrating from Russia to the United States, Copland's father, Harris Morris Copland, lived and worked in Scotland for two to three years to pay for his boat fare to the United States. It was there that Copland's father may have Anglicized his surname \"Kaplan\" to \"Copland\", though Copland himself believed for many years that the change had been caused by an Ellis Island immigration official when his father entered the country. Copland was unaware until late in his life that the family name had been Kaplan, his parents having never told him. Throughout his childhood, Copland and his family lived above his parents' Brooklyn shop, H. M. Copland's, at 628 Washington Avenue (which Aaron later called \"a kind of neighborhood Macy's\"), on the corner of Dean Street and Washington Avenue, and most of the children helped out in the store. His father was a staunch Democrat. The family members were active in Congregation Baith Israel Anshei Emes, where Aaron celebrated his bar mitzvah, for which he studied under Israel Goldfarb. Not especially athletic, the sensitive young man became an avid reader and often read Horatio Alger stories on his front steps.\nCopland's father had no musical interest. His mother, Sarah Mittenthal Copland, sang, played the piano, and arranged music lessons for her children. Copland had four older siblings: two brothers, Ralph and Leon, and two sisters, Laurine and Josephine. Of his siblings, his oldest brother Ralph was the most advanced musically; he was proficient on the violin. Laurine had the strongest connection with Aaron; she gave him his first piano lessons, promoted his musical education, and supported him in his musical career. A student at the Metropolitan Opera School and frequent opera-goer, Laurine also brought home libretti for Aaron to study. Copland attended Boys High School and in the summer went to various camps. Most of his early exposure to music was at Jewish weddings and ceremonies, and occasional family musicales.\nCopland began writing songs at the age of eight and a half. His earliest notated music, about seven bars he wrote when age 11, was for an opera scenario he created and called \"Zenatello\". From 1913 to 1917 he took piano lessons with Leopold Wolfsohn, who taught him the standard classical fare. Copland's first public music performance was at a Wanamaker's recital. By age 15, after attending a concert by Polish composer-pianist Ignacy Jan Paderewski, Copland decided to become a composer. At 16, he heard his first symphony, at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. After attempts to further his music study from a correspondence course, Copland took formal lessons in harmony, theory, and composition from Rubin Goldmark, a noted teacher and composer of American music (who had given George Gershwin three lessons). Goldmark, with whom Copland studied between 1917 and 1921, gave the young Copland a solid foundation, especially in the Germanic tradition. As Copland later said: \"This was a stroke of luck for me. I was spared the floundering that so many musicians have suffered through incompetent teaching.\" But Copland also said that Goldmark had \"little sympathy for the advanced musical idioms of the day\" and his \"approved\" composers ended with Richard Strauss.\nCopland's graduation piece from his studies with Goldmark was a three-movement piano sonata in a Romantic style. But he had also composed more original and daring pieces that he did not share with his teacher. In addition to regularly attending the Metropolitan Opera and the New York Symphony, where he heard the standard classical repertory, Copland continued his musical development through an expanding circle of musical friends. After graduating from high school, he played in dance bands. Continuing his musical education, he received further piano lessons from Victor Wittgenstein, who found him \"quiet, shy, well-mannered, and gracious in accepting criticism\". Copland's fascination with the Russian Revolution and its promise for freeing the lower classes drew a rebuke from his father and uncles. In spite of that, in his early adult life, Copland developed friendships with people who had socialist and communist leanings.\nStudy in Paris.\nCopland's passion for the latest European music, plus glowing letters from his friend Aaron Schaffer, inspired him to go to Paris for further study. An article in \"Musical America\" about a summer school program for American musicians at the Fontainebleau School of Music, offered by the French government, encouraged Copland further. His father wanted him to go to college, but his mother's vote in the family conference allowed him to give Paris a try. On arriving in France, he studied at Fontainebleau with pianist and pedagog Isidor Philipp and composer Paul Vidal. When Copland found Vidal too much like Goldmark, he switched at the suggestion of a fellow student to Nadia Boulanger, then aged 34. He had initial reservations: \"No one to my knowledge had ever before thought of studying with a woman.\" She interviewed him, and recalled later: \"One could tell his talent immediately.\"\nBoulanger had as many as 40 students at once and employed a formal regimen that Copland had to follow. Copland found her incisive mind much to his liking and her ability to critique a composition impeccable. Boulanger \"could always find the weak spot in a place you suspected was weak... She also could tell you \"why\" it was weak [italics Copland].\" He wrote in a letter to his brother Ralph, \"This intellectual Amazon is not only professor at the Conservatoire, is not only familiar with all music from Bach to Stravinsky, but is prepared for anything worse in the way of dissonance. But make no mistake\u00a0... A more charming womanly woman never lived.\" Copland later wrote: \"it was wonderful for me to find a teacher with such openness of mind, while at the same time she held firm ideas of right and wrong in musical matters. The confidence she had in my talents and her belief in me were at the very least flattering and more\u2014they were crucial to my development at this time of my career.\" Though he had planned on only one year abroad, he studied with her for three years, finding that her eclectic approach inspired his own broad musical taste.\nAlong with his studies with Boulanger, Copland took classes in French language and history at the Sorbonne, attended plays, and frequented Shakespeare and Company, the English-language bookstore that was a gathering place for expatriate American writers. Among this group in the heady cultural atmosphere of Paris in the 1920s were Paul Bowles, Ernest Hemingway, Sinclair Lewis, Henry Miller, Gertrude Stein, and Ezra Pound, as well as artists like Pablo Picasso, Marc Chagall, and Amedeo Modigliani. Also influential on the new music were the French intellectuals Marcel Proust, Paul Val\u00e9ry, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Andr\u00e9 Gide; Copland said the latter was his favorite and most read. Travels to Italy, Austria, and Germany rounded out Copland's musical education. During his stay in Paris, he began writing musical critiques, the first on Gabriel Faur\u00e9, which helped spread his fame and stature in the music community.\n1925 to 1935.\nCopland returned to America optimistic and enthusiastic about the future, determined to make his way as a full-time composer. He rented a studio apartment on New York City's Upper West Side in the Empire Hotel, close to Carnegie Hall and other musical venues and publishers. He remained in that area for the next 30 years, later moving to Westchester County, New York. Copland lived frugally and survived financially with help from two $2,500 Guggenheim Fellowships in 1925 and 1926 (each of the two ). Lecture-recitals, awards, appointments, and small commissions, plus some teaching, writing, and personal loans, kept him afloat in the subsequent years through World War II.\nAlso important, especially during the Depression, were wealthy patrons who underwrote performances, helped pay for publication of works, and promoted musical events and composers. Among them was Serge Koussevitzky, the music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, who was known as a champion of \"new music\". Koussevitsky proved to be very influential in Copland's life, perhaps the second most important figure in Copland's career after Boulanger. Beginning with the Symphony for Organ and Orchestra (1924), Koussevitzky performed more of Copland's music than that of any the composer's contemporaries, at a time when other conductors were programming only a few of Copland's works.\nSoon after his return to the United States, Copland was exposed to the artistic circle of photographer Alfred Stieglitz. While Copland did not care for Stieglitz's domineering attitude, he admired his work and took to heart Stieglitz's conviction that American artists should reflect \"the ideas of American Democracy.\" This ideal influenced not just Copland, but also a generation of artists and photographers, including Paul Strand, Edward Weston, Ansel Adams, Georgia O'Keeffe, and Walker Evans. Evans's photographs inspired portions of Copland's opera \"The Tender Land\".\nIn his quest to take up the slogan of the Stieglitz group, \"Affirm America\", Copland found only the music of Carl Ruggles and Charles Ives upon which to draw. Without what Copland called a \"usable past\" in American classical composers, he looked to jazz and popular music, something he had started to do while in Europe. In the 1920s, Gershwin, Bessie Smith, and Louis Armstrong were in the forefront of American popular music and jazz. By the end of the decade, Copland felt his music was going in a more abstract, less jazz-oriented direction. But as large swing bands such as those of Benny Goodman and Glenn Miller became popular in the 1930s, Copland took a renewed interest in the genre.\nInspired by the example of Les Six in France, Copland sought out contemporaries such as Roger Sessions, Roy Harris, Virgil Thomson, and Walter Piston, and quickly established himself as a spokesperson for composers of his generation. He also helped found the Copland-Sessions Concerts to showcase these composers' chamber works to new audiences. Copland's relationship with these men, who became known as \"commando unit\", was one of both support and rivalry, and he played a key role in keeping them together until after World War II. He also was generous with his time with nearly every American young composer he met during his life, later earning the title \"Dean of American Music.\"\nWith the knowledge he had gained from his studies in Paris, Copland came into demand as a lecturer and writer on contemporary European classical music. From 1927 to 1930 and from 1935 to 1938, he taught classes at The New School for Social Research in New York City. Eventually, his New School lectures appeared in the form of two books\u2014\"What to Listen for in Music\" (1937, revised 1957) and \"Our New Music\" (1940, revised 1968 and retitled \"The New Music: 1900\u20131960\"). During this period, Copland also wrote regularly for \"The New York Times\", \"The Musical Quarterly\", and other journals. These articles appeared in 1969 as the book \"Copland on Music\". During his time at The New School, Copland was active as a presenter and curator, using The New School to present a wide range of composers and artists.\nCopland's compositions in the early 1920s reflected the modernist attitude that prevailed among intellectuals, that the arts need be accessible to only a cadre of the enlightened, and that the masses would come to appreciate their efforts over time. But mounting troubles with the \"Symphonic Ode\" (1929) and \"Short Symphony\" (1933) caused Copland to rethink this approach. It was financially unprofitable, particularly during the Depression. Avant-garde music had lost what cultural historian Morris Dickstein calls \"its buoyant experimental edge\" and the national attitude toward it had changed. As biographer Howard Pollack writes:\nCopland observed two trends among composers in the 1930s: first, a continuing attempt to \"simplify their musical language\" and, second, a desire to \"make contact\" with as wide an audience as possible. Since 1927, he had been in the process of simplifying, or at least paring down, his musical language, though in such a manner as to sometimes have the effect, paradoxically, of estranging audiences and performers. By 1933 ... he began to find ways to make his starkly personal language accessible to a surprisingly large number of people.\nIn many ways, this shift mirrored the German idea of (\"music for use\"), as composers sought to create music that could serve a utilitarian as well as artistic purpose. This approach encompassed two trends: first, music that students could easily learn, and second, music which would have wider appeal, such as incidental music for plays, movies, radio, etc. To this end, Copland provided musical advice and inspiration to The Group Theatre, a company that also attracted Stella Adler, Elia Kazan, and Lee Strasberg. Philosophically an outgrowth of Stieglitz and his ideals, the Group focused on socially relevant plays by American authors. Through it and later his work in film, Copland met several major American playwrights, including Thornton Wilder, William Inge, Arthur Miller, and Edward Albee, and considered projects with all of them.\n1935 to 1950.\nAround 1935 Copland began to compose musical pieces for young audiences, in accordance with the first goal of American Gebrauchsmusik. These works included piano pieces (\"The Young Pioneers\") and an opera (\"The Second Hurricane\"). During the Depression years, Copland traveled extensively to Europe, Africa, and Mexico. He formed an important friendship with Mexican composer Carlos Ch\u00e1vez and returned often to Mexico for working vacations conducting engagements. During his initial visit to Mexico, Copland began composing the first of his signature works, \"El Sal\u00f3n M\u00e9xico\", completed in 1936. In it and in \"The Second Hurricane\" Copland began \"experimenting\", as he phrased it, with a simpler, more accessible style. This and other incidental commissions fulfilled the second goal of American Gebrauchsmusik, creating music of wide appeal.\nConcurrent with \"The Second Hurricane\", Copland composed (for radio broadcast) \"Prairie Journal\" on a commission from the Columbia Broadcast System. This was one of his first pieces to convey the landscape of the American West. This emphasis on the frontier carried over to his ballet \"Billy the Kid\" (1938), which along with \"El Sal\u00f3n M\u00e9xico\" became his first widespread public success. Copland's ballet music established him as an authentic composer of American music much as Stravinsky's ballet scores connected the composer with Russian music and came at an opportune time. He helped fill a vacuum for American choreographers to fill their dance repertory and tapped into an artistic groundswell, from the motion pictures of Busby Berkeley and Fred Astaire to the ballets of George Balanchine and Martha Graham, to both democratize and Americanize dance as an art form. In 1938, Copland helped form the American Composers Alliance to promote and publish American contemporary classical music. He was president of the organization from 1939 to 1945. In 1939, Copland completed his first two Hollywood film scores, for \"Of Mice and Men\" and \"Our Town\", and composed the radio score \"John Henry\", based on the folk ballad.\nWhile these works and others like them that followed were accepted by the listening public at large, detractors accused Copland of pandering to the masses. Music critic Paul Rosenfeld, for one, warned in 1939 that Copland was \"standing in the fork in the high road, the two branches of which lead respectively to popular and artistic success\". Even some of Copland's friends, such as composer Arthur Berger, were confused about Copland's simpler style. One, composer David Diamond, went so far as to lecture Copland: \"By having sold out to the mongrel commercialists half-way already, the danger is going to be wider for you, and I beg you dear Aaron, don't sell out [entirely] yet.\" Copland's response was that his writing as he did and in as many genres was his response to how the Depression had affected society, as well as to new media and the audiences made available by these new media. As he put it, \"The composer who is frightened of losing his artistic integrity through contact with a mass audience is no longer aware of the meaning of the word art.\"\nThe 1940s were arguably Copland's most productive years, and some of his works from this period cemented his fame. His ballet scores for \"Rodeo\" (1942) and \"Appalachian Spring\" (1944) were huge successes. \"Lincoln Portrait\" and \"Fanfare for the Common Man\" became patriotic standards. Also important was the Third Symphony. Composed from 1944 to 1946, it became Copland's best-known symphony. The Clarinet Concerto (1948), scored for solo clarinet, strings, harp, and piano, was a commission piece for band-leader and clarinetist Benny Goodman and a complement to Copland's earlier jazz-influenced work, the Piano Concerto (1926). His \"Four Piano Blues\" is an introspective composition with a jazz influence. Copland finished the 1940s with two film scores, one for William Wyler's \"The Heiress\" and one for the film adaptation of John Steinbeck's novel \"The Red Pony\".\nIn 1949, Copland returned to Europe, where he found French composer Pierre Boulez dominating the group of postwar avant-garde composers there. He also met with proponents of twelve-tone technique, based on the works of Arnold Schoenberg, and found himself interested in adapting serial methods to his own musical voice.\n1950s and 1960s.\nIn 1950, Copland received a U.S.-Italy Fulbright Commission scholarship to study in Rome, which he did the following year. Around this time, he also composed his Piano Quartet, adopting Schoenberg's twelve-tone method, and \"Old American Songs\" (1950), the first set of which was premiered by Peter Pears and Benjamin Britten, the second by William Warfield. During the 1951\u201352 academic year, Copland gave a series of lectures under the Charles Eliot Norton Professorship at Harvard University. These lectures were published as the book \"Music and Imagination\".\nBecause of his leftist views, which had included his support of the Communist Party USA ticket during the 1936 presidential election and his strong support of Progressive Party candidate Henry A. Wallace in the 1948 presidential election, Copland was investigated by the FBI during the Red scare of the 1950s. He was included on an FBI list of 151 artists thought to have Communist associations and found himself blacklisted, with \"A Lincoln Portrait\" withdrawn from the 1953 inaugural concert for President Dwight Eisenhower. Called later that year to a private hearing at the United States Capitol in Washington, D.C., Copland was questioned by Joseph McCarthy and Roy Cohn about his lecturing abroad and his affiliations with various organizations and events. McCarthy and Cohn ignored Copland's works, which made a virtue of American values. Outraged by the accusations, many members of the musical community held up Copland's music as a banner of his patriotism. The investigations ceased in 1955 and were closed in 1975.\nThe McCarthy probes did not seriously affect Copland's career and international artistic reputation, however taxing as they might have been on his time, energy, and emotional state. Nevertheless, beginning in 1950, Copland\u2014who had been appalled at Stalin's persecution of Dmitri Shostakovich and other artists\u2014began resigning from participation in leftist groups. Copland, Pollack writes, \"stayed particularly concerned about the role of the artist in society\". He decried the lack of artistic freedom in the Soviet Union, and in his 1954 Norton lecture he asserted that loss of freedom under Soviet Communism deprived artists of \"the immemorial right of the artist to be wrong.\" He began to vote Democratic, first for Stevenson and then for Kennedy.\nPotentially more damaging for Copland was a sea change in artistic tastes, away from the Populist mores that infused his work of the 1930s and 40s. Beginning in the 1940s, intellectuals assailed Popular Front culture, to which Copland's music was linked, and labeled it, in Dickstein's words, \"hopelessly middlebrow, a dumbing down of art into toothless entertainment\". They often linked their disdain for Populist art with technology, new media and mass audiences\u2014in other words, the areas of radio, television and motion pictures, for which Copland either had or soon would write music, as well as his popular ballets. While these attacks actually began at the end of the 1930s with the writings of Clement Greenberg and Dwight Macdonald for \"Partisan Review\", they were based in anti-Stalinist politics and accelerated in the decades following World War II.\nDespite any difficulties that his suspected Communist sympathies might have posed, Copland traveled extensively during the 1950s and early 1960s to observe the avant-garde styles of Europe, hear compositions by Soviet composers not well known in the West, and experience the new school of Polish music. In Japan, he was taken with the work of T\u014dru Takemitsu and began a correspondence with him that lasted over the next decade. Copland revised his text \"The New Music\" with comments on the styles that he encountered. He found much of what he heard dull and impersonal. Electronic music seemed to have \"a depressing sameness of sound\", while aleatoric music was for those \"who enjoy teetering on the edge of chaos\". As he summarized, \"I've spent most of my life trying to get the right note in the right place. Just throwing it open to chance seems to go against my natural instincts.\"\nIn 1952, Copland received a commission from the League of Composers, funded by a grant from Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein, to write an opera for television. While Copland was aware of the potential pitfalls of that genre, which included weak libretti and demanding production values, he had also been thinking about writing an opera since the 1940s. Among the subjects he had considered were Theodore Dreiser's \"An American Tragedy\" and Frank Norris's \"McTeague\" He finally settled on James Agee's \"Let Us Now Praise Famous Men\", which seemed appropriate for the more intimate setting of television and could also be used in the \"college trade\", with more schools mounting operas than they had before World War II. The resulting opera, \"The Tender Land\", was written in two acts but later expanded to three. As Copland feared, when the opera premiered in 1954 critics found the libretto to be weak. In spite of its flaws, the opera became one of the few American operas to enter the standard repertory.\nIn 1957, 1958, and 1976, Copland was the music director of the Ojai Music Festival, a classical and contemporary music festival in Ojai, California. For the occasion of the Metropolitan Museum of Art Centennial, Copland composed \"Ceremonial Fanfare for Brass Ensemble\" to accompany the exhibition \"Masterpieces of Fifty Centuries.\" Leonard Bernstein, Piston, William Schuman, and Thomson also composed pieces for the museum's Centennial exhibitions.\nLater years.\nFrom the 1960s onward, Copland turned increasingly to conducting. Though not enamored of the prospect, he found himself without new ideas for composition, saying, \"It was exactly as if someone had simply turned off a faucet.\" He became a frequent guest conductor in the United States and the United Kingdom and made a series of recordings of his music, primarily for Columbia Records. In 1960, RCA Victor released Copland's recordings with the Boston Symphony Orchestra of the orchestral suites from \"Appalachian Spring\" and \"The Tender Land\"; these recordings were later reissued on CD, as were most of Copland's Columbia recordings (by Sony).\nFrom 1960 until his death, Copland resided at Cortlandt Manor, New York. Known as Rock Hill, his home was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2003 and further designated a National Historic Landmark in 2008. Copland's health deteriorated through the 1980s, and he died of Alzheimer's disease and respiratory failure on December 2, 1990, in North Tarrytown, New York (now Sleepy Hollow).\nFollowing his death, his ashes were scattered over the Tanglewood Music Center near Lenox, Massachusetts. Much of his large estate was bequeathed to the creation of the Aaron Copland Fund for Composers, which bestows over $600,000 per year to performing groups.\nPersonal life.\nCopland never enrolled as a member of any political party. Nevertheless, he inherited a considerable interest in civic and world events from his father. His views were generally progressive and he had strong ties with numerous colleagues and friends in the Popular Front, including Clifford Odets. Early in his life, Copland developed, in Pollack's words, \"a deep admiration for the works of Frank Norris, Theodore Dreiser and Upton Sinclair, all socialists whose novels passionately excoriated capitalism's physical and emotional toll on the average man.\" Even after the McCarthy hearings, he remained a committed opponent of militarism and the Cold War, which he regarded as having been instigated by the United States. He condemned it as \"almost worse for art than the real thing\". Throw the artist \"into a mood of suspicion, ill-will, and dread that typifies the cold war attitude and he'll create nothing\".\nWhile Copland had various encounters with organized religious thought, which influenced some of his early compositions, he remained agnostic. He was close with Zionism during the Popular Front movement, when it was endorsed by the left. Pollack writes:\nLike many contemporaries, Copland regarded Judaism alternately in terms of religion, culture, and race; but he showed relatively little involvement in any aspect of his Jewish heritage. At the same time, he had ties to Christianity, identifying with such profoundly Christian writers as Gerard Manley Hopkins and often spending Christmas Day at home with a special dinner with close friends. In general, his music seemed to evoke Protestant hymns as often as it did Jewish chant. Copland characteristically found connections among various religious traditions. But if Copland was discreet about his Jewish background, he never hid it, either.\nPollack states that Copland was gay and that the composer came to an early acceptance and understanding of his sexuality. Like many at that time, Copland guarded his privacy, especially in regard to his homosexuality. He provided few written details about his private life, and even after the Stonewall riots of 1969, showed no inclination to \"come out\". However, he was one of the few composers of his stature to live openly and travel with his intimates. They tended to be talented, younger men involved in the arts, and the age-gap between them and the composer widened as he grew older. Most became enduring friends after a few years and, in Pollack's words, \"remained a primary source of companionship\". Among Copland's love affairs were ones with photographer Victor Kraft, artist Alvin Ross, pianist Paul Moor, dancer Erik Johns, composer John Brodbin Kennedy, and painter Prentiss Taylor.\nVictor Kraft became a constant in Copland's life, though their romance might have ended by 1944. Originally a violin prodigy when the composer met him in 1932, Kraft gave up music to pursue a career in photography, in part due to Copland's urging. Kraft would leave and re-enter Copland's life, often bringing much stress with him as his behavior became increasingly erratic, sometimes confrontational. Kraft fathered a child to whom Copland later provided financial security, through a bequest from his estate.\nMusic.\nVivian Perlis, who collaborated with Copland on his autobiography, writes: \"Copland's method of composing was to write down fragments of musical ideas as they came to him. When he needed a piece, he would turn to these ideas (his 'gold nuggets').\" If one or more of these nuggets looked promising, he would then write a piano sketch and eventually work on them at the keyboard. The piano, Perlis writes, \"was so integral to his composing that it permeated his compositional style, not only in the frequent use in the instrument but in more subtle and complex ways\". His habit of turning to the keyboard tended to embarrass Copland until he learned that Stravinsky also did so.\nCopland would not consider the specific instrumentation for a piece until it was complete and notated. Nor, according to Pollack, did he generally work in linear fashion, from beginning to end of a composition. Instead, he tended to compose whole sections in no particular order and surmise their eventual sequence after all those parts were complete, much like assembling a collage. Copland himself admitted, \"I don't compose. I assemble materials.\" Many times, he included material he had written years earlier. If the situation dictated, as it did with his film scores, Copland could work quickly. Otherwise, he tended to write slowly whenever possible. Even with this deliberation, Copland considered composition, in his words, \"the product of the emotions\", which included \"self-expression\" and \"self-discovery\".\nInfluences.\nWhile Copland's earliest musical inclinations as a teenager ran toward Chopin, Debussy, Verdi and the Russian composers, Copland's teacher and mentor Nadia Boulanger became his most important influence. Copland especially admired Boulanger's total grasp of all classical music, and he was encouraged to experiment and develop a \"clarity of conception and elegance in proportion\". Following her model, he studied all periods of classical music and all forms\u2014from madrigals to symphonies. This breadth of vision led Copland to compose music for numerous settings\u2014orchestra, opera, solo piano, small ensemble, art song, ballet, theater and film. Boulanger particularly emphasized \"la grande ligne\" (the long line), \"a sense of forward motion\u00a0... the feeling for inevitability, for the creating of an entire piece that could be thought of as a functioning entity\".\nDuring his studies with Boulanger in Paris, Copland was excited to be so close to the new post-Impressionistic French music of Ravel, Roussel, and Satie, as well as Les Six, a group that included Milhaud, Poulenc, and Honegger. Webern, Berg, and Bart\u00f3k also impressed him. Copland was \"insatiable\" in seeking out the newest European music, whether in concerts, score reading or heated debate. These \"moderns\" were discarding the old laws of composition and experimenting with new forms, harmonies and rhythms, and including the use of jazz and quarter-tone music. Milhaud was Copland's inspiration for some of his earlier \"jazzy\" works. He was also exposed to Schoenberg and admired his earlier atonal pieces, thinking Schoenberg's \"Pierrot lunaire\" above all others. Copland named Igor Stravinsky as his \"hero\" and his favorite 20th-century composer. Copland especially admired Stravinsky's \"jagged and uncouth rhythmic effects\", \"bold use of dissonance\", and \"hard, dry, crackling sonority\".\nAnother inspiration for much of Copland's music was jazz. Although familiar with jazz back in America\u2014having listened to it and also played it in bands\u2014he fully realized its potential while traveling in Austria: \"The impression of jazz one receives in a foreign country is totally unlike the impression of such music heard in one's own country\u00a0... when I heard jazz played in Vienna, it was like hearing it for the first time.\" He also found that the distance from his native country helped him see the United States more clearly. Beginning in 1923, he employed \"jazzy elements\" in his classical music, but by the late 1930s, he moved on to Latin and American folk tunes in his more successful pieces. Although his early focus of jazz gave way to other influences, Copland continued to make use of jazz in more subtle ways in later works. Copland's work from the late 1940s onward included experimentation with Schoenberg's twelve-tone system, resulting in two major works, the Piano Quartet (1950) and the Piano Fantasy (1957).\nEarly works.\nCopland's compositions before leaving for Paris were mainly short works for piano and art songs, inspired by Liszt and Debussy. In them, he experimented with ambiguous beginnings and endings, rapid key changes, and the frequent use of tritones. His first published work, \"The Cat and the Mouse\"\u00a0(1920), was a piece for piano solo based on the Jean de La Fontaine fable \"The Old Cat and the Young Mouse\". In \"Three Moods\" (1921), Copland's final movement is entitled \"Jazzy\", which he noted \"is based on two jazz melodies and ought to make the old professors sit up and take notice\".\nThe Symphony for Organ and Orchestra established Copland as a serious modern composer. Musicologist Gayle Murchison cites Copland's use melodic, harmonic and rhythmic elements endemic in jazz, which he would also use in his \"Music for the Theater\" and Piano Concerto to evoke an essentially \"American\" sound. he fuses these qualities with modernist elements such as octatonic and whole-tone scales, polyrhythmic ostinato figures, and dissonant counterpoint. Murchinson points out the influence of Igor Stravinsky in the work's nervous, driving rhythms and some of its harmonic language. Copland in hindsight found the work too \"European\" as he consciously sought a more consciously American idiom to evoke in his future work.\nVisits to Europe in 1926 and 1927 brought him into contact with the most recent developments there, including Webern's Five Pieces for Orchestra, which greatly impressed him. In August 1927, while staying in K\u00f6nigstein, Copland wrote \"Poet's Song\", a setting of a text by E. E. Cummings and his first composition using Schoenberg's twelve-tone technique. This was followed by the \"Symphonic Ode\" (1929) and the Piano Variations (1930), both of which rely on the exhaustive development of a single short motif. This procedure, which provided Copland with more formal flexibility and a greater emotional range than in his earlier music, is similar to Schoenberg's idea of \"continuous variation\" and, according to Copland's own admission, was influenced by the twelve-tone method, though neither work actually uses a twelve-tone row.\nThe other major work of Copland's first period is the \"Short Symphony\" (1933). In it, music critic and musicologist Michael Steinberg writes, the \"jazz-influenced dislocations of meter that are so characteristic of Copland's music of the 1920s are more prevalent than ever\". Compared to the \"Symphonic Ode\", the orchestration is much leaner and the composition itself more concentrated. In its combination and refinement of modernist and jazz elements, Steinberg calls the \"Short Symphony\" \"a remarkable synthesis of the learned and the vernacular, and thus, in all its brevity [the work last just 15 minutes], a singularly 'complete' representation of its composer\". However, Copland moved from this work toward more accessible works and folk sources.\nPopulist works.\nCopland wrote \"El Sal\u00f3n M\u00e9xico\" between 1932 and 1936, which met with a popular acclaim that contrasted the relative obscurity of most of his previous works. Inspiration for this work came from Copland's vivid recollection of visiting the \"Salon Mexico\" dancehall where he witnessed a more intimate view of Mexico's nightlife. Copland derived his melodic material for this piece freely from two collections of Mexican folk tunes, changing pitches and varying rhythms. The use of a folk tune with variations set in a symphonic context started a pattern he repeated in many of his most successful works right on through the 1940s. It also marked a shift in emphasis from a unified musical structure to the rhetorical effect the music might have on an audience and showed Copland refining a simplified, more accessible musical language.\n\"El Sal\u00f3n\" prepared Copland to write the ballet score \"Billy the Kid\", which became, in Pollack's words, an \"archetypical depiction of the legendary American West\". Based on a Walter Noble Burns novel, with choreography by Eugene Loring, \"Billy\" was among the first to display an American music and dance vocabulary. Copland used six cowboy folk songs to provide period atmosphere and employed polyrhythm and polyharmony when not quoting these tunes literally to maintain the work's overall tone. In this way, Copland's music worked much in the same way as the murals of Thomas Hart Benton, in that it employed elements that could be grasped easily by a mass audience. The ballet premiered in New York in 1939, with Copland recalling: \"I cannot remember another work of mine that was so unanimously received.\" Along with the ballet \"Rodeo\", \"Billy the Kid\" became, in the words of musicologist Elizabeth Crist, \"the basis for Copland's reputation as a composer of Americana\" and defines \"an uncomplicated form of American nationalism\".\nCopland's brand of nationalism in his ballets differed from that of European composers such as B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k, who tried to preserve the folk tones they used as close to the original as possible. Copland enhanced the tunes he used with contemporary rhythms, textures and structures. In what could seem contradictory, he used complex harmonies and rhythms to simplify folk melodies and make them more accessible and familiar to his listeners. Except for the Shaker tune in \"Appalachian Spring\", Copland often syncopates traditional melodies, changes their metric patterns and note values. In \"Billy the Kid\", he derives many of the work's sparse harmonies from the implied harmonic constructions of the cowboy tunes themselves.\nLike Stravinsky, Copland mastered the ability to create a coherent, integrated composition from what was essentially a mosaic of divergent folk-based and original elements. In that sense, Copland's Populist works such as \"Billy the Kid\", \"Rodeo\", \"Appalachian Spring\" are not far removed from Stravinsky's ballet \"The Rite of Spring\". Within that framework, however, Copland preserved the American atmosphere of these ballets through what musicologist Elliott Antokoletz calls \"the conservative handling of open diatonic sonorities\", which fosters \"a pastoral quality\" in the music. This is especially true in the opening of \"Appalachian Spring\", where the harmonizations remain \"transparent and bare, suggested by the melodic disposition of the Shaker tune\". Variations which contrast to this tune in rhythm, key, texture and dynamics, fit within Copland's compositional practice of juxtaposing structural blocks.\nFilm scores.\nWhen Hollywood beckoned concert hall composers in the 1930s with promises of better films and higher pay, Copland saw both a challenge for his abilities as a composer as well as an opportunity to expand his reputation and audience for his more serious works. In a departure from other film scores of the time, Copland's work largely reflected his own style, instead of the usual borrowing from the late-Romantic period. He often avoided the full orchestra, and he rejected the common practice of using a leitmotif to identify characters with their own personal themes. He instead matched a theme to the action, while avoiding the underlining of every action with exaggerated emphasis. Another technique Copland employed was to keep silent during intimate screen moments and only begin the music as a confirming motive toward the end of a scene. Virgil Thomson wrote that the score for \"Of Mice and Men\" established \"the most distinguished populist musical style yet created in America\". Many composers who scored for Western movies, particularly between 1940 and 1960, were influenced by Copland's style, though some also followed the late Romantic \"Max Steiner\" approach, which was considered more conventional and desirable.\nLater works.\nCopland's work in the late 1940s and 1950s included use of Schoenberg's twelve-tone system, a development that he had recognized but not fully embraced. He had also believed the atonality of serialized music to run counter to his desire to reach a wide audience. Copland therefore approached dodecaphony with some initial skepticism. While in Europe in 1949, he heard a number of serial works but did not admire much of it because \"so often it seemed that individuality was sacrificed to the method\". The music of French composer Pierre Boulez showed Copland that the technique could be separated from the \"old Wagnerian\" aesthetic with which he had associated it previously. Subsequent exposure to the late music of Austrian composer Anton Webern and twelve-tone pieces by Swiss composer Frank Martin and Italian composer Luigi Dallapiccola strengthened this opinion.\nCopland came to the conclusion that composing along serial lines was \"nothing more than an angle of vision. Like fugal treatment, it is a stimulus that enlivens musical thinking, especially when applied to a series of tones that lend themselves to that treatment.\" He began his first serial work, the \"Piano Fantasy\", in 1951 to fulfill a commission from the young virtuoso pianist William Kapell. The piece became one of his most challenging works, over which he labored until 1957. During the work's development, in 1953, Kapell died in an aircraft crash. Critics lauded the \"Fantasy\" when it was finally premiered, calling the piece \"an outstanding addition to his own oeuvre and to contemporary piano literature\" and \"a tremendous achievement\". Jay Rosenfield stated: \"This is a new Copland to us, an artist advancing with strength and not building on the past alone.\"\nSerialism allowed Copland a synthesis of serial and non-serial practices. Before he did this, according to musicologist Joseph Straus, the philosophical and compositional difference between non-tonal composers such as Schoenberg and tonal composers like Stravinsky had been considered too wide a gulf to bridge. Copland wrote that, to him, serialism pointed in two opposite directions, one \"toward the extreme of total organization with electronic applications\" and the other \"a gradual absorption into what had become a very \"freely interpreted tonalism\" [italics Copland]\". The path he said he chose was the latter one, which he said, when he described his \"Piano Fantasy\", allowed him to incorporate \"elements able to be associated with the twelve-tone method and also with music tonally conceived\". This practice differed markedly from Schoenberg, who used his tone rows as complete statements around which to structure his compositions. Copland used his rows not very differently from how he fashioned the material in his tonal pieces. He saw his rows as sources for melodies and harmonies, not as complete and independent entities, except at points in the musical structure that dictated the complete statement of a row.\nEven after Copland started using 12-tone techniques, he did not stick to them exclusively but went back and forth between tonal and non-tonal compositions. Other late works include: \"Dance Panels\" (1959, ballet music), \"Something Wild\" (1961, his last film score, much of which would be later incorporated into his \"Music for a Great City\"), \"Connotations\" (1962, for the new Lincoln Center Philharmonic hall), \"Emblems\" (1964, for wind band), \"Night Thoughts\" (1972, for the Van Cliburn International Piano Competition), and \"Proclamation\" (1982, his last work, started in 1973).\nCritic, writer, teacher.\nCopland did not consider himself a professional writer. He called his writing \"a byproduct of my trade\" as \"a kind of salesman for contemporary music\". As such, he wrote prolifically about music, including pieces on music criticism analysis, on musical trends, and on his own compositions. An avid lecturer and lecturer-performer, Copland eventually collected his presentation notes into three books, \"What to Listen for in Music\" (1939), \"Our New Music\" (1941), and \"Music and Imagination\" (1952). In the 1980s, he collaborated with Vivian Perlis on a two-volume autobiography, \"Copland: 1900 Through 1942\" (1984) and \"Copland Since 1943\" (1989). Along with the composer's first-person narrative, these two books incorporate 11 \"interludes\" by Perlis and other sections from friends and peers. Some controversy arose over the second volume's increased reliance over the first on old documents for source material. Due to the then-advanced stage of Copland's Alzheimer's and the resulting memory loss, however, this fallback to previous material was inevitable. The use in both books of letters and other unpublished sources, expertly researched and organized, made them what Pollack terms \"invaluable\".\nDuring his career, Copland met and helped hundreds of young composers, whom he met and who were drawn to him by his continual interest and acuity into the contemporary musical scene. This assistance came mainly outside an institutional framework\u2014other than his summers at the Berkshire Music Center at Tanglewood, a decade of teaching and curating at The New School, and a few semesters at Harvard and the State University of New York at Buffalo, Copland operated outside an academic setting. Pollack writes: \"Those composers who actually studied with him were small in number and did so for only brief periods; rather, Copland helped younger composers more informally, with intermittent advice and aid.\" This advice included focusing on expressive content rather than on purely technical points and on developing a personal style.\nCopland's willingness to foster talent extended to critiquing scores in progress that were presented to him by his peers. Composer William Schuman writes: \"As a teacher, Aaron was extraordinary... Copland would look at your music and try to understand what \"you\" were after [italics Schuman]. He didn't want to turn you into another Aaron Copland... When he questioned something, it was in a manner that might make you want to question it yourself. Everything he said was helpful in making a younger composer realize the potential of a particular work. On the other hand, Aaron could be strongly critical.\"\nConductor.\nAlthough Copland studied conducting in Paris in 1921, he remained essentially a self-taught conductor with a very personal style. Encouraged by Igor Stravinsky to master conducting and perhaps emboldened by Carlos Chavez's efforts in Mexico, he began to direct his own works on his international travels in the 1940s. By the 1950s, he was also conducting the works of other composers, and after a televised appearance where he directed the New York Philharmonic, Copland became in high demand. He placed a strong emphasis in his programs on 20th-century music and lesser-known composers, and until the 1970s rarely planned concerts to feature his music exclusively. Performers and audiences generally greeted his conducting appearances as positive opportunities to hear his music as the composer intended. His efforts on behalf of other composers could be penetrating but also uneven.\nUnderstated on the podium, Copland modeled his style after other composer/conductors such as Stravinsky and Paul Hindemith. Critics wrote of his precision and clarity before an orchestra. Observers noted that he had \"none of the typical conductorial vanities\". Copland's unpretentious charm was appreciated by professional musicians but some criticized his \"unsteady\" beat and \"unexciting\" interpretations. Koussevitzky advised him to \"stay home and compose\". Copland at times asked for conducting advice from Bernstein, who occasionally joked that Copland could conduct his works \"a little better\". Bernstein also noted that Copland improved over time, and he considered him a more natural conductor than Stravinsky or Hindemith. Eventually, Copland recorded nearly all his orchestral works with himself conducting.\nLegacy.\nCopland wrote a total of about 100 works which covered a diverse range of genres. Many of these compositions, especially orchestral pieces, have remained part of the standard American repertoire. According to Pollack, Copland \"had perhaps the most distinctive and identifiable musical voice produced by this country so far, an individuality ... that helped define for many what American concert music sounds like at its most characteristic and that exerted enormous influence on multitudes of contemporaries and successors.\" His synthesis of influences and inclinations helped create the \"Americanism\" of his music. The composer himself pointed out, in summarizing the American character of his music, \"the optimistic tone\", \"his love of rather large canvases\", \"a certain directness in expression of sentiment\", and \"a certain songfulness\".\nWhile \"Copland's musical rhetoric has become iconic\" and \"has functioned as a mirror of America\", conductor Leon Botstein suggests that the composer \"helped define the modern consciousness of America's ideals, character and sense of place. The notion that his music played not a subsidiary but a central role in the shaping of the national consciousness makes Copland uniquely interesting, for the historian as well as the musician.\" Composer Ned Rorem states, \"Aaron stressed simplicity: Remove, remove, remove what isn't needed... Aaron brought leanness to America, which set the tone for our musical language throughout [World War II]. Thanks to Aaron, American music came into its own.\"\nIn popular culture.\nAaron Copland's music has served as the inspiration for a number of popular modern works of music:\nCopland's music was prominently featured throughout Spike Lee's 1998 film, \"He Got Game\".\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSource:\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51299", "revid": "23551833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51299", "title": "Jammu and Kashmir (state)", "text": "State administered by India (1952\u20132019)\nJammu and Kashmir was a region formerly administered by India as a state from 1952 to 2019, constituting the southern and southeastern portion of the larger Kashmir region, which has been the subject of a dispute between India, Pakistan and China since the mid-20th century. The underlying region of this state were parts of the former princely state of Jammu and Kashmir, whose western districts, now known as Azad Kashmir, and northern territories, now known as Gilgit-Baltistan, are administered by Pakistan. The Aksai Chin region in the east, bordering Tibet, has been under Chinese control since 1962.\nAfter the Government of India repealed the special status accorded to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 of the Indian constitution in 2019, the Parliament of India passed the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, which contained provisions to split the state into two union territories \u2013 Ladakh in the east and the residuary Jammu and Kashmir in the west, with effect from 31 October 2019. Jammu and Kashmir was the only state in India with a Muslim-majority population.\nEstablishment.\nAfter the Indo-Pakistani War of 1947\u20131948, the princely state of Jammu and Kashmir was divided between India (which controlled the regions of Jammu, Kashmir Valley, and Ladakh) and Pakistan (which controlled Gilgit\u2013Baltistan and Azad Kashmir). Maharaja Hari Singh signed the Instrument of Accession on 26 October 1947 after an invasion by Pakistani tribesmen. Sheikh Abdullah was appointed as the prime minister of Jammu and Kashmir as part of an interim government by Maharaja Hari Singh in March 1948. In order to integrate the provisions of the instrument of accession relating to the powers of the state and Indian government, the Constituent Assembly of India drew up the draft provision named Article 306-A, which would later become Article 370.\nA constituent assembly for Jammu and Kashmir was convened to frame a new constitution for the state in October 1951, after an election in which all the seats were won by the Jammu &amp; Kashmir National Conference party of Abdullah.\nAbdullah reached an agreement termed as the \"Delhi Agreement\" with Jawaharlal Nehru, the Prime Minister of India, on 24 July 1952. It extended provisions of the Constitution of India regarding citizenship and fundamental rights to the state, in addition to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of India. Agreements were also reached on issues of abolishing the monarchy, as well as the state being allowed a separate flag and official language. The Delhi Agreement spelt out the relationship between the central government and the state through recognizing the autonomy of Jammu and Kashmir, while also declaring it as an integral part of India and granting the central government control of several subjects that were not a part of the instrument of accession.\nThe government of Jammu and Kashmir quickly moved to adopt the provisions of the agreement. The recommendations of the Drafting Committee on the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir regarding the monarchy were accepted by the Constituent Assembly of Jammu and Kashmir on 21 August 1952. The Jammu and Kashmir Constitution Act 1939 was amended in November 1952 to adopt the resolutions and the monarchy was officially abolished on 12 November. The regent Karan Singh was formally elected as the \"Sadar-i-Riyasat\" or head of state by the Constituent Assembly and was later recognized by the President of India. The amendments incorporating the provisions into the state constitution entered into force on 17 November.\nIntegration with India.\nAbdullah however sought to make Article 370 permanent and began calling for the secession of the state from India, which led to his arrest in 1953. Bakshi Ghulam Mohammad then became the Prime Minister of Jammu and Kashmir. The Constituent Assembly of the state passed a resolution in February 1954, extending some provisions of the Constitution of India and formally ratifying the accession of the state to India per the Instrument of Accession. A Presidential Order was passed on 14 May 1954 to implement the Delhi Agreement, drawing its validity from the resolution of the Constituent Assembly.\nThe new Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir was adopted on 17 November 1956 and came into force on 26 January 1957. Following this, the state constituent assembly dissolved itself and elections were held for the legislative assembly in 1957, with the National Conference winning 68 out of 75 seats.\nIn 1956\u201357, China constructed a road through the disputed Aksai Chin area of Ladakh. India's belated discovery of this road culminated in the Sino-Indian War of 1962; China has since administered Aksai Chin. Following the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, India and Pakistan signed the Simla Agreement, recognising a Line of Control in Kashmir, and committing to a peaceful resolution of the dispute through bilateral negotiations.\nIn December 1964, the Indian government extended provisions of Articles 356 and 357 of the Constitution of India, which allowed for President's rule in the state.\nIn April 1965, the legislative assembly approved renaming the positions of \"Sadar-i-Riyasat\" to Governor and \"Wazir-i-Azam\" (Prime Minister) to Chief Minister of Jammu and Kashmir. Though the change had no actual effect on the legal structure of the state, it conveyed that the government of Jammu and Kashmir was equal to that of any other Indian state.\nDespite Nehru releasing the imprisoned Abdullah in April 1964 to initiate dialogue with Pakistan, it viewed these developments as leading to the inseparability of Jammu and Kashmir from India and launched an armed conflict, infiltrating Kashmir during Operation Gibraltar in August 1965. However, it ultimately failed in its objective and both countries returned to the status quo after the Tashkent Declaration of 1966. The government of Ghulam Mohammed Sadiq meanwhile rapidly extended many provisions of the Indian Constitution to further integrate the state into India.\nThe failure of Pakistan in the 1971 Indo-Pakistani war weakened the Kashmiri nationalist movement and Abdullah dropped demands of secession. Under the Indira\u2013Sheikh Accord of 1975, he recognised the region as a part of India, the state legislature requiring the approval of the President to make laws, and the Parliament of India being able to promulgate laws against secessionism. In return, Article 370 was left untouched and Abdullah became the Chief Minister of the state. The region remained mostly peaceful until his death in 1982.\nKashmir insurgency.\nIn the late 1980s, discontent over the high-handed policies of the union government and allegations of the rigging of the 1987 Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly election provoked separatist sentiments in the region, culminating in a violent uprising and prolonged armed insurgency backed by Pakistan, who claimed to have given its \"moral and diplomatic\" support to the movement. Several new militant groups with radical Islamic views emerged and changed the ideological emphasis of the movement to Islamic. This was facilitated by a large influx of Islamic \"Jihadi\" fighters (mujahideen) who had entered the Kashmir valley following the end of the Soviet\u2013Afghan War in the 1980s. The Inter-Services Intelligence of Pakistan has been accused by India and the international community of supporting, supplying arms and training mujahideen, to fight in Jammu and Kashmir. In 2015, former President of Pakistan Pervez Musharraf admitted that Pakistan had supported and trained insurgent groups in the 1990s. A prolonged, bloody conflict between the Islamic militant separatists and the Indian Army took place, both of whom have been accused of widespread human rights abuses, including abductions, massacres, rapes and armed robbery.\nThe violence emerged as a setback to industries in the Valley. Doda district, rich in high-grade sapphire, had active mines until 1989 that were abandoned owing to their turbulent location. In 1998, the government discovered that smugglers had occupied these mines and stolen much of the resource. Following the 2008 Kashmir unrest, secessionist movements in the region were boosted. The 2016\u201317 Kashmir unrest resulted in the death of over 90 civilians and the injury of over 15,000. Six policemen, including a sub-inspector were killed in an ambush in Anantnag in June 2017, by trespassing militants of the Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Toiba. An attack on an Indian police convoy in Pulwama, in February 2019, resulted in the deaths of 40 police officers. Responsibility for the attack was claimed by a Pakistan-backed militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed.\nRevocation of special status and reorganisation.\nIn August 2019, the Parliament of India passed resolutions to amend Article 370, ending Jammu and Kashmir\u2019s special constitutional status and bringing it entirely under the Constitution of India. Alongside this, the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 was passed, spliting the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories: Ladakh and the residuary Jammu and Kashmir.\nAhead of these actions, the union government locked down the Kashmir Valley, increased security forces, restricted public movement under Section 144, and detained several political leaders, including former chief ministers Omar Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti. Internet and phone services were also suspended. The new administrative structure came into effect on 31 October 2019.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe state of Jammu and Kashmir consisted of three divisions: the Jammu Division, the Kashmir Division and Ladakh which were further divided into 22 districts. The Siachen Glacier, while under Indian military control, did not lie under the administration of the state of Jammu and Kashmir. Kishtwar, Ramban, Reasi, Samba, Bandipora, Ganderbal, Kulgam and Shopian were districts formed in 2008.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJammu and Kashmir was the only state in India with a Muslim-majority population. In the Census of India held in 1961, the first to be conducted after the formation of the state, Islam was practised by 68.31% of the population, while 28.45% followed Hinduism. The proportion of population that practised Islam fell to 64.19% by 1981 but recovered afterward. According to the 2011 census, the last to be conducted in the state, Islam was practised by about 68.3% of the state population, while 28.4% followed Hinduism and small minorities followed Sikhism (1.9%), Buddhism (0.9%) and Christianity (0.3%).\nGovernment.\nJammu and Kashmir was the only Indian state that had special autonomy under Article 370 of the Constitution of India, which stipulated that no law enacted by the Parliament of India, except for those in the field of defence, communication and foreign policy, would be extendable to Jammu and Kashmir unless it was ratified by the state legislature of Jammu and Kashmir. The state was able to define the permanent residents of the state who alone had the privilege to vote in state elections, the right to seek government jobs and the ability to own land or property in the state. By virtue of this autonomy, Jammu and Kashmir was the only state to have an official state flag, hoisted alongside India's national flag, and had a separate constitution. Designed by the then-ruling National Conference, the flag of Jammu and Kashmir featured a plough on a red background symbolising labour; it replaced the Maharaja's state flag. The three stripes on the flag represented the three distinct administrative divisions of the state. By 1999, 94 out of the 97 subjects in the Union List and 260 out of 395 articles of the Constitution of India had become applicable in the state, though it retained some of its autonomy. Article 370 had meanwhile become mostly symbolic.\nLike all the states of India, Jammu and Kashmir had a multi-party democratic system of governance and had a bicameral legislature. At the time of drafting the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir, 100 seats were earmarked for direct elections from territorial constituencies. Of these, 25 seats were reserved for the areas of Jammu and Kashmir state that came under Pakistani control; this was reduced to 24 after the 12th amendment of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir. After a delimitation in 1988, the total number of seats increased to 111, of which 87 were within Indian-administered territory. The Jammu and Kashmir Assembly had a 6-year term, in contrast to the norm of a 5-year term followed in other state assemblies. This anomaly arose because Jammu and Kashmir accepted the provision in the Forty-second Amendment of the Constitution of India but did not accept its repeal in the Forty-fourth Amendment.\nThe state's official language was Urdu, which occupied a central space in media, education, religious and political discourses and the legislature of Jammu and Kashmir; the language functioned as a symbol of identity among Muslims of South Asia. The first language of less than 1% of the population, it was regarded as a \"neutral\" and non-native language of the multilingual region, and broadly accepted by Kashmiri Muslims. The dominant position of Urdu has been criticised for rendering Kashmiri into a functional \"minority language\", effectively restricting its use to households and family.\nCentral provisions.\nIn 1990, an Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act of India, which gave special powers to the Indian security forces, including the detaining of individuals for up to two years without presenting charges, was enforced in Jammu and Kashmir, a decision which drew criticism from Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International for violating human rights. Security forces claimed that many missing people were not detained, but had crossed into Pakistan-administered Kashmir to engage in militancy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51301", "revid": "24812962", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51301", "title": "Pope Pontian", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 230 to 235\nPope Pontian (; died October 235) was the bishop of Rome from 21 July 230 to 28 September 235. In 235, during the persecution of Christians in the reign of the Emperor Maximinus Thrax, Pontian was arrested and sent to the island of Sardinia.\nHe abdicated to make the election of a new pope possible. Resigning on 28 September 235, he was the first pope to do so. This allowed an orderly transition in the Church of Rome and so ended a schism that had existed in the Church for eighteen years. Some accounts say he was beaten to death only weeks after his arrival on Sardinia.\nPontian is venerated as a saint in both the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches.\nLife.\nA little more is known of Pontian than his predecessors, apparently from a lost papal chronicle that was available to the compiler of the \"Liberian Catalogue\" of the bishops of Rome, written in the fourth century. The \"Liber Pontificalis\" states that he was a Roman citizen and that his father's name was Calpurnius. Early Church historian Eusebius wrote that his pontificate lasted six years.\nPontian's pontificate was initially relatively peaceful under the reign of the tolerant Emperor Severus Alexander. He presided over the Roman synod which approved Origen's expulsion and deposition by Pope Demetrius I of Alexandria in 230 or 231. According to Eusebius, the next emperor, Maximinus, overturned his predecessor's policy of tolerance towards Christianity. Both Pope Pontian and the Antipope Hippolytus of Rome were arrested and exiled to labor in the mines of Sardinia, generally regarded as a death sentence.\nIn light of his sentence, Pontian resigned, the first pope to do so, so as to allow an orderly transition in the Church of Rome, on 28 September 235. This date was recorded in the Liberian Catalogue and is notable for being the first full date of a papal reign given by contemporaries. This action ended a schism that had existed in the Church for eighteen years. Pontian was beaten to death with sticks. He died in October 235. Like Pontian, Hippolytus did not survive his exile. The two may have reconciled with one another in Rome or in Sardinia before their deaths.\nVeneration.\nPope Fabian had the bodies of both Pontian and Hippolytus brought back to Rome in 236 or 237, and had Pontian buried in the papal crypt in the Catacomb of Callixtus on the Appian Way. The slab covering his tomb was discovered in 1909. On it is inscribed in Greek: (\"Pontianos Episk\"; in English \"Pontianus Bish\"). The inscription \"\" (\"martyr\") had been added in another hand.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church and the General Roman Calendar of 1969, Pontian and Hippolytus are commemorated jointly on 13 August. In those Catholic communities which use a historical calendar such as the General Roman Calendar of 1960, Pontian's feast day is celebrated on 19 November.\nSan Ponziano, a titular church in Rome, is named in his honour. Churches named for Pontian are also found in Spoleto, Lucca, and Carbonia, Sardinia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51302", "revid": "40374695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51302", "title": "Airplanes", "text": ""}
{"id": "51303", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51303", "title": "Cowpox", "text": "Disease of humans and animals\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nCowpox is an infectious disease caused by Cowpox virus (CPXV). It presents with large blisters in the skin, a fever and swollen glands, historically typically following contact with an infected cow, though in the last several decades more often (though overall rarely) from infected cats. The hands and face are most frequently affected and the spots are generally very painful.\nThe virus, part of the genus \"Orthopoxvirus\", is closely related to Vaccinia virus. The virus is zoonotic, meaning that it is transferable between species, such as from cat to human. The transferral of the disease was first observed in dairy workers who touched the udders of infected cows and consequently developed the signature pustules on their hands. Cowpox is more commonly found in animals other than bovines, such as rodents. Cowpox is similar to, but much milder than, the highly contagious and often deadly smallpox disease. Its close resemblance to the mild form of smallpox and the observation that dairy farmers were immune to smallpox inspired the modern smallpox vaccine, created and administered by English physician Edward Jenner.\nThe first description of cowpox was given by Jenner in 1798. \"Vaccination\" is derived from the Latin adjective \"vaccinus\", meaning \"of or from the cow\". Once vaccinated, a patient develops antibodies that make them immune to cowpox, but they also develop immunity to the smallpox virus, or Variola virus. The cowpox vaccinations and later incarnations proved so successful that in 1980, the World Health Organization announced that smallpox was the first disease to be eradicated by vaccination efforts worldwide. Other orthopox viruses remain prevalent in certain communities and continue to infect humans, such as the cowpox virus in Europe and monkeypox virus in Central and West Africa.\nMedical use.\nNaturally occurring cases of cowpox were not common, but it was discovered that the vaccine could be \"carried\" in humans and reproduced and disseminated human-to-human. Jenner's original vaccination used lymph from the cowpox pustule on a milkmaid, and subsequent \"arm-to-arm\" vaccinations applied the same principle. As this transfer of human fluids came with its own set of complications, a safer manner of producing the vaccine was first introduced in Italy. The new method used cows to manufacture the vaccine using a process called \"retrovaccination\", in which a heifer was inoculated with humanized cowpox virus, and it was passed from calf to calf to produce massive quantities efficiently and safely. This then led to the next incarnation, \"true animal vaccine\", which used the same process but began with naturally occurring cowpox virus, and not the humanized form.\nThis method of production proved to be lucrative and was taken advantage of by many entrepreneurs needing only calves and seed lymph from an infected cow to manufacture crude versions of the vaccine. W. F. Elgin of the National Vaccine Establishment presented his slightly refined technique to the Conference of State and Provincial Boards of Health of North America. A tuberculosis-free calf, stomach shaved, would be bound to an operating table, where incisions would be made on its lower body. Glycerinated lymph from a previously inoculated calf was spread along the cuts. After a few days, the cuts would have scabbed or crusted over. The crust was softened with sterilized water and mixed with glycerin, which disinfected it, then stored hermetically sealed in capillary tubes for later use.\nAt some point, the virus in use was no longer cowpox, but vaccinia. Scientists have not determined exactly when the change or mutation occurred, but the effects of vaccinia and cowpox virus as vaccine are nearly the same.\nThe virus is found in Europe, and mainly in the UK. Human cases today are very rare and most often contracted from domestic cats. The virus is not commonly found in cattle; the reservoir hosts for the virus are woodland rodents, particularly voles. From these rodents, domestic cats contract and transmit the virus to humans.\nSymptoms in cats include lesions on the face, neck, forelimbs, and paws, and less commonly upper respiratory tract infections. Symptoms of infection with cowpox virus in humans are localized, pustular lesions generally found on the hands and limited to the site of introduction. The incubation period is 9 to 10 days. The virus is prevalent in late summer and autumn.\nOrigin.\nDiscovery.\nIn the years from 1770 to 1790, at least six people who had contact with a cow had independently tested the possibility of using the cowpox vaccine as an immunization for smallpox in humans. Among them were the English farmer Benjamin Jesty, in Dorset in 1774 and the German teacher Peter Plett in 1791. Jesty inoculated his wife and two young sons with cowpox, in a successful effort to immunize them to smallpox, an epidemic of which had arisen in their town. His patients who had contracted and recovered from the similar but milder cowpox (mainly milkmaids), seemed to be immune not only to further cases of cowpox, but also to smallpox. By scratching the fluid from cowpox lesions into the skin of healthy individuals, he was able to immunize those people against smallpox.\nReportedly, farmers and people working regularly with cattle and horses were often spared during smallpox outbreaks. Investigations by the British Army in 1790 showed that horse-mounted troops were less infected by smallpox than infantry, due to probable exposure to the similar horsepox virus (\"Variola equina\"). By the early 19th century, more than 100,000 people in Great Britain had been vaccinated. The arm-to-arm method of transfer of the cowpox vaccine was also used to distribute Jenner's vaccine throughout the Spanish Empire. Spanish king Charles IV's daughter had been stricken with smallpox in 1798, and after she recovered, he arranged for the rest of his family to be vaccinated.\nIn 1803, the king, convinced of the benefits of the vaccine, ordered his personal physician Francis Xavier de Balmis, to deliver it to the Spanish dominions in North and South America. To maintain the vaccine in an available state during the voyage, the physician recruited 22 young boys who had never had cowpox or smallpox before, aged three to nine years, from the orphanages of Spain. During the trip across the Atlantic, de Balmis vaccinated the orphans in a living chain. Two children were vaccinated immediately before departure, and when cowpox pustules had appeared on their arms, material from these lesions was used to vaccinate two more children.\nIn 1796, English medical practitioner Edward Jenner tested the theory that cowpox could protect someone from being infected by smallpox. There had long been speculation regarding the origins of Jenner's variolae vaccinae, until DNA sequencing data showed close similarities between horsepox and cowpox viruses. Jenner noted that farriers sometimes milked cows and that material from the equine disease could produce a vesicular disease in cows from which variolae vaccinae was derived. Contemporary accounts provide support for Jenner's speculation that the vaccine probably originated as an equine disease called \"grease\".\nAlthough cowpox originates on the udder of cows, Jenner took his sample from a milkmaid, Sarah Nelmes.\nJenner extracted the pus of one of the lesions formed by cowpox on Nelmes to James Phipps, an eight-year-old boy who had never had smallpox. He eventually developed a scab and fever that was manageable. Approximately six weeks later, Jenner then introduced an active sample of the smallpox virus into Phipps to test the theory. After being observed for an extended amount of time, it was recorded that Phipps did not receive a reaction from it. Although Jenner was not the first person to conceive the notion of cowpox protecting against the smallpox virus, his experiment proved the theory. Jenner named this procedure \"vaccination\" from the Latin for cow, \"vacca\".\nThe number of vaccinations among people of that era increased drastically. It was widely considered to be a relatively safer procedure compared to the mainstream inoculation. Although Jenner was propelled into the spotlight from the vaccination popularity, he mainly focused on science behind why the cowpox allowed persons to not be infected by smallpox. The honour of the discovery of the vaccination is often attributed to Benjamin Jesty, but he was no scientist and did not repeat or publish his findings. He is considered to be the first to use cowpox as a vaccination, though the term vaccination was not invented yet.\nDuring the midst of the smallpox outbreak, Jesty transferred pieces of cow udder which he knew had been infected with cowpox into the skin of his family members in the hopes of protecting them. Jesty did not publicize his findings, and Jenner, who performed his first inoculation 22 years later and publicized his findings, assumed credit. It is said that Jenner made this discovery by himself, possibly without knowing previous accounts 20 years earlier. Although Jesty may have been the first to discover it, Jenner made vaccination widely accessible and has therefore been credited for its invention.\nLife cycle.\nThe genome for the CPXV is over 220kbp. This makes it the largest genome in the Orthopoxviral species. It can be divided into three different regions. There are two end regions called R1 and R2 and a main central region that is roughly half of the size of the genome. There are also inverted terminal repeats that are located at the terminal sites of the genome and measure around 10kbp. These inverted terminal repeats can then be divided into two more distinct regions. The first section is around 7.5kbp long and includes a coding region. The other section includes a terminal region that can be repeated up to as many times as thirty and is composed of 50 nucleotides. The CPXV genome encodes only 30-40% of products of which are involved in the pathogenesis of the virus. The CPXV genome has the most complete set of genes out of all of the orthopoxviruses. This unique feature of CPXV makes it ideal to be able to mutate into different strains of the virus. It is a double stranded DNA virus. The virus does have an envelope that surrounds the virion. The cowpox's genome allows the virus to encode its own transcription machinery along with its own DNA replication machinery. The replication then takes place in the cytoplasm after the virus is in the cell and the virion is uncoated. The virion is then assembled and released from the host cell.\nThe genome is arranged so that both of the ends contain the genes responsible for evading the defenses from the immune system of the host which is only activated in the extracellular portion. These receptors are able to be stopped by cytokine and chemokine secretion by blocking the cytokine and chemokine found extracellularly. This is the process responsible for attachment and entry of the virion into the host cell. Because of the large size of the genome, it makes the virus more likely and capable to fight back against the immunes system defenses. Out of all of the poxviruses, CPXV has the most cytokine responses that fight back against the immune system. It encodes cytokine receptors such as TNF, CrmB, CrmC, CrmD, and CrmE proteins. Another set of receptors that CPXV have are lymphotoxins such as IL-1\u00df, IFN-y, IFN 1, \u03b2-chemokines, and IL-18. However, not all of the receptors of CPXV are still not known. CPXV also encodes four tumor necrosis factors (TNF) and lymphotoxin which are the biggest group of homologous receptors for the virus. These receptors play a crucial role that are involved with the immune system.\nCPXV has two different types of inclusion bodies. All of the poxviruses have basophilic inclusions also called B-type inclusion bodies. The B-type inclusion bodies contain the factory where the virus produces necessary elements for the replication and maturation of the virion. CPXV has another inclusion body that is unique to only some chordopoxviruses called acidophilic inclusion bodies also called A-type inclusion bodies (ATIs). The ATIs are encoded by the cpxv158 gene and is then made the protein ATIP which is a late protein. However, the importance of these ATIs in the life cycle are still not well known or understood and research is still being done to better understand them. It is known that replication can still continue without the cpxv158 gene, and that the replication cycle shows no difference between a fully encoded virion versus the virion that had deleted cwpx158 gene. However, with studies done on mice, the lesions that were caused by the CPXV-BR\u25b3ati were able to heal faster due to less tissue that was lost than the CPXV-BR lesions that took longer to heal and lost more tissue. This suggests that this gene helps supports the idea that ATIs are partly involved in how the host responds to the virus infection.\nAnother way that the virus is able to control and infect the host is by regulating cellular signaling pathways. During the infection, CPXV is known to use MEK/ERK/1/2/Egr-1, JNK1/2, and PI3K/Akt pathways. Some of these pathways are not unique only to CPXV, but how they function in response to the host is unique to this virus.\nOne notable protein in the CPXV is the p28 protein. It is made up of 242 amino acids and contains two domains, and N terminal KilA-N and a C-terminal RING domain. One of those domains, the N-terminal KilA-N domain, allows for DNA to bind to it. The KilA-N domain facilitates this p28 protein that is translated early in the replication cycle in the cytoplasm and is then located in the cytoplasm for the rest of the life cycle of the virus. There is current research still being done to determine if the p28 protein could be a requital for an essential macrophage factor that is needed for the DNA replication.\nOpposition to vaccination.\nThe majority of the population at the time accepted the up-and-coming vaccination. However, there was still opposition from individuals who were reluctant to change from the inoculations. In addition, there became a growing concern from parties who were worried about the unknown repercussions of infecting a human with an animal disease. One way individuals expressed their discontent was to draw comics that sometimes depicted small cows growing from the sites of vaccination. Others publicly advocated for the continuance of the inoculations; however, this was not because of their discontent for the vaccinations. Some of their reluctance had to do with an apprehensiveness for change. They had become so familiar with the process, outcome, positives, and negatives of inoculations that they did not want to be surprised by the outcome or effects of the vaccinations. Jenner soon eased their minds after extensive trials. However, others advocated against vaccinations for different reasons. Because of the high price of inoculation, Jenner experienced very few common folk who were not willing to accept the vaccination. Due to this, Jenner found many subjects for his tests. He was able to publish his results in a pamphlet in 1798: \"An Inquiry into the Causes and Effects of Variolae Vaccinae, a Disease, Discovered in some of the Western Counties of England particularly Gloucestershire, and known by the Name of Cow Pox.\"\nHistorical use.\nAfter inoculation, vaccination using the cowpox virus became the primary defense against smallpox. After infection by the cowpox virus, the body (usually) gains the ability to recognize the similar smallpox virus from its antigens and is able to fight the smallpox disease much more efficiently.\nThe cowpox virus contains 222 thousand base pairs of DNA, which contains the information for about 203-204 genes. This makes cowpox one of the most complicated viruses known. A significant number of these genes give instructions for key parts of the human immune system, giving a clue as to why the closely related smallpox is so lethal. The vaccinia virus now used for smallpox vaccination is sufficiently different from the cowpox virus found in the wild as to be considered a separate virus.\nBritish Parliament.\nWhile the vaccination's popularity increased exponentially, so did its monetary value. This was realized by the British Parliament, which compensated Jenner 10,000 pounds for the vaccination. In addition, they later compensated Jenner an additional 20,000 pounds. In the coming years, Jenner continued advocacy for his vaccination over the still popular inoculation. Eventually, in 1840, the inoculation became banned in England and was replaced with the cowpox vaccination as the main medical solution to combat smallpox. The cowpox vaccination saved the British Army thousands of soldiers, by making them immune to the effects of smallpox in upcoming wars. The cowpox also saved the United Kingdom thousands of pounds.\nKinepox.\nKinepox is an alternative term for the smallpox vaccine used in early 19th-century America. Popularized by Jenner in the late 1790s, kinepox was a far safer method for inoculating people against smallpox than the previous method, variolation, which had a 3% fatality rate.\nIn a famous letter to Meriwether Lewis in 1803, Thomas Jefferson instructed the Lewis and Clark Expedition to \"carry with you some matter of the kine-pox; inform those of them with whom you may be, of its efficacy as a preservative from the smallpox; &amp; encourage them in the use of it...\" Jefferson had developed an interest in protecting American Indians from smallpox, having been aware of epidemics along the Missouri River during the previous century. A year before his special instructions to Lewis, Jefferson had persuaded a visiting delegation of North American Indian chieftains to be vaccinated with kinepox during the winter of 1801\u20131802. Unfortunately, Lewis never got the opportunity to use kinepox during the pair's expedition, as it had become inadvertently inactive\u2014a common occurrence in a time before vaccines were stabilized with preservatives such as glycerol or kept at refrigeration temperatures.\nPrevention.\nToday, the virus is found in Europe, mainly in the UK. Human cases are very rare (though in 2010 a laboratory worker contracted cowpox) and most often contracted from domestic cats. Human infections usually remain localized and self-limiting, but can become fatal in immunosuppressed patients. The virus is not commonly found in cattle; the reservoir hosts for the virus are woodland rodents, particularly voles. Domestic cats contract the virus from these rodents. Symptoms in cats include lesions on the face, neck, forelimbs, and paws, and, less commonly, upper respiratory tract infections. Symptoms of infection with cowpox virus in humans are localized, pustular lesions generally found on the hands and limited to the site of introduction. The incubation period is nine to ten days. The virus is most prevalent in late summer and autumn.\nImmunity to cowpox is gained when the smallpox vaccine is administered. Although the vaccine now uses vaccinia virus, the poxviruses are similar enough that the body becomes immune to both cow- and smallpox.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51304", "revid": "50544311", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51304", "title": "White Rose", "text": "Resistance group in Nazi Germany\nThe White Rose (, ) was a non-violent, intellectual resistance group in Nazi Germany which was led by five students and one professor at the University of Munich: Willi Graf, Kurt Huber, Christoph Probst, Alexander Schmorell, Hans Scholl and Sophie Scholl. The group conducted an anonymous leaflet and graffiti campaign that called for active opposition to the Nazi regime. Their activities started in Munich on 27 June 1942; they ended with the arrest of the core group by the Gestapo on 18 February 1943. They, as well as other members and supporters of the group who carried on distributing the pamphlets, faced show trials by the Nazi People's Court (); many of them were imprisoned and executed.\nHans Fritz Scholl and Sophie Magdalena Scholl, as well as Christoph Probst were executed by guillotine four days after their arrest, on 22 February 1943. During the trial, Sophie interrupted the judge multiple times. No defendants were given any opportunity to speak.\nThe group wrote, printed and initially distributed their pamphlets in the greater Munich region. Later on, secret carriers brought copies to other cities, mostly in the southern parts of Germany. In July 1943, Allied planes dropped their sixth and final leaflet over Germany with the headline \"The Manifesto of the Students of Munich.\" In total, the White Rose authored six leaflets, which were multiplied and spread, in a total of about 15,000 copies. They denounced the Nazi regime's crimes and oppression, and called for resistance. In their second leaflet, they denounced the persecution and mass murder of the Jews. By the time of their arrest, the members of the White Rose were just about to establish contacts with other German resistance groups like the Kreisau Circle or the Schulze-Boysen/Harnack group of the Red Orchestra. Today, the White Rose is well known both within Germany and worldwide.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMembers and supporters.\nStudents from the University of Munich comprised the core of the White Rose: Hans Scholl, Alexander Schmorell, Willi Graf, Christoph Probst, and Kurt Huber, a professor of philosophy and musicology. Hans's younger sister, Sophie later came to be a core member of the White Rose.\nThey were supported by other people, including: Otl Aicher, Willi Habermann (\"Grogo\"), Theodor Haecker, Anneliese Graf, Traute Lafrenz, Katharina Sch\u00fcddekopf, Lieselotte \"Lilo\" Ramdohr, J\u00fcrgen Wittenstein, Falk Harnack, Marie-Luise Jahn, Wilhelm Geyer, Manfred Eickemeyer, Josef S\u00f6hngen, Heinrich Guter, Heinrich Bollinger, Wilhelm Bollinger, Helmut Bauer, Harald Dohrn, Hans Conrad Leipelt, Gisela Schertling, Rudi Alt, Michael Brink, Lilo Dreyfeldt, Josef Furtmeier, G\u00fcnter Ammon, Fred Thieler and Wolfgang Jaeger. Most were in their early twenties.\nWilhelm Geyer taught Alexander Schmorell how to make the tin templates used in the graffiti campaign. Eugen Grimminger of Stuttgart funded their operations. Grimminger was arrested on 2 March 1943, sentenced to ten years in a penal institution for high treason by the \"People's Court\" on 19 April 1943, and imprisoned in Ludwigsburg penal institution until April 1945. His wife Jenny was murdered in the Auschwitz-Birkenau extermination camp, presumably on 2 December 1943. Grimminger's secretary Tilly Hahn contributed her own funds to the cause, and acted as go-between for Grimminger and the group in Munich. She frequently carried supplies such as envelopes, paper, and an additional duplicating machine from Stuttgart to Munich.\nIn addition, a group of students in the city of Ulm distributed a number of the group's leaflets and were arrested and tried with the group from Munich. Among this group were Sophie Scholl's childhood friend Susanne Hirzel and her teenage brother Hans Hirzel and Franz Josef M\u00fcller. In Hamburg, a group of students including Reinhold Meyer, Albert Suhr, Heinz Kucharski, Margaretha Rothe, Bruno Himpkamp, Rudolf Degkwitz (junior), Ursula de Boor, Hannelore Willbrandt, Karl Ludwig Schneider, Ilse Ledien, Eva von Dumreicher, Dorothea Zill, Apelles Sobeczko, and Maria Liepelt formed the White Rose Hamburg resistance group against the National Socialist regime and distributed the group's leaflets.\nHistorical and intellectual background.\nGermany in 1942.\nWhite Rose survivor J\u00fcrgen Wittenstein described what it was like for ordinary Germans to live in Nazi Germany:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The government\u2014or rather, the party\u2014controlled everything: the news media, arms, police, the armed forces, the judiciary system, communications, travel, all levels of education from kindergarten to universities, all cultural and religious institutions. Political indoctrination started at a very early age, and continued by means of the Hitler Youth with the ultimate goal of complete mind control. Children were exhorted in school to denounce even their own parents for derogatory remarks about Hitler or Nazi ideology.\u2014\u200a\nThe activities of the White Rose started in the autumn of 1942. This was a time that was particularly critical for the Nazi regime; after initial victories in World War II, the German population became increasingly aware of the losses and damages of the war. In summer 1942, the German Army was preparing a new military campaign in the southern part of the Eastern front to regain the initiative after their earlier defeat close to Moscow. This German offensive was initially very successful, but it slowed in the autumn as Army Group South approached Stalingrad and the Caucasus region. During this time, the authors of the pamphlets could neither be discovered, nor could the campaign be stopped by the Nazi authorities. When Hans and Sophie Scholl were discovered and arrested whilst distributing leaflets at Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, the regime reacted brutally. The \"Volksgerichtshof\" was not bound by law, but its decisions were guided by Nazi ideology. Thus, its actions were declared unlawful in post-war Germany. The execution of the White Rose group members, among many others, is considered judicial murder today.\nSocial background.\nThe members of the core group all shared an academic background as students at Munich University. The Scholl siblings, Christoph Probst, Willi Graf and Alexander Schmorell were all raised by independently thinking and wealthy parents. Alexander Schmorell was born in Russia, and his first language was Russian. After he and Hans Scholl had become friends at the university, Alexander invited Hans to his parents' home, where Hans also met Christoph Probst at the beginning of 1941. Alexander Schmorell and Christoph Probst had already been friends since their school days. As Christoph's father had been divorced and had married again to a Jewish wife, the effects of the Nazi Nuremberg Laws, and Nazi racial ideology had impacts on both Christoph's and Alexander's lives from early on.\nThe German Youth Movement and the Hitler Youth.\nThe ideas and thoughts of the German Youth Movement, founded in 1896, had a major impact on the German youth at the beginning of the twentieth century. The movement aimed at providing free space to develop a healthy life. A common trait of the various organizations was a romantic longing for a pristine state of things, and a return to older cultural traditions, with a strong emphasis on independent, non-conformist thinking. They propagated a return to nature, confraternity and shared adventures. The (abbreviated as \"d.j.1.11.\") was part of this youth movement, founded by Eberhard Koebel in 1929. Christoph Probst was a member of the German Youth Movement, and Willi Graf was a member of (\"New Germany\"), and the (\"Grey Convent\"), which were illegal Catholic youth organizations.\nThe Nazi Party's youth organizations took over some of the elements of the Youth Movement, and engaged their members in activities similar to the adventures of the Boy Scouts, but also subjected them to ideological indoctrination. Some, but not all, of the White Rose members had enthusiastically joined the youth organizations of the Nazi party: Hans Scholl had joined the Hitler Youth, and Sophie Scholl was a member of the . Membership in both party youth organizations was compulsory for young Germans, although a few\u2014such as Willi Graf, Otl Aicher, and Heinz Brenner\u2014refused to join. Sophie and Hans' sister Inge Scholl reported about the initial enthusiasm of the young people for the Nazi youth organization, to their parents' dismay:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But there was something else that drew us with mysterious power and swept us along: the closed ranks of marching youth with banners waving, eyes fixed straight ahead, keeping time to drumbeat and song. Was not this sense of fellowship overpowering? It is not surprising that all of us, Hans and Sophie and the others, joined the Hitler Youth? We entered into it with body and soul, and we could not understand why our father did not approve, why he was not happy and proud. On the contrary, he was quite displeased with us.\u2014\u200a\nYouth organizations other than those led by the Nazi party were dissolved and officially forbidden in 1936. Both Hans Scholl and Willi Graf were arrested in 1937\u201338 because of their membership in forbidden Youth Movement organizations. Hans Scholl had joined the 1. 11. in 1934, when he and other Hitler Youth members in Ulm considered membership in this group and the Hitler Youth to be compatible. Hans Scholl was also accused of transgressing the German anti-homosexuality law, because of a same-sex teen relationship dating back to 1934\u20131935, when Hans was only 16 years old. The argument was built partially on the work of Eckard Holler, a sociologist specializing in the German Youth Movement, as well as on the Gestapo interrogation transcripts from the 1937\u201338 arrest, and with reference to historian George Mosse's discussion of the homoerotic aspects of the German Youth Movement. As Mosse indicated, idealized romantic attachments among male youths were not uncommon in Germany, especially among members of the associations. It was argued that the experience of being persecuted may have led both Hans and Sophie to identify with the victims of the Nazi state, providing another explanation for why Hans and Sophie Scholl made their way from ardent \"Hitler Youth\" leaders to passionate opponents of the Nazi regime.\nReligion.\nThe White Rose group was motivated by ethical, moral, and religious considerations. They supported and took in individuals of all backgrounds, and it did not depend on race, sex, religion, or age. They came from various religious backgrounds. Willi Graf and Katharina Sch\u00fcddekopf were devout Catholics. Alexander Schmorell was an Orthodox Christian. Traute Lafrenz adhered to the concepts of anthroposophy, while Eugen Grimminger considered himself a Buddhist. Christoph Probst was baptized a Catholic only shortly before his execution. His father Hermann was nominally a Catholic, but also a private scholar of Eastern thought and wisdom. In their diaries and letters to friends, both Scholl siblings wrote about their reading of Christian scholars including Augustine of Hippo's \"Confessions\" and Etienne Gilson, whose work on Medieval philosophy they discussed amongst other philosophical works within their network of friends. The Scholls read sermons by John Henry Newman, and Sophie gave two volumes of Newman's sermons to her boyfriend, Fritz Hartnagel, when he was assigned to the Eastern Front; he wrote to her: \"[W]e know by whom we are created, and that we stand in a relationship of moral obligation to our creator. Conscience gives us the capacity to distinguish between good and evil.\" This is a paraphrase of Newman's sermon, \"The Testimony of Conscience\".\nMentors and role models.\nIn 1941, Hans Scholl read a copy of a sermon by an outspoken critic of the Nazi regime, Catholic Bishop August von Galen, decrying the euthanasia policies expressed in Action T4 (and extended that same year to the Nazi concentration camps by Action 14f13) which the Nazis maintained would protect the German gene pool. Horrified by the Nazi policies, Sophie obtained permission to reprint the sermon and distribute it at the University of Munich.\nIn 1940, Otl Aicher had met Carl Muth, the founder of the Catholic magazine \"Hochland\". Otl in turn introduced Hans Scholl to Muth in 1941. In his letters to Muth, Hans wrote about his growing attraction to the Catholic Christian faith. Both Hans and Sophie Scholl were influenced by Carl Muth whom they describe as deeply religious, and opposed to Nazism. He drew the Scholl siblings' attention to the persecution of the Jews, which he considered sinful and anti-Christian.\nBoth Sophie Scholl and Willi Graf attended some of Kurt Huber's lectures at the University of Munich. Kurt Huber was known amongst his students for the political innuendos which he used to include in his university lectures, by which he criticized Nazi ideology by talking about classical philosophers like Leibniz. He met Hans Scholl for the first time in June 1942, was admitted to the activities of the White Rose on 17 December 1942, and became their mentor and the main author of the sixth pamphlet.\nExperience on the World War II Eastern Front.\nHans Scholl, Alexander Schmorell, Christoph Probst, and Willi Graf were medical students. Their studies were regularly interrupted by terms of compulsory service as student soldiers in the Wehrmacht medical corps on the Eastern Front. Their experience during this time had a major impact on their thinking, and it also motivated their resistance, because it led to their disillusionment with the Nazi regime. Alexander Schmorell, who was born in Orenburg and raised by Russian nurses, spoke perfect Russian, which allowed him to have direct contact and communication with the local Russian population and their plight. This Russian insight proved invaluable during their time there, and he could convey to his fellow White Rose members what was not understood or even heard by other Germans coming from the Eastern front.\nIn summer 1942, Hans, Alexander, and Willi had to serve for three months on the Russian front alongside many other male medical students from the University of Munich. There, they observed the horrors of war, saw beatings and other mistreatment of Jews by the Germans, and heard about the persecution of the Jews from reliable sources. Some witnessed atrocities of the war on the battlefield and against civilian populations in the East. In a letter to his sister Anneliese, Willi Graf wrote: \"I wish I had been spared the view of all this which I had to witness.\" Gradually, detachment gave way to the conviction that something had to be done. It was not enough to keep to oneself one's beliefs, and ethical standards, but the time had come to act.\nThe members of the White Rose were fully aware of the risks they incurred by their acts of resistance:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I knew what I took upon myself and I was prepared to lose my life by so doing.\u2014\u200a\nOrigin of the name.\nUnder Gestapo interrogation, Hans Scholl gave several explanations for the origin of the name \"The White Rose\", and suggested he may have chosen it while he was under the emotional influence of a 19th-century poem with the same name by German poet Clemens Brentano. It has also been speculated that the name might have been taken from either the Cuban poet, Jose Marti's verse \"Cultivo una rosa blanca\" or the novel \"Die Wei\u00dfe Rose\" (\"The White Rose\") by B. Traven, which Hans Scholl and Alex Schmorell had both read. They also wrote that the symbol of the white rose was intended to represent purity and innocence in the face of evil.\nIf the White Rose was indeed named after Traven's novel, Hans Scholl's interrogation testimony may have been intentionally vague in order to protect Josef Soehngen, the anti-Nazi bookseller who had supplied this banned book. S\u00f6hngen had provided the White Rose members with a safe meeting place for exchange of information, and receipt of occasional financial contributions. S\u00f6hngen kept a stash of banned books hidden in his store, and had also hidden such books when being printed. \nActions: The leaflets and graffiti.\nAfter their experiences at the Eastern Front, having learned about mass murder in Poland and the Soviet Union, Hans Scholl and Alexander Schmorell felt compelled to take action. With a portable Remington typewriter Schmorell borrowed from a friend, from late June until mid-July 1942, they wrote the first four leaflets. Quoting extensively from the Bible, Aristotle and Novalis, as well as Goethe and Schiller, the iconic poets of German bourgeoisie, they appealed to what they considered the German intelligentsia, believing that these people would be easily convinced by the same arguments that also motivated the authors themselves. These leaflets were left in telephone books in public phone booths, mailed to professors and students, and taken by courier to other universities for distribution. From 23 July to 30 October 1942, Graf, Scholl and Schmorell served again at the Soviet front, and activities ceased until their return. In autumn 1942, Sophie Scholl discovered that her brother Hans was one of the authors of the pamphlets, and joined the group. Shortly after, Willi Graf, and by the end of December 1942, Kurt Huber became members of the White Rose.\nIn January 1943, the fifth leaflet, \"Aufruf an alle Deutsche!\" (\"Appeal to all Germans!\") was produced in 6,000\u20139,000 copies, using a hand-operated duplicating machine. It was carried to other German cities between 27 and 29 January 1943 by the members and supporters of the group, and then mailed from there. Copies appeared in Saarbr\u00fccken, Stuttgart, Cologne, Vienna, Freiburg, Chemnitz, Hamburg, Innsbruck and Berlin. Sophie Scholl stated during her Gestapo interrogation that from summer 1942 on, the aim of the White Rose was to address a broader range of the population. Consequently, in the fifth leaflet, the name of the group was changed from White Rose to \"German Resistance Movement\", and also the style of writing became more polemic and less intellectual. The students had become convinced during their military service that the war was lost: \"\"Hitler kann den Krieg nicht gewinnen, nur noch verl\u00e4ngern.\" \u2013 Hitler cannot win the war, he can only prolong it.\" They appealed to renounce \"national socialist subhumanism\", imperialism and Prussian militarism \"for all time\". The reader was urged to \"Support the resistance movement!\" in the struggle for \"freedom of speech, freedom of religion and protection of the individual citizen from the arbitrary action of criminal dictator-states\". These were the principles that would form \"the foundations of a new Europe\".\nBy the end of January 1943, the Battle of Stalingrad ended with the capitulation and near-total loss of the Wehrmacht's Sixth Army. In Stalingrad, World War II had taken a decisive turn, inspiring resistance movements throughout the European countries then occupied by Germany. It also had a devastating effect on German morale. On 13 January 1943, a student riot broke out at Munich University after a speech by Paul Giesler, the Nazi Gauleiter of Munich and Upper Bavaria, in which he had denounced male students not serving in the army as skulkers and had also made obscene remarks to female students. These events encouraged the members of the White Rose. When the defeat at Stalingrad was officially announced, they sent out their sixth\u2014and last\u2014leaflet. The tone of this writing, authored by Kurt Huber and revised by Hans Scholl and Alexander Schmorell, was more patriotic. Headed \"Fellow students!\" (the now-iconic \"Kommilitoninnen! Kommilitonen!\"), it announced that the \"day of reckoning\" had come for \"the most contemptible tyrant our people has ever endured.\" \"The dead of Stalingrad adjure us!\"\nOn 3, 8, and 15 February 1943, Alexander Schmorell, Hans Scholl, and Willi Graf used tin stencils to write slogans like \"Down with Hitler\" and \"Freedom\" on the walls of the university and other buildings in Munich.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMonths later, a smuggled copy of the sixth leaflet caught the attention of UK Prime Minister Winston Churchill, who had millions of copies printed and, in summer and fall of 1943, dropped over Germany by Royal Air Force pilots.\nCapture, Gestapo interrogation and trial.\nOn 18 February 1943, the Scholls brought a suitcase full of leaflets to the university main building. They hurriedly dropped stacks of copies in the empty corridors for students to find when they left the lecture rooms. Leaving before the lectures had ended, the Scholls noticed that there were some left-over copies in the suitcase and decided to distribute them. Sophie flung the last remaining leaflets from the top floor down into the atrium. This spontaneous action was observed by the university maintenance man, Jakob Schmid, who called the Gestapo. The university doors were locked, and the fate of brother and sister were sealed. Hans and Sophie Scholl were taken into Gestapo custody. A draft of a seventh pamphlet, written by Christoph Probst, was found in the possession of Hans Scholl at the time of his arrest by the Gestapo. While Sophie Scholl got rid of incriminating evidence before being taken into custody, Hans did try to destroy the draft of the last leaflet by tearing it apart and trying to swallow it. However, the Gestapo recovered enough of it and were able to match the handwriting with other writings from Probst, which they found when they searched Hans's apartment.\nChristoph was captured on 20 February. The main Gestapo interrogator was Robert Mohr, who initially thought Sophie was innocent. However, after Hans had confessed, Sophie assumed full responsibility in an attempt to protect other members of the White Rose.\nThe Scholls and Probst were scheduled to stand trial before the \"Volksgerichtshof\"\u2014the Nazi \"People's Court\" infamous for its unfair political trials, which more often than not ended with a death sentence\u2014on 22 February 1943. They were found guilty of treason. Roland Freisler, head judge of the court, sentenced them to death. The three were executed the same day by guillotine at Stadelheim Prison. Sophie went under the guillotine first, followed by Hans and then Christoph. While Sophie and Christoph were silent as they died, Hans yelled \"es lebe die Freiheit!\" (long live freedom) as the blade fell.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nWilli Graf had already been arrested on 18 February 1943; in his interrogations, which continued until his execution in October 1943, he successfully covered other members of the group. Alexander Schmorell was recognized, denounced and arrested on 24 February 1943, after his return to Munich following an unsuccessful effort to travel to Switzerland. Kurt Huber was taken into custody on 26 February, and only then did the Gestapo learn about his role within the White Rose group.\nThe second White Rose trial took place on 19 April 1943. Among those on trial were Hans Hirzel, Susanne Hirzel, Franz Josef M\u00fcller, Heinrich Guter, Eugen Grimminger, Otto Aicher, Theodor Haecker, Willi Graf, Anneliese Graf, Heinrich Bollinger, Helmut Bauer and Falk Harnack. At the last minute, the prosecutor added Traute Lafrenz, Gisela Schertling and Katharina Sch\u00fcddekopf. Willi Graf, Kurt Huber, and Alexander Schmorell were sentenced to death. Eleven others were sentenced to prison, and Falk Harnack was acquitted of the accusations, which was unexpected, given that his brother and sister-in-law had been killed by the Nazis for subversive activities. Schmorell and Huber were executed on 13 July 1943. Willi Graf was kept in solitary confinement for about seven months. During that time, he was tortured in an attempt to make him give up other names of members of The White Rose. He never gave up any names, even when the Gestapo threatened to capture his family if he continued to withhold information. He was executed on 12 October 1943. On 29 January 1945, Hans Konrad Leipelt was executed. He had been sent down from Hamburg University in 1940 because of his Jewish ancestry, and had copied and further distributed the White Rose's pamphlets together with his girlfriend Marie-Luise Jahn. The pamphlets were now entitled \"And their spirit lives on.\"\nThe third White Rose trial was scheduled for 20 April 1943, Hitler's birthday, which was a public holiday in Nazi Germany. Judge Freisler had intended to issue death sentences against Wilhelm Geyer, Harald Dohrn, Josef S\u00f6hngen and Manfred Eickemeyer. Because he did not want to issue too many death sentences in a single trial, he therefore wanted to postpone his judgment against those four until the next day. However, the evidence against them was lost, and the trial finally took place on 13 July 1943. In that trial, Gisela Schertling\u2014who had betrayed most of the friends, even fringe members like Gerhard Feuerle\u2014changed her mind and recanted her testimony against all of them. Since Freisler did not preside over the third trial, the judge acquitted for lack of evidence all but S\u00f6hngen, who was sentenced to a six months' term in prison. After her acquittal on 19 April, Traute Lafrenz was placed under arrest again. She spent the last year of the war in prison. Trials kept being postponed and moved to different locations because of Allied air raids. Her trial was finally set for April 1945, after which she probably would have been executed. Three days before the trial, however, the Allies liberated the town where she was held prisoner, thereby saving her life.\nThe student members of the White Rose make up a few of the nearly 70 juveniles that were indicted for high treason by the People's Court from 1933 to 1945.\nReactions in Germany and abroad during World War II.\nThe hopes of the White Rose members that the defeat at Stalingrad would incite German opposition against the Nazi regime and the war effort did not come true. On the contrary, Nazi propaganda used the defeat to call on the German people to embrace \"Total War\". Coincidentally, on 18 February 1943, the same day that saw the arrests of Sophie and Hans Scholl and Willi Graf, Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels delivered his Sportpalast speech, and he was enthusiastically applauded by his audience.\nShortly after the arrest of the Scholl siblings and Christoph Probst, newspapers published all-points bulletins in search of Alexander Schmorell. On 22 February 1943, the students of Munich were assembled, and officially protested against the \"traitors\" who came from within their ranks. Gestapo and Nazi jurisdiction documented in their files their view of the White Rose members as \"traitors and defeatists\". On 23 February, the official newspaper of the Nazi party, \"V\u00f6lkischer Beobachter\" and local newspapers in Munich briefly reported about the capture and execution of some \"degenerate rogues\". However, the network of friends and supporters proved to be too large, so that the rumors about the White Rose could not be suppressed any more by Nazi German officials. Further prosecutions took place until the end of World War II, and German newspapers continued to report, mostly in brief notes, that more people had been arrested and punished. On 15 March 1943, a report by the \"Sicherheitsdienst\" of the \"Schutzstaffel\" stated that rumors about the leaflets spread \"considerable unrest\" amongst the German population. The report expressed particular concern about the fact that leaflets were not handed in to the Nazi authorities by their finders as promptly as they used to be in the past.\nOn 18 April 1943, \"The New York Times\" mentioned the student opposition in Munich. The paper also published articles on the first White Rose trials on 29 March 1943 and 25 April 1943. Though they did not correctly record all of the information about the resistance, the trials, and the execution, they were the first acknowledgement of the White Rose in the United States.\nOn 27 June 1943, the German author and Nobel prize winner Thomas Mann, in his monthly anti-Nazi broadcasts by the BBC called \"Deutsche H\u00f6rer!\" (\"German Listeners!\") highly praised the White Rose members' courage. Soviet Army propaganda issued a leaflet, wrongly attributed by later researchers to the National Committee for a Free Germany, in honour of the White Rose's fight for freedom.\nThe text of the sixth leaflet of the White Rose was smuggled out of Germany through Scandinavia to the United Kingdom by the German lawyer and member of the Kreisau Circle, Helmuth James Graf von Moltke. In summer and fall of 1943, copies were dropped over Germany by Allied planes, retitled \"The Manifesto of the Students of Munich\". Thus, the activities of the White Rose became widely known in World War II Germany, but, like other attempts at resistance, did not succeed in provoking widespread active opposition against the totalitarian regime within the German population. However, it continued to be an important inspiration for acts of individual or small-scale resistance throughout the final years of the war.\nResearch history.\nFor many years the primary sources for research were limited to those provided by White Rose members and their supporters. These included Inge Scholl's 1952 commemorative book \"The White Rose\", surviving copies of the pamphlets, the letters and diaries of Sophie and Hans Scholl and Willi Graf, and other people with direct knowledge of the group's activities. With the end of communism in the Soviet Union and the German Democratic Republic in the early 1990s, the Gestapo interrogation protocols and other documents from Nazi authorities became publicly available. The interrogation protocols were part of the \"Volksgerichtshof\" documents, and were confiscated by the Soviet Red Army, and brought to Moscow. Here, they were kept secret in a special archive. After the foundation of the German Democratic Republic, the major part of the Nazi documents were handed over to the East German government, except the documents concerning Alexander Schmorell, who was born in Russia. The documents were distributed between the Central Archive of the communist Socialist Unity Party of Germany and the archive of the Ministry for State Security. With the German reunification, the documents were transferred to the Federal Archive of Germany in Berlin, and finally published. The documents concerning Alexander Schmorell still remain in the State Military Archive of Russia, but have been fully transcribed and published in a German/Russian edition.\nMemorials and legacy.\nWith the fall of Nazi Germany, the White Rose came to represent opposition to tyranny in the German psyche and was lauded for acting without interest in personal power or self-aggrandizement. Their story became so well known that the composer Carl Orff claimed (falsely by some accounts) to his Allied interrogators that he was a founding member of the White Rose and was released. He was personally acquainted with Huber, but there is no evidence that Orff was ever involved in the movement.\nOn 5 February 2012 Alexander Schmorell was canonized as a New Martyr by the Orthodox Church.\nThe square where the central hall of Munich University is located has been named \"Geschwister-Scholl-Platz\" after Hans and Sophie Scholl; the square opposite to it is \"Professor-Huber-Platz\". Two large fountains are in front of the university, one on either side of Ludwigstra\u00dfe. The fountain in front of the university is dedicated to Hans and Sophie Scholl. The other, across the street, is dedicated to Professor Huber. Many schools, streets, and other places across Germany are named in memory of the members of the White Rose.\nIn Paris, a high school of the 17th arrondissement (coll\u00e8ge La Rose Blanche), is named after the White Rose, and a public park pays homage to Hans and Sophie Scholl.\nOne of Germany's leading literary prizes is called the Geschwister-Scholl-Preis (the \"Scholl Siblings\" prize).\nAsteroid 7571 Weisse Rose is named after the group.\nThe Audimax of the Bundeswehr Medical Academy in Munich was named after Hans Scholl in 2012. The Joint Medical Service of the Bundeswehr, named barracks north of Munich after Christoph Probst at his 100th birthday in 2019.\nThe last surviving member of the group was Traute Lafrenz. She was 100 years old on 3 May 2019 and was awarded the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany on that same date for her work as part of the White Rose. She died on 6 March 2023.\nIn May 2021, Germany issued a stamp to commemorate the 100th anniversary of Sophie Scholl's birthday.\nWhite Rose appropriation.\nIn 2021, a conspiracy theorist group known as the \"White Rose\" appropriated the name of the White Rose anti-Nazi resistance group to make an analogy between the original White Rose's non-violent resistance against Nazism and the non-violent supposed \"resistance\" by the conspiracy theorists against COVID-19 lockdowns and other measures by national governments intended to stop the virus during the COVID-19 pandemic in the early 2020s, which the conspiracy theorists falsely claim was the secret establishment of a worldwide totalitarian Nazi-style government. The methods of the White Rose conspiracy theorists are somewhat similar in that the conspiracy theorists printed stickers asking for resistance against anti-Covid measures alongside the \"White Rose\" name with the address of their Telegram group, then posted the stickers in public places. The use of the Internet meant that the conspiracy theorists spread misinformation and gained members across the world unlike the original White Rose who were limited to Germany. Apart from the name, there is absolutely no connection between the original White Rose and the conspiracy theorists who took their name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n[[Category:White Rose| ]]\n[[Category:Munich in World War II]]\n[[Category:German resistance to Nazism]]\n[[Category:German Youth Movement]]\n[[Category:Political repression in Nazi Germany]]\n[[Category:Mass media companies of Germany]]"}
{"id": "51306", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51306", "title": "Battle of Lake Benacus", "text": "Battle during the Imperial Crisis and the Roman\u2013Germanic wars (268/269)\nThe Battle of Lake Benacus was fought along the banks of Lake Garda in northern Italy, which was known to the Romans as Benacus, in 268 or early 269, between the army under the command of the Roman Emperor Claudius II and the Germanic tribes of the Alamanni and Juthungi.\nBackground.\n\u0399n 268, the Alamanni, who had been making incursions into Roman territory since the reign of Marcus Aurelius, had broken through the Roman frontier at the Danube and crossed the Alps. The power struggles in Mediolanum due to Aureolus' revolt, the murder of Emperor Gallienus and the resulting confrontation between Aureolus and Claudius, who had been nominated as emperor by Gallienus on his death bed, forced the Romans to denude the frontier of troops. Having defeated and killed Aureolus in a siege on Mediolanum, Claudius led his army, together with the remnants of Aureolus' force, north to confront the Germans.\nBattle.\nDetails of the battle are unknown, but future Emperor Aurelian was present at the battle. After what was described as a decisive victory, Claudius assumed the title Germanicus Maximus. Much of the German force was slaughtered on the field with the remainder retreating beyond the bounds of the Empire.\nAftermath.\nClaudius returned to Rome after the battle to attend to affairs of state. The Alemanni returned to Italy in 271 and won a victory against Emperor Aurelian at the Battle of Placentia before their ultimate defeat in the Battle of Fano.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
