{"id": "56433", "revid": "201064", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56433", "title": "Operation Market Garden", "text": "1944 World War II military operation\nOperation Market Garden was an Allied military operation during the Second World War fought in the German-occupied Netherlands from 17 to 25 September 1944. Its objective was to create a salient spanning into German territory with a bridgehead over the Nederrijn (Lower Rhine River), creating an Allied invasion route into northern Germany. This was to be achieved by two sub-operations: seizing nine bridges with combined American, British and Polish airborne forces (\"Market\") followed by British land forces swiftly following over the bridges (\"Garden\").\nThe airborne operation was undertaken by the First Allied Airborne Army with the land operation by the British Second Army, with XXX Corps moving up the centre supported by VIII and XII Corps on their flanks. The airborne soldiers, consisting of paratroops and glider-borne troops numbering around 35,000\u201340,000, were dropped at sites where they could capture key bridges and hold the terrain until the land forces arrived. The land forces consisted of ten armoured and motorised brigades with approximately 800 tanks and 50,000 soldiers. The land forces advanced from the south along a single road partly surrounded by flood plain on both sides. The plan anticipated that they would cover the from their start at the Belgian\u2013Dutch border to the Arnhem bridge across the Lower Rhine in 48 hours. About 100,000 German soldiers were in the vicinity to oppose the allied offensive. It was the largest airborne operation of the war up to that point.\nThe operation succeeded in capturing the Dutch cities of Eindhoven and Nijmegen along with many towns, and a few V-2 rocket launching sites. It failed in its most important objective: securing the bridge over the Rhine at Arnhem. The British 1st Airborne Division was unable to secure the bridge and was withdrawn from the north side of the Rhine after suffering 8,000 dead, missing, and captured out of a complement of 10,000 men. When the retreat order came there were not enough boats to get everyone back across the river. The Germans subsequently rounded up most of those left behind, but some of the British and Polish paratroopers managed to avoid capture by the Germans and were sheltered by the Dutch underground until they could be rescued in Operation Pegasus on 22 October 1944. Historians have been critical of the planning and execution of Operation Market Garden. Antony Beevor said that Market Garden \"was a bad plan right from the start and right from the top\".\nThe Germans counterattacked the Nijmegen salient but failed to retake any of the Allied gains. Arnhem was finally captured by the Allies in April 1945, towards the end of the war.\nGeography.\nHighway 69 (later nicknamed \"Hell's Highway\") leading through the planned route was two narrow lanes, partly raised above a surrounding flat terrain of polder or floodplain. The ground on either side of the highway was in places too soft to support tactical vehicle movement and there were numerous dikes and drainage ditches. Dikes tended to be topped by trees or large bushes, and roads and paths were lined with trees. In early autumn this meant that observation would be seriously restricted.\nThere were six major water obstacles between the XXX Corps' start point and the objective of the north bank of the Lower Rhine River: the Wilhelmina Canal at Son en Breugel wide; the Zuid-Willems Canal at Veghel ; the Maas River at Grave ; the Maas-Waal Canal ; the Waal River at Nijmegen ; and the Rhine at Arnhem . The plan was for airborne forces to seize bridges across all these obstacles nearly simultaneously\u00a0\u2013 any failure to do so would result in delay or defeat. In case bridges were demolished by the Germans, XXX Corps had plans to rebuild them. To this end, a vast quantity of bridging material was collected, along with 2,300 vehicles to carry it and 9,000 engineers to assemble it.\nAlthough the area is generally flat with less than of variation in altitude, Lieutenant-General Brian Horrocks, commander of XXX Corps, recalled that \"The country was wooded and rather marshy, which made any outflanking operation impossible.\" Two important hill areas, high, were some of the highest ground in the Netherlands: one northwest of Arnhem and one in the 82nd Airborne Division's zone, the Groesbeek ridge. Seizure and defence of this elevated terrain was considered vital to holding the highway bridges.\nBackground.\nIn August 1944, following the Allied breakout from Normandy and the closure of the Falaise Pocket, the allied armies pursued the retreating German army, expelling it from nearly all of France and Belgium. On 1 September, the Supreme Allied Commander General Dwight D. Eisenhower took over command of ground forces, while continuing as Supreme Commander. Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery resented this change, although the US and UK had agreed to it before the Normandy invasion. He had been the commander of ground forces and the change resulted in his former subordinate, Omar Bradley, becoming his equal. Montgomery continued to command the 21st Army Group, consisting mainly of British and Canadian units.\nLogistics.\nBy late August the allied armies were running out of petroleum gasoline. Several allied divisions and corps were forced to halt their advance temporarily to replenish supplies. To Eisenhower fell the task of responding to competing demands for fuel and other supplies for the armies under his command. There was no shortage of fuel in the makeshift ports in Normandy; the difficulty lay in transporting sufficient quantities from Normandy to the armies in Belgium and northern France. Most arrived at the front in five gallon jerry cans after being transported hundreds of kilometres by trucks, known as the Red Ball Express, from makeshift ports in Normandy. A potential solution to the logistics problem was to capture a large port more accessible to the advancing allied armies. On 4 September, Montgomery's troops did just that, capturing the massive port of Antwerp in Belgium virtually intact. However, the Scheldt Estuary leading to it was still under German control preventing its use. Neither Eisenhower nor Montgomery initially made opening the port of Antwerp a top priority and Antwerp was not used by allied supply ships until 28 November after the Battle of the Scheldt. The allied failure to win access quickly to the port of Antwerp has been called \"one of the greatest tactical mistakes of the war\". Winston Churchill later acknowledged that \"clearing the Scheldt Estuary and opening the port of Antwerp had been delayed for the sake of the Arnhem thrust. Thereafter it was given first priority.\"\nStrategy.\nEisenhower proposed a \"broad front strategy\" in which the allied armies of Montgomery in Belgium and Bradley further south in France advanced in parallel on a front several hundred miles wide into Germany. Montgomery\u00a0\u2013 and Bradley's aggressive subordinate, George S. Patton\u00a0\u2013 both desired a concentration of forces, a \"single thrust\" forward into Germany, but each man saw himself as the leader of a single thrust. Montgomery said the allied strategy should be \"one powerful full-blooded thrust across the Rhine and into the heart of Germany backed by the whole of the resources of the Allied Armies\". Such a policy would relegate Bradley's American armies to a \"purely static role\". On his part, Patton said that with 400,000 gallons of gasoline he could be in Germany in two days. War planners saw both men's proposals as tactically and logistically infeasible.\nWhile agreeing that Montgomery's drive towards the industrial district of the Ruhr in Germany should have priority, Eisenhower still thought it was important to \"get Patton moving again\". This strategy was contested by Montgomery, who argued that with the supply situation deteriorating, he would not be able to reach the Ruhr, but \"a relocation of our present resources of every description \"would\" be adequate to get \"one\" thrust to Berlin\". Montgomery initially suggested \"Operation Comet\", a limited airborne \"coup de main\" operation that was to be launched on 2 September 1944. Comet envisioned using British and Polish airborne forces to capture several bridges en route to the Rhine. However several days of poor weather and Montgomery's concerns over increasing levels of German resistance caused him to postpone the operation and then cancel it on 10 September.\nMontgomery replaced Comet with Market Garden, a more ambitious plan to bypass the West Wall or Siegfried Line of German defenses by hooking around its northern end and securing a crossing of the Rhine River, thereby gaining a path to the Ruhr. Another factor was the existence of V-2 sites in the Netherlands which were launching rocket strikes on London. On 10 September Dempsey, the British Second Army commander, told Montgomery that he had doubts about this plan. Montgomery replied that he had just received an order from the British government that the V-2 launch sites around The Hague should be neutralised and that the plan must therefore proceed.\nThat same day, angered by Eisenhower's reluctance to give his plan the priority he desired, Montgomery met with him inside Eisenhower's plane shortly after it arrived at the Brussels airport. Montgomery tore a file of Eisenhower's messages to shreds in front of him, argued for a concentrated northern thrust, and demanded priority in supplies. So fierce and unrestrained was Montgomery's language that Eisenhower reached out, patted Montgomery's knee, and said, \"Steady, Monty! You can't talk to me like that. I'm your boss.\"\nEisenhower allegedly told Montgomery why a \"single thrust\" toward Berlin was not feasible:\nWhat you're proposing is this \u2013 if I give you all the supplies you want, you could go straight to Berlin \u2013 right straight (500 miles) to Berlin? Monty, you're nuts. You can't do it... If you try a long column like that in a single thrust you'd have to throw off division after division to protect your flanks from attack.\nNevertheless, Eisenhower consented to Operation Market Garden, giving it \"limited priority\" in terms of supplies \u2013 but only as part of an advance on a broad front. Eisenhower promised that aircraft and trucks would deliver an additional 1,000 tons of supplies daily to Montgomery for Market Garden.\nEisenhower was also under pressure from the United States to use the First Allied Airborne Army as soon as possible. After Normandy, most of the airborne forces had been withdrawn to England, re-forming into the First Allied Airborne Army of two British and three US airborne divisions, the Polish 1st Independent Parachute Brigade, and the air-portable 52nd Infantry Division. Eighteen airborne operations had been proposed, then cancelled, when the rapidly moving Allied ground forces overran the intended drop zones. Eisenhower believed that the use of the airborne forces might provide the push needed for the allies to cross the Rhine.\nThe plan.\nThe plan of action consisted of two operations:\nMarket.\nMarket would employ four of the six divisions of the First Allied Airborne Army. The U.S. 101st Airborne Division, under Major General Maxwell D. Taylor, would drop in two locations just north of XXX Corps to take the bridges north of Eindhoven at Son and Veghel. The 82nd Airborne Division, under Brigadier General James M. Gavin, would drop northeast of them to take the bridges at Grave and Nijmegen and the British 1st Airborne Division, under Major-General Roy Urquhart, with the Polish 1st Independent Parachute Brigade, under Major General Stanis\u0142aw Sosabowski, attached, would drop at the extreme north end of the route, capturing the road bridge at Arnhem and the rail bridge at Oosterbeek. To permit unrestricted bombing between Nijmegen and Arnhem, 1st Airborne Division would not send forces south to link up with 82nd Airborne Division. The 52nd (Lowland) Infantry Division would be flown to the captured Deelen Airfield north of Arnhem on D+5. (In the event, Deelen was not captured and 52nd Division never flew in.) On D+1, Brereton told Ridgway that once 52nd Division had landed, XVIII Airborne Corps headquarters would fly in to assume command of the two US divisions. I Airborne Corps would then command only 1st Airborne Division, 52nd Division, and the Polish Brigade. No one told Browning about this change.\nThe First Allied Airborne Army had been created on 16 August as the result of British requests for a coordinated headquarters for airborne operations, a concept approved by General Eisenhower on 20 June. The British had strongly hinted that a British officer \u2013 Browning in particular \u2013 be appointed its commander. Browning for his part decided to bring his entire staff with him on the operation to establish his field HQ using the much-needed 32 Airspeed Horsa gliders for administrative personnel, and six Waco CG-4A gliders for U.S. Signals' personnel. Since the bulk of both troops and aircraft were American, Brereton, a U.S. Army Air Forces officer, was named by Eisenhower on 16 July and appointed by SHAEF on 2 August. Brereton had no experience in airborne operations but had extensive command experience at the air force level in several theaters, most recently as commander of Ninth Air Force, which gave him a working knowledge of the operations of IX Troop Carrier Command.\nMarket would be the largest airborne operation in history, delivering over 34,600 men of the 101st, 82nd and 1st Airborne Divisions and the Polish Brigade. 14,589 troops were landed by glider and 20,011 by parachute. Gliders also brought in 1,736 vehicles and 263 artillery pieces. 3,342 tons of ammunition and other supplies were brought by glider and parachute drop.\nTo deliver its 36 battalions of airborne infantry and their support troops to the continent, the First Allied Airborne Army had under its operational control the 14 groups of IX Troop Carrier Command, and after 11 September the 16 squadrons of 38 Group RAF (an organization of converted bombers providing support to resistance groups) and a transport formation, 46 Group.\nThe combined force had 1,438 C-47/Dakota transports (1,274 USAAF and 164 RAF) and 321 converted RAF bombers. The Allied glider force had been rebuilt after Normandy until by 16 September it numbered 2,160 CG-4A Waco gliders, 916 Airspeed Horsas (812 RAF and 104 U.S. Army) and 64 General Aircraft Hamilcars (large cargo gliders). The U.S. had only 2,060 glider pilots available, so that none of its gliders would have a co-pilot but would instead carry an extra passenger.\nBecause the C-47s served as paratrooper transports and glider tugs and because IX Troop Carrier Command would provide all the transports for both British parachute brigades, this massive force could deliver only 60 percent of the ground forces in one lift. This limit was the reason for the decision to split the troop-lift schedule into successive days. Ninety percent of the USAAF transports on the first day would drop parachute troops, with the same proportion towing gliders on the second day (the RAF transports were almost entirely used for glider operations). Brereton rejected having two airlifts on the first day, although this had been accomplished during Operation Dragoon, albeit with slightly more daylight (45 minutes) and against negligible opposition. Brereton was concerned that the undermanned groundcrews would not be able to refuel, service, and repair the large number of aircraft quickly enough to perform two lifts in a single day.\n17 September was on a dark moon and in the days following it the new moon set before dark. Allied airborne doctrine prohibited big operations in the absence of all light, so the operation would have to be carried out in daylight. The risk of \"Luftwaffe\" interception was judged small, given the crushing air superiority of Allied fighters but there were concerns about the increasing number of flak units in the Netherlands, especially around Arnhem. Brereton's experience with tactical air operations judged that flak suppression would be sufficient to permit the troop carriers to operate without prohibitive loss. The invasion of Southern France had demonstrated that large scale daylight airborne operations were feasible. Daylight operations, in contrast to those in Sicily and Normandy, would have much greater navigational accuracy and time-compression of succeeding waves of aircraft, tripling the number of troops that could be delivered per hour. The time required to assemble airborne units on the drop zone after landing would be reduced by two-thirds.\nIX Troop Carrier Command's transport aircraft had to tow gliders and drop paratroopers, duties that could not be performed simultaneously. Although every division commander requested two drops on the first day, Brereton's staff scheduled only one lift based on the need to prepare for the first drop by bombarding German flak positions for half a day and a weather forecast on the afternoon of 16 September (which soon proved erroneous) that the area would have clear conditions for four days, so allowing drops during them.\nAfter one week preparations were declared complete. The planning and training for the airborne drops at Sicily and Normandy had taken months. One United States Air Force historian noted that 'Market' was the only large airborne operation of the war in which the USAAF \"had no training program, no rehearsals, almost no exercises, and a... low level of tactical training.\"\nGavin had doubts about the plan. In his diary he wrote, \"It looks very rough. If I get through this one I will be very lucky.\" He was also highly critical of Browning, writing that he \"... unquestionably lacks the standing, influence and judgment that comes from a proper troop experience... his staff was superficial... Why the British units fumble along... becomes more and more apparent. Their tops lack the know-how, never do they get down into the dirt and learn the hard way.\"\nGarden.\nGarden consisted primarily of XXX Corps and was initially spearheaded by the Guards Armoured Division, with the 43rd Wessex and 50th Northumbrian Infantry Divisions in reserve. They were expected to arrive at the south end of the 101st Airborne Division's area on the first day, the 82nd's by the second day and the 1st's by the fourth day at the latest. The precise targets were 17 September: 17:00 Eindhoven and midnight Veghel; 18 September: noon Grave and 18:00 Nijmegen; and 19 September: 15:00 Arnhem. The airborne divisions would then join XXX Corps in the breakout from the Arnhem bridgehead. Guards Armoured would bypass Apeldoorn and advance to the IJsselmeer near Nunspeet. 43rd Division would form IJssel bridgeheads at Zutphen and Deventer. 50th Division would form an IJssel bridgehead at Doesburg. The Dutch Princess Irene Brigade would liberate and garrison Apeldoorn. Montgomery's written directive M.525 gave subsequent objectives:\nFrom this position it will be prepared to advance eastwards to the general area RHEINE-OSNABRUCK-HAMM-MUNSTER. In this movement its weight will be on its right and directed towards HAMM, from which place a strong thrust will be made southwards along the eastern face of the RUHR.\nHowever, Eisenhower just wanted to secure bridgeheads over the Nederrijn and IJssel and had not authorised further operations along this axis. Eisenhower had also stipulated on 13 September that the two US divisions were to be released after XXX Corps passed through them, but Montgomery held on to them until November because the operation almost doubled 21st Army Group's frontage and Montgomery needed American assistance to hold it.\nFour days was a long time for an airborne force to fight unsupported. Even so, before Operation Market Garden started it seemed to the Allied high command that the German resistance had broken. Most of the German Fifteenth Army in the area appeared to be fleeing from the Canadians and they were known to have no panzer divisions. It was thought that XXX Corps would face limited resistance on their route up Highway 69 and little armour. Meanwhile, the German defenders would be spread out over trying to contain the pockets of airborne forces, from the Second Army in the south to Arnhem in the north.\nGerman preparation.\nThe rout of the \"Wehrmacht\" during July and August led the Allies to believe that the German army was a spent force unable to reconstitute its shattered units. During those two months the \"Wehrmacht\" had suffered a string of defeats with heavy losses. Between 6 June and 14 August it had suffered 23,019 killed in action, 198,616 missing or taken prisoner and 67,240 wounded. Many of the formations the \"Wehrmacht\" had at the beginning of the Normandy campaign had been annihilated or reduced to skeleton formations by the end of August. As the German armies retreated towards the German frontier, they were often harried by air attacks and bombing raids by aircraft of the Allied air forces, inflicting casualties and destroying vehicles. Attempts to halt the Allied advance often seemed fruitless as hurried counter-attacks and blocking positions were brushed aside and at times there seemed to be too few German units to hold anywhere. By early September the situation was beginning to change. Between 5 and 21 September, some 65,000 troops of the German Fifteenth Army with 225 guns, 750 trucks, and 1000 horses escaped north across the Scheldt Estuary using a flotilla of commandeered freighters, barges and small boats. From there they moved east along the South Beveland peninsula to mainland Netherlands north of Antwerp. Another accounting claims that between 4 and 23 September, 89,707 troops, 645 guns, and 6625 vehicles escaped.\nAdolf Hitler began to take a personal interest in the apparent disintegration of Army Group B, which comprised the German armies in northern France, Belgium, and the Netherlands. On 4 September he recalled \"Generalfeldmarschall\" Gerd von Rundstedt, who had been in retirement since Hitler had dismissed him as \"Wehrmacht\" Commander-in-Chief West on 2 July, and reinstated him in his former command, replacing \"Generalfeldmarschall\" Walter Model, who had taken command just 18 days previously and would henceforth command only Army Group B. Rundstedt immediately began to plan a defence against what Wehrmacht intelligence judged to be 60 Allied divisions at full strength, although Eisenhower possessed only 49 divisions.\nModel set out to stop the Allied advance. The German 719th Infantry Division, part of LXXXVIII Corps, was dispatched south to the Albert Canal and Model requested reinforcements from Germany, stating that he required an additional 25 infantry divisions and six armoured divisions. He envisioned a line stretching from Antwerp along the Albert Canal to Maastricht, then along the Siegfried Line and the Moselle River to Metz. Meanwhile, Colonel General Kurt Student, commander of the \"Fallschirmj\u00e4ger\", the German airborne forces, received orders from Alfred Jodl, Chief of the Operations Staff of the \"Oberkommando der Wehrmacht\", to immediately move from Berlin and proceed to the Netherlands, where he would collect all available units and build a front near the Albert Canal, which was to be held at all costs. This front was to be held by the new First Parachute Army, which despite its grandiose name was merely a paper formation. Its units were scattered throughout Germany and the Netherlands and were a mixture of new units in the process of being formed and burnt-out remnants being fleshed out with untrained personnel.\nThough the situation seemed dire, the German front was starting to form into what Robert Kershaw terms \"a crust\". Leadership, initiative, and a good staff system were beginning to create an organised push-back out of the initial chaos. On 4 September, the 719th Infantry Division began to dig in along the Albert Canal and was soon joined by forces under the command of Lieutenant General Kurt Chill. Although Chill only officially commanded the 85th Infantry Division, which had suffered heavy casualties during the retreat from Normandy, he had assumed command of the remnants of the 84th and 89th Infantry Divisions en route. Initially ordered to take his command to the Rhineland for rest and reinforcements, Chill disregarded the order and moved his forces to the Albert Canal, linking up with the 719th; he also had \"reception centres\" set up at the bridges crossing the Albert Canal, where small groups of retreating troops were picked up and turned into ad hoc units. By 7 September the 176th Infantry Division, a \"Kranken\" division composed of elderly men and men with various medical complaints, had arrived from the Siegfried Line and elements of the First Parachute Army began to appear. At this stage the Army consisted of approximately seven \"Fallschirmjaeger\" regiments composed of some 20,000 airborne troops along with a collection of 20 anti-aircraft batteries and a mix of 25 self-propelled guns and tank destroyers. \"Kriegsmarine\" and SS units were also allocated to Student's command, and Hitler had promised Model that 200 Panther tanks would be sent straight from the production lines; he also ordered all Tiger tanks, \"Jagdpanther\" tank destroyers, and 88 mm guns that were available in Germany to be transferred to the West.\nOn 5 September, Model's forces were bolstered by the arrival of the II SS Panzer Corps, which consisted of the 9th and 10th SS Panzer Divisions under the command of Lieutenant General Wilhelm Bittrich. Kershaw, cautioning that his sources were fragmentary, estimated that the Corps had probably been reduced to approximately 6,000\u20137,000 men, 20\u201330% of its original strength in the course of continuous action since late June including in the Falaise pocket; losses in officers and NCOs had been especially high. A more recent accounting found that the 9th SS Panzer Division had 6380 men on 3 September and the 10th SS Panzer Division had 7142 men in early September. Model ordered the two divisions to rest and refit in \"safe\" areas behind the new German line; these areas coincidentally were to be Eindhoven and Arnhem. The 10th SS Panzer Division was to be restored to full strength in order to provide an armoured reserve and thus the 9th SS Panzer Division was ordered to transfer all of its heavy equipment to its sister division; it was intended that the 9th would then be transported to Germany for replenishment. At the time of Operation Market Garden, the 10th SS Panzer Division had an approximate strength of 3,000 men; an armoured infantry regiment, divisional reconnaissance battalion, two artillery battalions, and an engineer battalion, all partially motorised. However, Bittrich said after the war that he only had five tanks at Arnhem. Other formations were appearing to strengthen the German defences. Between 16 and 17 September, the 59th and 245th Infantry Divisions from Fifteenth Army assembled in Brabant, under strength but well-equipped and able to act as a reserve. Near Eindhoven and Arnhem a number of scratch formations were being assembled. Several SS units, including an NCO training battalion and a \"Panzergrenadier\" reserve battalion, were being prepared to enter combat and Luftwaffe and Kriegsmarine personnel were being grouped into \"Fliegerhorst\" and \"Schiffstammabteilung\" formations. There were also a number of training battalions that were being equipped, several depot battalions from the Panzer Division \"Hermann G\u00f6ring\" and various artillery, anti-aircraft, and field police units scattered throughout the north of the Netherlands.\nIntelligence.\nGerman.\nRundstedt and Model suspected that a large Allied offensive was imminent, having received many intelligence reports that described a 'constant stream' of reinforcements to the right wing of the British Second Army. Anthony Blunt is accused of passing information from MI5. The senior intelligence officer of Army Group B believed the Second Army would launch an offensive in the direction of Nijmegen, Arnhem and Wesel with a primary objective of reaching the industrial area along the Ruhr river. He was convinced that airborne troops would be used in this offensive but was unsure where they would be deployed, suspecting areas along the Siegfried Line north of Aachen or possibly even near the Saar. Second Army would assemble its units at the Maas-Scheldt and Albert Canals. The right wing of the Army would be the assault force, composed primarily of armoured units, which would force a crossing of the Maas and attempt to break through to the Ruhr industrial area near Roermond. The left wing would cover the Army's northern flank by moving up to the Waal near Nijmegen and isolating the German 15th Army situated on the Dutch coast.\nAllied.\nA number of reports about German troop movements reached Allied high command, including details of the identity and location of German armoured formations. The UK Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park which monitored and decrypted German radio traffic produced intelligence reports codenamed Ultra. These were sent to senior Allied commanders, but they only reached army headquarters level and were not passed down any lower. Ultra reports revealed the movement of the 9th SS and 10th SS Panzer Divisions to the area north and east of Arnhem, creating enough concern for Eisenhower to send his chief of staff, Lieutenant General Walter Bedell Smith, to raise the issue with Montgomery on 15 September. Having already approved Montgomery's operation, Eisenhower felt that only Montgomery could alter or cancel it. However, Montgomery dismissed Smith's concerns and refused to alter the plans for the landing of 1st Airborne Division at Arnhem. In his memoirs Montgomery admitted, \"The 2nd S.S. Panzer Corps was refitting in the Arnhem area, having limped there. But we were wrong in supposing it could not fight effectively; its battle state was far beyond our expectation.\" The intelligence was not, however, withheld from the 1st Airborne Division. The 1st Parachute Brigade's Intelligence Summary No. 1 dated 13 September said, \"a reported concentration of 10,000 troops SW of ZWOLLE on 1 Sep may represent a battle scarred panzer division or two reforming\". As a result, when some gliders were deducted from 1st Airborne Division's first lift in order to transport the I Airborne Corps HQ, Urquhart ensured that this would not bump any anti-tank guns to the second lift.\nThe intelligence officer of I Airborne Corps, Major Brian Urquhart, received information from members of the Dutch Resistance that the SS Divisions were in the area, although they did not specify if there were tanks. He therefore requested aerial reconnaissance of the Arnhem area. Aerial photographs of Arnhem taken by a photo-reconnaissance Spitfire XI from RAF's No. 16 Squadron on 12 September showed tanks in the area. However, most of the original photos have disappeared and this cannot be verified. The only tanks partly visible in the remaining images are probably a short-barrelled Panzer IV and a Panzer III, both of which were unlikely to be from the 9th and 10th SS. The 9th and 10th SS had Panthers and long-barreled Panzer IVs. The tanks likely belonged to the II./Fallschirm-Panzer Ersatz und Ausbildungs Regiment Hermann G\u00f6ring, which was later located near Son (north of Eindhoven) on 17 September. Fearing that 1st Airborne Division might be in grave danger if it landed at Arnhem, Urquhart arranged a meeting with Browning and informed him of the armour present at Arnhem. Browning dismissed his claims and ordered the division's senior medical officer to send Urquhart on sick leave on account of \"nervous strain and exhaustion\".\nThe 9th SS and 10th SS Panzer Divisions actually had very few tanks with them. 9th SS had 2 operational Panthers and 10th SS had between 5 and 14 operational Panzer IVs. In fact, no German tanks were involved in the battle on the first day. The 9th SS Panthers later fought in the Oosterbeek area (earliest sightings on 19 September) and were damaged on 20 and 23 September. On the 18th, two 10th SS tanks attacked the Arnhem bridge area with Euling's infantry battalion but they were withdrawn later in the day and sent towards the Nijmegen area. On the 19th, the 2nd South Staffordshires encountered a tank that was from one of the two divisions. Field Marshal Walter Model was, coincidentally, in Oosterbeek and it was he who ordered all available armoured vehicles to the area. It was this rapid reaction by the Army Group B commander that resulted in large numbers of Axis armour at Arnhem, rather than the presence of the SS Divisions.\nThe Allies severely underestimated the German ability to reorganize stragglers into effective units. Allied intelligence reported the numerous stragglers pouring into Germany but discounted them. A Second Army intelligence summary from 17 September said, \"[I]t is considered unlikely that any large scale reinforcements can be made available, and the battle now joined will be fought out by the troops on the ground, with the uncertain addition of some troops south of the River Scheldt. They will not amount to much.\" After the war, John Hackett (commander of 4th Parachute Brigade) noted that a German headquarters could take control of a group of stragglers and function as a cohesive and aggressive unit in an amount of time that the Allies thought impossibly short. \"You have never fought in a [real] war, until you have fought Germans.\"\nBattle.\nDay 1: Sunday, 17 September 1944.\nEarly successes.\nOperation Market Garden opened with Allied success all round. In the first landing, almost all troops arrived on top of their drop zones without incident. In the 82nd Airborne Division, 89% of troops landed on or within of their drop zones and 84% of gliders landed on or within of their landing zones. This contrasted with previous operations where night drops had resulted in units being scattered by up to . Losses to enemy aircraft and flak were light; German flak was described in reports as \"heavy but inaccurate\". By the end of the first day all water crossings were 100 percent in allied hands, or German troops prevented from using the crossings, except for the large Nijmegen bridge.\nIn the south, the 101st met little resistance and captured four of five bridges assigned to them. After a brief delay caused by four 88\u00a0mm guns and a machine gun post, the bridge at Son was blown up by the Germans on approach. Later that day several small attacks by the German 59th Infantry Division were beaten off. Small units of the 101st moved south of Son, towards Eindhoven. Later that day they made contact with German forces.\nTo their north, the 82nd arrived with a small group dropped near Grave securing the bridge. They also succeeded in capturing one of the vitally important bridges over the Maas-Waal canal, the lock-bridge at Heumen. The 82nd concentrated their efforts to seize the Groesbeek Heights instead of capturing their prime objective, the Nijmegen bridge. The capture of the Groesbeek Heights was to set up a blocking position on the high ground to prevent a German attack out of the nearby Klever Reichswald and to deny the heights to German artillery observers. Browning, the commander of the 1st Airborne Army agreed with the assertions of Gavin, the commander of the 82nd, that Groesbeek Heights were the priority. Gavin wanted to occupy the Grave and the Maas (Meuse)-Waal canal bridges before Nijmegen bridge. He would attempt to seize the Nijmegen bridge only when these were secure, thus releasing troops for Nijmegen.\nBefore the operation on 15 September Gavin verbally ordered Lt-Col Lindquist of the 508th Parachute Infantry Regiment to send a battalion to the Nijmegen bridge after landing. He had decided that there were enough troops for the other objectives. Lindquist later said he understood he should send a battalion after his regiment had completed their earlier assigned targets. Lindquist's battalion approached the bridge that evening delaying the seizure of the bridge. The battalion was stopped by a SS unit that had driven south from Arnhem. A part of the SS unit returned to Arnhem but found the northern end of the Arnhem bridge occupied by the British 1st Airborne. In an attempt to cross the bridge most of the SS unit was killed, including the commander.\nThe 508th was tasked with taking the long Nijmegen highway bridge if possible but because of miscommunication they did not start until late in the day. General Gavin's orders to Colonel Lindquist of the 508th were to \"move without delay\" onto the Nijmegen road bridge. Lindquist's 508th started jumping at 13:28 with 1,922 men. The jump was perfect with the regiment 90% assembled by 15:00. The commander of 3rd Battalion wrote later that...\"we could not have landed better under any circumstances\". The 508th was still sitting around when Gavin asked them at 18:00 if they had got to the bridge yet.\nThey faced the same disadvantage as the British at Arnhem in dropping many miles from their objective. If they had attacked earlier they would have faced only a dozen German bridge guards. By the time the 508th attacked, troops of the 10th SS Reconnaissance Battalion were arriving. The attack failed, leaving the Nijmegen bridge in German hands.\nCapturing this bridge was vital. Unlike some of the bridges to the south which were over smaller rivers and canals that could be bridged by engineering units, the Nijmegen and Arnhem bridges crossed two arms of the Rhine that could not be bridged easily. If either of the Nijmegen or Arnhem bridges were not captured and held, the advance of XXX Corps would be blocked and Operation Market Garden would fail.\nBritish landings.\nThe 1st Airborne Division landed at 13:30 without serious incident but problems associated with the poor plan began soon after. Only half of the division arrived with the first lift and only half of these (1st Parachute Brigade) could advance on the bridge. The remaining troops had to defend the drop zones overnight for the arrival of the second lift on the following day. Thus the division's primary objective had to be tackled by less than half a brigade. While the paratroopers marched eastwards to Arnhem, the Reconnaissance Squadron was to race to the bridge in their jeeps and hold it until the rest of the brigade arrived. The unit set off to the bridge late and having traveled only a short distance the vanguard was halted by a strong German defensive position; the squadron could make no further progress.\nThis had grave consequences. Five hours after the initial landing, feeling that the British were tied down in Arnhem, the Reconnaissance Battalion of the 9th SS Panzer Division was able to cross the Arnhem bridge and drive to Nijmegen and the bridge over the Waal branch of the Rhine. No British airborne unit was at the bridge.\nArnhem veteran Tom Hicks of 1st Parachute Squadron of the Royal Engineers described the problems the paratroops faced: \"They (the Germans) had guns that out-ranged ours. We had no artillery with us so they could just lay off and pick you off kind of thing. If we wanted to get a gun out of action we had to send a patrol out, do it man to man kind of thing.\"\nTwo of the three battalions of the 1st Parachute Brigade were slowed down by Krafft's 16th SS Panzergrenadier Training and Replacement Battalion, Allw\u00f6rden's 9th SS Panzerj\u00e4ger Battalion, two infantry alarm companies formed from Spindler's 9th SS Panzer Artillery Regiment, and ten half-tracks detached from Gr\u00e4bner's 9th SS Reconnaissance Battalion, which had all quickly established a thin blocking line covering the obvious routes into Arnhem. Lieutenant-Colonel John Frost's 2nd Parachute Battalion, advancing eastwards along the southernmost road into Arnhem near the Rhine, found its route largely undefended. They arrived at the bridge in the evening and set up defensive positions at the north end. They were joined by Brigade HQ, led by Major Tony Hibbert, which was the brigade's only other unit to reach the bridge.\nTwo attempts to capture the arched steel bridge and its southern approach failed. Of the other battalions, the 3rd Parachute Battalion had covered only half the distance to the bridge when they halted for the night, the rear of their column being under attack and needing time to catch up. The 1st Parachute Battalion was similarly fragmented, yet pushed on around the flank of the German line throughout the night. Frequent skirmishes resulted in their making little more progress. The 3rd Battalion under Captain James Cleminson, KBE, MC, ambushed a German staff car and killed the commander of Arnhem's garrison, Major-General Friedrich Kussin, as well as his aide and his driver.\nCommunication breakdown.\nSome loss of communication between the bridge and divisional headquarters in one of the drop zones was expected, because separated them and the main radio was the Type 22 set, with an effective range of . The British radios did not function at any range; some had difficulty receiving signals from just a few hundred metres and others received nothing at all. It was found after landing that the radios had been set to different frequencies, two of which coincided with German and British public broadcasting stations. Other theories have been advanced to explain the greatly reduced range of the 1st Airborne Division radio sets. Thus communication between 1st Airborne units was poor while German defences were being coordinated and reinforced. John Greenacre's study points out that radio communications failures were experienced by the division before, were warned about prior to the operation and provided for by bringing extra field telephone wire. The more powerful WS19HP set was used by the 1st Brigade on D+1.\nThe only means of calling for air support was through two special American units dropped with the 1st Airborne Division. These units were equipped with \"Veeps\": jeeps having Very High Frequency SCR-193 crystal sets. It was found impossible to communicate with aircraft on the higher of two frequencies for this and the sets could not be tuned to the lower frequency. Despite efforts to re-tune them, one set was soon destroyed by mortar fire and the other abandoned the next day, cutting the only possible link with RAF fighter-bombers. The pilots were under orders not to attack on their own initiative, since from the air there was no easy way to distinguish friend from foe; together with poor weather, this led to a lack of air support. After the war it was found that the Royal Corps of Signals was either unaware or failed to tell divisional signals of the communication problems identified in November 1943 due to sun spots by the Scientific Advisor's Office to the 21st Army Group. Urquhart ordered the aerials to be used, which were useless due to the physics of radio propagation. The wrong frequencies were part of the same problem due to signals personnel not knowing the science of radio communications.\nXXX Corps advance.\nOn the morning of 17 September Horrocks was given confirmation that the operation was to take place that day. At 12:30 hours Horrocks received a signal that the first wave of the airborne forces had left their bases within the United Kingdom and set the time for the ground attack to start at 14:35 hours. At 14:15 hours 300 guns of the Corps artillery opened fire, firing a creeping barrage in front of XXX Corps start line that was wide and in depth. The barrage was supported by seven squadrons of RAF Hawker Typhoons firing rockets at all known German positions along the road to Valkenswaard. The advance was led by tanks and infantry of the Irish Guards and started on time when Lieutenant Keith Heathcote, commanding the lead tank, ordered his driver to advance. The lead units of the Irish Guards Group had broken out of the XXX Corps bridgehead on the Maas-Schelde canal and crossed into the Netherlands by 15:00 hours. After crossing the border the Irish Guards were ambushed by infantry and anti-tank guns dug in on both sides of the main road. Portions of the artillery barrage were refired and fresh waves of Hawker Typhoons were called in.\nThe Guardsmen moved forward to clear the German positions, manned by elements from two German parachute battalions and two battalions of the 9th SS Panzer Division and soon routed the German forces flanking the road. Interrogation of captured German soldiers led to some of them willingly, others after being threatened, pointing out the remaining German positions. The fighting soon died down and the advance resumed. By last light the town of Valkenswaard had been reached and occupied by the Irish Guards Group. Horrocks had expected that the Irish Guards would have been able to advance the to Eindhoven within two to three hours but they had only covered . The operation was already starting to fall behind schedule. In Valkenswaard engineers were moved up to construct a Class 40 Bailey bridge over a stream, which was completed within 12 hours.\nHorrocks claimed that the halt at Valkenswaard was ordered by the 5th Guards Brigade commander, Norman Gwatkin, and denied that this was a sign of lack of urgency. They had learned that the Son bridge had been blown and \"They had been fighting hard and tanks require maintenance. In my opinion it was the act of an experienced commander to halt, rest his troops, etc., while the bridge was being repaired.\" Lieutenant Colonel Joe Vandeleur of the Irish Guards recalled that Gwatkin told him to \"Push on to Eindhoven tomorrow, old boy, but take your time.\u00a0We've lost a bridge.\" However, the bridge repairs would not actually commence until 21:00 on 18 September because the XXX Corps bridging material was in the column following the Guards. An alternative explanation is that the Guards chose to wait for units of the 50th Infantry Division to catch up and take over responsibility for Valkenswaard.\nGerman reactions.\nModel was staying at the Tafelberg Hotel in Oosterbeek, a village to the west of Arnhem, when the British began to land in the countryside to the west of Oosterbeek. He rapidly deduced the likely focus of the attack and after evacuating his headquarters, organised a defense. Bittrich sent a reconnaissance company of the 9th SS Panzer Division to Nijmegen to reinforce the bridge defenses. By midnight, Model had gained a clear picture of the situation and had organised the defense of Arnhem. The confusion usually caused by airborne operations was absent at Arnhem and the advantage of surprise was lost. During the operation, the Germans allegedly recovered a copy of the Market Garden plan from the body of an American officer, who should not have carried it into combat.\nDay 2: Monday 18 September.\nAllied weather forecasters correctly predicted that England would be covered in fog on the morning of 18 September. The Second Lift was postponed for three hours and thick low clouds began to develop over the southern part of the battle zone, spreading during the day over the area, hampering supply and air support (Seven of the next eight days had poor weather and all air operations were cancelled on 22 and 24 September).\n1st Airborne zone.\nThe 1st and 3rd Parachute Battalions pushed towards the Arnhem bridge during the early hours and had made good progress but they were frequently halted in skirmishes as soon as it became light. With their long and unwieldy columns having to halt to beat off attacks whilst the troops in front carried on unaware, the Germans delayed segments of the two battalions, fragmented them and mopped up the remnants.\nEarly in the day the 9th SS Reconnaissance Battalion (sent south the day before) concluded it was not needed in Nijmegen and returned to Arnhem. Though aware of the British troops at the bridge, it attempted to cross by force and was beaten back with heavy losses, including its commanding officer, SS-Hauptsturmf\u00fchrer Viktor Gr\u00e4bner.\nBy the end of the day the 1st and 3rd Parachute Battalions had entered Arnhem and were within of the bridge with approximately 200 men, one-sixth their original strength. Most of the officers and non-commissioned officers had been killed, wounded or captured. The Second Lift was delayed by fog and jumped onto a landing zone under heavy attack but landed at full strength. The 4th Parachute Brigade, consisting of the 10th, 11th and 156th Battalions of the Parachute Regiment and commanded by Brigadier-General John Winthrop Hackett, dropped on DZ Y while C and D Companies of the 2nd South Staffordshire Regiment landed on LZ S.\n82nd Airborne zone.\nGrave proved to be well defended and German forces continued to press on the 82nd deployed on the Groesbeek heights to the east of Nijmegen. The 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment defended against German attacks in Horst, Grafwegen and Riethorst. Early in the day, German counterattacks seized one of the Allied landing zones where the Second Lift was scheduled to arrive at 13:00. The 508th Parachute Infantry Regiment attacked at 13:10 and cleared the landing zone by 14:00, capturing 16 German Flak pieces and 149 prisoners. Delayed by weather in Britain, the Second Lift did not arrive until 15:30. This lift brought in elements of the 319th and 320th Glider Field Artillery battalions, the 456th Parachute Field Artillery battalion and medical support elements. Twenty minutes later, 135 B-24 bombers dropped supplies from low level.\n101st Airborne zone.\nFaced with the loss of the bridge at Son, a 101st attempt to capture a similar bridge a few kilometres away at Best found the approach blocked. Other units continued moving to the south and eventually reached the northern end of Eindhoven. At 07:00 the Guards Armoured's reconnaissance regiment resumed the advance, but the Irish Guards Group's infantry and armour waited until 09:00 and 10:00, respectively, for the 50th Infantry Division to catch up. Aalst, defended by three Sturmgesch\u00fctze and the remnants of Kerutt's I./18 Fallschirmj\u00e4ger Battalion, was cleared by late morning. Up the road, recon encountered four of K\u00f6ppel's 88mm flak guns defending a bridge over the Dommel. British artillery failed to neutralize them, so recon was sent to find an alternative route to the east and the Grenadier Guards Group tried to bypass Aalst and Eindhoven to the west. Joe Vandeleur felt this was a good time to take a break, so he halted the Irish Guards column at noon, took a bath in a swimming pool, and drank champagne with a female war correspondent. At 12:30 two vehicles scouting the Grenadier Guards' route linked up with the 101st Airborne at the Son bridge site, but the main body could not follow because the bridges could not support tanks. The Americans told them what bridging equipment was required, the information was relayed back to XXX Corps, and a bridging unit was dispatched. A British recon squadron found a river crossing a mile north of the roadblock and attacked K\u00f6ppel's flak battery from the rear. At 17:00 the flak gunners withdrew, allowing the Irish Guards to reach Eindhoven at 18:00 and the Son bridge area at 19:00. By nightfall, the Guards Armoured Division had established itself in the Eindhoven area. Transport columns were jammed in the packed streets of the town, and they were subjected to German air raid during the night.\nXXX Corps engineers, supported by German prisoners of war, constructed a class 40 Bailey bridge within 10 hours across the Wilhelmina Canal. During the day the British VIII and XII Corps, supporting the main attack, had forged bridgeheads across Meuse-Escaut Canal while facing stiff German resistance. The 50th (Northumbrian) Infantry Division was transferred from XXX Corps to VIII Corps to relieve XXX Corps from having to secure the ground gained thus far. Throughout the day German attacks were launched against XXX Corps and against the new bridgeheads over the Meuse\u2013Escaut Canal, all without success.\nDay 3: Tuesday 19 September.\nArnhem.\nAt 03:00 the commanders of the 2nd Battalion and the 1st and 11th Parachute Battalions met to plan their attack. At 04:30, before dawn, the 1st Parachute Brigade began its attack towards Arnhem Bridge, with the 1st Battalion leading supported by remnants of the 3rd Battalion, with the 2nd South Staffordshires on the 1st Battalion's left flank and the 11th Battalion following. As soon as it became light the 1st Battalion was spotted and halted by fire from the main German defensive line. Trapped in open ground and under heavy fire from three sides, the 1st Battalion disintegrated and what remained of the 3rd Battalion fell back. The 2nd South Staffordshires were similarly cut off and, save for about 150 men, overcome by midday. The 11th Battalion, (which had stayed out of much of the fighting) was then overwhelmed in exposed positions while attempting to capture high ground to the north. With no hope of breaking through, the 500 remaining men of these four battalions withdrew westwards in the direction of the main force, away in Oosterbeek.\nThe 2nd Battalion and attached units (approximately 740\u2013750 men) were still in control of the northern approach ramp to the Arnhem bridge. They had been ceaselessly bombarded by enemy tanks and artillery from two battle groups led by SS-Sturmbannf\u00fchrer Brinkmann and one commanded by Major Hans-Peter Knaust. The Germans recognised that they would not be moved by infantry attacks such as those that had been bloodily repulsed on the previous day so instead they heavily shelled the short British perimeter with mortars, artillery and tanks; systematically demolishing each house to enable their infantry to exploit gaps and dislodge the defenders. Although in battle against enormous odds, the British clung to their positions and much of the perimeter was held. More recent research by Zwarts shows that Brinkmann's unit had left the area and that Kampfgruppe Knaust and I./21 Panzergrenadier Battalion were commanded by Hans-Georg Sonnenstuhl, commander of 10th SS Panzer Division's artillery regiment.\nOosterbeek.\nTo the north of Oosterbeek, the 4th Parachute Brigade led an attempt by the 1st Airborne Division to break through the German lines, but communication difficulties between British paratroopers and General Frederick Browning and the Americans, and enemy resistance, caused the attack to fail with heavy losses. The 1st Airborne Division, scattered far and wide and hard pressed by the enemy on all sides, had lost its offensive capability. Unable to help Lt.-Col. Frost, who commanded the only battalion that had made it to the Arnhem bridge, the remaining soldiers attempted to withdraw into a defensive pocket at Oosterbeek and hold a bridgehead on the north bank of the Rhine after overwhelming German resistance.\nAt 16:00 hours the British 4th Parachute Brigade's withdrawal coincided with the arrival of an estimated 30 gliders at Landing Zone L: 28 containing a portion of the 1st Polish Independent Parachute Brigade and its anti-tank battery and 2 containing carry-overs from the second lift. The lift originally had 35 Polish gliders and 8 carry-overs but had taken losses along the way. Landing Zone L was under attack by \"Kampfgruppe\" Krafft. Most of the gliders made good landings but they had to unload under fire with the assistance of 7th King's Own Scottish Borderers. Of the eight 6-pounder guns that arrived, only three were unloaded. The drop of the remainder of the Polish paratroopers and General Sosabowski was postponed due to dense fog over their airfields.\nNijmegen.\nAt 08:20, the 504th Parachute Infantry Regiment made contact with the Grenadier Guards of XXX Corps advancing north at Grave. This enabled the regiment to move on to other missions and place the 3rd Battalion in division reserve. XXX Corps were from Arnhem with six hours in hand, \"The earlier delays had been made up\". Control of all troops now fell to XXX Corps whose prime objective was to seize the Nijmegen bridge, having two companies from the Guards Armoured Division assisted by the US 2nd Battalion, 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment. The attack got within of the bridge before being halted; skirmishing continued throughout the night. A plan was made to attack the south end of the bridge again with support from the 3rd Battalion, 504th Parachute Infantry Regiment, who would cross the River Waal in boats downstream of the bridge and then attack the north end. The boats were requested for late afternoon but they did not arrive as requested. The 1st and 5th Battalions, Coldstream Guards, were attached to the division. A supply attempt by 35 C-47s (out of 60 sent) failed; the supplies were dropped from a high altitude and could not be recovered. Bad weather over English bases prevented the scheduled big glider mission carrying the 325th Glider Infantry Regiment from taking off, ending any hope for the scheduled reinforcements for the 82nd Airborne.\nWijchen.\nAt 09:50 the 504th Parachute Infantry Regiment was going forward to Wijchen, to attack the Edithbridge from its south end. The bridge was secured. After this fierce engagement they pushed on to the traffic bridge south of Wijchen. Another fierce engagement followed and this bridge was secured.\nEindhoven\u2013Veghel.\nTo the south, the battle at Best continued to rage and sucked in the 101st's reserves. Cromwells of the 15th/19th Hussars arrived in the Eindhoven area at 10:00 and split up to provide tank support where needed. A squadron of Cromwells and two battalions of the 327th Glider Infantry Regiment reinforced the 502nd Parachute Infantry Regiment and defeated the Germans defending the Best bridge site and the Zonsche Forest, taking 1100-1400 prisoners and counting 300\u2013600 German dead. To the southeast of Son, six Cromwells of the 15th/19th Hussars assisted the 506th Parachute Infantry Regiment against Panthers of the 107th Panzer Brigade. Six Panthers of a second group advanced towards the Son Bailey bridge from the east along the narrow canal towpath. They took the Americans by surprise and destroyed an ammunition truck crossing the bridge. The attack was beaten back by bazooka fire and a 57mm anti-tank gun from the recently-landed Battery B, 81st Anti-Tank Battalion and the bridge was saved. The 44th Royal Tank Regiment moved forward from its assembly area this day and would arrive to assist the 101st the next morning.\nOn the night of 19/20 September, 78 German bombers took off to attack Eindhoven. The Allies had no anti-aircraft guns in the city, allowing the Germans to drop \"a clear golden cluster of parachute flares\" and bomb Eindhoven without loss. The city centre was shattered and the water pressure failed; over 200 houses were \"gutted\" and 9,000 buildings were damaged, with over 1,000 civilian casualties, including 227 dead. General Matthew Ridgway, in Eindhoven during the attack, wrote \"Great fires were burning everywhere, ammo trucks were exploding, gasoline trucks were on fire, and debris from wrecked houses clogged the streets\". Elements of the 101st, based in and around the city, witnessed the attack and escaped loss. The 506th Parachute Infantry Regiment rushed into the burning city and rescued civilians during the night. According to Rick Atkinson, this was \"the only large, long-range air strike by German bombers during the fall of 1944\".\nDay 4: Wednesday 20 September.\nArnhem bridge.\nFrost's force at the bridge continued to hold and established communication via the public telephone system with 1st Division around noon learning that the division had no hope of relieving them and that XXX Corps was stopped to the south in front of Nijmegen bridge. By the afternoon the British positions around the north end of Arnhem bridge had weakened considerably. Casualties, mostly wounded, were high from constant shelling. An acute lack of ammunition, especially anti-tank munitions, enabled enemy armor to demolish British positions from point-blank range. Food, water and medical supplies were scarce, and so many buildings were on fire and in such serious danger of collapse that a two-hour truce was arranged to evacuate the wounded (including Lieutenant-Colonel Frost) into German captivity. Frederick Gough took over as commander when Frost left. While leading a remnant group in withdrawal from the bridge, toward Oosterbeek, for a joining with the rest of the 1st Division, Major Hibbert was captured.\nThe Germans overcame pockets of resistance throughout the day, gaining control of the northern bridge approaches and permitting reinforcements to cross the span and reinforce units further south near Nijmegen. The remaining British troops continued to fight on, some with just fighting knives, but by early Thursday morning almost all had been taken prisoner. The last radio message broadcast from the bridge \u2013 \"Out of ammo, God save the King\" \u2013 was heard only by German radio intercept operators.\nWhile it was estimated that the 1st Airborne Division, 10,000 strong, would only need to hold the Arnhem bridge for two days, 740 had held it for twice as long against far heavier opposition than anticipated. While 81 British soldiers died defending Arnhem bridge, German losses cannot be stated with any accuracy, though they were high; 11 units known to have participated in the fighting reported 50% casualties after the battle. In memory of the fighting there, the bridge has been renamed the \"John Frost Bridge\".\nOosterbeek.\nFurther west, the remnants of the 1st Airborne Division were gathering at Oosterbeek for their last stand; those already there were not seriously challenged by the enemy that day. To the east of the village, the 1st, 3rd and 11th Parachute Battalions and the 2nd South Staffordshires were organised into a defensive position. In desperate fighting later in the day, they repulsed an enemy attack which threatened to cut the division off from the Rhine and seal the fate of the bridgehead.\nIn the woods to the west of Oosterbeek the 4th Parachute Brigade fought its way towards the divisional perimeter but was attacked by German troops supported by artillery, mortars and tanks, (some mounting flame-throwers). The brigade had many casualties and the 10th Battalion reached Oosterbeek in the early afternoon with only 60 men.\nIn the rear, the 156th Parachute Battalion fought off numerous enemy attacks before counter-attacking; the Germans did not know they were fighting men who were in full retreat. The battalion, down to 150 men, mounted a bayonet charge to capture a hollow in the ground in the woods where they were pinned down by enemy attacks for the next eight hours. Towards the end of the day, 75 men fixed bayonets, broke through the German lines and retreated to the Allied pocket at Oosterbeek.\nNijmegen.\nThe 82nd did not drop on both sides of the Nijmegen bridge: all troops were dropped on the south side of the Waal river. Hence the Americans had no means to seize the bridge, other than by a frontal river crossing from the south. The only boats available were canvas folding boats (normally used only by engineers) from the British XXX Corps stores. These boats, described at the time as \"Bailey boats\", did not arrive until the afternoon, and with time running short, a daylight assault crossing was ordered.\nAt about 15:00 (D+3), the 504th PIR began the river assault, when members of its 3rd Battalion \u2013 commanded by Major Julian Cook \u2013 were rowed across the Waal, by members of Company \"C\", 307th Engineer Battalion (C/307th) in 26 boats. A shortage of paddles required some troopers to paddle the craft with their rifle butts. Despite heavy fire from the German side, about half the boats survived the first crossing and 11 survived the first two crossings. Before the day was over, some boat \"crews\" from C/307th had crossed the Waal five times, while ferrying across two entire battalions from the 504th. (The costly attack was later nicknamed \"Little Omaha\" in reference to Omaha Beach. The paratroopers took 200 casualties, while German losses exceeded 267.) The paratroopers then proceeded through the village of Lent, toward the north end of the bridge. As German forces withdrew from the north end, tanks of the Grenadier Guards began to cross the bridge from the south, supported by elements of 505th PIR, at 19:30 (D+3). The Grenadier Guards' tanks linked up with the 504th PIR north of the bridge, in Lent.\nThe tanks of 2nd Irish Guards had provided fire support from south of the river. The infantry of 3rd Irish Guards was in reserve under the temporary command of Denis FitzGerald. The commander, Joe Vandeleur, had a severely upset stomach from \"too many raw apples and champagne\" and spent the entire battle sleeping on the kitchen floor of his HQ.\nA perception that subsequent advances by XXX Corps were unreasonably slow has remained controversial. Frost and Hibbert's forces controlled the Arnhem bridge, away for about another two-and-a-half hours (until about 22:00 that night) and some British resistance in that area continued until the early hours of the following morning. However, it was already dark when the Nijmegen bridge was captured, the overall situation was chaotic, and the depth of German opposition to the north was unknown, to the Allies, and even to German officers on the ground. For instance, the 10th SS Panzer Division commander, Heinz Harmel, when interviewed several decades later by Robert Kershaw (a former British Army officer), stated: \"The four panzers (Carrington's Grenadier tank troop) who crossed the bridge made a mistake when they stayed in the village of Lent. If they had carried on their advance, it would have been all over for us.\" Harmel's artillery map, preserved from the time of the battle, suggested that German troops between Nijmegen and Arnhem were extremely thin: there were a handful of security pickets with rifles at the Betuwe midpoint, in Elst. In fact, however, Harmel was evidently unaware that three Tiger tanks, one heavy gun and two companies of infantry had already been heading south from Arnhem towards Lent, when the Grenadier Guards' tanks crossed the Nijmegen bridge.\nSgt Peter Robinson, Guards Armoured Division, whose tank led the advance over the Nijmegen road bridge, stated:We reached the far end of the bridge and immediately there was a [German] roadblock. So the troop sergeant covered me through and then I got to the other side and covered the rest of the troop through. We were still being engaged; there was a gun in front of the church three or four hundred yards in front of us. We knocked him out. We got down the road to the railway bridge; we cruised round there very steady. We were being engaged all the time. Initially, four tanks crossed the bridge with a high probability some of the German explosive charges for demolition would activate. British engineers had cut some charges on the south of the bridge. As the tanks moved over the bridge they were fired on by single-shot, disposable anti-tank Panzerfausts, and had grenades dropped on them by German troops in the bridge girders \u2013 180 German bodies were recovered from the girders with some unaccounted falling into the river below. Once across the bridge only a few 82nd troops met the first tanks as they crossed the bridge. After crossing the bridge one tank was destroyed and another badly damaged, yet moving, and was driven to the village of Lent on the north side of the bridge by the only survivor of the attack \u2013 a Sgt Knight \u2013 who had survived by feigning to be dead. The rest of the crews were killed, injured, or taken prisoner. One tank destroyed a German Sturmgesch\u00fctz assault gun lying in wait. The Guards tanks met the bulk of the 82nd troops north of the bridge in the village of Lent, north of the bridge and in darkness, after clearing out SS troops from the village and setting the church ablaze. It was dark by the time (19:30) the Grenadier Guards tanks linked up with the 504th PIR, north of the Nijmegen bridge. Moreover, on the road out of Lent, on the northern side of the railway bridge, the leading tank met two hidden German anti-tank guns in darkness. Even if the guns were located and destroyed, German troops with Panzerfausts were on the road and four available Guards tanks were low on ammunition. Only one of the four available tanks was a Firefly, mounting a gun capable of destroying a Tiger tank from the front. Three Tiger tanks were heading south to Lent, unbeknownst to the Guards tank crews. Unable to locate the anti-tank guns, the tanks stopped.\nIn addition, German forces were still threatening to retake the north end of the bridge. Many of the Guards tanks were still assisting the 82nd and XXX Corps infantry in Nijmegen. The Guards who were over the bridge could not leave the northern end of the bridge for fear of recapture. At Lent only five tanks were available, including the damaged tank, which now reportedly had a joint UK-US crew: it included members of the 82nd who had prior experience with Sherman tanks. Carrington's tank was stationary, alone, at the northern end of the bridge for 45 minutes, awaiting infantry who were fighting German snipers in the girders as they moved across the bridge. In the meantime, Carrington was attacked by Germans with a Panzerfaust. After clearing the bridge of snipers, the Grenadier Guards crossed the bridge and formed a defence line. The line was reinforced with 82nd troops.\nTo the east, German attacks on the Groesbeek Heights made significant progress. A counterattack at Mook by elements of the 505th PIR and 1st Battalion, the Coldstream Guards of XXX Corps forced the Germans back to their line of departure by 20:00. The 508th PIR lost ground at Im Thal and Legewald, when attacked by German infantry and tanks. To the south, running battles between the 101st and various German units continued. Eventually several tanks and self-propelled guns managed to cut the roads but pulled back when low on ammunition.\nDay 5: Thursday 21 September.\nOosterbeek.\nApproximately 3,584 survivors of the 1st Airborne Division established themselves in the buildings and woods around Oosterbeek with the intention of holding a bridgehead on the north side of the Rhine until XXX Corps could arrive. Throughout the day their position was heavily attacked on all sides. In the southeast, Lonsdale Force (the remnants of the 1st, 3rd, and 11th Parachute Battalions and 2nd South Staffordshires) repulsed a big attack aided by the fire of the divisional light artillery. In the north the 7th King's Own Scottish Borderers were almost overrun during the afternoon but a counterattack with bayonets restored the situation and the heavily depleted battalion moved further south to occupy a narrower front. The most serious attack of the day was made at dawn against \"B\" Company, 1st Battalion, Border Regiment which controlled a vital area of high ground in the southwestern tip of the perimeter overlooking the Heveadorp ferry crossing at Driel, which was the division's only straightforward means of receiving reinforcements from the south. The company was attacked by enemy infantry and armour, including captured French tanks equipped with flamethrowers, and the heights were lost. Counterattacks failed and the remnants of the company were redeployed. The division was left in a precarious position, controlling just of the riverbank. The division held ground to similar attacks elsewhere on their front.\nA supply attempt by RAF Stirlings of 38 Group was disrupted by the only Luftwaffe fighter interception during the operation. Fw 190s intercepted the Stirlings at low altitude and shot down 15. Anti-aircraft fire accounted for 8 further losses. The Fw 190s were able to penetrate the screen of Allied fighters sent to cover the drop when the U.S. 56th Fighter Group was late in arriving in its patrol sector between Lochem and Deventer. The 56th redeemed itself to an extent by shooting down 15 of the 22 Fw 190s as they departed.\nRemainder of Polish paratroopers enter the battle.\nAfter two days of delay due to the weather, the remainder of the Polish 1st Independent Parachute Brigade under Major-General Stanislaw Sosabowski entered the battle on the afternoon of 21 September, delivered at about 17:15 by 114 C-47s of the U.S. 61st and 314th Troop Carrier Groups. Two of the brigade's three battalions were dropped amidst heavy German fire, opposite the 1st Airborne Division's position on a new drop zone south of the Rhine near the village of Driel. The remaining battalion was recalled due to the weather and dropped two days later and away near Grave to avoid the flak. 1003 men had arrived and casualties during the drop and later that day amounted to five killed and 25 wounded.\nIntending to use the Heveadorp ferry to reinforce the division, they discovered that the opposite bank was dominated by the enemy and that the ferry was missing; it was later found downstream past the road bridge, completely unserviceable. Unable to help the British, the Polish withdrew to Driel for the night and organised defence there, with the Rhine behind their backs and German units increasing in strength around them. Several attempts to cross the Rhine on improvised equipment were only partly successful due to heavy German fire and an inability by the 1st Airborne to secure the landing area on the Rhine's northern bank. The 1st Airborne Division made radio contact during the day with guns of the 64th Medium Regiment of XXX Corps' artillery, which had advanced with the ground forces and were assigned to the division for support. Unlike many others, this radio link worked throughout the battle and the regiment provided valuable fire support to the division.\nNijmegen.\nDespite the capture of Nijmegen bridge and the clearing of the town on the previous evening, the five tanks of Guards Armoured Division which were across the river did not advance due to: darkness, one tank having been hit, meeting hidden German anti-tank guns, not knowing the full situation on the road ahead and having to secure the northern end of the bridge until infantry were fully in place. Unbeknown to the leading tank crews, three Tiger tanks and two companies of infantry were heading down the road south from Arnhem to Lent. The division resumed its advance about 18 hours later, at noon in daylight with reinforcements from Nijmegen.\nHorrocks claimed he needed to hold his force as his troops were still fighting in Nijmegen and supplies were slow coming up the single road from Belgium. The Coldstream Guards Group were repulsing an attack on the Groesbeek position, the Irish Guards Group had moved back south to Eindhoven to meet another attack, the Grenadiers had just captured the approaches to the bridge with assistance by the 82nd Airborne paratroops and had five tanks across to support securing the north end of the bridge, and the Welsh Guards were in reserve for the 82nd Airborne. The Guards Armoured Division was scattered over 25 square miles of the south bank of the Waal. Horrocks stated, \"Jim Gavin, the divisional commander, could have had no idea of the utter confusion that reigned in Nijmegen at the time, with sporadic battles going on all over the place, and particularly on our one road to the rear where chaos reigned\".\nThe Market Garden plan depended upon a single highway as the route of advance and supply. This imposed a delay, although the delay was not that great. A problem was that other units could not be deployed on other routes to maintain momentum. Brigadier General Gavin opinioned that this would not have been an issue with firm leadership, although he failed to discuss his own failings in maintaining the set schedule. The historian Max Hastings argued that the delays in moving towards Arnhem \"reflected poorly on the British Army\". Carrington stated that he met no one who \"suggested we should press on to Arnhem.\" The historian Robin Neillands argued that the failure of Gavin's 82nd Airborne to take the Nijmegan bridge on 17 September, was a \"major contribution to the failure of the entire Arnhem operation and it will not do to pass the blame for that failure on to the British or to Captain Lord Carrington.\"\nThe delay enabled the Germans to reinforce the defence already established at Ressen (an SS infantry battalion, eleven tanks, an infantry battalion, two 88\u00a0mm batteries, twenty 20\u00a0mm flak and the remnants of the forces fighting at Arnhem), aided by use of the bridge following their capture of its northern end. The advance of the Guards, hindered by marshes that prevented off-road movement, was soon halted by a firm German defensive line. The Guards spearhead did not have the strength to outflank the line. The 43rd Division was ordered to take over the lead, work its way around the enemy positions and make contact with the Polish airborne troops at Driel to the west. The 43rd was away and there was a traffic jam between them and Nijmegen. It was not until the following day, Friday, that the whole division crossed the River Waal and began its advance.\nThe Germans, clearly starting to gain the upper hand at Arnhem, continued counterattacking all along the path of XXX Corps. XXX Corps still managed to advance with the 101st Airborne Division and XXX Corps holding ground. Glider tugs and cargo carriers delivered supplies to the 82nd Airborne Division. About 60% of the supplies were recovered with 351 of the gliders being counted as effective, partly with the help of Dutch civilians. Most of the 82nd and 101st, reinforced with British armoured units, were engaged in defensive fighting with the objective of holding the highway corridor. Small engagements were fought along the whole length of the corridor.\nDay 6: Friday 22 September (\"Black Friday\").\nOosterbeek.\nThe Germans, wary after unsuccessful and costly attacks the previous day, shelled and mortared the airborne positions heavily. By the end of the battle some 110 guns had been brought to Oosterbeek as the Germans shifted to the tactics that had worked so well at Arnhem bridge. Attacks were limited, conducted against specific positions and even individual houses. Numerous well-sited British anti-tank guns also caused German reluctance to attack. The survivors of the 1st Airborne were outnumbered 4 to 1. The Polish 1st Parachute Brigade at Driel, unable to cross the Rhine, nonetheless forced a redeployment of German forces. Fearing a Polish attempt to recapture Arnhem bridge or, worse, an attempt to cut the road to the south and so trap the 10th SS Panzer Division then blocking the route of the Guards Armoured Division to Arnhem, the Germans withdrew 2,461 troops from Oosterbeek. They were moved south of the river to engage the Polish paratroopers at Driel, making attacks to little effect through the day.\nLink-up between the Poles and XXX Corps.\nThe British 43rd Wessex Division had moved up in order to relieve the Guards Armoured Division. At first light the 2nd Household Cavalry Regiment was sent to establish contact with the Poles via a left hook on minor roads. They sneaked past the Germans at Oosterhout in the fog and then proceeded through Valburg to Driel. The 7th Somerset Light Infantry of the 214th Brigade followed, attacking Oosterhout as the fog lifted and taking it from elements of Kampfgruppe Knaust and Panzer-Kompanie \"Mielke\" by 17:00.\nOnce Oosterhout was cleared, the 5th Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry passed through and drove towards Driel. Whilst passing the outskirts of Elst at the De Hoop crossroads, the Cornwalls came across a column of tanks of schwere Panzer-Kompanie \"Hummel\". The Cornwalls set up an ambush and succeeded in knocking out five tanks (3 Tigers and 2 Panthers) in a combined use of mines and PIATs. They arrived in Driel during the evening. \nLacking assault craft, an unsuccessful attempt was made that night to put elements of the Polish brigade across the river. British and Polish engineers on both sides of the Rhine had worked through the day to improvise a crossing using small boats linked by signals cable but the cable kept breaking forcing the Polish troops to slowly row across against the strong current. The attempt was made under enemy observation and fire and only 52 soldiers of the 8th Polish Parachute Company survived the crossing before a halt was called at dawn.\nEindhoven\u2013Veghel.\nWhile much of the corridor was firmly in Allied hands, German counterattacks were still being mounted along its length. Early on 22 September the Germans attacked towards Veghel in an uncoordinated pincer movement to cut Highway 69. Kampfgruppe Huber of 59th Infantry Division attacked from the west, supported by four Jagdpanthers from 1st Company 559th Panzerj\u00e4ger Battalion. It briefly cut the highway south of Veghel but was cut off and decimated by 1st Battalion 506th Parachute Infantry Regiment, 1st and 2nd Battalions 327th Glider Infantry Regiment, 1st and 3rd Battalions 501st Parachute Infantry Regiment, and B and C Squadrons 44th Royal Tank Regiment. \nAttacking from the east was Kampfgruppe Walther, comprising 107th Panzer Brigade, 16th Battalion Division No. 180, and SS Kampfgruppe Richter. Between Veghel and Uden, the Germans clashed with 2nd Battalion 501st Parachute Infantry Regiment, 2nd Battalion 506th Parachute Infantry Regiment, and 3rd Battalion 327th Glider Infantry Regiment. The Germans took heavy losses and could not enter Veghel to destroy the bridge, but remained close enough to halt traffic on the highway. Horrocks sent 32nd Guards Brigade south from Nijmegen to Uden to assist with reopening the highway the next day.\nDay 7: Saturday 23 September.\nThe Germans had figured out what the Poles were attempting to do and they spent the rest of the day trying to cut off the British in their northern bridgehead from the riverside. The British managed to hold on and both sides suffered heavy losses. The Germans also attacked the Poles on the south side in order to tie them down but several tanks arrived from XXX Corps and the German attack was defeated. Boats and engineers from the Canadian army also arrived that day and another river crossing that night landed 150 troops of the Polish 3rd Parachute Battalion on the north bank of the Rhine.\nTo the south several more German attacks from their position astride the road were stopped but the road was still cut. XXX Corps then sent a unit of the Guards Armoured Division south and re-took the road. The rest of the force to the north continued to wait for infantry to move up, still only a few kilometres south of Arnhem.\nThe 325th GIR was finally delivered to reinforce the 82nd Airborne, originally planned for 19 September, and while it was immediately 75% effective, arrived far too late to affect the battle in that sector.\nDay 8: Sunday 24 September.\nAnother German force cut the road to the south of Veghel and set up defensive positions for the night. It was not clear to the Allies at this point how much of a danger this represented but the principal objective of Operation Market Garden, i.e. the Allied crossing of the Rhine, was abandoned this day and the decision made to go over to the defensive with a new front line in Nijmegen. Nonetheless, an attempt was made on Sunday night to reinforce the 1st Airborne Division with the 4th Battalion, The Dorsetshire Regiment. Two companies were put across the river but the location of the crossing point was ill-advised and the Dorsets landed among German positions. Fragmented by their landing and immediately pinned down, of the 315 men who crossed only 75 reached Oosterbeek; the remainder were taken prisoner. As a result of this failure, it was decided to withdraw the 1st Airborne Division from its bridgehead on the northern side of the Rhine.\nDay 9: Monday 25 September.\nAt dawn the 1st Airborne Division received their orders to withdraw across the Rhine; this was called \"Operation Berlin\". This could not be done until nightfall and in the meantime the division struggled to survive. In a departure from their cautious attritional tactics of the previous days, the Germans formed two potent SS battlegroups and made a significant thrust along a narrow front in the eastern sector. This succeeded in breaking through the thin front line and for a time the division was in peril. The attack met with increasing resistance as it pushed deeper into the British lines and was finally broken up by a heavy bombardment of the 64th Medium Regiment.\nEmploying every ruse to give the Germans the impression that their positions were unchanged, the 1st Airborne Division began its withdrawal at 22:00. British and Canadian engineer units ferried the troops across the Rhine, covered by the Polish 3rd Parachute Battalion on the north bank. By early the next morning they had withdrawn 2,398 survivors, leaving 300 men to surrender on the north bank at first light, when German fire prevented their rescue. Of approximately 10,600 men of the 1st Airborne Division and other units who fought north of the Rhine, 1,485 had died and 6,414 were taken prisoner of whom one third were wounded.\nTo the south the newly arrived 50th (Northumbrian) Infantry Division attacked the Germans holding the highway and secured it by the next day. The German bridgehead on the island by this time initially encompassed the villages of Elden, Elst, Huissen and Bemmel\u00a0\u2013 the latter considered the most important. Elst however was lost on 25 September after several days of bitter street fighting with troops from the 43rd Wessex. Meanwhile, the village of Bemmel was captured by the 5th East Yorkshire Regiment on the same day.\nFurther fighting, 26\u201328 September.\nOn 26 September the Germans then crossed the Rhine in battalion strength and managed to gain a small bridgehead at Randwijk. This was only lightly held by 43rd Wessex Reconnaissance troops but on seeing the Germans were soon reinforced by the Hampshires and Somersets with additional support from tanks of the 8th Armoured brigade. Their intention was to take out the dyke road near Randwijk which was used by the Germans to ferry the crossings. Despite the interference from the Luftwaffe, the British were able to force the Germans out after a final gun battle in the village church\u00a0\u2013 the Hampshires took 150 POWs. The German bridgehead south of the Nederrijn was effectively destroyed. The following two days saw the 6th and 7th Green Howards attempt to take Baal and Haalderen, two villages both to the northeast and east of Bemmel respectively. This however was a failure. To the south of Haalderen, on the bank of the Waal River, lay a number of brickworks where the tall chimneys were used as German observation points, from where artillery fire could be directed.\nFrom 28 September onwards, the II Fallschirmj\u00e4ger Korps launched a series of assaults from the Klever Reichswald against the Allied positions east of Nijmegen. These attacks were in preparation for a much larger counter-attack planned by Bittrich. Delays in the preparations of 2nd SS Panzer Korps however meant these were repelled as they weren't properly supported by the XII SS Korps, even though they carried out some local diversionary attacks across the Nederrijn towards Doorwerth and Wageningen\u00a0\u2013 these too being repulsed.\nHitler ordered the Nijmegen bridges to be destroyed, in the hope that supplies and reinforcements to the Allies would be hampered, and to enable a German counterattack to retake the bridgehead. Various attempts at destroying both bridges proved a costly failure, particularly to the Luftwaffe, who launched many sorties \u2013 in one day forty-six fighters were lost to the RAF and anti-aircraft fire. Nevertheless, an attempt by three groups of four German Marine Einsatzkommandos (frogmen) set off from upstream from the Nijmegen bridges to place explosives under them. The frogmen then used the river current in an attempt to return to their lines. The operation was a partial success \u2212 the railway bridge was blown up, a span managed to break away from a section and fell into the river, making it totally unusable, but the road bridge was only slightly damaged because the mine had been badly placed. Of the twelve men, three were killed, seven were captured, and two managed to return to their lines. The bridges however were repaired albeit temporarily \u2013 Royal Engineers were able to span a prefabricated Bailey bridge both over the railway bridge and the damaged section of the road bridge.\nCasualties.\nXXX Corps suffered fewer than 1,500 casualties, which stands in stark contrast to the 8,000 casualties suffered by the 1st Airborne Division. On several occasions, units of the flanking British Corps made contact with paratroopers before units of XXX Corps, and fought on to support them until the end of the operation. The higher toll by the 101st Airborne Division reflects the reality that in addition to contending with the local German defenders, they also had to combat German troops retreating from the XXX Corps advance.\nGerman casualties are harder to determine, due to incomplete records. Rundstedt provided an official figure of 3,300, but this has been challenged by historians. Conservative estimates range from 6,400 to 8,000 killed and wounded. Kershaw listed the German order of battle, with between 6,315 and 8,925 casualties. In \"A Bridge Too Far\", Cornelius Ryan estimated 7,500 to 10,000 additional casualties to those provided by Rundstedt, for a final total of 10,800\u201313,300 losses. A contemporary paper by the 21st Army Group claimed that 16,000 German prisoners were taken during the course of Operation Market Garden. The report also claimed the destruction of 159 German aircraft, and 30 tanks or self-propelled guns during the operation.\nHonours.\nVictoria Cross.\nFive Victoria Crosses were awarded during Operation Market Garden. On 19 September, RAF Douglas Dakota Mk. III, \"KG374\", c/n 12383, (ex-USAAF C-47A-DK, \"42-92568\"), 'YS-DM', of 271 Squadron, RAF Down Ampney, Gloucester, piloted by F/Lt. David Lord, was hit by anti-aircraft fire in the starboard engine while on a supply sortie to Arnhem. Fire spread over the starboard wing, as Lord spent ten minutes making two passes over very small drop zones (which, unknown to the crew, had been overrun by German forces) to drop eight ammunition panniers. Just after the last pannier was dropped, the fuel tank exploded and tore off the wing, and only the navigator F/O Harry King escaped. He was made a POW the following morning, spending the rest of the war in Stalag Luft I at Barth, Germany. Lord, the second pilot P/O R. E. H. \"Dickie\" Medhurst (son of Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Medhurst), the wireless operator F/O Alec Ballantyne, and air dispatchers Cpl. P. Nixon, Dvr. A. Rowbotham, Dvr. J. Ricketts, and Dvr. L. Harper of 223 Company RASC, were killed. Following the release of King from prison camp, full details of the action became known and Lord received a posthumous Victoria Cross (VC) on 13 November 1945, the only VC awarded to any member of Transport Command during the Second World War. In May 1949, the Dutch Government awarded Harry King the Netherlands Bronze Cross.\nFrom 17 to 20 September, John Hollington Grayburn of the 2nd Parachute Battalion \"led his men with supreme gallantry and determination. Although in pain and weakened by his wounds, short of food and without sleep, his courage never flagged. There is no doubt that, had it not been for this officer's inspiring leadership and personal bravery, the Arnhem bridge could never have been held for this time.\" John Grayburn's posthumous award of the Victoria Cross was accompanied by his posthumous promotion to captain.\nAlso on 19 September, Captain Lionel Queripel of the 10th Parachute Battalion, though injured in the face and both arms, personally remained as a solitary rear guard after ordering his men to withdraw, over their protests. He was awarded a posthumous Victoria Cross.\nOn 20 September, Lance Sergeant John Baskeyfield's \"superb gallantry [was] beyond praise. During the remaining days at Arnhem stories of his valour were a constant inspiration to all ranks. He spurned danger, ignored pain and, by his supreme fighting spirit, infected all who witnessed his conduct with the same aggressiveness and dogged devotion to duty which characterised his actions throughout.\" Sergeant Baskeyfield, a member of the 2nd Battalion, South Staffordshire Regiment, posthumously received his Victoria Cross.\nOn 25 September, Major Robert Henry Cain, also of the 2nd Battalion, South Staffordshire Regiment, \"showed superb gallantry. His powers of endurance and leadership were the admiration of all his fellow officers and stories of his valour were being constantly exchanged amongst the troops. His coolness and courage under incessant fire could not be surpassed.\" Major Cain was the only Victoria Cross recipient to survive the battle.\nMedal of Honor.\nThree American soldiers received the Medal of Honor, posthumously. On 19 September, Private First Class Joe E. Mann of the 101st Airborne Division, under attack and injured in both arms, \"which were bandaged to his body... yelled \"grenade\" and threw his body over the grenade, and as it exploded, he died.\"\nOn 21 September, Private John R. Towle of the 82nd Airborne Division, under attack and \"motivated only by his high conception of duty ... rushed approximately 125 yards through grazing enemy fire to an exposed position from which he could engage [an] enemy half-track with his rocket launcher. While in a kneeling position preparatory to firing on the enemy vehicle, Pvt. Towle was mortally wounded by a mortar shell. By his heroic tenacity, at the price of his life, Pvt. Towle saved the lives of many of his comrades and was directly instrumental in breaking up the enemy counterattack.\"\nOn 18 September, Robert G. Cole, commanding the 3rd Battalion of the 502d PIR in Best, Netherlands, got on the radio. A pilot asked him to put some orange identification panels in front of his position. Cole decided to do it himself. For a moment, Cole raised his head, shielding his eyes to see the plane. A German sniper in a farmhouse only 300 yards (270 m) away shot Cole, killing him instantly. Two weeks later, he was awarded the Medal of Honor for his bayonet charge near Carentan on 11 June. As his widow and two-year-old son looked on, Cole's mother accepted his posthumous award on the Fort Sam Houston parade ground where Cole had played as a child.\nMilitary Order of William.\nFor gallantry during Operation Market Garden, two units received the highest Dutch military award, the Military Order of William. On 8 October 1945, the US 82nd Airborne Division was awarded the Knights 4th class honour by HM Queen Wilhelmina. The division was also allowed to add \"Nijmegen 1944\" to her battle honors.\nOn 31 May 2006, HM Queen Beatrix awarded the Knights 4th class honour to the Polish 1st Independent Parachute Brigade.\nAftermath.\nGerman counter-attack.\nModel attempted to regain the Nijmegen bridgehead in an effort to contain the Allied offensive and drive them off the Betuwe, also known as 'the Island.' Bittrich led II SS Panzer Korps in the counteroffensive with the aim of retaking Nijmegen and its bridges. British forces now consisted of the 43rd Wessex, the 50th Northumbrian divisions assisted later by the American 101st and backed by XXX Corps artillery. The line held by the Allies was east of the main road Nijmegen\u2013Arnhem, the line ran through Elst, Bemmel and just west of Haalderen down to the Waal River. Commencing on 30 September, the Germans with some armoured support attacked the Allied line\u00a0\u2013 some ground was gained and over the next few days they continued their attacks. By 3 October the Germans had been repelled, suffering heavy losses in the process, including many of the heavy tanks.\nBritish forces from 50th Division then launched a counter-attack on 4 and 5 October, recapturing most of the lost ground, and also capturing the villages of Bemmel and Haalderen, giving extra strength to hold the bridgehead. The 10th SS Division suffered such grievous losses that it was incapable of any offensive action.\nThe Germans made one final effort, this time against the American 101st, who had relieved the 43rd Wessex around Randwijk, Driel and Opheusden. The 116th Panzer Division were beaten back at Driel and were forced to withdraw on 5 October. The following day, the 363rd Volksgrenadier Division attempted to take Randwijk and Opheusden from the Americans, and a bitter battle was fought for the possession of the latter. Opheusden lay in rubble and soon became a no man's land, while the Allies stood firm. The 363rd Division was itself destroyed in the fighting.\nOn 7 October, Arnhem bridge was finally bombed and destroyed by Martin B-26 Marauders of 344th Bomb Group, USAAF. Now unable to ferry heavy equipment across the river, the Germans were unable to mount any further attacks.\nVon Rundstedt gave permission for Model to abandon the Arnhem bridgehead, and thus was reduced to small outposts. In November, the Germans flooded the island.\nDebate on Allied strategy and tactics.\nOperation Market Garden has remained a controversial battle for several reasons.\nAllied tactics and strategy have been much debated. The operation was the result of a strategy debate at the highest levels of Allied command in Europe. Much post-war analysis has thus probed the alternatives that were not taken, such as giving priority to securing the Scheldt estuary and so opening the port of Antwerp. But Montgomery insisted that the First Canadian Army should clear the German garrisons in Boulogne, Calais and Dunkirk first although the ports were damaged and would not be navigable for some time. Admiral Cunningham warned that Antwerp would be \"as much use as Timbuktu\" unless the approaches were cleared, and Admiral Ramsay warned SHAEF and Montgomery that the Germans could block the Scheldt Estuary with ease. The (French) Channel ports were \"resolutely defended\" and Antwerp was the only solution. But the Germans reinforced their island garrisons, and the Canadians \"sustained 12,873 casualties in an operation which could have been achieved at little cost if tackled immediately after the capture of Antwerp. ... This delay was a grave blow to the Allied build-up before winter approached.\"\nOptimistic planning.\nHistorian Antony Beevor said in 2021 that \"Market Garden was a very bad plan, right from the start.\"\nAmong the controversial aspects of the plan was the necessity that all the main bridges be taken. The terrain was also ill-suited for the mission of XXX Corps. Brereton had ordered that the bridges along XXX Corps' route should be captured with \"thunderclap surprise\".\nThe decision to drop the 82nd Airborne on the Groesbeek Heights, several kilometres from the Nijmegen Bridge, has been questioned because it resulted in a long delay in its capture. Browning and Gavin considered holding a defensive blocking position on the ridge a prerequisite for holding the highway corridor. Gavin generally favoured accepting the higher initial casualties involved in dropping as close to objectives as possible in the belief that distant drop zones would result in lower chances of success. With the 82nd responsible for holding the centre of the salient, he and Browning decided the ridge must take priority. Combined with the 1st Airborne Division's delays within Arnhem, which left the Arnhem bridge open to traffic until 20:00, the Germans were given vital hours to create a defence on the Nijmegen bridge.\nAt Arnhem, the RAF planners selected the drop zones, refusing to drop near the town on the north side of the target bridge because of flak at Deelen. Another suitable drop zone just to the south of the bridge was rejected because it was thought to be too marshy for landing gliders containing the force's heavy equipment. However, that same drop zone was selected for the 1st Polish Brigade in the third lift, which suggests they were well aware of its suitability. Urquhart allegedly made his objections to the RAF planners, who were unmoved, even when he informed them that the troops and glider pilots were willing to take whatever risks landing closer to the objectives entailed. Urquhart made the best of the RAF planners' decision and thus the three main landing and drop zones were from the bridge, with the fourth being away.\nHowever, in his memoir Urquhart did not claim to have confronted the RAF planners. He just wrote that he \"should have liked to put in troops on both sides of the river and as close as possible to the main bridge\" and then described the airmen's reasons why that was unacceptable. Sebastian Ritchie could not find evidence of a confrontation in the official records. In 1952 Urquhart told the Cabinet Office historian, \"The RAF, I think, quite rightly were not prepared to fly into this defended zone.\"\nAfter the war Lawrence Wright, operations officer of 38 Group, explained the air planners' reasoning. Parachute troops needed to be accompanied by gliders carrying their equipment and supplies or else they sacrificed combat power. South of the Arnhem bridge, only the Malburgsche Polder was suitable for a glider landing. Ditches, banks, and sparse roads and tracks made the rest of the area unsuitable: most of the glider loads would have been either trapped by impassable ditches or damaged. Unfortunately, the Malburgsche Polder was only large enough for a \"coup de main\" force. It could not handle a parachute brigade's gliders. It was also adjacent to a mixed flak battery of 6 heavy and 6 light guns and very visible from the higher north bank. A \"coup de main\" would therefore only be possible at night, but the lack of moonlight made that impossible so it was rejected. The Malburgsche Polder was considered acceptable for the drop of the Polish Brigade scheduled for D+2 because the flak would have been overrun by the first lift and there would be a quick link-up with the Polish glider forces that landed near the British. Wright's account omitted the mixed flak battery at Meinerswijk (about a mile west of the bridge) comprising 6 75mm guns and 3 20mm guns and the 37mm flak battery of 3 guns near the south side of the bridge.\nIn 1951, Gerald Lathbury wrote a letter to Chester Wilmot giving similar reasoning:\nUrquhart wanted to drop one brigade near the bridge. It would have had to be south of the river owing to Deelen on the north. It was carefully considered and turned down for the following reasons:\nHorrocks was overoptimistic about the speed of the XXX Corps advance, leading him to initially forbid movement by night as both unnecessary and too disruptive. After XXX Corps fell behind schedule (e.g. stopped for about five hours on the 18th by a single flak battery of four 88mm guns), Horrocks rescinded the ban on 19 September with no adverse effects. Two nights had been lost for no good reason.\nThe planners were also overoptimistic about XXX Corps' ability to cross rivers that the airborne divisions might fail to secure a crossing over. They gathered 9000 engineers, the bridging assets of 21st Army Group and XXX Corps and its three divisions, and an additional 2000 truckloads of equipment from elsewhere in the theatre. There was enough bridging material to build two bridges at each water barrier on the axis of advance. Twenty individual bridging columns were formed, each given a single contingency to prepare for. It therefore only required the issuance of a codeword to dispatch the right column for a given job. If the Germans still controlled the far end of a water barrier, 43rd Division would be called forward to execute a river assault and then provide protection for the engineers.\nThis part of the plan fell apart at Nijmegen. Neither of the city's two bridges had been captured by 82nd Airborne Division on 17 September, but 43rd Division was not ordered forward until the 20th and it didn't arrive until after the bridges had already been captured by 82nd Airborne Division and Guards Armoured Division. 130th Brigade arrived by 08:30 on the 21st, 214th Brigade arrived at 11:30 on the 21st, and 129th Brigade arrived at 11:00 on the 22nd. They had not been held up by German attacks on the highway: the German attack on Son was over by 11:00 on the 20th\u2014before the 43rd Division had begun to move. Assault boats from the Guards Armoured column were not ordered forward until the evening of the 19th. The boats eventually arrived around 14:45 on the 20th. \nFour engineering companies and at least one complete bridging train finally arrived at Nijmegen on the 21st and could have been used for a division-sized left hook across the Nederrijn, crossing near Renkum to the west of the Germans. This proved impossible because all of XXX Corps except for 130th Brigade was tied down holding the corridor and the Waal bridgehead. Rather than sacrificing that brigade in a weak river assault, Horrocks and Browning pretended that they couldn't get the necessary equipment forward. Horrocks wrote that reserves of everything XXX Corps needed to cross the Nederrijn in force were still south of Veghel on the 25th. When Browning gave this excuse to Sosabowski on the 24th, Sosabowski \"forcibly told Browning what he thought of British commanders who carried out a major operation across a series of wide rivers without bringing forward a good supply of boats.\" \nAllan Adair was overoptimistic about the difficulties his Guards Armoured Division would face. He recalled that when he arrived at Nijmegen, \"I was surprised to discover upon arrival that we did not have the Nijmegen bridge. I assumed it would be in airborne hands by the time we reached it and we'd simply sweep on through.\" Then after crossing the Waal River at Nijmegen, he was surprised by the polder terrain. \"When I saw that island my heart sank. You can't imagine anything more unsuitable for tanks: steep banks with ditches on each side that could be easily covered by German guns.\" The plan didn't call for 43rd Division to take the lead until after Guards Armoured crossed the Nederrijn at Arnhem, so XXX Corps was either unaware of the difficulty of the polders or dismissed it. Dutch officers stationed at Montgomery's headquarters claimed to have warned the British that tanks would require substantial infantry support in the polders, but that their warnings were politely rejected. At I Airborne Corps HQ, intelligence officer Major Brian Urquhart unsuccessfully argued against the \"unbelievable notion that once the bridges were captured, XXX Corps's tanks could drive up this abominably narrow corridor\u2014which was little more than a causeway, allowing no maneuverability\u2014and then walk into Germany like a bride into a church.\"\nWeather.\nA precarious timetable at the mercy of the weather resulted in the 101st Airborne Division being without its artillery for two days, the 82nd Airborne without its artillery for a day and without its glider infantry regiment for four days, and the British 1st Airborne Division without its fourth brigade until the fifth day. The more time required to complete the air drops, the longer each division had to devote forces to defending the drop and landing zones, weakening their offensive power.\nPriority of operation.\nOn 4 September the British had captured Antwerp and its all-important port facilities. This action had the potential to greatly shorten the Allies' supply lines and trap Gustav-Adolf von Zangen's Fifteenth Army of almost 100,000 men on the south side of the Scheldt Estuary. Instead, Von Zangen's men, with most of their heavy equipment including their artillery, escaped by boat to South Beveland peninsula (Zeeland province, the Netherlands). In September, the peninsula could have been sealed by a short advance of only past Antwerp. On 5 September Dempsey told Horrocks that \"the Huns are escaping from the bag over the water\" and to \"Get a cork in.\" 11th Armoured Division made only a weak attempt before being sent eastwards for Operations Comet and Market Garden. In his memoir, Horrocks tried to shift the blame by feigning ignorance of the German ferry operation and explaining that as a corps commander he was concerned only with tactics and not strategy.\nAntwerp then became the responsibility of First Canadian Army. That army's priority, however, was to capture the Channel ports, because they could be made operational sooner than Antwerp and were thought to have sufficient capacity to support 21st Army Group. Antwerp was thought vital only for the American forces, so making it operational fell to the very bottom of Montgomery's priorities in defiance of Eisenhower's orders of 24 and 29 August and 4 September. Montgomery issued these orders on 9 September:\nCanadian Army\n(a) To take over GHENT from Second Army.&lt;br&gt;\n(b) To capture Havre&lt;br&gt;\n(c) In the Pas de Calais to capture BOULOGNE, DUNKIRK, and CALAIS in that order.&lt;br&gt;\n(d) Then to clear the area of the mainland enclosed in the line BRUGES-GHENT-NICHOLAS.&lt;br&gt;\n(e) Then to capture the islands at the mouth of the SCHELDT, i. e., WALCHEREN and others, so as to open up the port of ANTWERP.\nSecond Army\n(f) To operate northwards across the MEUSE and the RHINE, through EINDHOVEN and ARNHEM, and secure the area ZWOLLE-ARNHEM-UTRECHT. Later it will move eastwards to the MUNSTER-HAMM area.\nFirst Canadian Army was starved of supplies, first because of Market Garden and thereafter because of the Battle of Overloon, in which Second Army slogged eastwards towards the Ruhr. On 9 October, Montgomery was still giving the Ruhr priority over Antwerp and tactlessly told Eisenhower's chief of staff Walter Bedell Smith that it was only the Americans who needed Antwerp, not 21st Army Group. The Battle of Overloon was finally called off on 16 October and Antwerp given priority after an exasperated Eisenhower complained about Montgomery's failure to open the port. On 20 October, 246 Allied supply ships were waiting in European waters, unable to unload their cargo because of the limited port facilities on the continent. The Communications Zone was effectively using the ships as floating warehouses, selectively unloading ships carrying ammunition, rations, and vehicles. Lower priority ships could be kept waiting longer than 60 days. The costly Battle of the Scheldt finally ended on 8 November and minesweeping could begin, allowing Antwerp to become operational on 26 November and receive its first sea-going convoy on the 28th.\nMissed opportunities.\nAfter the Germans took the Arnhem road bridge, the British still had a chance to prevail by building a bridge over the Nederrijn into the perimeter held by the remnants of the 1st Airborne Division. However, the Germans held both the Heveadorp ferry terminal and the Westerbouwing Heights immediately to the north of the terminal. Possession of the heights allowed the Germans to interdict attempts to cross the river into the British perimeter, and the ferry terminal had the only road in the vicinity that led right up to the riverbank and was therefore the only good spot for a Bailey bridge. Horrocks concluded that he could only build a bridge by making a left hook and crossing near Renkum to the west of the Germans, but he was unable to concentrate the necessary forces and bridging equipment before the 1st Airborne's situation became desperate and it required evacuation. Middlebrook criticised Urquhart for not establishing the perimeter with the ferry and the heights securely in the centre. Buckingham noted that this was because Urquhart's absence from Division HQ during the first 40 hours of the battle resulted in the division following the initial plan without considering whether it might be better to defend farther west. By the time Urquhart returned it was too late. Urquhart's chief engineer Lieutenant Colonel Eddie Myers recalled, \"The divisional staff, including myself I freely admit, did not realize how important the ferry would become.\"\nHypothetically, had XXX Corps pushed north, they might have arrived at the south end and secured it (had the Guards Armoured sent more than five Sherman tanks across the bridge at Nijmegen and had they not been later stopped by the German position at Ressen), leaving the way open for another crossing to the north at some other point. There was the smaller possibility of arriving with Frost's force intact. This perceived \"lack of guts\" caused some bitterness at the time among members of both the British 1st Airborne and the U.S. 82nd Airborne. As it was, XXX Corps did not resume the drive to Arnhem that night, but rather eighteen hours later.\nThe commander of XXX Corps advocated another course of action. About to the west was another bridge at Rhenen, which he predicted would be undefended, because of all the efforts being directed on Oosterbeek. This was true, but the corps was never authorised to take the bridge; if it had, it is almost certain they would have crossed unopposed into the rear of the German lines. By this time, it appears that Montgomery was more concerned with the German assaults on Market Garden's lengthy \"tail\".\nBad choices were made throughout the operation, and opportunities were ignored. The commander of the Glider Pilot Regiment had asked for a small force with gliders to land on the southern side of the bridge at Arnhem to quickly capture it, but he was denied. This was surprising in light of the fact that in Normandy, the British 6th Airborne Division had used such coup-de-main tactics to take the Pegasus Bridge. In Britain, the commander of the British 52nd (Lowland) Infantry Division, whose troops were slated to fly into a captured airfield, pleaded with his superiors to allow a brigade to fly in with gliders to assist Major-General Urquhart's trapped forces. Browning declined the offer, \"as situation better than you think\" and reaffirmed his intention to fly the 52nd Division into Deelen airfield as planned. This was probably fortunate, as glider landings on undefended landing zones before the eyes of an alert enemy could have resulted in catastrophe. There was another airfield near Grave and the 52nd Lowland could have been landed there, as the 1st Light Antitank Battery did on 26 September. The Polish 1st Parachute Brigade commander, Sosabowski, was prepared to try a dangerous drop through the fog which held up his deployment but again was refused.\nThe 1st Airborne Division, the least experienced in working as a whole division and the least battleworthy, was given the most distant (and therefore most hazardous) objective and some have argued that an American division would have done better. There were however a number of reasons why the 1st Airborne was the most appropriate choice for Arnhem. It eliminated the risk of damaging the alliance through a British failure to relieve an American division, it gave the 1st Airborne the least complicated mission with the fewest objectives, it would integrate better with XXX Corps for further exploitation, and it was already familiar with the area from planning Operation Comet. \nThe failure of the 82nd Airborne Division to attach maximum importance to the early capture of Nijmegen Bridge was a major mistake. XXX Corps was also criticised for its inability to keep to the operation's timetable. The most notable example of this was on Wednesday 20 September, when the Nijmegen Bridge had finally been captured and elements of the Guards Armoured Division, after crossing, promptly came to a halt for the night to rest, refuel, and rearm. XXX Corps was delayed at Son by a bridge demolition, and again at Nijmegen (having arrived by D+3, within the maximum time estimate, having compensated for the delay to build a Bailey Bridge at Son). The lead unit of XXX Corps, the Guards Armoured Division, was led by a commander (Allan Adair) whom Montgomery had sought to remove prior to D-Day for lack of drive. Montgomery delegated the task to Dempsey, who then asked Adair's corps commander O'Connor to write an unfavorable report. O'Connor had recently taken over the corps and claimed that he did not know Adair well enough to write the requested report, so Adair kept his job. In 1975, O'Connor admitted that Adair \"was not really a flyer.\" Gavin regretted giving his division's most important tasks (Groesbeek ridge and Nijmegen) to the 508th PIR rather than his best regiment, Tucker's 504th PIR.\nIntelligence failure.\nUnlike the American airborne divisions in the area, British forces at Arnhem ignored the local Dutch resistance. There was a reason for this: Britain's spy network in the Netherlands had been thoroughly and infamously compromised\u00a0\u2013 the so-called \"England game\", which had only been discovered in April 1944, therefore British intelligence took pains to minimise all civilian contact. U.S. units, without this bad experience, made use of Dutch help. As things turned out, knowledge of the Driel ferry or of the underground's secret telephone network could have changed the result of the operation, especially since Allied radio equipment failed, having to rely on messengers. The latter would have given the XXX Corps and Airborne High Command knowledge about the dire situation at Arnhem.\nAfter the war, claims arose that the Dutch resistance had indeed been penetrated. One high-ranking Dutch officer who had worked in counter-intelligence at SHAEF, Lieutenant-Colonel Oreste Pinto, published a popular book, \"Spy Catcher\", part-memoir and part counter-intelligence handbook. Pinto, who had made a name for himself in World War I for his part in uncovering Mata Hari, claimed that a minor figure in the Dutch resistance, Christiaan Lindemans (nicknamed \"King Kong\") had been a German agent and had betrayed Operation Market Garden to the Germans. Lindemans was arrested in October 1944, but committed suicide in his cell in 1946, while awaiting trial. In 1969, the French journalist and historian Anne Laurens concluded that Lindemans had been a double agent.\nTributes to the participants.\nEisenhower wrote to Urquhart: \"In this war there has been no single performance by any unit that has more greatly inspired me or more highly excited my admiration, than the nine days action of your division between 17 and 26 September\".\nMontgomery predicted that \"in years to come it will be a great thing for a man to be able to say: 'I fought at Arnhem'.\"\nCBS war correspondent Bill Downs, who was assigned to Montgomery's campaign since the Normandy invasion, famously said of Nijmegen that it was \"...a single, isolated battle that ranks in magnificence and courage with Guam, Tarawa, Omaha Beach...a story that should be told to the blowing of bugles and the beating of drums for the men whose bravery made the capture of this crossing over the Waal River possible.\"\nDebate on outcome.\nContemporaneous.\nBoth Churchill and Montgomery claimed that the operation was nearly or 90% successful, although in Montgomery's equivocal acceptance of responsibility for failure he blames lack of support, and also refers to the Battle of the Scheldt which was undertaken by Canadian troops not involved in Market Garden.\nChurchill claimed in a telegram to Jan Smuts on 9 October that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As regards Arnhem, I think you have got the position a little out of focus. The battle was a decided victory, but the leading division, asking, quite rightly, for more, was given a chop. I have not been afflicted with any feeling of disappointment over this and am glad our commanders are capable of running this kind of risk. [The risks] were justified by the great prize so nearly in our grasp...Clearing the Scheldt estuary and opening the port of Antwerp had been delayed for the sake of the Arnhem thrust. Thereafter it was given first priority\nIn 1948, Eisenhower wrote that \"The attack began well and unquestionably would have been successful except for the intervention of bad weather.\" Eisenhower was isolated in the SHAEF HQ at Granville, which did not even have radio or telephone links, so his staff were largely ignorant of the details of the operation. Bedell Smith's objections were brushed aside by Montgomery, as were those of Montgomery's chief of staff Freddie de Guingand who went to England on sick leave.\nMontgomery claimed that Market Garden was \"90% successful\" and said:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was a bad mistake on my part\u00a0\u2013 I underestimated the difficulties of opening up the approaches to Antwerp ... I reckoned the Canadian Army could do it while we were going for the Ruhr. I was wrong ... In my\u00a0\u2013 prejudiced\u00a0\u2013 view, if the operation had been properly backed from its inception, and given the aircraft, ground forces, and administrative resources necessary for the job, it would have succeeded \"in spite of\" my mistakes, or the adverse weather, or the presence of the 2nd SS Panzer Corps in the Arnhem area. I remain Market Garden's unrepentant advocate.\nOne notable Dutch reaction was:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"My country can never again afford the luxury of another Montgomery success,\" stated Bernhard, the Prince of the Netherlands.\nAir Chief Marshal Arthur Tedder, Eisenhower's deputy, noted that, \"One jumps off a cliff with an even higher success rate, until the last few inches.\"\nMontgomery disparaged the Polish Brigade in a 17 October letter to Alan Brooke, Chief of the Imperial General Staff: \"Polish Para Brigade fought very badly and the men showed no keenness to fight if it meant risking their own lives. I do not want this brigade here and possibly you might like to send them to join other Poles in Italy.\"\nLater assessments.\nThe post-war American official history of the campaign, written by Charles MacDonald, stated that the operation \"accomplished much of what it had been designed to accomplish. Nevertheless, by the merciless logic of war, Market Garden was a failure.\" The operation failed to establish a bridgehead across the Neder Rijn (Lower Rhine) river and turn the northern flank of the West Wall. MacDonald stated that a salient deep had been created in the German lines. This salient created a constant threat of an Allied breakout to the north and proved advantageous when the 21st Army Group launched subsequent operations. While a collapse of the German military in the Netherlands was not a formal objective of the operation, MacDonald wrote that \"few would deny that many Allied commanders had nurtured the hope\" but the operation also failed to realise this. The British official history of the campaign noted that the operation failed, but won \"a valuable salient and a bridgehead over the Waal.\" The official history conceded that these \"had no immediate effect on the Allies advance into Germany.\" The German official history stated that \"In terms of the Allies' original objectives, the operation was a total failure\"; it failed to cut-off German forces in the Netherlands, failed to flank to the West Wall, and ended any possibility that the war could end before the end of the year. The reasons for these failures are stated to have primarily been poor terrain, bad weather conditions, and faulty intelligence. However, the history conceded that the German counter-objectives (\"to hem in the Allied troops south of the Lower Rhine and to destroy them there\") were likewise not met.\nResponsibility for the failure \"began with Eisenhower and extended to Montgomery, Brereton, Browning, and, on the ground side, Dempsey and Horrocks, neither of whom ... galvanised their tank units while there was still time to have seized and held Arnhem bridge\". D'Este notes that Montgomery's admission of a mistake was unique: \"the only admission of failure by a senior Allied commander\".\nRick Atkinson wrote that while \"one-fifth of the Netherlands had been liberated ... the rest would endure another nine months of occupation\", which resulted in 16,000 civilian deaths. Atkinson stated that the terrain captured \"led nowhere\", and that the operation failed to achieve its objectives due to \"an epic cock-up [of] poor plan[ing] with deficient intelligence, haphazard execution, and indifferent generalship\". Carlo D'Este wrote \"What had begun with high optimism had turned into a military disaster\", and that despite the heroics at Arnhem bridge, the operation \"failed to establish a bridgehead north of the Rhine\". D'Este argued that this resulted in a stalemate through winter, which saw lengthy attritional battles that obtained little significant territory and caused high casualties.\nDavid Fraser wrote that Market Garden was a strategic failure. Stephen Ashley Hart stated that the operation was \"partly unsuccessful\", and that Montgomery \"immediately reconstituted the Second (British) Army so that it could launch Operation Gatwick, an eastward thrust intended to reach the Rhine near Krefeld\". This second attempt was cancelled due to the \"precarious state of the ... salient and the failure to clear the flank-threatening enemy salient at Venlo\". Michael Reynolds wrote that \"With the war still in progress, it was inevitable that Market Garden would be presented to the British and American people as a victory.\", but stated \"In reality, it was a strategic failure\" that failed to obtain the desired objectives. Reynolds stated \"The salient achieved led nowhere and was to prove extremely costly in the coming months\", and that \"The seven [British commanders] most directly involved ... bear responsibility for the failure of the Operation. It is also clear that, whilst the German commanders were prepared to take all necessary measures and risk to win the battle, even to point of using men untrained in ground warfare, their British adversaries were [not]\".\nMilton Shulman wrote that the \"airborne operation had achieved some useful results\" by driving a wedge into the German position and \"thereby isolating the Fifteenth Army north of Antwerp from the First Parachute Army on the eastern side of the bulge. This segregation from the rest of the German front complicated the supply problem of Fifteenth Army, which was forced to rely on the inferior crossings over the Maas and the Waal rivers west of the Allied penetration.\" Shulman stated that the terrain captured \"served as an important base for subsequent operations against the Germans on the Rhine\", ensured the Allied forces maintained the initiative, forced the Germans to remain on the defensive and ensured they could not assemble enough forces for a counterattack towards Antwerp, and stated that German Fifteenth Army commander called the loss of bridges and terrain as \"a great embarrassment to us\".\nJonathan Trigg said the plan would have got a red F for Fail at Sandhurst. Eisenhower approved the plan to placate Montgomery. But it lengthened not shortened the war as it swallowed up vast amounts of resources which could have been used far more profitably elsewhere, and gave the Wehrmacht a huge fillip. And it squandered precious time that should have been spent breaking into Germany with an all-arms offensive to bring the war to a close in 1944. See Broad front versus narrow front controversy.\nChester Wilmot stated that the captured terrain was \"of immense tactical value\", which removed \"the threat of an immediate counter-stroke against Antwerp; strategically, however, it was in danger of becoming a blind alley, unless the bridgeheads over the Maas and the Waal could be quickly exploited.\" However, Wilmot noted that the operation failed to achieve its actual objectives, and that Montgomery's claim of a 90 per cent success \"is difficult to support, unless the success of the operation is judged merely in terms of the number of bridges captured.\" Citing the commander of the First Parachute Army, Wilmot stated that the weather was the main contributing factor to the failure of the operation. John Warren wrote that \"the greatest airborne operation of the war\" had \"ended in failure\", which had seen \"all objectives save Arnhem ... won, but without Arnhem the rest were as nothing.\" Gerhard Weinberg wrote \"At the end of ten days of bitter fighting ... the attempt to 'bounce' the [Rhine] had failed by a narrow margin in the face of reviving Germany resistance\".\nSubsequent combat in the Netherlands.\nAfter Operation Market Garden failed to establish a bridgehead across the Rhine, Allied forces launched offensives on three fronts in the south of the Netherlands. To secure shipping to the vital port of Antwerp they advanced northwards and westwards, the Canadian First Army taking the Scheldt Estuary in the Battle of the Scheldt. Allied forces also advanced eastwards in Operation Aintree to secure the banks of the Meuse as a natural boundary for the established salient. This attack on the German bridgehead west of the Meuse near Venlo was for the Allies an unexpectedly protracted affair, which included the Battle of Overloon. After \"Aintree\"'s completion Operation Pheasant was launched on 20 October which saw the Market Garden salient expand westward and resulted in the liberation of 's-Hertogenbosch.\nIn February 1945, Allied forces in Operation Veritable advanced from the Groesbeek heights which had been taken during Market Garden, and into Germany, crossing the Rhine in March during Operation Plunder. As a result of Operation Plunder, the city of Arnhem was finally liberated by I Canadian Corps on 14 April 1945 after two days of fighting. A surrender of the remaining German forces in the west of the Netherlands was signed on 5 May.\nFamine in the Netherlands.\nA consequence of the operation's failure was the Dutch famine of 1944\u201345, also known as the 'Hunger Winter'. During the battle, Dutch railway workers, incited by the Dutch government in London, went on strike in order to aid the Allied assault. In retribution, the Nazi occupation forces forbade food transportation, and in the following winter, more than twenty-thousand Dutch citizens starved to death.\nCommemoration.\nMemorials and remembrance.\nThe prized Arnhem bridge for which the British had fought so hard did not survive the war. As the front line stabilised south of the Rhine, B-26 Marauders of 344th Bomb Group, USAAF destroyed it on 7 October to deny its use to the Germans. It was replaced with a bridge of similar appearance in 1948 and renamed John Frost Bridge (John Frostbrug) on 17 December 1977.\nThere are a number of monuments in the Eindhoven\u00a0\u2013 Nijmegen\u00a0\u2013 Arnhem corridor. A memorial near Arnhem reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSeveral museums in the Netherlands are dedicated to Operation Market Garden, including the Freedom Museum in Groesbeek, Wings of Liberation Museum Park in Best (near Eindhoven) and Airborne Museum Hartenstein in Oosterbeek. Annually there is a commemorative walk in Oosterbeek on the first Saturday of September which attracts tens of thousands of participants.\nOn 16 September 1994, 101st Airborne veterans unveiled a \"Monument for the Dutch\" in Sint-Oedenrode. The monument is a gift from the veterans to the civilians who fought alongside of the U.S. troops, much to the surprise and relief of the U.S. soldiers. The inscription on the monument is in English and reads \"Dedicated to the people of the Corridor by the veterans of the 101st Airborne Division, in grateful appreciation of their courage, compassion and friendship\".\nThe \"Airborne trail\" (Airbornepad Market Garden) was created as a permanent reminder of Operation Market Garden by the Dutch hiking association, (OLAT) ('Hiking Sports Club of the Long-Distance Walkers of Olland'). It is a , long-distance pedestrian hiking trail that follows as closely as possible the path of the liberating forces, from Lommel to Arnhem. It was officially opened in September 2004, during the festivities marking the 60th anniversary of the Liberation.\nA Commemorative Project plaque was unveiled on 23 June 2009, to commemorate the unique military and historical ties between Canada and the Netherlands. A hole, a par five, on the south course (Hylands Golf Course Uplands) in Ottawa, Ontario was named \"Arnhem, in honour of the Royal Canadian Artillery squadrons that took part in Second World War allied airborne Operation from 17 to 26 September 1944. The operation, intended to secure a series of bridges so the allies could advance into Germany, fell short when the allied forces were unsuccessful in securing the bridge over the Rhine at Arnhem.\"\nThe village of Somerby in Leicestershire has a memorial hall dedicated to the men of the 10th battalion who were based there and who did not return. Each year there is a parade in their honour led by the Seaforth Highlanders.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56434", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56434", "title": "Julia set", "text": "Fractal sets in complex dynamics of mathematics\nIn complex dynamics, the Julia set and the Fatou set are two complementary sets (Julia \"laces\" and Fatou \"dusts\") defined from a function. Informally, the Fatou set of the function consists of values with the property that all nearby values behave similarly under repeated iteration of the function, and the Julia set consists of values such that an arbitrarily small perturbation can cause drastic changes in the sequence of iterated function values.\nThus the behavior of the function on the Fatou set is \"regular\", while on the Julia set its behavior is \"chaotic\".\nThe Julia set of a function \u2009f\u2009 is commonly denoted formula_1 and the Fatou set is denoted formula_2 These sets are named after the French mathematicians Gaston Julia and Pierre Fatou whose work began the study of complex dynamics during the early 20th century.\nFormal definition.\nLet formula_3 be a non-constant meromorphic function from the Riemann sphere onto itself. Such functions formula_3 are precisely the non-constant complex rational functions, that is, formula_5 where formula_6 and formula_7 are complex polynomials. Assume that \"p\" and \"q\" have no common roots, and at least one has degree larger than 1. Then there is a finite number of open sets formula_8 that are left invariant by formula_3 and are such that:\nThe last statement means that the termini of the sequences of iterations generated by the points of formula_10 are either precisely the same set, which is then a finite cycle, or they are finite cycles of circular or annular shaped sets that are lying concentrically. In the first case the cycle is \"attracting\", in the second case it is \"neutral\".\nThese sets formula_10 are the Fatou domains of formula_3, and their union is the Fatou set formula_16 of formula_3. Each of the Fatou domains contains at least one critical point of formula_3, that is, a (finite) point \"z\" satisfying formula_19, or formula_20 if the degree of the numerator formula_21 is at least two larger than the degree of the denominator formula_7, or if formula_23 for some \"c\" and a rational function formula_24 satisfying this condition.\nThe complement of formula_16 is the Julia set formula_26 of formula_3. If all the critical points are preperiodic, that is they are not periodic but eventually land on a periodic cycle, then formula_26 is all the sphere. Otherwise, formula_26 is a nowhere dense set (it is without interior points) and an uncountable set (of the same cardinality as the real numbers). Like formula_16, formula_26 is left invariant by formula_3, and on this set the iteration is repelling, meaning that formula_33 for all \"w\" in a neighbourhood of \"z\" (within formula_26). This means that formula_3 behaves chaotically on the Julia set. Although there are points in the Julia set whose sequence of iterations is finite, there are only a countable number of such points (and they make up an infinitesimal part of the Julia set). The sequences generated by points outside this set behave chaotically, a phenomenon called \"deterministic chaos\".\nThere has been extensive research on the Fatou set and Julia set of iterated rational functions, known as rational maps. For example, it is known that the Fatou set of a rational map has either 0, 1, 2 or infinitely many components. Each component of the Fatou set of a rational map can be classified into one of four different classes.\nProperties of the Julia set and Fatou set.\nThe Julia set and the Fatou set of \"f\" are both completely invariant under iterations of the holomorphic function \"f\":\n formula_42\n formula_43\nExamples.\nFor formula_44 the Julia set is the unit circle and on this the iteration is given by doubling of angles (an operation that is chaotic on the points whose argument is not a rational fraction of formula_45). There are two Fatou domains: the interior and the exterior of the circle, with iteration towards 0 and \u221e, respectively.\nFor formula_46 the Julia set is the line segment between \u22122 and 2. There is one Fatou domain: the points not on the line segment iterate towards \u221e. (Apart from a shift and scaling of the domain, this iteration is equivalent to formula_47 on the unit interval, which is commonly used as an example of chaotic system.)\nThe functions \"f\" and \"g\" are of the form formula_48, where \"c\" is a complex number. For such an iteration the Julia set is not in general a simple curve, but is a fractal, and for some values of \"c\" it can take surprising shapes. See the pictures below.\nFor some functions \"f\"(\"z\") we can say beforehand that the Julia set is a fractal and not a simple curve. This is because of the following result on the iterations of a rational function:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem\u2014Each of the Fatou domains has the same boundary, which consequently is the Julia set.\nThis means that each point of the Julia set is a point of accumulation for each of the Fatou domains. Therefore, if there are more than two Fatou domains, \"each\" point of the Julia set must have points of more than two different open sets infinitely close, and this means that the Julia set cannot be a simple curve. This phenomenon happens, for instance, when \"f\"(\"z\") is the Newton iteration for solving the equation formula_49:\nformula_50\nThe image on the right shows the case \"n\" = 3.\nQuadratic polynomials.\nA very popular complex dynamical system is given by the family of complex quadratic polynomials, a special case of rational maps. Such quadratic polynomials can be expressed as \n formula_51\nwhere \"c\" is a complex parameter. Fix some formula_52 large enough that formula_53 (For example, if c is in the Mandelbrot set, then formula_54 so we may simply let formula_55) Then the filled Julia set for this system is the subset of the complex plane given by\n formula_56\nwhere formula_57 is the \"n\"th iterate of formula_58 The Julia set formula_59 of this function is the boundary of formula_60.\nThe parameter plane of quadratic polynomials\u00a0\u2013 that is, the plane of possible \"c\" values\u00a0\u2013 gives rise to the famous Mandelbrot set. Indeed, the Mandelbrot set is defined as the set of all \"c\" such that formula_59 is connected. For parameters outside the Mandelbrot set, the Julia set is a Cantor space: in this case it is sometimes referred to as Fatou dust.\nIn many cases, the Julia set of \"c\" looks like the Mandelbrot set in sufficiently small neighborhoods of \"c\". This is true, in particular, for so-called Misiurewicz parameters, i.e. parameters \"c\" for which the critical point is pre-periodic. For instance:\nIn other words, the Julia sets formula_59 are locally similar around Misiurewicz points.\nGeneralizations.\nThe definition of Julia and Fatou sets easily carries over to the case of certain maps whose image contains their domain; most notably transcendental meromorphic functions and Adam Epstein's finite-type maps.\nJulia sets are also commonly defined in the study of dynamics in several complex variables.\nPseudocode.\nThe below pseudocode implementations hard code the functions for each fractal. Consider implementing complex number operations to allow for more dynamic and reusable code. \n formula_63\nPseudocode for normal Julia sets.\nR = escape radius # choose R &gt; 0 such that R**2 - R &gt;= sqrt(cx**2 + cy**2)\nfor each pixel (x, y) on the screen, do: \n zx = scaled x coordinate of pixel; # (scale to be between -R and R)\n # zx represents the real part of z.\n zy = scaled y coordinate of pixel; # (scale to be between -R and R)\n # zy represents the imaginary part of z.\n iteration = 0;\n max_iteration = 1000;\n while (zx * zx + zy * zy &lt; R**2 AND iteration &lt; max_iteration) \n xtemp = zx * zx - zy * zy;\n zy = 2 * zx * zy + cy;\n zx = xtemp + cx;\n iteration = iteration + 1;\n \n if (iteration == max_iteration)\n return black;\n else\n return iteration;\n formula_64\nPseudocode for multi-Julia sets.\nR = escape radius # choose R &gt; 0 such that R**n - R &gt;= sqrt(cx**2 + cy**2)\nfor each pixel (x, y) on the screen, do:\n zx = scaled x coordinate of pixel; # (scale to be between -R and R)\n zy = scaled y coordinate of pixel; # (scale to be between -R and R)\n iteration = 0;\n max_iteration = 1001;\n while (zx * zx + zy * zy &lt; R**2 AND iteration &lt; max_iteration) \n xtmp = (zx * zx + zy * zy) ^ (n / 2) * cos(n * atan2(zy, zx)) + cx;\n zy = (zx * zx + zy * zy) ^ (n / 2) * sin(n * atan2(zy, zx)) + cy;\n zx = xtmp;\n iteration = iteration + 1;\n if (iteration == max_iteration)\n return black;\n else\n return iteration;\nAnother recommended option is to reduce color banding between iterations by using a renormalization formula for the iteration. \nSuch formula is given to be,\nformula_65\nformula_66\nwhere formula_67 is the escaping iteration, bounded by some formula_68 such that formula_69 and formula_70, and formula_71 is the magnitude of the last iterate before escaping.\nThis can be implemented, very simply, like so:\nif(iteration == max_iteration)\n return black;\nelse \n abs_z = zx * zx + zy * zy;\n return iteration + 1 - log(log(abs_z))/log(n);\nThe difference is shown below with a Julia set defined as formula_72 where formula_73.\nThe potential function and the real iteration number.\nThe Julia set for formula_44 is the unit circle, and on the outer Fatou domain, the \"potential function\" \"\u03c6\"(\"z\") is defined by \"\u03c6\"(\"z\") = log|\"z\"|. The equipotential lines for this function are concentric circles. As formula_75 we have\nformula_76\nwhere formula_77 is the sequence of iteration generated by \"z\". For the more general iteration formula_63, it has been proved that if the Julia set is connected (that is, if \"c\" belongs to the (usual) Mandelbrot set), then there exist a biholomorphic map \"\u03c8\" between the outer Fatou domain and the outer of the unit circle such that formula_79. This means that the potential function on the outer Fatou domain defined by this correspondence is given by:\nformula_80\nThis formula has meaning also if the Julia set is not connected, so that we for all \"c\" can define the potential function on the Fatou domain containing \u221e by this formula. For a general rational function \"f\"(\"z\") such that \u221e is a critical point and a fixed point, that is, such that the degree \"m\" of the numerator is at least two larger than the degree \"n\" of the denominator, we define the \"potential function\" on the Fatou domain containing \u221e by:\nformula_81\nwhere \"d\" = \"m\" \u2212 \"n\" is the degree of the rational function.\nIf \"N\" is a very large number (e.g. 10100), and if \"k\" is the first iteration number such that formula_82, we have that\nformula_83\nfor some real number formula_84, which should be regarded as the real iteration number, and we have that:\nformula_85\nwhere the last number is in the interval [0,\u00a01).\nFor iteration towards a finite attracting cycle of order \"r\", we have that if formula_86 is a point of the cycle, then formula_87 (the \"r\"-fold composition), and the number\nformula_88\nis the \"attraction\" of the cycle. If \"w\" is a point very near formula_86 and \"w\"\u2032 is \"w\" iterated \"r\" times, we have that\nformula_90\nTherefore, the number formula_91 is almost independent of \"k\". We define the potential function on the Fatou domain by:\nformula_92\nIf \u03b5 is a very small number and \"k\" is the first iteration number such that formula_93, we have that\nformula_94\nfor some real number formula_84, which should be regarded as the real iteration number, and we have that:\nformula_96\nIf the attraction is \u221e, meaning that the cycle is \"super-attracting\", meaning again that one of the points of the cycle is a critical point, we must replace \"\u03b1\" by\nformula_97\nwhere \"w\"\u2032 is \"w\" iterated \"r\" times and the formula for \"\u03c6\"(\"z\") by:\nformula_98\nAnd now the real iteration number is given by:\nformula_99\nFor the colouring we must have a cyclic scale of colours (constructed mathematically, for instance) and containing \"H\" colours numbered from 0 to \"H\"\u22121 (\"H\" = 500, for instance). We multiply the real number formula_84 by a fixed real number determining the density of the colours in the picture, and take the integral part of this number modulo \"H\".\nThe definition of the potential function and our way of colouring presuppose that the cycle is attracting, that is, not neutral. If the cycle is neutral, we cannot colour the Fatou domain in a natural way. As the terminus of the iteration is a revolving movement, we can, for instance, colour by the minimum distance from the cycle left fixed by the iteration.\nField lines.\nIn each Fatou domain (that is not neutral) there are two systems of lines orthogonal to each other: the \"equipotential lines\" (for the potential function or the real iteration number) and the \"field lines\".\nIf we colour the Fatou domain according to the iteration number (and \"not\" the real iteration number formula_84, as defined in the previous section), the bands of iteration show the course of the equipotential lines. If the iteration is towards \u221e (as is the case with the outer Fatou domain for the usual iteration formula_102), we can easily show the course of the field lines, namely by altering the colour according as the last point in the sequence of iteration is above or below the \"x\"-axis (first picture), but in this case (more precisely: when the Fatou domain is super-attracting) we cannot draw the field lines coherently - at least not by the method we describe here. In this case a field line is also called an external ray.\nLet \"z\" be a point in the attracting Fatou domain. If we iterate \"z\" a large number of times, the terminus of the sequence of iteration is a finite cycle \"C\", and the Fatou domain is (by definition) the set of points whose sequence of iteration converges towards \"C\". The field lines issue from the points of \"C\" and from the (infinite number of) points that iterate \"into\" a point of \"C\". And they end on the Julia set in points that are non-chaotic (that is, generating a finite cycle). Let \"r\" be the order of the cycle \"C\" (its number of points) and let formula_86 be a point in \"C\". We have formula_104 (the r-fold composition), and we define the complex number \u03b1 by\nformula_105\nIf the points of \"C\" are formula_106, \u03b1 is the product of the \"r\" numbers formula_107. The real number 1/|\u03b1| is the \"attraction\" of the cycle, and our assumption that the cycle is neither neutral nor super-attracting, means that 1 &lt; &lt; \u221e. The point formula_86 is a fixed point for formula_109, and near this point the map formula_109 has (in connection with field lines) character of a rotation with the argument \u03b2 of \u03b1 (that is, formula_111).\nIn order to colour the Fatou domain, we have chosen a small number \u03b5 and set the sequences of iteration formula_112 to stop when formula_93, and we colour the point \"z\" according to the number \"k\" (or the real iteration number, if we prefer a smooth colouring). If we choose a direction from formula_86 given by an angle \"\u03b8\", the field line issuing from formula_86 in this direction consists of the points \"z\" such that the argument \"\u03c8\" of the number formula_116 satisfies the condition that\nformula_117\nFor if we pass an iteration band in the direction of the field lines (and away from the cycle), the iteration number \"k\" is increased by 1 and the number \u03c8 is increased by \u03b2, therefore the number formula_118 is constant along the field line.\nA colouring of the field lines of the Fatou domain means that we colour the spaces between pairs of field lines: we choose a number of regularly situated directions issuing from formula_86, and in each of these directions we choose two directions around this direction. As it can happen that the two field lines of a pair do not end in the same point of the Julia set, our coloured field lines can ramify (endlessly) in their way towards the Julia set. We can colour on the basis of the distance to the center line of the field line, and we can mix this colouring with the usual colouring. Such pictures can be very decorative (second picture).\nA coloured field line (the domain between two field lines) is divided up by the iteration bands, and such a part can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with the unit square: the one coordinate is (calculated from) the distance from one of the bounding field lines, the other is (calculated from) the distance from the inner of the bounding iteration bands (this number is the non-integral part of the real iteration number). Therefore, we can put pictures into the field lines (third picture).\nPlotting the Julia set.\nMethods : \nUsing backwards (inverse) iteration (IIM).\n \nAs mentioned above, the Julia set can be found as the set of limit points of the set of pre-images of (essentially) any given point. So we can try to plot the Julia set of a given function as follows. Start with any point \"z\" we know to be in the Julia set, such as a repelling periodic point, and compute all pre-images of \"z\" under some high iterate formula_120 of \"f\".\nUnfortunately, as the number of iterated pre-images grows exponentially, this is not feasible computationally. However, we can adjust this method, in a similar way as the \"random game\" method for iterated function systems. That is, in each step, we choose at random one of the inverse images of \"f\".\nFor example, for the quadratic polynomial \"fc\", the backwards iteration is described by\nformula_121\nAt each step, one of the two square roots is selected at random.\nNote that certain parts of the Julia set are quite difficult to access with the reverse Julia algorithm. For this reason, one must modify IIM/J ( it is called MIIM/J) or use other methods to produce better images.\nUsing DEM/J.\nAs a Julia set is infinitely thin we cannot draw it effectively by backwards iteration from the pixels. It will appear fragmented because of the impracticality of examining infinitely many startpoints. Since the iteration count changes vigorously near the Julia set, a partial solution is to imply the outline of the set from the nearest color contours, but the set will tend to look muddy.\nA better way to draw the Julia set in black and white is to estimate the distance of pixels (DEM) from the set and to color every pixel whose center is close to the set. The formula for the distance estimation is derived from the formula for the potential function \"\u03c6\"(\"z\"). When the equipotential lines for \"\u03c6\"(\"z\") lie close, the number formula_122 is large, and conversely, therefore the equipotential lines for the function formula_123 should lie approximately regularly. It has been proven that the value found by this formula (up to a constant factor) converges towards the true distance for z converging towards the Julia set.\nWe assume that \"f\"(\"z\") is rational, that is, formula_5 where \"p\"(\"z\") and \"q\"(\"z\") are complex polynomials of degrees \"m\" and \"n\", respectively, and we have to find the derivative of the above expressions for \"\u03c6\"(\"z\"). And as it is only formula_77 that varies, we must calculate the derivative formula_126 of formula_77 with respect to \"z\". But as formula_128 (the \"k\"-fold composition), formula_126 is the product of the numbers formula_130, and this sequence can be calculated recursively by formula_131, starting with formula_132 (\"before\" the calculation of the next iteration formula_133).\nFor iteration towards \u221e (more precisely when \"m\" \u2265 \"n\" + 2, so that \u221e is a super-attracting fixed point), we have\nformula_134\n(\"d\" = \"m\" \u2212 \"n\") and consequently:\nformula_135\nFor iteration towards a finite attracting cycle (that is not super-attracting) containing the point &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and having order \"r\", we have\nformula_136\nand consequently:\nformula_137\nFor a super-attracting cycle, the formula is:\nformula_138\nWe calculate this number when the iteration stops. Note that the distance estimation is independent of the attraction of the cycle. This means that it has meaning for transcendental functions of \"degree infinity\" (e.g. sin(\"z\") and tan(\"z\")).\nBesides drawing of the boundary, the distance function can be introduced as a 3rd dimension to create a solid fractal landscape.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56435", "revid": "2542622", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56435", "title": "Obesity", "text": "Medical condition of excess body fat\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nObesity is a medical condition, considered by multiple organizations to be a disease, in which excess body fat has accumulated to such an extent that it can have negative effects on health. People are classified as obese when their body mass index (BMI)\u2014a person's weight divided by the square of the person's height\u2014is over ; the range is defined as overweight. Some East Asian countries use lower values to calculate obesity. Obesity is a major cause of disability and is correlated with various diseases and conditions, particularly cardiovascular diseases, type 2 diabetes, obstructive sleep apnea, certain types of cancer, and osteoarthritis.\nObesity has individual, socioeconomic, and environmental causes. Some known causes are diet, low physical activity, automation, urbanization, genetic susceptibility, medications, mental disorders, economic policies, endocrine disorders, and exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals.\nWhile many people with obesity attempt to lose weight and are often successful, maintaining weight loss long-term is rare. Obesity prevention requires a complex approach, including interventions at medical, societal, community, family, and individual levels. Changes to diet as well as exercising are the main treatments recommended by health professionals. Diet quality can be improved by reducing the consumption of energy-dense foods, such as those high in fat or sugars, and by increasing the intake of dietary fiber. The World Health Organization stresses that the disease is a societal responsibility and that these dietary choices should be made the most available, affordable, and accessible options. Medications can be used, along with a suitable diet, to reduce appetite or decrease fat absorption. If diet, exercise, and medication are not effective, a gastric balloon or surgery may be performed to reduce stomach volume or length of the intestines, leading to feeling full earlier, or a reduced ability to absorb nutrients from food. Metabolic surgery promotes weight loss not only by reducing caloric intake but also by inducing sustained changes in the secretion of gut hormones involved in appetite and metabolic regulation.\nObesity is a leading preventable cause of death worldwide, with increasing rates in adults and children. In 2022, over 1 billion people lived with obesity worldwide (879 million adults and 159 million children), representing more than a double of adult cases (and four times higher than cases among children) registered in 1990. Obesity is more common in women than in men. Obesity is stigmatized in most of the world. Conversely, some cultures, past and present, have a favorable view of obesity, seeing it as a symbol of wealth and fertility. The World Health Organization, the US, Canada, Japan, Portugal, Germany, the European Parliament and medical societies (such as the American Medical Association) classify obesity as a disease. Others, such as the UK, do not.\nClassification.\nObesity is typically defined as a substantial accumulation of body fat that could impact health. Medical organizations tend to classify people living with obesity as based on body mass index (BMI) \u2013 a ratio of a person's weight in kilograms to the square of their height in meters. For adults, the World Health Organization (WHO) defines \"overweight\" as a BMI 25 or higher, and \"obesity\" as a BMI 30 or higher. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) further subdivides obesity based on BMI, with a BMI 30 to 35 called class 1 obesity; 35 to 40, class 2 obesity; and 40+, class 3 obesity.\nFor children, obesity measures take age into consideration along with height and weight. For children aged 5\u201319, the WHO defines obesity as a BMI two standard deviations above the median for their age (a BMI around 18 for a five-year old; around 30 for a 19-year old). For children under five, the WHO defines obesity as a weight three standard deviations above the median for their height.\nSome modifications to the WHO definitions have been made by particular organizations. The surgical literature breaks down class II and III or only class III obesity into further categories whose exact values are still disputed.\nAs Asian populations develop negative health consequences at a lower BMI than Caucasians, some nations have redefined obesity; Japan has defined obesity as any BMI greater than 25\u00a0kg/m2 while China uses a BMI of greater than 28\u00a0kg/m2.\nThe preferred obesity metric in scholarly circles is the body fat percentage (BF%) \u2013 the ratio of the total weight of person's fat to his or her body weight, and BMI is viewed merely as a way to approximate BF%. According to \"American Society of Bariatric Physicians\", levels in excess of 32% for women and 25% for men are generally considered to indicate obesity.\nBMI is now viewed as outdated in some countries because it ignores variations between individuals in amounts of lean body mass, particularly muscle mass. Individuals involved in heavy physical labor or sports may have high BMI values despite having little fat. For example, more than half of all NFL players are classified as \"obese\" (BMI \u2265 30), and 1 in 4 are classified as \"extremely obese\" (BMI \u2265 35), according to the BMI metric. However, their mean body fat percentage, 14%, is well within what is considered a healthy range. Similarly, Sumo wrestlers are typically categorized by BMI as \"severely obese\" or \"very severely obese\"; but one study of college-aged Sumo wrestlers found that 40% of them were no longer categorized as obese when body fat percentage (with a cutoff of &lt;25%) was used instead of BMI; this was attributed to their very high lean body mass.\nCanada utilises BMI sparingly within their method of defining levels of obesity through use of the Edmonton Scale (for adult obesity). This scale also introduces factors such as Quality of Life, Mental Health &amp; Mobility amongst others. In recent years, Canada chose to allow both Chile &amp; Ireland to adapt their obesity guidelines to suit both countries' health systems. In Ireland, obesity is now defined as \"a Complex, Chronic &amp; Relapsing Disease\".\nEffects on health.\nObesity increases a person's risk of developing various metabolic diseases, cardiovascular disease, osteoarthritis, Alzheimer disease, depression, and certain types of cancer. Depending on the degree of obesity and the presence of comorbid disorders, obesity is associated with an estimated 2\u201320 year shorter life expectancy. High BMI is a marker of risk for, but not a direct cause of, diseases caused by diet and physical activity.\nMortality.\nObesity is one of the leading preventable causes of death worldwide. The mortality risk is lowest at a BMI of 20\u201325\u00a0kg/m2 in non-smokers and at 24\u201327\u00a0kg/m2 in current smokers, with risk increasing along with changes in either direction. This appears to apply in at least four continents. Other research suggests that the association of BMI and waist circumference with mortality is U- or J-shaped, while the association between waist-to-hip ratio and waist-to-height ratio with mortality is more positive. In Asians the risk of negative health effects begins to increase between 22 and 25\u00a0kg/m2. In 2021, the World Health Organization estimated that obesity caused at least 2.8 million deaths annually. On average, obesity reduces life expectancy by six to seven\u00a0years, a BMI of 30\u201335\u00a0kg/m2 reduces life expectancy by two to four years, while severe obesity (BMI\u00a0\u2265\u00a040\u00a0kg/m2) reduces life expectancy by ten years.\nMorbidity.\nObesity increases the risk of many physical and mental conditions. These comorbidities are most commonly shown in metabolic syndrome, a combination of medical disorders which includes: diabetes mellitus type 2, high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, and high triglyceride levels. A study from the RAK Hospital found that obese people are at a greater risk of developing long COVID. The CDC has found that obesity is the single strongest risk factor for severe COVID-19 illness.\nComplications may be either directly caused by obesity or indirectly related through mechanisms sharing a common cause such as a poor diet or a sedentary lifestyle. The strength of the link between obesity and specific conditions varies. One of the strongest is the link with type 2 diabetes. Excess body fat underlies 64% of cases of diabetes in men and 77% of cases in women.\nHealth consequences fall into two broad categories: those attributable to the effects of increased fat mass (such as osteoarthritis, obstructive sleep apnea, social stigmatization) and those due to the increased number of fat cells (diabetes, cancer, cardiovascular disease, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease). Increases in body fat alter the body's response to insulin, potentially leading to insulin resistance. Increased fat also creates a proinflammatory state, and a prothrombotic state.\nMetrics of health.\nNewer research has focused on methods of identifying healthier obese people by clinicians, and not treating obese people as a monolithic group. Obese people who do not experience medical complications from their obesity are sometimes called \"(metabolically) healthy obese\", but the extent to which this group exists (especially among older people) is in dispute. The number of people considered \"metabolically healthy\" depends on the definition used, and there is no universally accepted definition. There are numerous obese people who have relatively few metabolic abnormalities, and a minority of obese people have no medical complications. The guidelines of the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists call for physicians to use risk stratification with obese patients when considering how to assess their risk of developing type 2 diabetes.\nIn 2014, the BioSHaRE\u2013EU Healthy Obese Project (sponsored by Maelstrom Research, a team under the Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre) came up with two definitions for \"healthy obesity\", one more strict and one less so:\nTo come up with these criteria, BioSHaRE controlled for age and tobacco use, researching how both may effect the metabolic syndrome associated with obesity, but not found to exist in the metabolically healthy obese. Other definitions of metabolically healthy obesity exist, including ones based on waist circumference rather than BMI, which is unreliable in certain individuals.\nAnother identification metric for health in obese people is calf strength, which is positively correlated with physical fitness in obese people. Body composition in general is hypothesized to help explain the existence of metabolically healthy obesity\u2014the metabolically healthy obese are often found to have low amounts of ectopic fat (fat stored in tissues other than adipose tissue) despite having overall fat mass equivalent in weight to obese people with metabolic syndrome.1282\nSurvival paradox.\nAlthough the negative health consequences of obesity in the general population are well supported by the available research evidence, health outcomes in certain subgroups seem to be improved at an increased BMI, a phenomenon known as the obesity survival paradox. The paradox was first described in 1999 in overweight and obese people undergoing hemodialysis and has subsequently been found in those with heart failure and peripheral artery disease (PAD).\nIn people with heart failure, those with a BMI between 30.0 and 34.9 had lower mortality than those with a normal weight. This has been attributed to the fact that people often lose weight as they become progressively more ill. Similar findings have been made in other types of heart disease. People with class I obesity and heart disease do not have greater rates of further heart problems than people of normal weight who also have heart disease. In people with greater degrees of obesity, however, the risk of further cardiovascular events is increased. Even after cardiac bypass surgery, no increase in mortality is seen in the overweight and obese. One study found that the improved survival could be explained by the more aggressive treatment obese people receive after a cardiac event. Another study found that if one takes into account chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in those with PAD, the benefit of obesity no longer exists.\nCauses.\nThe \"a calorie is a calorie\" model of obesity posits a combination of excessive food energy intake and a lack of physical activity as the cause of most cases of obesity. A limited number of cases are due primarily to genetics, medical reasons, or psychiatric illness. The satiety value shows that the feeling of satiety per calorie varies between food types. Increasing rates of obesity at a societal level are felt to be due to an easily accessible and palatable diet, increased reliance on cars, and mechanized manufacturing.\nSome other factors have been proposed as causes towards rising rates of obesity worldwide, including insufficient sleep, endocrine disruptors, increased usage of certain medications (such as atypical antipsychotics), increases in ambient temperature, decreased rates of smoking, demographic changes, increasing maternal age of first-time mothers, changes to epigenetic regulation from the environment, increased phenotypic variance via assortative mating, social pressure to diet, among others. According to one study in 2006, factors like these may play as big of a role as excessive food energy intake and a lack of physical activity; however, the relative magnitudes of the effects of any proposed cause of obesity is varied and uncertain, as there is a general need for randomized controlled trials on humans before definitive statement can be made.\nAccording to the Endocrine Society, there is \"growing evidence suggesting that obesity is a disorder of the energy homeostasis system, rather than simply arising from the passive accumulation of excess weight\" and that \"obesity pathogenesis involves two related but distinct processes: (1) sustained positive energy balance (energy [caloric] intake &gt; energy expenditure) and (2) resetting of the body weight \"set point\" at an increased value.\" In other words, the fundamental cause of obesity is consuming more calories than are used by the body, and the body adapting to a heavier weight as the standard for the individual. \nDiet.\n1961\n2001\u201303\nMap of dietary energy availability per person per day in 1961 (left) and 2001\u20132003 (right) Calories per person per day (kilojoules per person per day)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExcess appetite for palatable, high-calorie food (especially fat, sugar, and certain animal proteins) is seen as the primary factor driving obesity worldwide, likely because of imbalances in neurotransmitters affecting the drive to eat, as well as changes to the duodenum impacting nutrient sensing and signaling. Dietary energy supply (the amount of calories in available food) per capita varies markedly between different regions and countries. It has also changed significantly over time. From the early 1970s to the late 1990s the average food energy available per person per day (the amount of food bought) increased in all parts of the world except Eastern Europe. The United States had the highest availability with per person in 1996. This increased further in 2003 to . During the late 1990s, Europeans had per person, in the developing areas of Asia there were per person, and in sub-Saharan Africa people had per person. Total food energy consumption has been found to be related to obesity.\nThe widespread availability of dietary guidelines has done little to address the problems of overeating and poor dietary choice. From 1971 to 2000, obesity rates in the United States increased from 14.5% to 30.9%. During the same period, an increase occurred in the average amount of food energy consumed. For women, the average increase was per day ( in 1971 and in 2004), while for men the average increase was per day ( in 1971 and in 2004). Most of this extra food energy came from an increase in carbohydrate consumption rather than fat consumption. The primary sources of these extra carbohydrates are sweetened beverages, which now account for almost 25 percent of daily food energy in young adults in America, and potato chips. Consumption of sweetened beverages such as soft drinks, fruit drinks, and iced tea is believed to be contributing to the rising rates of obesity and to an increased risk of metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. Vitamin D deficiency is related to diseases associated with obesity.\nAs societies become increasingly reliant on calorie-dense, big-portions, and fast-food meals, the association between fast-food consumption and obesity becomes more concerning. In the United States, consumption of fast-food meals tripled and food energy intake from these meals quadrupled between 1977 and 1995.\nAgricultural policy and techniques in the United States and Europe have led to lower food prices. In the United States, subsidization of corn, soy, wheat, and rice through the U.S. farm bill has made the main sources of processed food cheap compared to fruits and vegetables. Calorie count laws and nutrition facts labels attempt to steer people toward making healthier food choices, including awareness of how much food energy is being consumed.\nObese people consistently under-report their food consumption as compared to people of normal weight. This is supported both by tests of people carried out in a calorimeter room and by direct observation.\nSedentary lifestyle.\nA sedentary lifestyle may play a significant role in obesity. Worldwide there has been a large shift towards less physically demanding work, and currently at least 30% of the world's population gets insufficient exercise. This is primarily due to increasing use of mechanized transportation and a greater prevalence of labor-saving technology in the home. In children, there appear to be declines in levels of physical activity (with particularly strong declines in the amount of walking and physical education), likely due to safety concerns, changes in social interaction (such as fewer relationships with neighborhood children), and inadequate urban design (such as too few public spaces for safe physical activity). World trends in active leisure time physical activity are less clear. The World Health Organization indicates people worldwide are taking up less active recreational pursuits, while research from Finland found an increase and research from the United States found leisure-time physical activity has not changed significantly. Physical activity in children may not be a significant contributor.\nIn both children and adults, there is an association between television viewing time and the risk of obesity. Increased media exposure increases the rate of childhood obesity, with rates increasing proportionally to time spent watching television.\nGenetics.\nLike many other medical conditions, obesity is the result of an interplay between genetic and environmental factors. Polymorphisms in various genes controlling appetite and metabolism predispose to obesity when sufficient food energy is present. As of 2006, more than 41 of these sites on the human genome have been linked to the development of obesity when a favorable environment is present. People with two copies of the FTO gene (fat mass and obesity associated gene) have been found on average to weigh 3\u20134\u00a0kg more and have a 1.67-fold greater risk of obesity compared with those without the risk allele. The differences in BMI between people that are due to genetics varies depending on the population examined from 6% to 85%.\nObesity is a major feature in several syndromes, such as Prader\u2013Willi syndrome, Bardet\u2013Biedl syndrome, Cohen syndrome, and MOMO syndrome. (The term \"non-syndromic obesity\" is sometimes used to exclude these conditions.) In people with early-onset severe obesity (defined by an onset before 10\u00a0years of age and body mass index over three standard deviations above normal), 7% harbor a single point DNA mutation.\nStudies that have focused on inheritance patterns rather than on specific genes have found that 80% of the offspring of two obese parents were also obese, in contrast to less than 10% of the offspring of two parents who were of normal weight. Different people exposed to the same environment have different risks of obesity due to their underlying genetics.\nThe thrifty gene hypothesis postulates that, due to dietary scarcity during human evolution, people are prone to obesity. Their ability to take advantage of rare periods of abundance by storing energy as fat would be advantageous during times of varying food availability, and individuals with greater adipose reserves would be more likely to survive famine. This tendency to store fat, however, would be maladaptive in societies with stable food supplies. This theory has received various criticisms, and other evolutionarily-based theories such as the drifty gene hypothesis and the thrifty phenotype hypothesis have also been proposed.\nOther illnesses.\nCertain physical and mental illnesses and the pharmaceutical substances used to treat them can increase risk of obesity. Medical illnesses that increase obesity risk include several rare genetic syndromes (listed above) as well as some congenital or acquired conditions: hypothyroidism, Cushing's syndrome, growth hormone deficiency, and some eating disorders such as binge eating disorder and night eating syndrome. However, obesity is not regarded as a psychiatric disorder, and therefore is not listed in the DSM-IVR as a psychiatric illness. The risk of overweight and obesity is higher in patients with psychiatric disorders than in persons without psychiatric disorders. Obesity and depression influence each other mutually, with obesity increasing the risk of clinical depression, and also depression leading to a higher chance of developing obesity.\nDrug-induced obesity.\nCertain medications may cause weight gain or changes in body composition; these include insulin, sulfonylureas, thiazolidinediones, atypical antipsychotics, antidepressants, steroids, certain anticonvulsants (phenytoin and valproate), pizotifen, and some forms of hormonal contraception.\nSocial determinants.\nWhile genetic influences are important to understanding obesity, they cannot completely explain the dramatic increase seen within specific countries or globally. Though it is accepted that energy consumption in excess of energy expenditure leads to increases in body weight on an individual basis, the cause of the shifts in these two factors on the societal scale is much debated. There are a number of theories as to the cause but most believe it is a combination of various factors.\nThe correlation between social class and BMI varies globally. Research in 1989 found that in developed countries women of a high social class were less likely to be obese. No significant differences were seen among men of different social classes. In the developing world, women, men, and children from high social classes had greater rates of obesity. In 2007 repeating the same research found the same relationships, but they were weaker. The decrease in strength of correlation was felt to be due to the effects of globalization. Among developed countries, levels of adult obesity, and percentage of teenage children who are overweight, are correlated with income inequality. A similar relationship is seen among US states: more adults, even in higher social classes, are obese in more unequal states.\nMany explanations have been put forth for associations between BMI and social class. It is thought that in developed countries, the wealthy are able to afford more nutritious food, they are under greater social pressure to remain slim, and have more opportunities along with greater expectations for physical fitness. In undeveloped countries the ability to afford food, high energy expenditure with physical labor, and cultural values favoring a larger body size are believed to contribute to the observed patterns. Attitudes toward body weight held by people in one's life may also play a role in obesity. A correlation in BMI changes over time has been found among friends, siblings, and spouses. Stress and perceived low social status appear to increase risk of obesity.\nSmoking has a significant effect on an individual's weight. Those who quit smoking gain an average of 4.4\u00a0kilograms (9.7\u00a0lb) for men and 5.0\u00a0kilograms (11.0\u00a0lb) for women over ten years. However, changing rates of smoking have had little effect on the overall rates of obesity.\nIn the United States, the number of children a person has is related to their risk of obesity. A woman's risk increases by 7% per child, while a man's risk increases by 4% per child. This could be partly explained by the fact that having dependent children decreases physical activity in Western parents.\nIn the developing world urbanization is playing a role in increasing rate of obesity. In China overall rates of obesity are below 5%; however, in some cities rates of obesity are greater than 20%. In part, this may be because of urban design issues (such as inadequate public spaces for physical activity). Time spent in motor vehicles, as opposed to active transportation options such as cycling or walking, is correlated with increased risk of obesity.\nMalnutrition in early life is believed to play a role in the rising rates of obesity in the developing world. Endocrine changes that occur during periods of malnutrition may promote the storage of fat once more food energy becomes available.\nGut bacteria.\nThe study of the effect of infectious agents on metabolism is still in its early stages. Gut flora has been shown to differ between lean and obese people. There is an indication that gut flora can affect the metabolic potential. This apparent alteration is believed to confer a greater capacity to harvest energy contributing to obesity. Whether these differences are the direct cause or the result of obesity has yet to be determined unequivocally. The use of antibiotics among children has also been associated with obesity later in life.\nAn association between viruses and obesity has been found in humans and several different animal species. The amount that these associations may have contributed to the rising rate of obesity is yet to be determined.\nOther factors.\nNot getting enough sleep is also associated with obesity. Whether one causes the other is unclear. Even if short sleep does increase weight gain, it is unclear if this is to a meaningful degree or if increasing sleep would be of benefit.\nSome have proposed that chemical compounds called \"obesogens\" may play a role in obesity.\nCertain aspects of personality are associated with being obese. Loneliness, neuroticism, impulsivity, and sensitivity to reward are more common in people who are obese while conscientiousness and self-control are less common in people who are obese. Because most of the studies on this topic are questionnaire-based, it is possible that these findings overestimate the relationships between personality and obesity: people who are obese might be aware of the social stigma of obesity and their questionnaire responses might be biased accordingly. Similarly, the personalities of people who are obese as children might be influenced by obesity stigma, rather than these personality factors acting as risk factors for obesity.\nIn relation to globalization, it is known that trade liberalization is linked to obesity; research, based on data from 175 countries during 1975\u20132016, showed that obesity prevalence was positively correlated with trade openness, and the correlation was stronger in developing countries.\nPathophysiology.\nTwo distinct but related processes are considered to be involved in the development of obesity: sustained positive energy balance (energy intake exceeding energy expenditure) and the resetting of the body weight \"set point\" at an increased value. The second process explains why finding effective obesity treatments has been difficult. While the underlying biology of this process still remains uncertain, research is beginning to clarify the mechanisms.\nAt a biological level, there are many possible pathophysiological mechanisms involved in the development and maintenance of obesity. This field of research had been almost unapproached until the leptin gene was discovered in 1994 by J. M. Friedman's laboratory. While leptin and ghrelin are produced peripherally, they control appetite through their actions on the central nervous system. In particular, they and other appetite-related hormones act on the hypothalamus, a region of the brain central to the regulation of food intake and energy expenditure. There are several circuits within the hypothalamus that contribute to its role in integrating appetite, the melanocortin pathway being the most well understood. The circuit begins with an area of the hypothalamus, the arcuate nucleus, that has outputs to the lateral hypothalamus (LH) and ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH), the brain's feeding and satiety centers, respectively.\nThe arcuate nucleus contains two distinct groups of neurons. The first group coexpresses neuropeptide Y (NPY) and agouti-related peptide (AgRP) and has stimulatory inputs to the LH and inhibitory inputs to the VMH. The second group coexpresses pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) and cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) and has stimulatory inputs to the VMH and inhibitory inputs to the LH. Consequently, NPY/AgRP neurons stimulate feeding and inhibit satiety, while POMC/CART neurons stimulate satiety and inhibit feeding. Both groups of arcuate nucleus neurons are regulated in part by leptin. Leptin inhibits the NPY/AgRP group while stimulating the POMC/CART group. Thus a deficiency in leptin signaling, either via leptin deficiency or leptin resistance, leads to overfeeding and may account for some genetic and acquired forms of obesity.\nManagement.\nThe main treatment for obesity consists of weight loss via lifestyle interventions, including prescribed diets and physical exercise. Although it is unclear what diets might support long-term weight loss, and although the effectiveness of low-calorie diets is debated, lifestyle changes that reduce calorie consumption or increase physical exercise over the long term also tend to produce some sustained weight loss, despite slow weight regain over time.\nAlthough 87% of participants in the National Weight Control Registry were able to maintain 10% body weight loss for 10 years, the most appropriate dietary approach for long term weight loss maintenance is still unknown. In the US, intensive behavioral interventions combining both dietary changes and exercise are recommended. Intermittent fasting has no additional benefit of weight loss compared to continuous energy restriction. Adherence is a more important factor in weight loss success than whatever kind of diet an individual undertakes.\nSeveral hypo-caloric diets are effective. In the short-term low carbohydrate diets appear better than low fat diets for weight loss. In the long term, however, all types of low-carbohydrate and low-fat diets appear equally beneficial. Heart disease and diabetes risks associated with different diets appear to be similar.\nPromotion of the Mediterranean diets among the obese may lower the risk of heart disease. Decreased intake of sweet drinks is also related to weight-loss. Success rates of long-term weight loss maintenance with lifestyle changes are low, ranging from 2\u201320%. Dietary and lifestyle changes are effective in limiting excessive weight gain in pregnancy and improve outcomes for both the mother and the child. Intensive behavioral counseling is recommended in those who are both obese and have other risk factors for heart disease.\nHealth policy.\nObesity is a complex public health and policy problem because of its prevalence, costs, and health effects. As such, managing it requires changes in the wider societal context and effort by communities, local authorities, and governments. Public health efforts seek to understand and correct the environmental factors responsible for the increasing prevalence of obesity in the population. Solutions look at changing the factors that cause excess food energy consumption and inhibit physical activity. Efforts include federally reimbursed meal programs in schools, limiting direct junk food marketing to children, and decreasing access to sugar-sweetened beverages in schools. The World Health Organization recommends the taxing of sugary drinks. When constructing urban environments, efforts have been made to increase access to parks and to develop pedestrian routes. Efforts also exist to address the occurrence of food swamps, or areas with an overabundance of convenient or fast food options, as these has been found to be strongly predictive of obesity rates.\nMass media campaigns seem to have limited effectiveness in changing behaviors that influence obesity, but may increase knowledge and awareness regarding physical activity and diet, which might lead to changes in the long term. Campaigns might also be able to reduce the amount of time spent sitting or lying down and positively affect the intention to be active physically. Nutritional labelling with energy information on menus might be able to help reducing energy intake while dining in restaurants. Some call for policy against ultra-processed foods.\nMedical interventions.\nMedication.\nSince the introduction of medicines for the management of obesity in the 1930s, many compounds have been tried. Most of them reduce body weight by small amounts, and several of them are no longer marketed for obesity because of their side effects. Out of 25 anti-obesity medications withdrawn from the market between 1964 and 2009, 23 acted by altering the functions of chemical neurotransmitters in the brain. The most common side effects of these drugs that led to withdrawals were mental disturbances, cardiac side effects, and drug abuse or drug dependence. Deaths were reportedly associated with seven products.\nSix medications for long-term use are: liraglutide, naltrexone/bupropion, orlistat, semaglutide, tirzepatide and phentermine/topiramate. There is no information on how these drugs affect longer-term complications of obesity such as cardiovascular disease or death, although studies on semaglutide have shown cardiovascular benefits. After stopping treatment with GLP-1 agonists such as semaglutide, liraglutide and tirzepatide, people regain on average more than half (50\u201370%) of the lost weight within 1 year.\nIn 2019 a systematic review compared the effects on weight of various doses of fluoxetine (60\u00a0mg/d, 40\u00a0mg/d, 20\u00a0mg/d, 10\u00a0mg/d) in obese adults. When compared to placebo, all dosages of fluoxetine appeared to contribute to weight loss but lead to increased risk of experiencing side effects such as dizziness, drowsiness, fatigue, insomnia and nausea during period of treatment. However, these conclusions were from low certainty evidence. When comparing, in the same review, the effects of fluoxetine on weight of obese adults, to other anti-obesity agents, omega-3 gel and not receiving a treatment, the authors could not reach conclusive results due to poor quality of evidence.\nAmong antipsychotic drugs for treating schizophrenia clozapine is the most effective, but it also has the highest risk of causing the metabolic syndrome, of which obesity is the main feature. For people who gain weight because of clozapine, taking metformin may reportedly improve three of the five components of the metabolic syndrome: waist circumference, fasting glucose, and fasting triglycerides.\nSurgery.\nThe most effective treatment for obesity is bariatric surgery. The types of procedures include laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, vertical-sleeve gastrectomy, and biliopancreatic diversion. Surgery for severe obesity is associated with long-term weight loss, improvement in obesity-related conditions, and decreased overall mortality; however, improved metabolic health results from the weight loss, not the surgery. One study found a weight loss of between 14% and 25% (depending on the type of procedure performed) at 10\u00a0years, and a 29% reduction in all cause mortality when compared to standard weight loss measures. Complications occur in about 17% of cases and reoperation is needed in 7% of cases.\nEpidemiology.\nIn earlier historical periods obesity was rare and achievable only by a small elite, although already recognised as a problem for health. But as prosperity increased in the Early Modern period, it affected increasingly larger groups of the population. Prior to the 1970s, obesity was a relatively rare condition even in the wealthiest of nations, and when it did exist it tended to occur among the wealthy. Then, a confluence of events started to change the human condition. The average BMI of populations in first-world countries started to increase, and consequently there was a rapid increase in the proportion of people overweight and obese.\nIn 1997, the WHO formally recognized obesity as a global epidemic. As of 2008, the WHO estimates that at least 500\u00a0million adults (greater than 10%) are obese, with higher rates among women than men. The global prevalence of obesity more than doubled between 1980 and 2014. In 2014, more than 600 million adults were obese, equal to about 13 percent of the world's adult population, with that figure growing to 16% by 2022, according to the World Health Organization. The percentage of adults affected in the United States as of 2015\u20132016 is about 39.6% overall (37.9% of males and 41.1% of females). In 2000, the World Health Organization (WHO) stated that overweight and obesity were replacing more traditional public health concerns such as undernutrition and infectious diseases as one of the most significant cause of poor health.\nThe rate of obesity also increases with age at least up to 50 or 60\u00a0years old and severe obesity in the United States, Australia, and Canada is increasing faster than the overall rate of obesity. The OECD has projected an increase in obesity rates until at least 2030, especially in the United States, Mexico and England with rates reaching 47%, 39% and 35%, respectively.\nOnce considered a problem only of high-income countries, obesity rates are rising worldwide and affecting both the developed and developing world. These increases have been felt most dramatically in urban settings. In 2021, nearly half the global adult population - a billion men and 1.11 billion women aged 25 or older - were overweight or obese. It was predicted that if these trends continue about 57.4% of men and 60.3% of women would be overweight or obese by 2050.\nSex- and gender-based differences influence the prevalence of obesity. Globally there are more obese women than men, but the numbers differ depending on how obesity is measured.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\n\"Obesity\" is from the Latin \"obesitas\", which means \"stout, fat, or plump\". \"\u0112sus\" is the past participle of \"edere\" (to eat), with \"ob\" (over) added to it. \"The Oxford English Dictionary\" documents its first usage in 1611 by Randle Cotgrave.\nHistorical attitudes.\nAncient Greek medicine recognizes obesity as a medical disorder and records that the Ancient Egyptians saw it in the same way. Hippocrates wrote that \"Corpulence is not only a disease itself, but the harbinger of others\". The Indian surgeon Sushruta (6th century BCE) related obesity to diabetes and heart disorders. He recommended physical work to help cure it and its side effects. For most of human history, mankind struggled with food scarcity. Obesity has thus historically been viewed as a sign of wealth and prosperity. It was common among high officials in Ancient East Asian civilizations. In the 17th century, English medical author Tobias Venner is credited with being one of the first to refer to the term as a societal disease in a published English language book.\nWith the onset of the Industrial Revolution, it was realized that the military and economic might of nations were dependent on both the body size and strength of their soldiers and workers. Increasing the average body mass index from what is now considered underweight to what is now the normal range played a significant role in the development of industrialized societies. Height and weight thus both increased through the 19th\u00a0century in the developed world. During the 20th century, as populations reached their genetic potential for height, weight began increasing much more than height, resulting in obesity. In the 1950s, increasing wealth in the developed world decreased child mortality, but as body weight increased, heart and kidney disease became more common.\nDuring this time period, insurance companies realized the connection between weight and life expectancy and increased premiums for the obese.\nMany cultures throughout history have viewed obesity as the result of a character flaw. The \"obesus\" or fat character in Ancient Greek comedy was a glutton and figure of mockery. During Christian times, food was viewed as a gateway to the sins of sloth and lust. In modern Western culture, excess weight is often regarded as unattractive, and obesity is commonly associated with various negative stereotypes. People of all ages can face social stigmatization and may be targeted by bullies or shunned by their peers.\nPublic perceptions in Western society regarding healthy body weight differ from those regarding the weight that is considered ideal \u2013 and both have changed since the beginning of the 20th century. The weight that is viewed as an ideal has become lower since the 1920s. This is illustrated by the fact that the average height of Miss America pageant winners increased by 2% from 1922 to 1999, while their average weight decreased by 12%. On the other hand, people's views concerning healthy weight have changed in the opposite direction. In Britain, the weight at which people considered themselves to be overweight was significantly higher in 2007 than in 1999. These changes are believed to be due to increasing rates of adiposity leading to increased acceptance of extra body fat as being normal.\nObesity is still seen as a sign of wealth and well-being in many parts of Africa. This has become particularly common since the HIV epidemic began.\nThe arts.\nThe first sculptural representations of the human body 20,000\u201335,000\u00a0years ago depict obese females. Some attribute the Venus figurines to the tendency to emphasize fertility while others feel they represent \"fatness\" in the people of the time. Corpulence is, however, absent in both Greek and Roman art, probably in keeping with their ideals regarding moderation. This continued through much of Christian European history, with only those of low socioeconomic status being depicted as obese.\nDuring the Renaissance some of the upper class began flaunting their large size, as can be seen in portraits of Henry VIII of England and Alessandro dal Borro. Rubens (1577\u20131640) regularly depicted heavyset women in his pictures, from which derives the term Rubenesque. These women, however, still maintained the \"hourglass\" shape with its relationship to fertility. During the 19th\u00a0century, views on obesity changed in the Western world. After centuries of obesity being synonymous with wealth and social status, slimness began to be seen as the desirable standard. In his 1819 print, \"The Belle Alliance, or the Female Reformers of Blackburn!!!,\" artist George Cruikshank criticised the work of female reformers in Blackburn and used fatness as a means to portray them as unfeminine.\nSociety and culture.\nEconomic impact.\nIn addition to its health impacts, obesity leads to many problems, including disadvantages in employment and increased business costs. \nIn 2005, the medical costs attributable to obesity in the US were an estimated $190.2\u00a0billion or 20.6% of all medical expenditures, while the cost of obesity in Canada was estimated at CA$2\u00a0billion in 1997 (2.4% of total health costs). The total annual direct cost of overweight and obesity in Australia in 2005 was A$21\u00a0billion. Overweight and obese Australians also received A$35.6\u00a0billion in government subsidies. The estimated range for annual expenditures on diet products is $40\u00a0billion to $100\u00a0billion in the US alone.\nThe Lancet Commission on Obesity in 2019 called for a global treaty\u2014modelled on the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control\u2014committing countries to address obesity and undernutrition, explicitly excluding the food industry from policy development. They estimate the global cost of obesity $2\u00a0trillion a year, about or 2.8% of world GDP.\nObesity prevention programs have been found to reduce the cost of treating obesity-related disease. However, the longer people live, the more medical costs they incur. Researchers, therefore, conclude that reducing obesity may improve the public's health, but it is unlikely to reduce overall health spending. Sin taxes such as a sugary drink tax have been implemented in certain countries globally to curb dietary and consumer habits, and as an effort to offset the economic tolls.\nObesity can lead to social stigmatization and disadvantages in employment. When compared to their ideal weight counterparts, workers with obesity, on average have higher rates of absenteeism from work and take more disability leave, thus increasing costs for employers and decreasing productivity. A study examining Duke University employees found that people with a BMI over 40\u00a0kg/m2 filed twice as many workers' compensation claims as those whose BMI was 18.5\u201324.9\u00a0kg/m2. They also had more than 12\u00a0times as many lost work days. The most common injuries in this group were due to falls and lifting, thus affecting the lower extremities, wrists or hands, and backs. The Alabama State Employees' Insurance Board approved a controversial plan to charge obese workers $25 a month for health insurance that would otherwise be free unless they take steps to lose weight and improve their health. These measures started in January 2010 and apply to those state workers whose BMI exceeds 35\u00a0kg/m2 and who fail to make improvements in their health after one year. This becomes a Catch 22 position as many insurance companies will refuse to pay for treatment methods for workers living with obesity.\nSome research shows that people with obesity are less likely to be hired for a job and are less likely to be promoted. People with obesity are also paid less than their counterparts who do not live with obesity for an equivalent job; women with obesity on average make 6% less and men with obesity make 3% less.\nSpecific industries, such as the airline, healthcare and food industries, have special concerns. Due to rising rates of obesity, airlines face higher fuel costs and pressures to increase seating width. In 2000, the extra weight of passengers with obesity cost airlines US$275\u00a0million. The healthcare industry has had to invest in special facilities for handling patients with class III obesity, including special lifting equipment and bariatric ambulances. Costs for restaurants are increased by litigation accusing them of causing obesity. In 2005, the US Congress discussed legislation to prevent civil lawsuits against the food industry in relation to obesity; however, it did not become law.\nWith the American Medical Association's 2013 classification of obesity as a chronic disease, it is thought that health insurance companies will more likely pay for obesity treatment, counseling and surgery, and the cost of research and development of adipose treatment pills or gene therapy treatments should be more affordable if insurers help to subsidize their cost. The AMA classification is not legally binding, however, so health insurers still have the right to reject coverage for a treatment or procedure.\nIn 2014, The European Court of Justice ruled that morbid obesity is a disability. The Court said that if an employee's obesity prevents them from \"full and effective participation of that person in professional life on an equal basis with other workers\", then it shall be considered a disability and that firing someone on such grounds is discriminatory.\nIn low-income countries, obesity can be a signal of wealth. A 2023 experimental study found that obese individuals in Uganda were more likely to access credit.\nSize acceptance.\nThe principal goal of the fat acceptance movement is to decrease discrimination against people who are overweight and obese. However, some in the movement are also attempting to challenge the established relationship between obesity and negative health outcomes.\nA number of organizations exist that promote the acceptance of obesity. They have increased in prominence in the latter half of the 20th\u00a0century. The US-based National Association to Advance Fat Acceptance (NAAFA) was formed in 1969 and describes itself as a civil rights organization dedicated to ending size discrimination.\nThe International Size Acceptance Association (ISAA) is a non-governmental organization (NGO) which was founded in 1997. It has more of a global orientation and describes its mission as promoting size acceptance and helping to end weight-based discrimination. These groups often argue for the recognition of obesity as a disability under the US Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA). The American legal system, however, has decided that the potential public health costs exceed the benefits of extending this anti-discrimination law to cover obesity.\nIndustry influence on research.\nIn 2015, the \"New York Times\" published an article on the Global Energy Balance Network, a nonprofit founded in 2014 that advocated for people to focus on increasing exercise rather than reducing calorie intake to avoid obesity and to be healthy. The organization was founded with at least $1.5M in funding from the Coca-Cola Company, and the company has provided $4M in research funding to the two founding scientists Gregory A. Hand and Steven N. Blair since 2008.\nReports.\nMany organizations have published reports pertaining to obesity. In 1998, the first US Federal guidelines were published, titled \"Clinical Guidelines on the Identification, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults: The Evidence Report\". In 2006, the Canadian Obesity Network, now known as Obesity Canada published the \"Canadian Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) on the Management and Prevention of Obesity in Adults and Children\". This is a comprehensive evidence-based guideline to address the management and prevention of overweight and obesity in adults and children.\nIn 2004, the United Kingdom Royal College of Physicians, the Faculty of Public Health and the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health released the report \"Storing up Problems\", which highlighted the growing problem of obesity in the UK. The same year, the House of Commons Health Select Committee published its \"most comprehensive inquiry [...] ever undertaken\" into the impact of obesity on health and society in the UK and possible approaches to the problem. In 2006, the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) issued a guideline on the diagnosis and management of obesity, as well as policy implications for non-healthcare organizations such as local councils. A 2007 report produced by Derek Wanless for the King's Fund warned that unless further action was taken, obesity had the capacity to debilitate the National Health Service financially. In 2022 the National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) published a comprehensive review of research on what local authorities can do to reduce obesity.\nThe Obesity Policy Action (OPA) framework divides measure into \"upstream\" policies, \"midstream\" policies, and \"downstream\" policies. Upstream policies have to do with changing society, while midstream policies try to alter behaviors believed to contribute to obesity at the individual level, while downstream policies treat currently obese people.\nChildhood obesity.\nThe healthy BMI range varies with the age and sex of the child. Obesity in children and adolescents is defined as a BMI greater than the 95th\u00a0percentile. The reference data that these percentiles are based on is from 1963 to 1994 and thus has not been affected by the recent increases in rates of obesity. Childhood obesity has reached epidemic proportions in the 21st\u00a0century, with rising rates in both the developed and the developing world. Rates of obesity in Canadian boys have increased from 11% in the 1980s to over 30% in the 1990s, while during this same time period rates increased from 4 to 14% in Brazilian children. In the UK, there were 60% more obese children in 2005 compared to 1989. In the US, the percentage of overweight and obese children increased to 16% in 2008, a 300% increase over the prior 30 years.\nAs with obesity in adults, many factors contribute to the rising rates of childhood obesity. Changing diet and decreasing physical activity are believed to be the two most important causes for the recent increase in the incidence of child obesity. Advertising of unhealthy foods to children also contributes, as it increases their consumption of the product. Antibiotics in the first 6 months of life have been associated with excess weight at age seven to twelve years of age. Because childhood obesity often persists into adulthood and is associated with numerous chronic illnesses, children who are obese are often tested for hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and fatty liver disease.\nTreatments used in children are primarily lifestyle interventions and behavioral techniques, although efforts to increase activity in children have had little success. In the United States, medications are not FDA approved for use in this age group. Brief weight management interventions in primary care (e.g. delivered by a physician or nurse practitioner) have only a marginal positive effect in reducing childhood overweight or obesity. Multi-component behaviour change interventions that include changes to dietary and physical activity may reduce BMI in the short term in children aged 6 to 11 years, although the benefits are small and quality of evidence is low.\nStatistics.\nThe CDC reported that this prevalence of obesity among U.S. adults 20 and over was 41.9% during 2017\u2013March 2020 in which during the same time, the prevalence of severe obesity among U.S. adults was 9.2%. The prevalence of obesity was lowest among non-Hispanic Asian adults (17.4%) compared with non-Hispanic white (42.2%), non-Hispanic black (49.6%), and Hispanic (44.8%) adults.\nOther animals.\nObesity in pets is common in many countries. In the United States, 23\u201341% of dogs are overweight, and about 5.1% are obese. The rate of obesity in cats was slightly higher at 6.4%. In Australia, the rate of obesity among dogs in a veterinary setting has been found to be 7.6%. The risk of obesity in dogs is related to whether or not their owners are obese; however, there is no similar correlation between cats and their owners.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56436", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56436", "title": "Julia Sets", "text": ""}
{"id": "56437", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56437", "title": "Infrared astronomy", "text": "Observation of infrared wavelengths\nInfrared astronomy is a sub-discipline of astronomy which specializes in the observation and analysis of astronomical objects using infrared (IR) radiation. The wavelength of infrared light ranges from 0.75 to 300 micrometers, and falls in between visible radiation, which ranges from 380 to 750 nanometers, and submillimeter waves.\nInfrared astronomy began in the 1830s, a few decades after the discovery of infrared light by William Herschel in 1800. Early progress was limited, and it was not until the early 20th century that conclusive detections of astronomical objects other than the Sun and Moon were made in infrared light. After a number of discoveries were made in the 1950s and 1960s in radio astronomy, astronomers realized the information available outside the visible wavelength range, and modern infrared astronomy was established.\nInfrared and optical astronomy are often practiced using the same telescopes, as the same mirrors or lenses are usually effective over a wavelength range that includes both visible and infrared light. Both fields also use solid state detectors, though the specific type of solid state photodetectors used are different. Infrared light is absorbed at many wavelengths by water vapor in the Earth's atmosphere, so most infrared telescopes are at high elevations in dry places, above as much of the atmosphere as possible. There have also been infrared observatories in space, including the Spitzer Space Telescope, the Herschel Space Observatory, and more recently the James Webb Space Telescope.\nHistory.\nThe discovery of infrared radiation is attributed to William Herschel, who performed an experiment in 1800 where he placed a thermometer in sunlight of different colors after it passed through a prism. He noticed that the temperature increase induced by sunlight was highest \"outside\" the visible spectrum, just beyond the red color. That the temperature increase was highest at infrared wavelengths was due to the spectral response of the prism rather than properties of the Sun, but the fact that there was any temperature increase at all prompted Herschel to deduce that there was invisible radiation from the Sun. He dubbed this radiation \"calorific rays\", and went on to show that it could be reflected, transmitted, and absorbed just like visible light.\nEfforts were made starting in the 1830s and continuing through the 19th century to detect infrared radiation from other astronomical sources. Radiation from the Moon was first detected in 1856 by Charles Piazzi Smyth, the Astronomer Royal for Scotland, during an expedition to Tenerife to test his ideas about mountain top astronomy. Ernest Fox Nichols used a modified Crookes radiometer in an attempt to detect infrared radiation from Arcturus and Vega, but Nichols deemed the results inconclusive. Even so, the ratio of flux he reported for the two stars is consistent with the modern value, so George Rieke gives Nichols credit for the first detection of a star other than our own in the infrared.\nThe field of infrared astronomy continued to develop slowly in the early 20th century, as Seth Barnes Nicholson and Edison Pettit developed thermopile detectors capable of accurate infrared photometry and sensitive to a few hundreds of stars. The field was mostly neglected by traditional astronomers until the 1960s, with most scientists who practiced infrared astronomy having actually been trained physicists. The success of radio astronomy during the 1950s and 1960s, combined with the improvement of infrared detector technology, prompted more astronomers to take notice, and infrared astronomy became well established as a subfield of astronomy.\nInfrared space telescopes entered service. Early infrared sky surveys were carried out by the United States Air Force using sounding rockets. In 1983, IRAS made an all-sky survey. In 1995, the European Space Agency created the Infrared Space Observatory. Before this satellite ran out of liquid helium in 1998, it discovered protostars and water in our universe (even on Saturn and Uranus).\nOn 25 August 2003, NASA launched the Spitzer Space Telescope, previously known as the Space Infrared Telescope Facility. In 2009, the telescope ran out of liquid helium and lost the ability to see far infrared. It had discovered stars, the Double Helix Nebula, and light from extrasolar planets. It continued working in 3.6 and 4.5 micrometer bands. Since then, other infrared telescopes helped find new stars that are forming, nebulae, and stellar nurseries. Infrared telescopes have opened up a whole new part of the galaxy for us. They are also useful for observing extremely distant things, like quasars. Quasars move away from Earth. The resulting large redshift make them difficult targets with an optical telescope. Infrared telescopes give much more information about them.\nDuring May 2008, a group of international infrared astronomers proved that intergalactic dust greatly dims the light of distant galaxies. In actuality, galaxies are almost twice as bright as they look. The dust absorbs much of the visible light and re-emits it as infrared light.\nModern infrared astronomy.\nInfrared radiation with wavelengths just longer than visible light, known as near-infrared, behaves in a very similar way to visible light, and can be detected using similar solid state devices (because of this, many quasars, stars, and galaxies were discovered). For this reason, the near infrared region of the spectrum is commonly incorporated as part of the \"optical\" spectrum, along with the near ultraviolet. Many optical telescopes, such as those at Keck Observatory, operate effectively in the near infrared as well as at visible wavelengths. The far-infrared extends to submillimeter wavelengths, which are observed by telescopes such as the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope at Mauna Kea Observatory.\nLike all other forms of electromagnetic radiation, infrared is utilized by astronomers to study the universe. Indeed, infrared measurements taken by the 2MASS and WISE astronomical surveys have been particularly effective at unveiling previously undiscovered star clusters. Examples of such embedded star clusters are FSR 1424, FSR 1432, Camargo 394, Camargo 399, Majaess 30, and Majaess 99. Infrared telescopes, which includes most major optical telescopes as well as a few dedicated infrared telescopes, need to be chilled with liquid nitrogen and shielded from warm objects. The reason for this is that objects with temperatures of a few hundred kelvins emit most of their thermal energy at infrared wavelengths. If infrared detectors were not kept cooled, the radiation from the detector itself would contribute noise that would dwarf the radiation from any celestial source. This is particularly important in the mid-infrared and far-infrared regions of the spectrum.\nTo achieve higher angular resolution, some infrared telescopes are combined to form astronomical interferometers. The effective resolution of an interferometer is set by the distance between the telescopes, rather than the size of the individual telescopes. When used together with adaptive optics, infrared interferometers, such as two 10 meter telescopes at Keck Observatory or the four 8.2 meter telescopes that make up the Very Large Telescope Interferometer, can achieve high angular resolution.\nThe principal limitation on infrared sensitivity from ground-based telescopes is the Earth's atmosphere. Water vapor absorbs a significant amount of infrared radiation, and the atmosphere itself emits at infrared wavelengths. For this reason, most infrared telescopes are built in very dry places at high altitude, so that they are above most of the water vapor in the atmosphere. Suitable locations on Earth include Mauna Kea Observatory at 4205 meters above sea level, the Paranal Observatory at 2635 meters in Chile and regions of high altitude ice-desert such as Dome C in Antarctic. Even at high altitudes, the transparency of the Earth's atmosphere is limited except in infrared windows, or wavelengths where the Earth's atmosphere is transparent. The main infrared windows are listed below:\nAs is the case for visible light telescopes, space is the ideal place for infrared telescopes. Telescopes in space can achieve higher resolution, as they do not suffer from blurring caused by the Earth's atmosphere, and are also free from infrared absorption caused by the Earth's atmosphere. Current infrared telescopes in space include the Herschel Space Observatory, the Spitzer Space Telescope, the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer and the James Webb Space Telescope. Since putting telescopes in orbit is expensive, there are also airborne observatories, such as the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy and the Kuiper Airborne Observatory. These observatories fly above most, but not all, of the atmosphere, and water vapor in the atmosphere absorbs some of infrared light from space. \nInfrared technology.\nOne of the most common infrared detector arrays used at research telescopes is HgCdTe arrays. These operate well between 0.6 and 5 micrometre wavelengths. For longer wavelength observations or higher sensitivity other detectors may be used, including other narrow gap semiconductor detectors, low temperature bolometer arrays or photon-counting Superconducting Tunnel Junction arrays.\nSpecial requirements for infrared astronomy include: very low dark currents to allow long integration times, associated low noise readout circuits and sometimes very high pixel counts.\nLow temperature is often achieved by a coolant, which can run out. Space missions have either ended or shifted to \"warm\" observations when the coolant supply used up. For example, WISE ran out of coolant in October 2010, about ten months after being launched. (See also NICMOS, Spitzer Space Telescope)\nObservatories.\nSpace observatories.\nMany space telescopes detect electromagnetic radiation in a wavelength range that overlaps at least to some degree with the infrared wavelength range. Therefore it is difficult to define which space telescopes are infrared telescopes. Here the definition of \"infrared space telescope\" is taken to be a space telescope whose main mission is detecting infrared light.\nEight infrared space telescopes have been operated in space. They are:\nNASA is also planning to launch the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope (NGRST), originally known as the Wide Field InfraRed Space Telescope (WFIRST), in 2027.\nMany other smaller space-missions and space-based detectors of infrared radiation have been operated in space. These include the Infrared Telescope (IRT) that flew with the Space Shuttle.\nThe Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS) is sometimes mentioned as an infrared satellite, although it is a submillimeter satellite.\nInfrared instruments on space telescopes.\nFor many space telescopes, only some of the instruments are capable of infrared observation. Below are listed some of the most notable of these space observatories and instruments:\nAirborne Observatories.\nThree airplane-based observatories have been used (other aircraft have also been used occasionally to host infrared space studies) to study the sky in infrared. They are:\nGround-based observatories.\nMany ground-based infrared telescopes exist around the world. The largest are:"}
{"id": "56438", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56438", "title": "Akhnaten (opera)", "text": "1984 opera by Philip Glass\nAkhnaten is an opera in three acts based on the life and religious convictions of the Egyptian pharaoh Akhenaten (Amenhotep IV), written by the American composer Philip Glass in 1983. The libretto is by Philip Glass in association with Shalom Goldman, Robert Israel, Richard Riddell, and Jerome Robbins. According to the composer, this work is the culmination of a trilogy including his two other biographical operas, \"Einstein on the Beach\" (about Albert Einstein) and \"Satyagraha\" (about Mahatma Gandhi). These three people were all driven by an inner vision which altered the age in which they lived: Akhenaten in religion, Einstein in science, and Gandhi in politics.\nThe text, taken from original sources, is sung in the original languages, linked together with the commentary of a narrator in a modern language, such as English or German. Egyptian texts of the period are taken from a poem of Akhenaten himself, from the \"Book of the Dead\", and from extracts of decrees and letters from the Amarna Period, the seventeen-year period of Akhenaten's rule. Other portions are in Akkadian and Biblical Hebrew. Akhnaten's Hymn to the Sun is sung in the language of the audience.\nPerformance history.\n\"Akhnaten\" was commissioned by W\u00fcrttembergische Staatstheater, Stuttgart and had its world premiere on March 24, 1984, at the Stuttgart State Theatre, under the German title \"Echnaton\". Paul Esswood sang the title role, German director Achim Freyer staged the opera in an abstract style with highly ritualistic movements. The American premiere, directed by David Freeman, was on October 12, 1984, at the Houston Grand Opera, where Glass's opera \"The Making of the Representative for Planet 8\" also premiered. The UK premiere, based on the American production, was on June 17, 1985, by English National Opera at the London Coliseum. This production was revived at the London Coliseum in March 1987.\nThe award-winning Polish premiere, directed by Henryk Baranowski, was on May 20, 2000, at the Grand Theatre in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a. The French premiere was on September 23, 2002, at Op\u00e9ra national du Rhin in Strasbourg as a co-production with Boston Lyric Opera which had premiered the production in February 2002\nA new co-production by English National Opera and LA Opera and in collaboration with Improbable directed by Phelim McDermott starring Anthony Roth Costanzo and Zachary James premiered at the London Coliseum on March 4, 2016, which won a 2017 Olivier Award, and at LA Opera on November 5, 2016. This production saw the addition of juggling choreography by Gandini Juggling. A revival of this production in London took place in March 2019 and played at the Metropolitan Opera in their 2019/2020 season, winning the 2022 Grammy Award for Best Opera Recording. The 2019 Met production was streamed online on June 20 and November 14, 2020, and February 12, 2021, and returned in 2022. A new production directed and choreographed by Nanine Linning premiered at Theater Heidelberg on June 6, 2014, another new production directed by Laura Scozzi premiered at Oper Bonn on March 11, 2018.\nA November 2020 production at Op\u00e9ra de Nice C\u00f4te d\u2019Azur was performed without an audience and screened online, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This production was produced and choreographed by longtime Glass collaborator Lucinda Childs, who conducted rehearsals remotely. She also performed the speaking roles in the opera, which were pre-recorded and projected during the performance. The Op\u00e9ra de Nice reprised their performance in October 2025 at the Philarmonie de Paris, again with Lucinda Childs as the narrator.\nMusic.\nThe orchestra's size is about the size employed for early 19th-century opera: 2 flutes (one doubling piccolo), 2 oboes (both doubling oboe d'amore), 2 clarinets, bass clarinet, 2 bassoons, 2 french horns, 2 trumpets, 2 trombones, tuba, percussion (3 players), celesta (doubling synthesizer), 12 violas, 8 celli, and 6 double basses.\nSince the Stuttgart State Opera house was being restored in 1984 and the orchestra pit of the \"\" at the Stuttgart State Theatre, where the premiere was to take place, was considerably smaller, Glass chose to completely leave out the violins (about 20), giving the orchestra a darker, sombre character. Apart from this, this was Glass's most \"conventional\" opera orchestra until then (compared to \"Einstein on the Beach\", written for the six-piece Philip Glass Ensemble, and \"Satyagraha\", scored for woodwinds and strings only).\nSynopsis.\nThe opera is divided into three acts:\nAct 1: Year 1 of Akhnaten's Reign in Thebes.\n\"Thebes, 1370 BC\"\n\"Prelude, verse 1, verse 2, verse 3\"\nSet in the key of A minor, the strings introduce a ground bass theme, with following variations (a passacaglia). The scribe recites funeral texts from the pyramids. \"Open are the double doors of the horizon; unlocked are its bolts.\"\n\"Scene 1: Funeral of Akhnaten's father Amenhotep III\"\nHeralded by hammering drums, Aye and a small male chorus chant a funeral hymn in Egyptian, later joined by the full chorus. The music is basically a march, based on the chords of A major and F\u266f minor (with added major sixth), and grows to ecstatic intensity towards the end.\n\"Scene 2: The Coronation of Akhnaten\"\nAfter a lengthy orchestral introduction, during which Akhnaten appears, heralded by a solo trumpet, the High Priest, Aye, and Horemhab sing a ritual text. After that, the Narrator recites a list of royal titles bestowed upon Akhnaten, while he is crowned. After the coronation, the chorus repeats the ritual text from the beginning of the scene. Again, the main key is A minor.\n\"Scene 3: The Window of Appearances\"\nAfter an introduction in A minor, dominated by tubular bells, Akhnaten sings a praise to the Creator (in Egyptian) at the window of public appearances. This is the first time he actually sings, after he has already been on stage for 20 minutes (and 40 minutes into the opera) and the effect of his countertenor voice (which in 1983 was even more rare than nowadays) is startling. He is joined by Queen Tye, whose soprano soars high above the soon intertwining voices of the royal couple, and later by Nefertiti, who actually sings lower notes than he.\nAct 2: Years 5 to 15 in Thebes and Akhetaten.\n\"Scene 1: The Temple\"\nThe scene opens again in A minor, with the High Priest and a group of priests singing a hymn to Amun, principal god of the old order, in his temple. The music becomes increasingly dramatic, as Akhnaten, together with Queen Tye and his followers, attack the temple. This scene has only wordless singing. The harmonies grow very chromatic, finally reaching A\u266d major and E minor. The temple roof is removed and the sun god Aten's rays invade the temple, thus ending Amun's reign and laying the foundation for the worship of the One God: the Sun God Aten.\n\"Scene 2: Akhnaten and Nefertiti\"\nTwo solo celli introduce a \"love theme\". Accompanied by a solo trombone while the harmony switches to B(sus), the Narrator recites a prayer-like poem to the sun god. The strings softly take over the music in E minor, and the same poem is recited again, this time actually as a love poem from Akhnaten to Nefertiti. Then Akhnaten and Nefertiti sing the same text to each other (in Egyptian), as an intimate love duet. After a while, the trumpet associated with Akhnaten joins them as the highest voice, turning the duet into a trio.\n\"Scene 3: The City \u2013 Dance\"\nThe Narrator speaks a text taken from the boundary stones of the new capital of the empire, Akhet-Aten (The Horizon of Aten), describing the construction of the city, with large, light-filled spaces. After a brass fanfare, the completion of the city is celebrated in a light-hearted dance, contrasting with the stark, ritualistic music with which this act began (in the Stuttgart premiere, the dance actually described the construction of the city). The dance scene was omitted from the UK premiere production and its 1987 revival.\n\"Scene 4: Hymn\"\nWhat now follows is a hymn to the only god Aten, a long aria (alternating between A minor and A major) by Akhnaten, and the central piece of the opera. Notably, it is the only text sung in the language of the audience, praising the sun giving life to everything. After the aria, an off-stage chorus sings Psalm 104 in Hebrew, dating some 400 years later, which has strong resemblances to Akhnaten's Hymn, thus emphasizing Akhnaten as the first founder of a monotheistic religion.\nAct 3: Year 17 and the Present.\n\"Akhnaten, 1358 BC\"\n\"Scene 1: The Family\"\nTwo oboes d'amore play the \"love theme\" from act 2. Akhnaten, Nefertiti and their six daughters, sing wordlessly in contemplation. They are oblivious to what happens outside of the palace. As the music switches from E minor to F minor, the Narrator reads letters from Syrian vassals, asking for help against their enemies. Since the king does not send troops, his land is being seized and plundered by their enemies. The scene focuses again on Akhnaten and his family, still oblivious to the country falling apart.\n\"Scene 2: The Attack and Fall of the City\"\nThe music moves again to a vigorous F minor. Horemhab, Aye and the High Priest of Amon instigate the people (as the chorus), singing part of the vassal's letters (in their original Akkadian language) until finally the palace is attacked, the royal family killed, and the city of the sun destroyed.\n\"Scene 3: The Ruins\"\nThe music of the very beginning of the opera returns. The scribe recites an inscription on Aye's tomb, praising the death of \"the great criminal\" and the new reign of the old gods. He then describes the restoration of Amun's temple by Akhnaten's son Tutankhamun. The Prelude music grows stronger and the scene moves to present-day Egypt, to the ruins of Amarna, the former capital Akhetaten. The Narrator appears as a modern tourist guide and speaks a text from a guide book, describing the ruins. \"There is nothing left of this glorious city of temples and palaces.\"\n\"Scene 4: Epilogue\"\nThe ghosts of Akhnaten, Nefertiti and Queen Tye appear, singing wordlessly amongst the ruins. The funeral procession from the beginning of the opera appears on the horizon, and they join it. The music introduces a bass line from the beginning of \"Einstein on the Beach\", the first part of Glass's \"portrait\" trilogy (The second one being \"Satyagraha\" and the third one \"Akhnaten\"), thus providing a musical bracket for the whole trilogy.\nIn popular culture.\n\"Window of Appearances\" and \"Akhnaten and Nefertiti\" feature in the seventh episode of the fourth season of the Netflix original series \"Stranger Things\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56439", "revid": "46306269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56439", "title": "Jeff Bridges", "text": "American actor (born 1949)\nJeffrey Leon Bridges (born December 4, 1949) is an American actor. He is best known for his leading man roles in film and television. In a career spanning more than seven decades, he has received various accolades, including an Academy Award and a Golden Globe Award, in addition to nominations for three BAFTA Awards and two Primetime Emmy Awards. In 2019, he was awarded the Cecil B. DeMille Award.\nBorn into a prominent acting family, Bridges appeared on the television series \"Sea Hunt\" (1958\u20131960) alongside his father, Lloyd, and brother, Beau. He made his feature film debut in the drama \"Halls of Anger\" (1970), and starred in \"The Last Picture Show\" (1971), which earned him his first Academy Award nomination. As a leading man, he starred in the adventure film \"King Kong\" (1976); neo-noir \"Cutter's Way\" (1981); science fiction film \"Tron\" (1982); thrillers \"Jagged Edge\" (1985) and \"The Morning After\" (1986); dramas \"The Fabulous Baker Boys\" (1989), \"The Fisher King\" (1991), and \"The Mirror Has Two Faces\" (1996); and crime comedy \"The Big Lebowski\" (1998).\nBridges received further Oscar nominations for his roles in \"Thunderbolt and Lightfoot\" (1974), \"Starman\" (1984), \"The Contender\" (2000), \"True Grit\" (2010), and \"Hell or High Water\" (2016); and won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his role as an alcoholic singer in \"Crazy Heart\" (2009). He has also starred in big-budget films, such as \"Seabiscuit\" (2003), \"Iron Man\" (2008), and \"\" (2010). On television, he earned Primetime Emmy Award nominations for his performances in the HBO film \"A Dog Year\" (2009), and the Hulu series \"The Old Man\" (2022\u20132024).\nEarly life and education.\nBridges was born on December 4, 1949, in Los Angeles, the son of actor Lloyd Bridges (1913\u20131998) and actress and writer Dorothy Bridges (n\u00e9e Simpson; 1915\u20132009). He is one of four children: older brother Beau Bridges (born December 9, 1941), who is also an actor; a younger sister Lucinda; and a brother named Garrett, who died of sudden infant death syndrome in 1948. His maternal grandfather was an immigrant from Liverpool, England.\nBridges and his siblings were raised in the Holmby Hills section of Los Angeles. He shared a close relationship with his brother Beau, who acted as a surrogate father when their father was working. He graduated from University High School in 1967. At age 17 he toured with his father in a stage production of \"Anniversary Waltz\", and then moved to New York City, where he studied acting at the Herbert Berghof Studio. He also served in the United States Coast Guard Reserve as a boatswain's mate from 1967 to 1975 in San Luis Obispo, California, with a terminal rating of Boatswain's Mate Second Class.\nCareer.\n1951\u20131970: Early roles.\nBridges made his first screen appearance in an uncredited role in \"The Company She Keeps\" (1951); the film was released shortly after his first birthday. In his youth, Bridges and his brother Beau made occasional appearances on their father's show \"Sea Hunt\" (1958\u20131961) and the CBS anthology series \"The Lloyd Bridges Show\" (1962\u20131963). In 1965, he played a supporting role alongside his father in an episode of \"The Loner\". In 1969, he played Job Corps crew member Cal Baker in the \"Lassie\" episode \"Success Story\".\n1971\u20131989: Breakthrough and stardom.\nIn 1971, he played the lead role Mike in the television film \"In Search of America\". His first major role came in the 1971 film \"The Last Picture Show\", for which he garnered a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. He next co-starred in the 1972 gritty boxing film \"Fat City\", directed by John Huston. In 1973, he starred as Junior Jackson in \"The Last American Hero\", a film based on the true story of NASCAR driver Junior Johnson. He was again nominated for Best Supporting Actor for his performance opposite Clint Eastwood in the 1974 film \"Thunderbolt and Lightfoot\".\nIn 1976, he starred as the protagonist Jack Prescott in the first remake of \"King Kong\", opposite Jessica Lange. This film was a commercial success, earning $90\u00a0million worldwide, more than triple its $23\u00a0million budget, and also winning an Academy Award for Best Visual Effects. Towards the end of the decade he acted in mystery \"Somebody Killed Her Husband\" (1978) opposite Farrah Fawcett, the satirical black comedy \"Winter Kills\" (1979) alongside John Huston, and the comedy-drama \"The American Success Company\" (1979). In 1980 he acted in Michael Cimino's large Western ensemble film \"Heaven's Gate\" acting opposite Kris Kristofferson, Christopher Walken, John Hurt, Sam Waterston, and Isabelle Huppert. The film was a public critical and commercial failure and was blamed for the downfall of the studio, United Artists. \nIn 1982, Bridges starred in the science fiction film \"Tron\", in which he played Kevin Flynn, a video game programmer. Critic Roger Ebert described the film as \"brilliant\" and compared it to \"The Empire Strikes Back\" (1980), writing, \"This movie is a machine to dazzle and delight us...[and] in a technical way maybe it's breaking ground for a generation of movies in which computer-generated universes will be the background for mind-generated stories about emotion-generated personalities\". Also in 1982 he voiced Prince Lir in the animated fantasy film \"The Last Unicorn\" alongside Alan Arkin, Mia Farrow, and Angela Lansbury and starred in the romantic comedy \"Kiss Me Goodbye\" directed by Robert Mulligan, acting alongside Sally Field.\nIn 1984, he starred in the John Carpenter-directed science fiction romance \"Starman\" playing an alien opposite Karen Allen. For his performance he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor. During this period he also performed in the neo-noir \"Against All Odds\" (1984) with James Woods and Rachel Ward, the thrillers \"Jagged Edge\" (1985) opposite Glenn Close and \"The Morning After\" (1986) with Jane Fonda, and the crime comedy \"Nadine\" (1987) alongside Kim Basinger. In 1988 he portrayed automobile entrepreneur Preston Tucker in the Francis Ford Coppola directed biographical film \"\" which earned positive reviews. The following year he acted in two romance films, the Alan J. Pakula directed \"See You in the Morning\" with Alice Krige and Farrah Fawcett and the Steve Kloves directed \"The Fabulous Baker Boys\" starring opposite Michelle Pfeiffer and his real life brother Beau Bridges.\n1990\u20132007: Established actor.\nIn 1990 he reunited with Cybill Shepard for Peter Bogdanovich's \"Texasville\", a sequel to the 1971 film \"The Last Picture Show\", which Bridges had starred in. The film also starred Cloris Leachman, Eileen Brennan, and Randy Quaid. The film was based on the 1987 novel of the same name by Larry McMurtry. Bridges said of making the film, \"[It] was like constantly being hit over the head by deja vu. Every day I'd grab Peter and place him in some corner on the street where we were shooting and I'd say, 'Now 20 years ago what did you say to me as I was standing right here?'\". The following year he starred in Terry Gilliam's fantasy comedy-drama \"The Fisher King\" (1991) opposite Robin Williams, Mercedes Ruehl and Amanda Plummer. In the film he plays a misanthropic radio shock jock who befriends a homeless person on the quest to find love and the Holy Grail. For their performances they both received nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor \u2013 Motion Picture Musical or Comedy. In 1992 he produced and starred as a man released from prison in the Martin Bel directed drama \"American Heart\" earning the Independent Spirit Award for Best Male Lead. Film critic Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" praised Bridges' performance writing, \"It's time to recognize Mr. Bridges as the most underappreciated great actor of his generation...he has managed to transform himself to an astonishing degree.\"\nIn 1993 he starred in the Peter Weir directed drama \"Fearless\" (1993) alongside Isabella Rossellini, John Turturro, and Rosie Perez. His role is thought by some critics to be one of his best performances. One critic dubbed it a masterpiece; Pauline Kael wrote that he \"may be the most natural and least self-conscious screen actor that has ever lived\". In 1994, he starred as Lt. Jimmy Dove in the action film \"Blown Away\", opposite Tommy Lee Jones and Forest Whitaker. His real-life father Lloyd Bridges was also featured in the film, playing the uncle of Bridges' character. The film was not a financial success, managing to recoup $30 million of its $50 million budget at the box office, with its release a few weeks after another explosive-themed film, \"Speed\". On July 11, 1994, Bridges received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contributions to the motion picture industry. The star is located at 7065 Hollywood Boulevard. Bridges portrayed James Butler \"Wild Bill\" Hickok in the western film \"Wild Bill\" (1995) acting with Ellen Burstyn, John Hurt and Bruce Dern. The film received mixed reviews and was a box-office bomb. In 1996 he acted in the Showtime television film \"Hidden in America\" alongside his brother Beau Bridges and Frances McDormand.\nThe following year acted in Ridley Scott's survival drama \"White Squall\" and co-starred with Barbra Streisand in the romantic comedy \"The Mirror Has Two Faces\". In 1998, he starred as what is arguably his most iconic role, Jeffrey \"The Dude\" Lebowski, in the Coen brothers' noir comedy \"The Big Lebowski\". He played a fictional president of the United States in the political drama \"The Contender\" acting opposite Gary Oldman and Joan Allen. For his performance he earned his fourth Academy Award nomination as well as nods for the Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actor. The following year he acted in the science-fiction drama \"K-Pax\" opposite Kevin Spacey. He portrayed businessman Charles S. Howard in the horse racing drama film \"Seabiscuit\" co-starring with Tobey Maguire and Chris Cooper. The film was based on the by Laura Hillenbrand. The film earned an Academy Award for Best Picture nomination. He also starred in the 2005 Terry Gilliam fantasy film \"Tideland\" co-starring with Janet McTeer and Jennifer Tilly. That was Bridges' second collaboration with Gilliam, the first being 1991's \"The Fisher King\" alongside Robin Williams.\nBridges hosted VH1's \"Top 100 Greatest Albums of Rock and Roll\" series in 2001. Bridges narrated the documentary \"Lost in La Mancha\" (2002), about the making of a Terry Gilliam retelling of \"Don Quixote\", tentatively titled \"The Man Who Killed Don Quixote\", which would have starred Johnny Depp as Sancho Panza and Jean Rochefort as the quixotic hero. Bridges also narrated the documentaries National Geographic's \"Lewis &amp; Clark: Great Journey West\" (2002, IMAX), Discovery Channel's \"Raising the Mammoth\" (2000), and ABC's \"Heroes of Rock and Roll\" (1979). He voiced the character Big Z in the animated film \"Surf's Up\" (2007). Bridges has performed TV commercial voiceover work as well, including Hyundai's 2007 \"Think About It\" advertising campaign, and the Duracell advertisements in the \"Trusted Everywhere\" campaign.\n2008\u2013present: Career expansion.\nIn 2008, Bridges shaved his head to play the role of Obadiah Stane in the Marvel comic book adaptation of \"Iron Man\" starring Robert Downey Jr. In July 2008, at San Diego Comic-Con, he appeared in a teaser, reprising his 1982 fan favorite role of Kevin Flynn for \"\". Also in 2008 he acted in the HBO film \"A Dog Year\" earning a Primetime Emmy Award nomination. He then acted in the comedy films \"How to Lose Friends &amp; Alienate People\" (2008), and \"The Open Road\" (2009). He gained widespread acclaim for his role as an alcoholic country singer in \"Crazy Heart\" (2009) for which he earned the Academy Award for Best Actor as well as the Golden Globe for Best Actor in a Drama and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role. Bridges is one of the youngest actors ever to be nominated for an Academy Award (1972, age 22, Best Supporting Actor, \"The Last Picture Show\"), and one of the oldest ever to win (winning the Best Actor in 2010 at age 60 for \"Crazy Heart\").\nIn 2009, he acted in the satirical comedy \"The Men Who Stare at Goats\" alongside George Clooney, Ewan McGregor, and Kevin Spacey. In 2010 he reprised his role as Kevin Flynn in \"\" acting with Garrett Hedlund and Olivia Wilde. Bridges received his sixth Academy Award nomination for his role in \"True Grit\", a collaboration with the Coen brothers in which he starred alongside Matt Damon, Josh Brolin, Barry Pepper, and Hailee Steinfeld. Both the film and Bridges' performance as Rooster Cogburn were critically praised. Bridges lost to Colin Firth, whom he had beaten for the Oscar in the same category the previous year. On December 18, 2010, Bridges hosted NBC's \"Saturday Night Live\"; he had hosted the show before in 1983 with his brother, Beau. With the December 18, 2010, episode, Bridges beat Sigourney Weaver's record for longest gap between hosting appearances on \"SNL\". (Weaver had a 24-year gap between her first time hosting in 1986 and her second time hosting in 2010, while Bridges had a 27-year gap between his first appearance in 1983 and his most recent one, also in 2010.)\nIn 2013, he starred alongside Ryan Reynolds in the action comedy \"R.I.P.D.\" which was a box office and critical failure. That same year Bridges wrote \"The Dude and the Zen Master\" with Bernie Glassman. Bridges found himself at a party with Glassman and Ram Dass and their conversation led to discussing the parallels between \"The Dude\" from \"The Big Lebowski\" and Zen Buddhism. The book was formed from what has been described as a \"transcript of a five-day 'hang' on a Montana ranch.\" The following year he produced and starred as the title role in dystopian drama \"The Giver\" and acted in the action fantasy film \"Seventh Son\", which were both critically panned and the latter a box office flop. In 2015 Bridges voiced The Aviator in the animated film \"The Little Prince\" based on the 1943 children's novella of the same name. The following year he narrated the documentary \"\" (2015) and acted in the Taylor Sheridan directed neo-Western drama film \"Hell or High Water\" (2015) opposite Chris Pine and Ben Foster. For the role he received his a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, which would be his seventh Oscar nomination.\nIn 2017, he acted in the romantic drama \"The Only Living Boy in New York\" with Callum Turner and Kate Beckinsale and in the spy action comedy ' starring Taron Egerton and Colin Firth. In 2018 he acted in the neo-noir ensemble thriller \"Bad Times at the El Royale\" with Cynthia Erivo, Dakota Johnson, and Jon Hamm. For his contribution to films, he was presented with the Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2019. Starting in 2022 he acted in the FX drama thriller series \"The Old Man\" opposite John Lithgow. For his performance he earned nominations for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor \u2013 Television Series Drama. In 2024, Bridges received the annual Chaplin Gala Award which was held at Alice Tully Hall at Lincoln Center. Also in 2024, it was announced that Bridges would be reprising his role as Kevin Flynn in '.\nIn June 2024, he was cast as God in the upcoming comedy film \"\".\nInterests.\nMusic.\nReferring to his career as an actor and his passion for music, Bridges says, \"I dug what an actor did, but it took me a while to feel it, to truly appreciate the craft and the preparation. Plus, I was still playing music a lot, and I guess I had a hard time choosing: was I an actor or a musician, or could I be both?\" Bridges studied piano at a young age, strongly encouraged by his mother. Before his first lead role as an actor he already sold two songs to the musician and composer Quincy Jones, who used his \"Lost in Space\" for the soundtrack of the 1970 film \"John and Mary\" and let Bridges contribute the vocals. While working on the 1980 film \"Heaven's Gate\", he often played guitar with his co-star, singer-songwriter Kris Kristofferson, between takes. His character in \"Crazy Heart\", Bad Blake, was later based partly on Kristofferson. In 1982, he voiced the character of Prince L\u00edr in the animated film \"The Last Unicorn\", and in that role sang on two songs, including a duet with Mia Farrow. He released his debut album \"Be Here Soon\" on January 1, 2000. In 2005, Bridges, known as \"The Dude\" in the film \"The Big Lebowski\", showed up at a Lebowski Fest in Los Angeles singing and playing the film's theme song written by Bob Dylan, \"Man in Me\".\nOn January 15, 2010, Bridges performed the song \"I Don't Know\" from \"Crazy Heart\" on \"The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien\". In the film \"The Contender\", in which he co-starred, Bridges recorded a version of Johnny Cash's standard \"Ring of Fire\" with Kim Carnes that played over the pivotal opening credits. In February 2010, he was among the nearly 80 musicians to sing on the charity-single remake of \"We Are the World\". On October 24, 2010, Bridges appeared at Neil Young's annual \"Bridge School Benefit\" concert and played a set with singer-songwriter Neko Case. On April 19, 2011, Country Music Television announced that Bridges had signed a recording contract with Blue Note Records/EMI Music Group. He worked with producer T Bone Burnett and released his second album, \"Jeff Bridges,\" on August 16, 2011. On November 5, 2011, Bridges played Austin City Limits in support of this album.\nIn 2015, he sang on the album \"Strangers Again\", performing a duet with Judy Collins of the song \"Make Our Garden Grow\" from \"Candide\" by Leonard Bernstein. The same year, he released an ambient/spoken-word album entitled \"Sleeping Tapes\". All proceeds from the album go directly to Bridges' charity No Kid Hungry. Bridges plays many guitars, including the Gretsch Chet Atkins Country Gentlemen Model G6122-19. In 2020, Bridges partnered with Breedlove Guitars to release his signature Oregon Concerto Bourbon CE with \"All In This Together\" scrawled across the fretboard. In 2025, he shared a verse and chorus on the song \"Men in Bars\" from Japanese Breakfast's album For Melancholy Brunettes (&amp; Sad Women).\nPhotography.\nBridges has been an amateur photographer since high school. He began taking photographs on film sets during \"Starman\" at the suggestion of co-star Karen Allen in 1984, with his favorite camera, a Widelux F8 that his wife bought him. He published many of these photographs online and in a 2003 book entitled \"Pictures: Photographs by Jeff Bridges\". In 2013, he received an Infinity Award for his photos from the International Center of Photography in New York. A follow-up book, \"Jeff Bridges: Pictures Volume Two\", was published in 2019.\nPersonal life.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBridges and his siblings inherited their family house in Malibu from their parents. In January 2025, the house burned down in the Palisades Fire.\nBridges dated Candy Clark for several years after they met on the set of \"Fat City\" in 1972.\nMarriage and family.\nBridges married Susan Geston in 1977. They met while filming \"Rancho Deluxe\" (1975), on a ranch where Geston had been working as a waitress. They have three daughters, born in 1981, 1983 and 1985.\nReligious beliefs.\nBridges has studied Buddhism and has described himself as \"a Buddhistly bent guy\". He has co-written a book with the Zen master Bernie Glassman on the subject, but doesn't consider himself a Buddhist in terms of formal affiliation, saying he only enjoys the meditation part. On most days, he meditates for half an hour before beginning work on a film set.\nHealth problems.\nOn October 19, 2020, Bridges announced that he had been diagnosed with Non-Hodgkin lymphoma and has gone through chemotherapy. On September 12, 2021, Bridges announced that his cancer was in remission: \"My cancer is in remission \u2014 the 9\" \u00d7 12\" mass has shrunk down to the size of a marble.\" Bridges also announced he contracted COVID-19 while in treatment and which he fought for almost five weeks.\nHe described the long process of recovery from both diseases, relating how large his tumor had grown, yet being unaware it was there. After five weeks in the hospital with COVID, he had months of recuperation at home before he could function again.\nPhilanthropy.\nIn 1984, Bridges and other entertainment industry leaders founded the End Hunger Network aimed at encouraging, stimulating and supporting action to end childhood hunger. He supported president Barack Obama's initiative to end childhood hunger by 2015. In November 2010, Bridges became spokesman for the No Kid Hungry campaign of the organization Share our Strength. Its goal was to present and undertake a state-by-state strategy to end childhood hunger in the United States by 2015. Bridges also supports environmental causes and organizations such as the Amazon Conservation Team.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56440", "revid": "1312982474", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56440", "title": "Orbital inclination", "text": "Angle between a reference plane and the plane of an orbit\nOrbital inclination measures the tilt of an object's orbit around a celestial body. It is expressed as the angle between a reference plane and the orbital plane or axis of direction of the orbiting object.\nFor a satellite orbiting the Earth directly above the Equator, the plane of the satellite's orbit is the same as the Earth's equatorial plane, and the satellite's orbital inclination is 0\u00b0. The general case for a circular orbit is that it is tilted, spending half an orbit over the northern hemisphere and half over the southern. If the orbit swung between 20\u00b0 north latitude and 20\u00b0 south latitude, then its orbital inclination would be 20\u00b0.\nOrbits.\nThe inclination is one of the six orbital elements describing the shape and orientation of a celestial orbit. It is the angle between the orbital plane and the plane of reference, normally stated in degrees. For a satellite orbiting a planet, the plane of reference is usually the plane containing the planet's equator. For planets in the Solar System, the plane of reference is usually the ecliptic, the plane in which the Earth orbits the Sun. This reference plane is most practical for Earth-based observers. Therefore, Earth's inclination is, by definition, zero.\nInclination can instead be measured with respect to another plane, such as the Sun's equator or the invariable plane (the plane that represents the angular momentum of the Solar System, approximately the orbital plane of Jupiter).\nNatural and artificial satellites.\nThe inclination of orbits of natural or artificial satellites is measured relative to the equatorial plane of the body they orbit, if they orbit sufficiently closely. The equatorial plane is the plane perpendicular to the axis of rotation of the central body.\nAn inclination of 30\u00b0 could also be described using an angle of 150\u00b0. The convention is that the normal orbit is prograde, an orbit in the same direction as the planet rotates. Inclinations greater than 90\u00b0 describe retrograde orbits (backward). Thus:\nFor impact-generated moons of terrestrial planets not too far from their star, with a large planet\u2013moon distance, the orbital planes of moons tend to be aligned with the planet's orbit around the star due to tides from the star, but if the planet\u2013moon distance is small, it may be inclined. For gas giants, the orbits of moons tend to be aligned with the giant planet's equator, because these formed in circumplanetary disks. Strictly speaking, this applies only to regular satellites. Captured bodies on distant orbits vary widely in their inclinations, while captured bodies in relatively close orbits tend to have low inclinations owing to tidal effects and perturbations by large regular satellites.\nExoplanets and multiple star systems.\nThe inclination of exoplanets or members of multi-star star systems is the angle of the plane of the orbit relative to the plane of the sky: a plane perpendicular to the line of sight from Earth to the object: .\nSince the word \"inclination\" is used in exoplanet studies for this line-of-sight inclination, the angle between the planet's orbit and its star's rotational axis is expressed using the term the \"spin-orbit angle\" or \"spin-orbit alignment\". In most cases the orientation of the star's rotational axis is unknown.\nBecause the radial-velocity method more easily finds planets with orbits closer to edge-on, most exoplanets found by this method have inclinations between 45\u00b0 and 135\u00b0, although in most cases the inclination is not known. Consequently, most exoplanets found by radial velocity have true masses no more than 40% greater than their minimum masses. If the orbit is almost face-on, especially for superjovians detected by radial velocity, then those objects may actually be brown dwarfs or even red dwarfs.\nIf the orbit is almost edge-on, then the planet can be seen transiting its star.\nCalculation.\nIn astrodynamics, the inclination formula_1 can be computed from the orbital momentum vector formula_2 (or any vector perpendicular to the orbital plane) as\nformula_3\nwhere formula_4 is the z-component of formula_2.\nMutual inclination of two orbits may be calculated from their inclinations to another plane using cosine rule for angles.\nObservations and theories.\nMost planetary orbits in the Solar System have relatively small inclinations, both in relation to each other and to the Sun's equator:\nOn the other hand, the dwarf planets Pluto and Eris have inclinations to the ecliptic of 17\u00b0 and 44\u00b0 respectively, and the large asteroid Pallas is inclined at 34\u00b0.\nIn 1966, Peter Goldreich published a classic paper on the evolution of the Moon's orbit and on the orbits of other moons in the Solar System. He showed that, for each planet, there is a distance such that moons closer to the planet than that distance maintain an almost constant orbital inclination with respect to the planet's equator (with an orbital precession mostly due to the tidal influence of the planet), whereas moons farther away maintain an almost constant orbital inclination with respect to the ecliptic (with precession due mostly to the tidal influence of the sun). The moons in the first category, with the exception of Neptune's moon Triton, orbit near the equatorial plane. He concluded that these moons formed from equatorial accretion disks. But he found that the Moon, although it was once inside the critical distance from the Earth, never had an equatorial orbit as would be expected from various scenarios for its origin. This is called the lunar inclination problem, to which various solutions have since been proposed.\nOther meaning.\nFor planets and other rotating celestial bodies, the angle of the equatorial plane relative to the orbital plane \u2013 such as the tilt of the Earth's poles toward or away from the Sun \u2013 is sometimes also called inclination, but less ambiguous terms are axial tilt or obliquity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56441", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56441", "title": "Astronomical distance", "text": ""}
{"id": "56442", "revid": "21054272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56442", "title": "A Dictionary of Modern English Usage", "text": "Style guide by Henry Watson Fowler \nA Dictionary of Modern English Usage (1926), by H. W. Fowler (1858\u20131933), is a style guide to British English usage and writing. It covers a wide range of topics that relate to usage, including: plurals, nouns, verbs, punctuation, cases, parentheses, quotation marks, the use of foreign terms, and so on. The dictionary became the standard for other style guides to writing in English. The 1926 first edition remains in print, along with the 1965 second edition, which was edited by Ernest Gowers, and was reprinted in 1983 and 1987. The 1996 third edition, re-titled \"The New Fowler's Modern English Usage\", and revised in 2004, was mostly rewritten by Robert W. Burchfield as a usage dictionary that incorporated corpus linguistics data. The 2015 fourth edition, re-titled \"Fowler's Dictionary of Modern English Usage\", was edited by Jeremy Butterfield as a usage dictionary. Informally, readers refer to the style guide and dictionary as Fowler's Modern English Usage, Fowler, and Fowler's.\nLinguistic approach.\n\"A Dictionary of Modern English Usage\" encourages a direct, vigorous writing style, and opposes artificiality, by advising against convoluted sentence construction and the use of archaisms. It opposes pedantry, and ridicules artificial grammar rules unwarranted by natural English usage, such as bans on ending a sentence with a preposition, rules on the placement of the word \"only\", and rules distinguishing between \"which\" and \"that\". It classifies and condemns clich\u00e9s. It discusses the terms \"battered ornament\", \"vogue words\", and \"worn-out humour\", and defends useful distinctions between words whose meanings were coalescing in practice, thereby guiding the speaker and the writer away from illogical sentence construction, and the misuse of words. In the entries \"Pedantic Humour\" and \"Polysyllabic Humour\" Fowler is critical of the use of arcane words (archaisms) and the use of unnecessarily long words.\nQuotations.\nWidely and often cited, \"A Dictionary of Modern English Usage\" is renowned for its witty passages. The following examples are found in either the first edition, the second edition, or both:\nEditions.\nBefore writing \"A Dictionary of Modern English Usage\", Henry W. Fowler and his younger brother, Francis George Fowler (1871\u20131918), wrote and revised \"The King's English\" (1906), a grammar and usage guide. Assisted in the research by Francis, who died in 1918 of tuberculosis contracted (1915\u201316) whilst serving with the British Expeditionary Force in the First World War (1914\u20131918), Henry dedicated the first edition of the \"Dictionary\" to his late brother:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe first edition of \"A Dictionary of Modern English Usage\" was published in 1926, and then was reprinted with corrections in 1930, 1937, 1954, and in 2009, with an introduction and commentary by the linguist David Crystal. The second edition, titled \"Fowler's Modern English Usage\", was published in 1965, revised and edited by Ernest Gowers. The third edition, \"The New Fowler's Modern English Usage\", was published in 1996, edited by Robert Burchfield; and in 2004, Burchfield's revision of the 1996 edition was published as \"Fowler's Modern English Usage\". The fourth edition, \"Fowler's Dictionary of Modern English Usage\", was published in 2015, edited by Jeremy Butterfield.\nThe modernisation of \"A Dictionary of English Usage\" (1926) yielded the \"Pocket Fowler's Modern English Usage\" (1999), edited by the lexicographer Robert Allen, which is based upon Burchfield's 1996 edition; the modernised edition is a forty per cent abridgement realised with reduced-length entries and the omission of about half the entries of the 1996 edition. A second edition of Allen's \"Pocket Fowler\" was published in 2008, the content of which the publisher said \"harks back to the original 1926 edition\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56443", "revid": "1294987758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56443", "title": "Fowler", "text": "Fowler may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "56444", "revid": "22242824", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56444", "title": "Jeans", "text": "Pants/trousers made from denim or dungaree cloth\nJeans are a type of trousers made from denim or dungaree cloth. Often the term \"jeans\" refers to a particular style of trousers, called \"blue jeans\", with the addition of copper pocket rivets added by Jacob W. Davis in 1871 and patented by Davis and Levi Strauss on May 20, 1873. Prior to the patent, the term \"blue jeans\" had been long in use for various garments (including trousers, overalls, and coats), constructed from blue-colored denim.\nOriginally designed for miners, modern jeans were popularized as casual wear by Marlon Brando and James Dean in their 1950s films, particularly \"The Wild One\" and \"Rebel Without a Cause\", leading to the fabric becoming a symbol of rebellion among teenagers, especially members of the greaser subculture. From the 1960s onwards, jeans became common among various youth subcultures and subsequently young members of the general population. Nowadays, they are one of the most popular types of trousers in Western culture. Historic brands include Levi's, Lee, and Wrangler.\nHistory.\nFabric.\nResearch on the trade of jean fabric shows that it emerged in the cities of, N\u00eemes, France followed by then Genoa, Italy. G\u00eanes, the French word for Genoa, might be the origin of the word \". In N\u00eemes, weavers tried to reproduce jean fabric but instead developed a similar twill fabric that became known as denim, \"de N\u00eemes\"\", meaning \"from N\u00eemes\". Genoa's jeans fabric was a fustian textile of \"medium quality and of reasonable cost\", very similar to cotton corduroy for which Genoa was famous, and was \"used for work clothes in general\". The Genoese navy equipped its sailors with jeans, as they needed a fabric that could be worn wet or dry. N\u00eemes's \"denim\" was coarser, considered higher quality, and was used \"for over garments such as smocks or overalls\".23 In 1576, a quantity of \"jean fustians\" arrived into the port of Barnstaple on a vessel from Bristol. Nearly all indigo, needed for dyeing, came from indigo bush plantations in India until the late 19th century. It was replaced by indigo synthesis methods developed in Germany.\nBy the 17th century, jean was a crucial textile for working-class people in Northern Italy. This is seen in a series of genre paintings from around the 17th century attributed to an artist now referred to as the Master of the Blue Jeans.10 The ten paintings depict impoverished scenes with lower-class figures wearing a fabric that looks like denim. The fabric would have been Genoese jean, which was cheaper. Genre painting came to prominence in the late 16th century, and the non-nobility subject matter in all ten paintings places them among others that portray similar scenes.\nDungaree, a type of fabric, was mentioned for the first time in the 17th century, when it was referred to as coarse calico cloth, often colored blue but sometimes bleached white, worn by impoverished workers in what was then a region of Bombay, India a dockside village called Dongri. This cloth was \"dungri\" in Hindi. Dungri was exported to England and used for manufacturing of cheap, robust working clothes such as overalls. In English, the word \"dungri\" became pronounced as \"dungaree\". It was used by utility workers of the US Navy throughout World War I. Dungaree was replaced with denim, a textile named after the N\u00eemes, that gained popularity after being manufactured by Jacob W. Davis.\nRivets.\nThe term \"jeans\" appears first in 1795, when a Swiss banker by the name Jean-Gabriel Eynard and his brother Jacques went to Genoa and both were soon heading a flourishing commercial concern. In 1800 Massena's troops entered the town and Jean-Gabriel was entrusted with their supply. In particular he furnished them with uniforms cut from blue cloth called \"bleu de Genes\" whence later derives the famous garment known worldwide as \"blue jeans\".\nLevi Strauss, as a young man in 1851, went from Germany to New York to join his older brothers who ran a goods store. In 1853, he moved to San Francisco to open his own dry goods business. Jacob Davis was a tailor who often bought bolts of cloth from the Levi Strauss &amp; Co. wholesale house. In 1872, Davis wrote to Strauss asking to partner with him to patent and sell clothing reinforced with rivets. The copper rivets were to reinforce the points of stress, such as pocket corners and at the bottom of the button fly. Strauss accepted Davis's offer, and the two men received US patent No. 139,121 for an \"Improvement in Fastening Pocket-Openings\" on May 20, 1873.\nDavis and Strauss experimented with different fabrics. An early attempt was brown cotton duck, a bottom-weight fabric. Finding denim a more suitable material for work-pants, they began using it to manufacture their riveted pants. The denim used was produced by an American manufacturer. Popular legend incorrectly states that it was imported from N\u00eemes. A popular myth is that Strauss initially sold brown canvas pants to miners, later dyed them blue, turned to using denim, and only after Davis wrote to him, added rivets.\nInitially, Strauss's jeans were simply sturdy trousers worn by factory workers, miners, farmers, and cattlemen throughout the North American West. During this period, men's jeans had the fly down the front, whereas women's jeans had the fly down the left side. When Levi Strauss &amp; Co. patented the modern, mass-produced prototype in 1873, there were two pockets in the front and a patch pocket on the back right reinforced with copper rivets. The small riveted watch pocket was first added by Levi Strauss to their jeans in the late 1870s.\n20th century evolution.\nIn 1901, Levi Strauss added the back left pocket to their 501 model. This created the now familiar and industry-standard five-pocket configuration with two large pockets and small watch pocket in front with two pockets on the rear.\nThe popularity of \"waist overalls\", as jeans were sometimes called, expanded during World War II. By the 1960s, both men's and women's jeans had the zipper down the front. Historic photographs indicate that in the decades before they became a staple of fashion, jeans generally fit quite loosely, much like a pair of bib overalls without the bib. Indeed, until 1960, Levi Strauss called its flagship product \"waist overalls\" rather than \"jeans\".\nAfter James Dean popularized them in the movie \"Rebel Without a Cause\", wearing jeans became a symbol of youth rebellion during the 1950s. During the 1960s, the wearing of jeans became more acceptable, and by the 1970s it had become general fashion in the United States for casual wear. In Japan in 1977, a professor of Osaka University Philip Karl Pehda chastised a female student wearing jeans in the classroom. Then he was protested by the students, and a controversy arose in the country.\nExamples of intentional denim distressing strictly to make them more fashionable can be seen as early as 1935 in Vogue's June issue. Michael Belluomo, editor of \"Sportswear International Magazine\", Oct/Nov 1987, p.\u00a045, wrote that in 1965, Limbo, a boutique in the New York East Village, was \"the first retailer to wash a new pair of jeans to get a used, worn effect, and the idea became a hit.\" He continued, \"[Limbo] hired East Village artists to embellish the jeans with patches, decals, and other touches, and sold them for $200.\" In the early 1980s the denim industry introduced the stone-washing technique developed by GWG also known as \"Great Western Garment Co.\" Donald Freeland of Edmonton, Alberta, pioneered the method, which helped to bring denim to a larger and more versatile market. Acceptance of jeans continued through the 1980s and 1990s. Originally a utilitarian garment, jeans became a common fashion choice in the second half of the 20th century.\nLevi' 501s are featured prominently in the chapter on trousers in the 1987 book \"A Gentleman's Wardrobe: Classic Clothes and the Modern Man\" by British fashion journalist Paul Keers.\nIn the early 21st century, \"Details Men's Style Manual\" devoted a chapter to jeans, saying, \"Now that jeans have become more acceptable cocktail-hour attire, you should probably own more than one pair.\" Calling Levi's 501s \"an icon from the moment they were introduced,\" and \"the quintessential pair of jeans,\" the guidebook calls the standard straight leg design, \"a classic clean-cut \"American Graffiti\" look.\"\nManufacturing processes.\nDyeing.\nTraditionally, jeans were dyed to a blue color using natural indigo dye. Most denim is now dyed using synthetic indigo. Approximately 20\u00a0thousand tons of indigo are produced annually for this purpose, though only a few grams of the dye are required for each pair. For other colors of denim other dyes must be used. Currently, jeans are produced in any color that can be achieved with cotton.\nFor more information on dyeing, refer to denim and the discussion there of using pigment dyes.\nPre-shrinking.\nIn 1962, Levi Strauss introduced their own pre-shrunk jeans (Lee and Wrangler jeans had already long been pre-shrunk); these did not shrink further after purchase, allowing the consumer to purchase a correctly fitting size. Pre-shrink is common in jeans nowadays. These jeans were known as the 505 regular fit jeans. The 505s are almost identical to the 501s with the exception of the button-fly. The Levi's Corporation also introduced a slim boot-cut fit known as 517 and 527. The difference between the two is that the 517s sit at the waist line and the 527s sit below the waist line. Later, Levi's would develop other styles and fits such as the loose, slim, comfort, relaxed, skinny, and a regular fit with a tapered leg.\nUsed and distressed looks.\nA significant amount of the aesthetic treatment of jeans may occur after the denim has been cut and sewn into the final garment. Many denim articles are washed to make them softer and to reduce or minimize shrinkage even beyond what sanforization prevents. Significantly washed denim can resemble dry denim which has faded naturally over extended use. Such distressing may be supplemented by chemical treatments or physical techniques such as stone washing.\nThe used or \"acid wash\" look is created by means of abrading the jeans or treating them with chemicals, such as acryl resin, phenol, a hypochlorite, potassium permanganate, caustic soda, acids etc.\nRipping or distressing of jeans, though also arising naturally as a result of wear and tear, is sometimes deliberately performed by suppliers\u2014with distressed clothing sometimes selling for more than a nondistressed pair. For example, Pucci sold \"embellished mid-rise boyfriend jeans\" for \u00a3600 (US$860).\nChanges in appearance due to use.\nOver time dry denim will fade, which is considered fashionable in some circumstances. During the process of wear, fading will usually occur on those parts of the article that receive the most stress. On a pair of jeans, this includes the upper thighs, the ankles, and the areas behind the knees. Patterns of fading in jeans caused by prolonged periods of wear include:\nDistressed jeans.\nDistressed denim emerged from the cultural punk movement in the 1970s. Early punks tore apart consumer goods as an expression of their anger towards capitalism and corporate greed.\nPunks used safety pins in garments to encourage the youth to not buy endless, meaningless fashion, and thus fund corporations. Clothes manufacturers gentrified the notion by selling clothes with safety pins already in them, so the original meaning of punk was lost. Denim became a key target of this politically fueled deconstruction, with both men and women donning torn pants and jackets, accessorized with safety pins and slogans. \nThe trend became popular again in the 1990s with the emergence of grunge fashion. The grunge youth wore loose-fitting ripped jeans, flannel shirts or woolen Pendletons layered over T-shirts. Their anti-conformist approach to fashion led to the popularization of the casual chic look, a trend which continued into the 2000s.\nEnvironmental and humanitarian impact.\nA typical pair of blue jeans uses of water during its life cycle. This includes the water to irrigate the cotton crop, manufacture the jeans, and the numerous washes by the consumer. During production, the typical amount for washing with traditional Pullman machines reaches 90 litres per jeans, which can be reduced to about 27 litres using modern frontloaders. Novel washing processes such as Droptima can reduce that to 6 litres fresh water plus 4 litres used water.\nThe production of jeans with a \"used look\" can be more environmentally damaging than regular jeans, depending on how the waste compounds are processed. Sandblasting and treating with sandpaper has the risk of causing silicosis to the workers, and in Turkey, more than 5,000 textile workers have been stricken with this disease, and 46 people are known to have died. Some companies have announced they are banning the use of sandblasting.\nCare and wear.\nDespite most jeans being \"pre-shrunk\", they are still sensitive to slight further shrinkage and loss of color from being washed. The Levi Strauss company recommends avoiding washing jeans as much as possible. These and other suggestions to avoid washing jeans where possible have encountered criticism. Cory Warren, editor of \"LS&amp;Co. Unzipped\", clarifies in a response to such a criticism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Our advice is to wash less often, but clearly, you have to judge for yourself what's appropriate. Hot day, dirty job? Wash your jeans. Please! Cold day, office job? Maybe you can wear them twice or more before they go back to the washing machine. Personally, if I wear a pair of jeans to work on Friday\u2014cool climate, office job\u2014I tend to wear them on Saturday. And if Saturday is spent indoors and I'm not spilling food all over myself, I might even wear them on Sunday.\u2014\u200a\nFor those who prefer to refrain from washing their jeans there have been suggestions to freeze them in order to kill the germs that cause odor. However, this advice has been proven ineffective.\nLegal cases.\nItalian rape trial.\nIn Rome, Italy, in 1992, a 45-year-old driving instructor was accused of rape. When he picked up an 18-year-old girl for her first driving lesson, he allegedly raped her for an hour, then told her that if she was to tell anyone he would kill her. Later that night she told her parents and her parents agreed to help her press charges. While the alleged rapist was convicted and sentenced, the Italian Supreme Court of Cassation overturned the conviction in 1998 because the victim wore tight jeans. It was argued that she must have necessarily had to help her attacker remove her jeans, thus making the act consensual (\"because the victim wore very, very tight jeans, she had to help him remove them... and by removing the jeans... it was no longer rape but consensual sex\"). The court stated in its decision \"it is a fact of common experience that it is nearly impossible to slip off tight jeans even partly without the active collaboration of the person who is wearing them.\"\nThe ruling sparked widespread feminist protest. The day after the decision, women in the Italian Parliament protested by wearing jeans and holding placards that read \"Jeans: An Alibi for Rape\". As a sign of support, the California Senate and the California Assembly followed suit. Patricia Giggans, the executive director of the Los Angeles Commission on Assaults Against Women (now Peace Over Violence) soon made Denim Day an annual event. As of 2011[ [update]] at least 20 U.S. states officially recognize Denim Day in April. Wearing jeans on that day has become an international symbol of protest against such attitudes about sexual assault. In 2008 the Supreme Court of Cassation overturned the ruling, so there is no longer a \"denim\" defense to the charge of rape.\nRokotov-Faibishenko case.\nIn 1957, during the 6th World Festival of Youth and Students held in Moscow, Soviet Union (present-day Russia), Western-made jeans were first introduced to the communist state and sparked \"jeans fever\" at the time. People preferred to wear Western-made blue jeans rather than local-made black ones. In Soviet ideology, such an action challenged communist-made jeans and symbolized Western victory. In 1961, two ringleaders, Y. T. Rokotov and V. P. Faibishenko, were caught with their group for smuggling currencies from other countries along with blue jeans and other contraband. Under the leadership of Nikita Khrushchev, the duo were executed.\nTrends.\nWorldwide market for jeans.\nNorth America accounts for 39% of global purchases for jeans, followed by Western Europe at 20%, Japan and Korea at 10% and the rest of the world at 31%.\nUnited States consumers spent more than US$14 billion on jeans in 2004 and US$15 billion in 2005. US consumers bought US$13.8 billion of men's and women's jeans in the year that ended April 30, 2011 (~$ in 2024), according to market-research firm NPD Group.\nSoviet Union.\nIn the Soviet Union, jeans were the symbol of the Western way of life. The \"jeans fever\" in the USSR started in 1957 during the World Festival of Youth and Students. According to a 1961 Soviet textile dictionary, jeans were initially referred to as a \"worker's uniform\" (\u0440\u0430\u0431\u043e\u0447\u0438\u0439 \u043a\u043e\u0441\u0442\u044e\u043c, \"rabochii kostyum\").\nThe jeans brand Rokotov and Fainberg is named after the defendants in the Rokotov\u2013Faibishenko case, Yan T. Rokotov and Vladislav P. Faibishenko, who were executed for, among other things, trafficking in jeans.\nAlthough not outright banned, jeans were hard to come by in the Soviet Union since they were seen as a symbol of rebellion by the Soviet youth, who wanted to emulate the style of film and rock stars of the West. The Soviet government resisted supplying the market with jeans as it would mean responding to the market, a capitalist principle. People went to great lengths, sometimes by resorting to violence and other illegal activities, to obtain real Western-made jeans. That led to the creation of black markets and to the bootlegging of jeans, which since has become an important cultural element of the history of the Soviet Union.\nMarket-share shift to activewear.\nIn 2014, teens were buying more fashion and athleisure clothing from brands such as Nike and Lululemon over denim classics from brands like Abercrombie &amp; Fitch. Activewear in 2014 comprised 28% of teens' apparel purchases, up from 6% in 2008. In 2014, Nike, Lululemon, Under Armour, and Adidas were the most popular brands for athletic apparel among teen consumers. Fashion retailers have begun to adjust their offerings accordingly. Bloomberg reports that Levi's stuck to its core product (denim) instead of adapting to consumer trends. As a result, Levi's sales decreased from over US$7 billion to US$4.8 billion in 2015.\nIn February 2021, it was found that sales for athleisure had risen by 84% since March 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 lockdowns.\nVariations on the basic type.\nLow-rise jeans.\nMedia reported in 2017 that the trend of low-rise jeans, famous in the 1990s and 2000s, was coming back into fashion due to a sparked by an interest in Y2K style.\nIn the early 2000s, low-rise jeans were commonly seen on celebrities such as Britney Spears, Jennifer Lopez, Paris Hilton, Gwen Stefani and Christina Aguilera, attributing to the Y2K style. In 2021, online searches for 'y2k fashion' had risen by 193%, showing that the fashion style was making a comeback, and low-rise jeans were becoming a common clothing item for teenagers and young adults. \nLow-rise jeans usually come or more below the navel. Manufactured low-rise jeans have a shorter rise (distance between the waistband and crotch seam). The low-rise look can also be accomplished by letting jeans with longer rises fall lower than they are meant to. This is a less extreme version of sagging, which was popularized by male hip-hop artists in the 1990s.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56446", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56446", "title": "Cristoforo Colombo", "text": ""}
{"id": "56447", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56447", "title": "Theo Wade Brown", "text": "British engineer\nTheo Wade Brown (26 May 1950 \u2013 30 April 2002) was an English carpenter, designer and engineer.\nBrown was also a bon viveur, amateur musician and genuine eccentric. With his handlebar moustache and long red hair, he was an unmistakable figure.\nBrown was a well-known member of the London film special effects community, and one of the core team at the Computer Film Company that won a Scientific and Technical Academy Award for developing digital film technology.\nBrown later designed the Northlight film scanner for the Computer Film Company scanner division (now Filmlight), and was responsible not only for its remarkable engineering design, but also its 1920s-style marble and steel appearance\u2014an artistic flourish that was characteristic of Brown's approach to life.\nBrown suffered from bipolar disorder which led eventually to his death.\nIn 2010, he was posthumously awarded a Scientific and Technical Academy Award for his work at Filmlight on the Northlight scanner technology."}
{"id": "56449", "revid": "6643015", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56449", "title": "Alexander Dumas", "text": ""}
{"id": "56452", "revid": "45523345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56452", "title": "\u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik Municipality", "text": "\u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik Municipality (; ) is one of Sweden's 290 municipalities, in V\u00e4sternorrland County in northern Sweden. Its seat is in the town \u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik. The present municipality was created in 1971 by the amalgamation of the \"City of \u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik\" with seven former rural municipalities.\nGeography.\n\u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik is situated near the northern end of the \"High Coast\", which is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and has the third longest suspension bridge in Europe, the H\u00f6ga Kusten Bridge.\nThe city is located around 100\u00a0km south of Ume\u00e5 and 550\u00a0km north of Stockholm. The area is dominated by forest, but it also contains minor areas of agriculture.\nLocalities.\nThe municipality of \u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik consists of a number of parishes, within which are towns and villages. The population is distributed as follows:\nParish (town) number of citizens (31 December 2005):\nTotal: 54,943\nDemographics.\nThis is a demographic table based on \u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik Municipality's electoral districts in the 2022 Swedish general election sourced from SVT's election platform, in turn taken from SCB official statistics.\nIn total there were 55,778 residents, including 43,029 Swedish citizens of voting age. 58.5% voted for the left coalition and 40.3% for the right coalition. Indicators are in percentage points except population totals and income.\nTransportation.\nMain road transportations are provided by the European route E4. The \u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik Airport provides daily flights to and from the Stockholm-Arlanda Airport courtesy of H\u00f6ga Kusten Flyg, and also charter flights to Turkey courtesy of Pegasus Airlines. Railway transportation will in the future be provided by high-speed railway Botniabanan, which is currently under construction. There is also a harbour, where cargo ships load and unload timber and other merchandise. In North America the town is known for its excellent hockey players, a number of whom play with the NHL.\nRecreation and sports.\nDue to the hilly surroundings, hiking and exploring the scenery of the High Coast is popular in the area. In the wintertime, skiing is popular. Both cross-country skiing, alpine skiing and even ski jumping is practiced almost in the downtown area. Since \u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik is a coastal town, there are also beaches near town, as well as campsites. There's also an indoor water park called Paradisbadet, with one of the longest water slides in Europe.\nSports is also popular, the main spectator sport in town is ice hockey, with the local team Modo Hockey in Swedish Hockey League, the main league for ice hockey in Sweden. The local football teams are not quite as successful, but still pretty popular, on the men's side especially the teams Friska Viljor FC from central \u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik and Anundsj\u00f6 IF from Bredbyn outside of town, and women's Sj\u00e4levads IK. A couple floorball teams from town have also had some success.\nNotable people.\n\u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik is the birthplace of many world-famous ice hockey players, including Nils Johansson, Per Svartvadet, Peter Forsberg, Markus N\u00e4slund, Niklas Sundstr\u00f6m, Andreas Salomonsson, Magnus Wernblom, Mattias Timander, Victor Hedman, Tobias Enstr\u00f6m, and the twins Daniel and Henrik Sedin. The Sedin twins were top players for the Vancouver Canucks, and Hedman plays for the Tampa Bay Lightning. Many stars from hockey's previous generation, including Anders Hedberg, Thomas Gradin, and Anders Kallur were also either \u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik natives (Hedberg) and/or played in the town for the Modo Hockey club.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\n\u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56454", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56454", "title": "FDA", "text": ""}
{"id": "56455", "revid": "1318775865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56455", "title": "Antonio Stradivari", "text": "Italian luthier (1644\u20131737)\nAntonio Stradivari (, , ; c.\u20091644 \u2013 18 December 1737) was an Italian luthier and a craftsman of string instruments such as violins, cellos, guitars, violas and harps. The Latinized form of his surname, \"Stradivarius\", as well as the colloquial \"Strad\" are terms often used to refer to his instruments. It is estimated that Stradivari produced 1,116 instruments, of which 960 were violins. Around 650 instruments survive, including 450 to 512 violins. His instruments are considered some of the finest ever made, and are extremely valuable collector's items.\nBiography.\nFamily and early life.\nAntonio Stradivari's birthdate, presumably between 1644 and 1649, has been debated amongst historians due to the numerous inconsistencies in the evidence of the latter. The 1668 and 1678 censuses report him actually growing younger, a fact explained by the probable loss of statistics from 1647 to 1649, when renewed belligerency between France's Modenese and Spain's Milanese proxies led to a flow of refugees that included Stradivari's mother.\nStradivari's ancestry consisted of notable citizens of Cremona, dating back to at least the 12th or 13th century. The earliest mention of the family name, or a variation upon it, is in a land grant dating from 1188. The origin of the name itself has several possible explanations; some sources say it is the plural of \"stradivare\", essentially meaning \"toll-man\" in Lombard, while others say that the form \"de Strataverta\" derives from , which in Cremonese dialect means \"open road\".\nAntonio's parents were Alessandro Stradivari, son of Giulio Cesare Stradivari, and Anna Moroni, daughter of Leonardo Moroni. They married on 30 August 1622, and had at least three children between 1623 and 1628: Giuseppe Giulio Cesare, Carlo Felice, and Giovanni Battista. The baptismal records of the parish of S. Prospero then stop, and it is unknown whether they had any children from 1628 to 1644. This gap in the records may be due to the family leaving Cremona in response to war, famine, and plague in the city from 1628 to 1630, or the records may have been lost due to clerical reforms imposed by Joseph II of Austria in 1788. The latter explanation is supported by the word \"Cremonensis\" (of Cremona) on many of Stradivari's labels, which suggests that he was born in the city instead of merely moving back there to work. Antonio was born in 1644, a fact deducible from later violins. However, there are no records or information available on his early childhood, and the first evidence of his presence in Cremona is the label of his oldest surviving violin from 1666.\nStradivari likely began an apprenticeship with Nicola Amati between the ages of 12 and 14, although a minor debate surrounds this fact. One of the few pieces of evidence supporting this is the label of his 1666 violin, which reads, \"Alumnus Nicolai Amati, faciebat anno 1666\". However, Stradivari did not repeatedly put Amati's name on his labels, unlike many of Amati's other students. Stradivari's early violins actually bear less resemblance to Amati's than his later instruments do. M. Chanot-Chardon, a well-known French luthier, asserted that his father had a label of Stradivari's stating, \"Made at the age of thirteen, in the workshop of Nicol\u00f2 Amati\". This label has never been found or confirmed. Amati would also have been a logical choice for Antonio's parents, as he represented an old family of violin makers in Cremona, and was far superior to most other luthiers in Italy.\nSome researchers believe there is a closer educational association between Antonio Stradivari and Francesco Rugeri than has previously been recognized. Despite the long-held belief that Antonio Stradivari was the pupil of Nicol\u00f2 Amati, there are important discrepancies between their work. Some researchers believe early instruments by Stradivari bear a stronger resemblance to Francesco Rugeri's work than Amati's. Additionally, the utilization of a small dorsal pin or small hole, invariably used not just by Nicol\u00f2 Amati but all of his recognized pupils \u2014 but not used by Antonio Stradivari \u2014 adds further evidence that Stradivari may not have learnt his craft from Amati. This pin or hole was fundamental in the graduation of the thickness of the plates and was a technique passed on through generations of pupils of the Amati. This dorsal pin is also not found in any of the instruments of the Rugeri family, suggesting Antonio Stradivari may have actually learnt his craft from Francesco Rugeri, both of them having been influenced by Amati. W. E. Hill &amp; Sons concede that they fail to find the hand of Stradivari in any of Nicola Amati's work, although the unmistakable hands of Andrea Guarneri and Francesco Rugeri are evident.\nAn alternative theory is that Stradivari started out as a woodworker: the house he lived in from 1667 to 1680 was owned by Francesco Pescaroli, a woodcarver and inlayer. Stradivari may even have been employed to decorate some of Amati's instruments, without being a true apprentice. This theory is supported by some of Stradivari's later violins, which have elaborate decorations and purfling.\nAssuming that Stradivari was a student of Amati, he would have begun his apprenticeship in 1656\u201358 and produced his first decent instruments in 1660, at the age of 16. His first labels were printed from 1660 to 1665, which indicates that his work had sufficient quality to be offered directly to his patrons. However, he probably stayed in Amati's workshop until about 1684, using his master's reputation as a launching point for his career.\nFirst marriage.\nStradivari married his first wife, Francesca Ferraboschi, on 4 July 1667. A clue to how they would have met lies in the 1659 Easter census, which lists the Ferraboschi family four houses away from the Amati residence. Francesca was the young widow of the burgher Giacomo Capra, with whom she had two children. Francesca's brother had shot Giacomo with a crossbow on the Piazza Garibaldi (formerly the Piazza Santa Agata) in 1664. He was later exiled, though allowed to return to Cremona many years later. After their marriage, Stradivari moved into a house known as the Casa del Pescatore, or the Casa Nuziale, in his wife's parish. The couple had a daughter, Giulia Maria, three to four months later. They remained in the house until 1680, during which time they had five more children, starting with an infant son who lived for only a week, and then Francesco, Catterina, Alessandro, and Omobono Stradivari.\nStradivari purchased a house now known as No. 1 Piazza Roma (formerly No. 2 Piazza San Domenico) around 1680 for the sum of 7000 lire, 2000 of which he paid at the time of the purchase. The totality of the house was paid for by 1684. The residence was just doors away from those of several other violin-making families of Cremona, including the Amatis and Guarneris. Stradivari probably worked in the loft and attic, and he stayed in this house for the rest of his life.\nStradivari's wife Francesca died on 20 May 1698, and received an elaborate funeral five days later.\nSecond marriage.\nStradivari married his second wife, Antonia Maria Zambelli, on 24 August 1699. She was 35 at the time of the marriage. They had five children from 1700 to 1708\u2014Francesca Maria, Giovanni Battista Giuseppe, Giovanni Battista Martino, Giuseppe Antonio, and Paolo.\nDeath.\nStradivari died in Cremona on 18 December 1737, aged 93, after roughly 75 years of crafting instruments. He is buried in the Church of San Domenico. The tomb was acquired eight years prior to his death, having been bought from a Cremonese family, substituting his name for theirs in the tombstone.\nWill.\nStradivari generated substantial wealth in his lifetime. His will, dated 1729, counted eight living heirs, including his wife. Zambelli was left with her clothing, bed linens, household items, and half of her jewelry. Antonia would become the responsibility of his two eldest sons. Annunciata Caterina was left her jewelry, clothing, linens, and income on loans. Paolo, the youngest child, would get six finished violins\u2014valued at 1,000 lire\u2014as well as some household effects and cash. Three other children who had joined religious orders were left with their share of inheritance: Maria, a nun, would get an annuity; Alessandro, a priest, would get fixed income on a home mortgage loan; and Giuseppe, another priest, would get some income on half a share from a pastry shop. There were also annual payments to his two sons of 150 and 300 lire each and 170 lire for Annunciata and 100 for Francesca.\nHis remaining two sons from his first marriage had both worked in the family shop. Omobono, who had left the dwelling aged eighteen in search of new employment possibilities in Naples, would inherit six violins, and Francesco, who was named his father's successor, would inherit the rest of the estate, including all of the tools, stencils, finished violins, patterns, and\u2014ostensibly\u2014his father's reputation. In 1733, he had bought his youngest son a partnership in a local textile firm for the large amount of 25,000 lire.\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nStradivari probably developed his own style slowly. Some of his early violins were smaller, with notable exception to this is the 1679 \"Hellier\" violin, which had much larger proportions. Stradivari's early (pre-1684) violins are in strong contrast to Amati's instruments from the same time period; Stradivari's have a stronger build; less rounded curves, with the purfling set farther in.\nBy 1680, Stradivari had acquired at least a small, yet growing, reputation. In 1682, a Venetian banker ordered a complete set of instruments, which he planned to present to King James II of England. The fate of these instruments is unknown. Cosimo III de' Medici bought another five years later. Amati died in 1684, an event followed by a noticeable increase in Stradivari's production. The years 1684 and 1685 also marked an important development in his style\u2014the dimensions he used generally increased, and his instruments were more in the style of Amati's work of the 1640s and 1650s. Stradivari's instruments underwent no major change in the next five years, although in 1688 he began cutting a more distinct bevel and began outlining the heads of instruments in black, a quite original improvement.\nStradivari's relatively early success in his career may have allowed him to use a more experimental approach to violin building. In fact, Stradivari's early career is marked by wide experimentation, and his instruments during this period are generally considered of a lesser quality than his later work. However, the precision with which he carved the heads and inserted the purfling quickly marked him as one of the most dextrous craftsmen in the world, a prime example of this being the 1690 \"Tuscan\" violin. Pre-1690 instruments are sometimes termed \"Amatis\u00e9\" but this is not completely accurate; it is largely because Stradivari created many more instruments later on that people try to connect his early work with Amati's style.\nBy 1680 Stradivari moved to No. 1 Piazza Roma (formerly No. 2 Piazza San Domenico). The house was just doors away from those of several other violin-making families of Cremona, including the Amatis and Guarneris. Stradivari probably worked in the loft and attic, and he lived in this house for the rest of his life.\n\"Golden\" period and later years.\nIn the early 1690s, Stradivari made a pronounced departure from this earlier style of instrument-making, changing two key elements of his instruments. First, he began to make violins with a larger pattern than previous instruments; these larger violins are usually known as \"Long Strads\". He also switched to using a darker, richer varnish, as opposed to a yellower varnish similar to that used by Amati. He continued to use this pattern until 1698, with few exceptions. Between 1698 and 1700, he abandoned the Long Strad model and returned to a slightly shorter model, which he used until his death. The period from 1700 to 1725 is often termed the \"Golden Period\" of his production. Instruments made during this time are usually considered of a higher quality than his earlier instruments. These instruments also fetch much higher prices than his other instruments and are especially prized by collectors. Late-period instruments made from the late 1720s until his death in 1737 show signs of Stradivari's advancing age. These late instruments may be a bit less beautiful than the Golden Period instruments, but many nonetheless possess a fine tone. Heavier and looser craftsmanship of the late Stradivari output can be seen in the 1734 'Habeneck'.\nStradivari and the Cremonese violin making school.\nInfluence in the 18th century.\nThe Stradivari parish, San Matteo, and the Amati parish, San Faustino, comprised the center of Cremonese violin making. They exerted influence on one another's shape, varnish and sound of instruments, but also on many of their contemporaries'; they defined violin making standards for the next 300 years.\nEven at the beginning of the 18th century, Stradivari's influence could be seen not only in the work of Cremonese makers, but also international ones, such as Barak Norman's, one of the first important British makers. In the 1720s Daniel Parker, a very important British luthier, produced fine violins after Stradivari's work selling anywhere from \u00a330,000 to \u00a360,000 in recent auctions. Parker based his best instruments on Stradivari's \"long pattern\", having the opportunity to study one or more of the instruments. Well into the 19th century, Jean-Baptiste Vuillaume, the leading French luthier of his time, also made many important copies of Strads and Guarneris.\nIn the 18th century, Cremonese luthiers were the suppliers and local players on the demand side. After Stradivari's death, this drastically changed. Although the Cremonese luthiers remained the suppliers, the demand side now consisted mainly of collectors, researchers, imitators, profiteers, and speculators. Many local players could no longer afford the sought-out instruments and most of the purchased instruments would be hidden in private collections, put in museums, or simply put back in their cases, hoping that they would gain value over time. This is when the Stradivari \"fever\" really took off. The violin collector Count Ignazio Alessandro Cozio di Salabue, Vuillaume, and later Tarisio Auctions have all contributed to this frenzy that would extend well into the 21st century. Also, most of the other major Cremonese luthiers died soon after Stradivari, putting an end to the golden period of Cremona's violin making, which lasted more than 150 years, starting with the Amatis and ending with the Cerutis.\nThe Cremonese maker Vincenzo Rugeri (1663\u20131719), while staying true to the Grand Amati Pattern by Nicolo Amati, was influenced by Stradivari in that he adopted a somewhat lower arch consistent with Stradivarian ideals.\nMembers of the Gagliano family such as Gennaro and Nicolo made excellent copies of the instruments in the 1740s, though the only similarity to Stradivari's instruments was the execution of the form and arching as well as consistently fine and detailed varnish. Nicolo would usually use the \"forma\" B model for his cellos and as the quality of the output steadily declined within the family, the Stradivari models were almost abandoned in Naples.\nHaving acquired many Strads from Paolo Stradivari, Count Cozio commissioned Giovanni Battista Guadagnini to make some replicas of the instruments. Although many features of Strads are present in the copies, they still remain heavily influenced by Guadagnini's workshop principles and represent well the maker's Turin period.\nVincenzo Panormo was also one of the many luthiers who based many of his violins on Strads. He learned about them in Paris between 1779 and 1789 when he worked closely with L\u00e9opold Renaudin, another one of Strad's followers. Stradivari's influence could also be seen in Spain with the outstanding work of Jos\u00e9 Contreras of Granada and Madrid. Having the privilege to be exposed to Stradivari's instruments through the Spanish court, he was experienced enough to replace the scroll of a 1717 Stradivari cello and possibly even make its back and ribs. He had a great ability to imitate the original varnish and intricacy of the instrument.\nInfluence in the 19th and 20th century.\nThe 19th century was not as eventful in comparison to the previous centuries. Some of the most important luthiers from this part of history include Giovanni Rota, as well as the two non-Italian makers Fran\u00e7ois Chanot in France and the artist, inventor and musician William Sidney Mount in the US, who both created experimental violins.\nThe 20th century was the so-called rebirth of Cremonese making, when luthiers such as Giuseppe Antonio Rocca, Giovanni Battista Morassi, Beltrami, and the Antoniazzi family emerged from a seemingly uneventful and experimental period. These makers, sometimes basing their early violins on Strads, would later on make their own models and would inspire each other's work.\nStradivari and his sons.\nEven though Antonio had a very long working life, it is impossible for him to have crafted more than 1,000 instruments entirely by himself, meaning that his sons, Francesco and Omobono, as well as possibly a third son, must have been working on and off in his shop. It is known that having left the workshop at eighteen, Omobono made a few instruments on his own, such as the 'Blagrove' and another violin dating from 1732. On his side, Francesco made very few violins independently, such as the 1742 'Salabue' and 'Oliveira', spending his lifetime in his father's shop. This was one of the main reasons that Francesco had a large part in Antonio's will, and Omobono a lesser one. One of the major differences between Antonio and his sons' craftsmanship was the quality of the purfling on their instruments, which in the case of Francesco and Omobono has been referred to as \"startlingly poor\".\n\"Only a handful of instruments are reliably attributed to Francesco alone. ... [There are only] two authentic labels known: 'Franciscus Stradivarius Cremonensis / Filius Antonii faciebat Anno 1742' ... Notably it omits the A+S stamp that occurs on Antonio's labels. Another label states 'Sotto la Disciplina d'Antonio / Stradivari F. in Cremona 1737'. This is of course the year of his father's death, and the phrase 'sotto la disciplina' ('under the discipline'), although it appears in a few other instruments, may here be a particular sign of his respect.\"\nStradivarius instruments.\nThe Hills Violin Shop estimates that Stradivari produced 1,116 instruments, of which 960 were violins. It is also estimated that around 650 of these instruments survive, including 450 to 512 violins.\nStradivari's instruments are regarded as amongst the finest bowed stringed instruments ever created, are highly prized, and are still played by professionals today. His violins are desired more than those of any other luthier except his contemporary, Giuseppe Guarneri del Ges\u00f9, who commands a similar respect among violinists. However, neither blind listening tests nor acoustic analysis have ever demonstrated that Stradivarius instruments are better than other high-quality instruments or even reliably distinguishable from them.\nWhile the usual label for a Stradivarius instrument, whether genuine or false, uses the traditional Latin inscription, after the McKinley Tariff Act of 1890, copies were also inscribed with the country of origin. Since thousands of instruments are based on Stradivari's models and bear the same name as his models, many unwary people are deceived into purchasing forged Stradivarius instruments, which can be avoided by authenticating the instrument.\nSome violinists and cellists use Stradivari instruments in their work. Yo-Yo Ma uses the \"Davidov Stradivarius\", Julian Lloyd Webber employs the \"Barjansky Stradivarius\", and, until his death in 2007, Mstislav Rostropovich played on the \"Duport Stradivarius\". The \"Soil\" of 1714 is owned by virtuoso Itzhak Perlman. The \"Countess Polignac\" is currently played by Gil Shaham. The Vienna Philharmonic uses several Stradivari instruments that were purchased by Austria's central bank \u00d6sterreichische Nationalbank and other sponsors: \"Chaconne\", 1725; \"ex-H\u00e4mmerle\", 1709; \"ex-Smith-Quersin\", 1714; \"ex-Arnold Ros\u00e9\", \"ex-Viotti\", 1718; and \"ex-Halphen\", 1727. Viktoria Mullova owns and plays the \"Jules Falk\". Joshua Bell owns and plays the Gibson ex-Huberman.\nThe London sales of \"The Mendelssohn\" at \u00a3902,000 ($1,776,940) in 1990 and \"The Kreutzer\" for \u00a3947,500 in 1998 constitute two top-selling Stradivari. A record price paid at a public auction for a Stradivari was $2,032,000 for the \"Lady Tennant\" at Christie's in New York, April 2005. On 16 May 2006, Christie's auctioned Stradivari's 1707 \"Hammer\" for a new record of US$3,544,000. On 2 April 2007, Christie's sold a Stradivari violin, the 1729 \"Solomon, Ex-Lambert\", for more than $2.7\u00a0million to an anonymous bidder in the auction house's fine musical instruments sale. Its price, US$2,728,000 including Christie's commission, far outdid its estimated value: $1\u00a0million to $1.5\u00a0million. On 14 October 2010, a 1697 Stradivari violin known as \"The Molitor\" was sold online by Tarisio Auctions for a world-record price of $3,600,000 to violinist Anne Akiko Meyers: at the time its price was the highest for any musical instrument sold at auction. On 21 June 2011, the Lady Blunt Stradivarius, a 1721 violin, was auctioned by Tarisio to an anonymous bidder for almost \u00a310 million, with all proceeds going to help the victims of the 2011 T\u014dhoku earthquake and tsunami. This was over four times the previous auction record for a Stradivari violin. The c.\u20091705 Baron von der Leyen Strad was auctioned by Tarisio on 26 April 2012, for $2.6 million.\nPublicly displayed collections of Stradivari instruments are those of:\nThe collection of the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra had the largest number of Stradivari in its string section, purchased in 2003 from the collection of Herbert R. Axelrod, until it decided to sell them in 2007. A collection assembled by Rodman Wanamaker in the 1920s contained as many as 65 stringed instruments by such masters as Stradivari, Gofriller, Baptiste and Giuseppe Guarneri. Included was \"The Swan\", the last violin made by Stradivari, and soloist instrument of the great Cuban 19th-century virtuoso Joseph White. The collection, known as The Cappella, was used in concerts with the Philadelphia Orchestra and Leopold Stokowski before being dispersed after Wanamaker's death. The Vienna Philharmonic uses four violins and one cello. The Metropolitan Museum of Art has three Stradivari violins dated 1693, 1694 and 1717. The National Music Museum, in Vermillion, South Dakota, has in its collection one of two known Stradivari guitars, one of eleven known violas da gamba, later modified into a cello form, one of two known choral mandolins, and one of six Stradivari violins that still retain their original neck. In the interests of conservation, the \"Messiah Stradivarius\" violin\u2014on display in the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, England\u2014has not been played at all in recent years.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nArticles\nHistorical books"}
{"id": "56456", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56456", "title": "ATGM", "text": ""}
{"id": "56458", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56458", "title": "Apraxia", "text": "Inability to perform purposeful movements\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nApraxia is a motor disorder caused by damage to the brain (specifically the posterior parietal cortex or corpus callosum), which causes difficulty with motor planning to perform tasks or movements. The nature of the damage determines the disorder's severity, and the absence of sensory loss or paralysis helps to explain the level of difficulty. Children may be born with apraxia; its cause is unknown, and symptoms are usually noticed in the early stages of development. Apraxia occurring later in life, known as \"acquired apraxia\", is typically caused by traumatic brain injury, stroke, dementia, Alzheimer's disease, brain tumor, or other neurodegenerative disorders. The multiple types of apraxia are categorized by the specific ability and/or body part affected.\nThe term \"apraxia\" comes from grc \" \"\u1f00\"- (a-)\"\u00a0'without' and \" \"\u03c0\u03c1\u1fb6\u03be\u03b9\u03c2\" (praxis)\"\u00a0'action'.\nTypes.\nThe several types of apraxia include:\nCauses.\nApraxia is most often due to a lesion located in the dominant (usually left) hemisphere of the brain, typically in the frontal and parietal lobes. Lesions may be due to stroke, acquired brain injuries, or neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease or other dementias, Parkinson's disease, or Huntington's disease. Also, apraxia possibly may be caused by lesions in other areas of the brain.\nIdeomotor apraxia is typically due to a decrease in blood flow to the dominant hemisphere of the brain and particularly the parietal and premotor areas. It is frequently seen in patients with corticobasal degeneration.\nIdeational apraxia has been observed in patients with lesions in the dominant hemisphere near areas associated with aphasia, but more research is needed on ideational apraxia due to brain lesions. The localization of lesions in areas of the frontal and temporal lobes would provide explanation for the difficulty in motor planning seen in ideational apraxia, as well as its difficulty to distinguish it from certain aphasias.\nConstructional apraxia is often caused by lesions of the inferior nondominant parietal lobe, and can be caused by brain injury, illness, tumor, or other condition that can result in a brain lesion.\nDiagnosis.\nAlthough qualitative and quantitative studies exist, little consensus exists on the proper method to assess for apraxia. The criticisms of past methods include failure to meet standard psychometric properties and research-specific designs that translate poorly to nonresearch use.\nThe Test to Measure Upper Limb Apraxia (TULIA) is one method of determining upper limb apraxia through the qualitative and quantitative assessment of gesture production. In contrast to previous publications on apraxic assessment, the reliability and validity of TULIA was thoroughly investigated. The TULIA consists of subtests for the imitation and pantomime of nonsymbolic (\"put your index finger on top of your nose\"), intransitive (\"wave goodbye\"), and transitive (\"show me how to use a hammer\") gestures. Discrimination (differentiating between well- and poorly performed tasks) and recognition (indicating which object corresponds to a pantomimed gesture) tasks are also often tested for a full apraxia evaluation.\nHowever, a strong correlation may not be seen between formal test results and actual performance in everyday functioning or activities of daily living (ADLs). A comprehensive assessment of apraxia should include formal testing, standardized measurements of ADLs, observation of daily routines, self-report questionnaires, and targeted interviews with the patients and their relatives.\nAs stated above, apraxia should not be confused with aphasia (the inability to understand language); however, they frequently occur together. Apraxia is so often accompanied by aphasia that many believe that if a person displays AOS, then the patient also having some level of aphasia should be assumed.\nTreatment.\nTreatment for individuals with apraxia includes speech therapy, occupational therapy, and physical therapy. Currently, no medications are indicated for the treatment of apraxia, only therapy treatments. Generally, treatments for apraxia have received little attention for several reasons, including the tendency for the condition to resolve spontaneously in acute cases. Additionally, the very nature of the automatic-voluntary dissociation of motor abilities that defines apraxia means that patients may still be able to automatically perform activities if cued to do so in daily life. Nevertheless, patients experiencing apraxia have less functional independence in their daily lives, and that evidence for the treatment of apraxia is scarce. However, a literature review of apraxia treatment to date reveals that although the field is in its early stages of treatment design, certain aspects can be included to treat apraxia.\nOne method is through rehabilitative treatment, which has been found to positively impact apraxia, as well as ADLs. In this review, rehabilitative treatment consisted of 12 different contextual cues, which were used to teach patients how to produce the same gesture under different contextual situations. Additional studies have also recommended varying forms of gesture therapy, whereby the patient is instructed to make gestures (either using objects or symbolically meaningful and nonmeaningful gestures) with progressively less cuing from the therapist. Patients with apraxia may need to use a form of alternative and augmentative communication depending on the severity of the disorder. In addition to using gestures as mentioned, patients can also use communication boards or more sophisticated electronic devices if needed.\nNo single type of therapy or approach has been proven as the best way to treat a patient with apraxia, since each patient's case varies. One-on-one sessions usually work the best, though, with the support of family members and friends. Since everyone responds to therapy differently, some patients will make significant improvements, while others will make less progress. The overall goal for treatment of apraxia is to treat the motor plans for speech, not treating at the phoneme (sound) level. Individuals with apraxia of speech should receive treatment that focuses on the repetition of target words and rate of speech. The overall goal for treatment of apraxia should be to improve speech intelligibility, rate of speech, and articulation of targeted words.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56460", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56460", "title": "Brain Aneurysm", "text": ""}
{"id": "56461", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56461", "title": "Canavan disease", "text": "Neurodegenerative disorder\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nCanavan disease, or Canavan\u2013Van Bogaert\u2013Bertrand disease, is a rare and fatal autosomal recessive degenerative disease that causes progressive damage to nerve cells and loss of white matter in the brain. It is one of the most common degenerative cerebral diseases of infancy. It is caused by a deficiency of the enzyme aspartoacylase, and is one of a group of genetic diseases referred to as leukodystrophies. It is characterized by degeneration of myelin in the phospholipid layer insulating the axon of a neuron and is associated with a gene located on human chromosome 17.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe signs and symptoms of the most common (and most serious) form of Canavan disease typically appear in early infancy usually between the first three to six months of age. Canavan disease then progresses rapidly from that stage, with typical cases involving intellectual disability, loss of previously acquired motor skills, feeding difficulties, abnormal muscle tone (i.e., initial floppiness \u2013 hypotonia \u2013 that may eventually translate into spasticity), poor head control, and megalocephaly (abnormally enlarged head). Paralysis, blindness, or seizures may also occur.\nThere exists a much less common variant of Canavan disease which is generally much less serious and involves later onset of symptoms, which are often mild and nonspecific enough to go unrecognized as manifestations of Canavan's disease. This variant does not seem to have any effect on lifespan and is typically limited to minor cases of speech and motor skill development delay.\nPathophysiology.\nCanavan disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. When both parents are carriers, the chance of having an affected child is 25%. Genetic counseling and genetic testing are recommended for families with two parental carriers.\nCanavan disease is caused by a defective \"ASPA\" gene which is responsible for the production of the enzyme aspartoacylase. Decreased aspartoacylase activity prevents the normal breakdown of \"N\"-acetylaspartate, wherein the accumulation of \"N\"-acetylaspartate, or lack of its further metabolism interferes with the growth of the myelin sheath of the nerve fibers of the brain. The myelin sheath is the fatty covering that surrounds nerve cells and acts as an insulator, allowing for efficient transmission of nerve impulses.\nDiagnosis.\nThe diagnosis of neonatal/infantile Canavan disease relies on the demonstration of a very high concentration of \"N\"-acetylaspartic acid (NAA) in the urine. In mild/juvenile Canavan disease, NAA may only be slightly elevated; thus, the diagnosis relies on molecular genetic testing of \"ASPA\", the gene encoding the enzyme aspartoacylase.\nTreatment.\nNo cure for Canavan disease is known, nor is there a standard course of treatment. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Physical therapy may help improve motor skills, and educational programs may help improve communication skills. Seizures are treated with antiepileptic drugs and gastrostomy is used to help maintain adequate food intake and hydration when swallowing difficulties exist. Also, an experimental treatment uses lithium citrate. When a person has Canavan disease, their levels of \"N\"-acetylaspartate are chronically elevated. The lithium citrate was proven in a rat genetic model of Canavan disease to decrease levels of \"N\"-acetyl aspartate significantly. When tested on a human, the subject's condition reversed during a two-week wash-out period after withdrawal of lithium.\nThe investigation revealed both decreased \"N\"-acetylaspartate levels in regions of the brain tested and magnetic resonance spectroscopic values that are more characteristic of normal development and myelination. This evidence suggests that a larger controlled trial of lithium may be warranted as supportive therapy for children with Canavan disease.\nExperimental gene therapy trial results, published in 2002, used a healthy gene to take over for the defective one that causes Canavan disease.\nIn human trials, the results of which were published in 2012, this method appeared to improve the patient's life without long-term adverse effects during a five-year follow-up.\nPrognosis.\nCanavan disease typically results in death or development of life-threatening conditions by the age of ten, though life expectancy is variable, and is highly dependent on specific circumstances. On the other hand, the milder variants of the disorder seem not to have any effect on lifespan.\nPrevalence.\nAlthough Canavan disease may occur in any ethnic group, it mostly affects people of Eastern European Jewish ancestry with about one in 40 (2.5%) individuals of Eastern European (Ashkenazi) Jewish ancestry being a carrier.\nHistory.\nCanavan disease was first described in 1931 by Myrtelle Canavan. In 1931, she co-wrote a paper discussing the case of a child who had died at 16 months old and whose brain had a spongy white section. Canavan was the first to identify this degenerative disorder of the central nervous system, which was later named Canavan disease.\nLawsuit.\nThe discovery of the gene for Canavan disease, and subsequent events, generated considerable controversy. In 1987, the Greenbergs, a family with two children affected by Canavan disease, donated tissue samples to Reuben Matalon, a researcher at the University of Chicago, who was looking for the Canavan gene. He successfully identified the gene in 1993 and developed a test for it that would enable antenatal (before birth) counseling of couples at risk of having a child with the disease. For a while, the Canavan Foundation offered free genetic testing using Matalon's test.\nHowever, in 1997, after he relocated to Florida, Matalon's new employer, Miami Children's Hospital, patented the gene and started claiming royalties on the genetic test, forcing the Canavan Foundation to withdraw their free testing. A subsequent lawsuit brought by the Canavan Foundation against Miami Children's Hospital was resolved with a sealed out-of-court settlement. The case is sometimes cited in arguments about the appropriateness of patenting genes.\nResearch.\nResearch involving triacetin supplementation has shown promise in a rat model. Triacetin, which can be enzymatically cleaved to form acetate, enters the brain more readily than the negatively charged acetate. The defective enzyme in Canavan disease, aspartoacylase, converts \"N\"-acetylaspartate into aspartate and acetate. Mutations in the gene for aspartoacylase prevent the breakdown of \"N\"-acetylaspartate and reduce brain acetate availability during brain development. Acetate supplementation using triacetin is meant to provide the missing acetate so brain development can continue normally.\nA team of researchers headed by Paola Leone at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, has tried a procedure involving the insertion of six catheters into the brain that deliver a solution containing 600 to 900 billion engineered virus particles. The virus, a modified version of adeno-associated virus, is designed to replace the aspartoacylase enzyme. Children treated with this procedure to date have shown marked improvements, including the growth of myelin, with decreased levels of the \"N\"-acetylaspartate toxin.\nA team of researchers of University of Massachusetts Medical School is working on developing rAAV-based and optimized gene replacement therapy, that would travel across the blood-brain-barrier.\nResearchers discovered the first drug-like inhibitors of \"N\"-acetyltransferase.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56462", "revid": "29060594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56462", "title": "Carpal tunnel syndrome", "text": "Compression of the median nerve in the wrist\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nCarpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is a nerve compression syndrome caused when the median nerve, in the carpal tunnel of the wrist, becomes compressed. CTS can affect both wrists when it is known as bilateral CTS. After a wrist fracture, inflammation and bone displacement can compress the median nerve. With rheumatoid arthritis, the enlarged synovial lining of the tendons causes compression.\nThe main symptoms are numbness and tingling of the thumb, index finger, middle finger, and the thumb side of the ring finger, as well as pain in the hand and fingers. Symptoms are typically most troublesome at night. Many people sleep with their wrists bent, and the ensuing symptoms may lead to awakening. People wake less often at night if they wear a wrist splint. Untreated, and over years to decades, CTS causes loss of sensibility, weakness, and shrinkage (atrophy) of the thenar muscles at the base of the thumb. \nWork-related factors such as vibration, wrist extension or flexion, hand force, and repetitive strain are risk factors for CTS. Other risk factors include being female, obesity, diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, thyroid disease, and genetics.\nDiagnosis can be made with a high probability based on characteristic symptoms and signs. It can also be measured with electrodiagnostic tests.\nInjection of corticosteroids may or may not alleviate symptoms better than simulated (placebo) injections. There is no evidence that corticosteroid injection sustainably alters the natural history of the disease, which seems to be a gradual progression of neuropathy. Surgery to cut the transverse carpal ligament is the only known disease modifying treatment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnatomy.\nThe carpal tunnel is an anatomical compartment located at the base of the palm. Nine flexor tendons and the median nerve pass through the carpal tunnel, which is surrounded on three sides by the carpal bones that form an arch. The median nerve provides feeling or sensation to the thumb, index finger, long finger, and half of the ring finger. At the level of the wrist, the median nerve supplies the muscles at the base of the thumb that allow it to abduct, move away from the other four fingers, as well as move out of the plane of the palm. The carpal tunnel is located at the middle third of the base of the palm, bounded by the bony prominence of the scaphoid tubercle and trapezium at the base of the thumb, and the hamate hook that can be palpated along the axis of the ring finger. From the anatomical position, the carpal tunnel is bordered on the anterior surface by the transverse carpal ligament, also known as the flexor retinaculum. The flexor retinaculum is a strong, fibrous band that attaches to the pisiform and the hamulus of the hamate. The proximal boundary is the distal wrist skin crease, and the distal boundary is approximated by a line known as Kaplan's cardinal line. This line uses surface landmarks, and is drawn between the apex of the skin fold between the thumb and index finger to the palpated hamate hook.\nPathophysiology.\nThe carpal bones and the transverse carpal ligament form the carpal tunnel. The median nerve passes through this space along with the flexor tendons. Increased compartmental pressure for any reason can squeeze the median nerve. Theoretically, increased pressure can interfere with normal intraneural blood flow, eventually causing a cascade of physiological changes in the nerve itself. There is a dose-respondent curve such that greater and longer periods of pressure are associated with greater nerve dysfunction. The symptoms and signs of carpal tunnel syndrome causes are hypertrophy of the synovial tissue surrounding the flexor tendons such as with rheumatoid arthritis.\nProlonged pressure can lead to a cascade of physiological changes in neural tissue. First, the blood-nerve barrier breaks down (increased permeability of perineureum and endothelial cells of endoneural blood vessels). If the pressure continues, the nerves will start the process of demyelination under the area of compression. This will result in abnormal nerve conduction even when the pressure is relieved leading to persistent sensory symptoms until remyelination can occur. If the compression continues and is severe enough, axons may be injured and Wallerian degeneration will occur. At this point there may be weakness and muscle atrophy, depending on the extent of axon damage.\nThe critical pressure above which the microcirculatory environment of a nerve becomes compromised depends on diastolic/systolic blood pressure. Higher blood pressure will require higher external pressure on the nerve to disrupt its microvascular environment. The critical pressure necessary to disrupt the blood supply of a nerve is approximately 30mm Hg below diastolic blood pressure or 45mm Hg below mean arterial pressure. For normohypertensive (normal blood pressure) adults, the average values for systolic blood pressure is 116mm Hg diastolic blood pressure is 69mm Hg. Using this data, the average person would become symptomatic with approximately 39mm Hg of pressure in the wrist (69 - 30 = 39 and 69 + (116 - 69)/3 - 45 ~ 40). Carpal tunnel syndrome patients tend to have elevated carpal tunnel pressures (12-31mm Hg) compared to controls (2.5 - 13mm Hg). Applying pressure to the carpal tunnel of normal subjects in a lab can produce mild neurophysiological changes at 30mm Hg with a rapid, complete sensory block at 60mm Hg. Carpal tunnel pressure may be affected by wrist movement/position, with flexion and extension capable of raising the tunnel pressure as high as 111mm Hg. Many of the activities associated with carpal tunnel symptoms such as driving, holding a phone, etc. involve flexing the wrist and it is likely due to an increase in carpal tunnel pressure during these activities.\nNerve compression can result in various stages of nerve injury. The majority of carpal tunnel syndrome patients have a degree I nerve injury (Sunderland classification), also called neuropraxia. This is characterized by a conduction block, segmental demyelination, and intact axons. With no further compression, the nerves will remyelinate and fully recover. Severe carpal tunnel syndrome patients may have degree II/III injuries (Sunderland classification), or axonotmesis, where the axon is injured partially or fully. With axon injury, there would be muscle weakness or atrophy, and with no further compression, the nerves may only partially recover.\nWhile there is evidence that chronic compression is a major cause of carpal tunnel syndrome, it may not be the only cause. Several alternative, potentially speculative, theories exist that describe alternative forms of nerve entrapment. One is the theory of nerve scarring (specifically adherence between the mesoneurium and epineureum), preventing the nerve from gliding during wrist/finger movements, causing repetitive traction injuries. Another is the double crush syndrome, where compression may interfere with axonal transport, and two separate points of compression (e.g. neck and wrist), neither enough to cause local demyelination, may together impair normal nerve function.\nEpidemiology.\nCarpal tunnel syndrome is estimated to affect one out of ten people during their lifetime and is the most common nerve compression syndrome. There is notable variation in such estimates based on how one defines the problem, in particular, whether one studies people presenting with symptoms vs. measurable median neuropathy, whether or not people are seeking care. Idiopathic neuropathy accounts for about 90% of all nerve compression syndromes.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe characteristic symptom is numbness, tingling, or burning sensations in the thumb, index, middle, and radial half of the ring finger. These areas process sensation through the median nerve. Numbness or tingling is usually worse with sleep. People tend to sleep with their wrists flexed, which increases pressure on the nerve. Ache and discomfort may be reported in the forearm or even the upper arm. Symptoms that are not as characteristic of CTS include pain in the wrists or hands, loss of grip strength, minor loss of sleep, and loss of manual dexterity.\nSevere CTS is associated with measurable loss of sensibility. As the median neuropathy progresses, there is loss of sensibility in the thumb, index, middle, and the thumb side of the ring finger. As the neuropathy progresses, there may be first weakness, then atrophy of the muscles of thenar eminence (the flexor pollicis brevis, opponens pollicis, and abductor pollicis brevis). The sensibility of the palm remains normal because the superficial sensory branch of the median nerve branches proximal to the transverse carpal ligament (TCL) and travels superficial to it. \nMedian nerve symptoms may arise from nerve compression at the level of the thoracic outlet or the area where the median nerve passes between the two heads of the pronator teres in the forearm, although this is debated.\nSevere CTS is also associated with weakness and atrophy of the muscles at the base of the thumb. The ability to abduct the thumb may be lost. \nA person with idiopathic carpal tunnel syndrome will not have any sensory loss over the thenar eminence (bulge of muscles in the palm of the hand and at the base of the thumb). This is because the palmar branch of the median nerve, which innervates that area of the palm, separates from the median nerve and passes over the carpal tunnel.\nCauses.\nMost presentations of CTS have no known disease cause (idiopathic).\nThe association of other factors with CTS is a source of notable debate. It is important to distinguish factors that provoke symptoms and factors that are associated with seeking care from factors that make the neuropathy worse.\nGenetic factors are believed to be the most important determinants of who develops carpal tunnel syndrome. In other words, one's wrist structure seems programmed at birth to develop CTS later in life. A genome-wide association study (GWAS) of carpal tunnel syndrome identified 50 genomic loci significantly associated with the disease, including several loci previously known to be associated with human height.\nSome other factors that contribute to carpal tunnel syndrome are conditions such as diabetes, alcoholism, vitamin deficiency or toxicity as well as exposure to toxins. Conditions such as these don't necessarily increase the interstitial pressure of the carpal tunnel. One case-control study noted that individuals classified as obese (BMI &gt;29) are 2.5 times more likely than slender individuals (BMI &lt;20) to be diagnosed with CTS. It is not clear whether this association is due to an alteration of pathophysiology, a variation in symptoms, or a variation in care-seeking.\nDiscrete pathophysiology and CTS.\nHereditary neuropathy with susceptibility to pressure palsies is a genetic condition that appears to increase the probability of developing CTS. Heterozygous mutations in the gene SH3TC2, associated with Charcot-Marie-Tooth, may confer susceptibility to neuropathy, including CTS.\nAssociation between common benign tumors such as lipomas, ganglion, and vascular malformation should be handled with care. Such tumors are very common and are more likely to compress the median nerve. Similarly, the association between transthyretin amyloidosis-associated polyneuropathy and carpal tunnel syndrome is under investigation. Prior carpal tunnel release is often noted in individuals who later present with transthyretin amyloid-associated cardiomyopathy. There is consideration that bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome could be a reason to consider amyloidosis, timely diagnosis of which could improve heart health. Amyloidosis is rare, even among people with carpal tunnel syndrome (0.55% incidence within 10 years of carpal tunnel release). In the absence of other factors associated with a notable probability of amyloidosis, it is not clear that biopsy at the time of carpal tunnel release has a suitable balance between potential harms and potential benefits.\nOther specific pathophysiologies that can cause CTS via pressure include:\nCTS and activity.\nWork-related factors that increase risk of CTS include vibration (5.4 odds ratio), hand force (4.2), and repetition (2.3). Exposure to wrist extension or flexion at work increases the risk of CTS by 2.0 times. As of 2023[ [update]], a systematic review of studies looking at the relationship between CTS and computer use has found current studies to be inconclusive and contradictory, due to poor study methods and confounding variables not being accounted for.\nThe international debate regarding the relationship between CTS and repetitive hand use (at work in particular) is ongoing. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has adopted rules and regulations regarding so-called \"cumulative trauma disorders\" based concerns regarding potential harm from exposure to repetitive tasks, force, posture, and vibration.\nA review of available scientific data by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) indicated that job tasks that involve highly repetitive manual acts or specific wrist postures were associated with symptoms of CTS. There was no clear distinction between paresthesia (appropriate) from pain (inappropriate), and causation was not established. The distinction from work-related arm pains that are not carpal tunnel syndrome was unclear. It is proposed that repetitive use of the arm can affect the biomechanics of the upper limb or cause damage to tissues. It is proposed that postural and spinal assessment, along with ergonomic assessments, should be considered, based on the observation that addressing these factors has been found to improve comfort in some studies, although experimental data are lacking, and the perceived benefits may not be specific to those interventions. A 2010 survey by NIOSH showed that two-thirds of the 5million carpal tunnel diagnoses in the US that year were related to work. Women are more likely to be diagnosed with work-related carpal tunnel syndrome than men. Many if not most patients described in published series of carpal tunnel release are older and often not working.\nNormal pressure of the carpal tunnel has been defined as a range of . Wrist flexion increases the pressure eight-fold and extension increases it ten-fold. There is speculation that repetitive flexion and extension in the wrist can cause thickening of the synovial tissue that lines the tendons within the carpal tunnel.\nAssociated conditions.\nA variety of patient factors can lead to CTS, including heredity, size of the carpal tunnel, associated local and systematic diseases, and certain habits. Non-traumatic causes generally happen over a period of time, and are not triggered by one certain event. Many of these factors are manifestations of physiologic aging.\nDiagnosis.\nThere is no consensus standard for diagnosing carpal tunnel syndrome. A combination of characteristic symptoms (how it feels) and signs (what the clinician finds on exam) is associated with a high probability of CTS without electrophysiological testing. Sensation loss can be established using Semmes-Weinstein monofilament testing.\nCTS can be detected on examination using one of several maneuvers to provoke paresthesia (a sensation of tingling or \"pins and needles\" in the median nerve distribution). These so-called provocative signs include:\nDiminished threshold sensibility (the ability to distinguish different amounts of pressure) can be measured using Semmes-Weinstein monofilament testing. This test establishes impaired or loss of sensation.\nElectrodiagnostic testing including electromyography, and nerve conduction studies can objectively measure and verify median neuropathy.\nUltrasound can image and measure the cross-sectional diameter of the median nerve, which has some correlation with CTS. The role of ultrasound in diagnosis\u2014just as with electrodiagnostic testing\u2014is a matter of debate. Data suggests that electrodiagnostic testing cannot detect the presence of CTS in 16% to 34% of people who have the condition.\nThe role of confirmatory electrodiagnostic testing is controversial. The goal of electrodiagnostic testing is to compare the speed of conduction in the median nerve with conduction in other nerves supplying the hand. When the median nerve is compressed, it will conduct more slowly than normal and more slowly than other nerves. Nerve compression results in damage to the myelin sheath and manifests as delayed latencies and slowed conduction velocities. Electrodiagnosis rests upon demonstrating impaired median nerve conduction across the carpal tunnel in the context of normal conduction elsewhere.\nIt is often stated that normal electrodiagnostic studies do not preclude the diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome. The rationale for this is that a threshold of neuropathy must be reached before study results become abnormal, and also that threshold values for abnormality vary. Others contend that idiopathic median neuropathy at the carpal tunnel with normal electrodiagnostic tests would represent very, very mild neuropathy that would be best managed as a normal median nerve. Even more important, notable symptoms with mild disease are strongly associated with unhelpful thoughts and symptoms of worry and despair. Notable CTS should remind clinicians to always consider the whole person, including their mindset and circumstances, in strategies to help people get and stay healthy.\nA report published by the American Association of Neuromuscular &amp; Electrodiagnostic Medicine (AANEM), the American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation (AAPM&amp;R), and the American Academy of Neurology defines practice parameters, standards, and guidelines for electrodiagnostic testing studies of CTS based on an extensive critical literature review. This joint review concluded that median and sensory nerve conduction studies are valid and reproducible in a clinical laboratory setting, and a clinical diagnosis of CTS can be made with a sensitivity greater than 85% and specificity greater than 95%. The AANEM has issued evidence-based practice guidelines for the diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome, both by electrodiagnostic studies and by neuromuscular ultrasound.\nImaging.\nThe role of MRI or ultrasound imaging in the diagnosis of CTS is unclear. Their routine use is not recommended. Morphological MRI has high sensitivity but low specificity for CTS. High signal intensity may suggest accumulation of axonal transport, myelin sheath degeneration, or edema. However, more recent quantitative MRI techniques, which derive repeatable, reliable, and objective biomarkers from nerves and skeletal muscle, may have utility, including diffusion-weighted (typically diffusion tensor) MRI, which has demonstrable normal values and aberrations in carpal tunnel syndrome.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nCervical radiculopathy can also cause paresthesia and abnormal sensibility in the hands and wrist. The distribution usually follows the nerve root, and the paresthesia may be provoked by neck movement. Electromyography and imaging of the cervical spine can help to differentiate cervical radiculopathy from carpal tunnel syndrome if the diagnosis is unclear. Carpal tunnel syndrome is sometimes applied as a label to anyone with pain, numbness, swelling, or burning in the radial side of the hands or wrists. When pain is the primary symptom, carpal tunnel syndrome is unlikely to be the source of the symptoms.\nWhen the symptoms and signs point to atrophy and muscle weakness more than numbness, consider neurodegenerative disorders such as Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis or Charcot-Marie Tooth.\nPrevention.\nThere is little or no data to support the concept that activity adjustment prevents carpal tunnel syndrome. The evidence for using a wrist rest at a computer keyboard is debated. There is also little research supporting that ergonomics is related to carpal tunnel syndrome.\nGiven that biological factors, such as genetic predisposition and anthropometric features, are more strongly associated with carpal tunnel syndrome than occupational/environmental factors such as hand use, CTS may not be prevented by activity modifications.\nSome claim that worksite modifications such as switching from a QWERTY computer keyboard layout to Dvorak are helpful, but meta-analyses of the available studies note limited supported evidence.\nTreatment.\nThere are more than 50 types of treatments for CTS with varied levels of evidence and recommendations across healthcare guidelines, with evidence most strongly supporting surgery, steroids, splinting for wrist positioning, and physical or occupational therapy interventions. When selecting treatment, it is important to consider the severity and chronicity of the CTS pathophysiology and to distinguish treatments that can alter the natural history of the pathophysiology (disease-modifying treatments) and treatments that only alleviate symptoms (palliative treatments).\u00a0The strongest evidence for disease-modifying treatment in chronic or severe CTS cases is carpal tunnel surgery to change the shape of the carpal tunnel.\nThe American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons recommends proceeding conservatively with a course of nonsurgical therapies tried before release surgery is considered. A different treatment should be tried if the current treatment fails to resolve the symptoms within 2 to 7 weeks. Early surgery with carpal tunnel release is indicated where there is evidence of median nerve denervation or a person elects to proceed directly to surgical treatment. Recommendations may differ when carpal tunnel syndrome is found in association with the following conditions: diabetes mellitus, coexistent cervical radiculopathy, hypothyroidism, polyneuropathy, pregnancy, rheumatoid arthritis, and carpal tunnel syndrome in the workplace. CTS related to another pathophysiology is addressed by treating that pathology. For instance, disease-modifying medications for rheumatoid arthritis or surgery for traumatic acute carpal tunnel syndrome.\nThere is insufficient evidence to recommend gabapentin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), yoga, acupuncture, low level laser therapy, magnet therapy, vitamin B6 or other supplements.\nSplint immobilization.\nWrist braces (splints) alleviate symptoms by keeping the wrist straight, which avoids the increased pressure in the carpal tunnel associated with wrist flexion or extension. They are used primarily to help people sleep.\nMany health professionals suggest that for the best results, one should wear braces at night. When possible, braces can be worn during the activity, primarily causing stress on the wrists. The brace should not generally be used during the day as wrist activity is needed to keep the wrist from becoming stiff and to prevent muscles from weakening.\nCorticosteroids.\nCorticosteroid injections may provide temporary alleviation of symptoms, although they are not clearly better than a placebo. This form of treatment is thought to reduce discomfort in those with CTS due to its ability to decrease median nerve swelling. The use of ultrasound while performing the injection is more expensive but leads to faster resolution of CTS symptoms. The injections are done under local anesthesia. This treatment is not appropriate for extended periods, however. In general, local steroid injections are used until more definitive treatment options can be used. Corticosteroid injections do not appear to slow disease progression.\nSurgery.\nRelease of the transverse carpal ligament is undertaken in carpal tunnel surgery. The purpose of cutting the transverse carpal ligament is to relieve pressure on the median nerve, and this is a type of nerve decompression surgery. It is recommended when there is constant (not just intermittent) numbness, muscle weakness, or atrophy, and when night-splinting or other palliative interventions no longer alleviate intermittent symptoms. The surgery may be done with local or regional anesthesia with or without sedation, or under general anesthesia. In general, milder cases can be controlled without surgery for months to years, but severe cases are unrelenting symptomatically and are likely to result in surgical treatment.\nPhysical and occupational therapy.\nThere are various techniques used in manual therapy for patients with CTS. Some examples include manual and instrumental soft tissue mobilizations, massage therapy, bone mobilizations or manipulations, and neurodynamic techniques, focused on the skeletal system or soft tissue.\nIn cases of epineural tethering in the upper extremity, manual therapy can reduce this dysfunction. It can have a positive impact on the gliding of the nerves through the carpal tunnel while moving the elbow, fingers, or wrist. Manual therapy included the incorporation of specified neurodynamic techniques, functional massage, and carpal bone mobilizations. People who receive physical therapy report less pain and an increased functional ability of their wrists and hands.\nSelf-myofascial ligament stretching has been suggested as an effective technique, although a meta-analysis claimed this form of therapy does not show significant improvement in symptoms or function. However, stretching with a physical therapist can be more beneficial than if the patient stretches alone. Tendon and nerve gliding exercises appear to be useful in carpal tunnel syndrome.\nAlternative medicine.\nA 2018 Cochrane review on acupuncture and related interventions for the treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome concluded that \"Acupuncture and laser acupuncture may have little or no effect in the short term on symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) in comparison with placebo or sham acupuncture.\" It was also noted that all studies had an unclear or high overall risk of bias and that all evidence was of low or very low quality.\nPrognosis.\nThe natural history of untreated CTS seems to be gradual worsening of the neuropathy.\u00a0It is difficult to prove that this is always the case, but the supportive evidence is compelling.\nAtrophy of the thenar muscles, weakness of palmar abduction, and loss of sensibility (constant numbness as opposed to intermittent paresthesia) are signs of advanced neuropathy. Advanced neuropathy is often permanent. The nerve will try to recover after surgery for more than 2 years, but the recovery may be incomplete.\nParesthesia may increase after the release of advanced carpal tunnel syndrome, and people may feel worse than they did before surgery for many months.\nTroublesome recovery seems related to symptoms of anxiety or depression, and unhelpful thoughts about symptoms (such as worst-case or catastrophic thinking), as well as advanced neuropathy with potentially permanent neuropathy.\nRecurrence of carpal tunnel syndrome after successful surgery is rare. Caution is warranted in considering additional surgery for people dissatisfied with the result of carpal tunnel release as perceived recurrence may more often be due to renewed awareness of persistent symptoms rather than worsening pathology.\nHistory.\nCTS was first described around 1850 but was infrequently diagnosed until findings were publicized by neurologist W. Russell Brain in 1947. People were often diagnosed with acroparesthesia. Clinicians would often ascribe it to \"poor circulation\" and not pursue it further.\nSir James Paget described median nerve compression at the carpal tunnel in two patients after trauma in 1854. The first was due to an injury where a cord had been wrapped around a man's wrist. The second was related to a distal radial fracture. For the first case, Paget performed an amputation of the hand. For the second case, Paget recommended a wrist splint.\nThe first to notice the association between the carpal ligament pathology and median nerve compression appears to have been Pierre Marie and Charles Foix in 1913. They described the results of a postmortem of an 80-year-old man with bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. They suggested that division of the carpal ligament would be curative in such cases. Putman had previously described a series of 37 patients and suggested a vasomotor origin. The association between the thenar muscle atrophy and compression was noted in 1914. The name \"carpal tunnel syndrome\" appears to have been coined by Moersch in 1938.\nPhysician George S. Phalen of the Cleveland Clinic drew attention to the pathology of compression as the reason for CTS after working with a group of patients in the 1950s and 1960s.\nTreatment.\nIn 1933, Sir James Learmonth outlined a method of nerve decompression of the nerve at the wrist. \nThis procedure may have been pioneered in Canada by orthopedic surgeon Herbert Galloway in 1924. \nEndoscopic release was described in 1988.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56464", "revid": "30392891", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56464", "title": "Joubert syndrome", "text": "Autosomal recessive genetic disorder\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nJoubert syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder that affects the cerebellum, an area of the brain that controls balance and coordination.\nJoubert syndrome is one of the many genetic syndromes associated with syndromic retinitis pigmentosa. The syndrome was first identified in 1969 by pediatric neurologist Marie Joubert in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, while working at the Montreal Neurological Institute and McGill University.\nSigns and symptoms.\nMost of the signs and symptoms of the Joubert syndrome appear very early in infancy with most children showing delays in gross motor milestones. Although other signs and symptoms vary widely from individual to individual, they generally fall under the hallmark of cerebellum involvement or in this case, lack thereof. Consequently, the most common features include ataxia (lack of muscle control), hyperpnea (abnormal breathing patterns), sleep apnea, abnormal eye and tongue movements, and hypotonia in early childhood. Other malformations such as polydactyly (extra fingers and toes), cleft lip or palate, tongue abnormalities, and seizures may also occur. Developmental delays, including cognitive, are always present to some degree. Severe forms have been noted to include hypoplasia of the corpus callosum.\nThose with this syndrome often exhibit specific facial features such as a broad forehead, arched eyebrows, ptosis (droopy eyelids), hypertelorism (widely spaced eyes), low-set ears, and a triangle shaped mouth. Additionally, this disease can include a broad range of other abnormalities in other organ systems such as retinal dystrophy, kidney diseases, liver diseases, skeletal deformities, and endocrine (hormonal) problems.\nGenetics.\nSeveral mutations have been identified in individuals with Joubert syndrome (JBTS) which allowed for classification of the disorder into subtypes.\nThis disorder can be caused by mutations in more than 30 genes within genetic makeup. The primary cilia play an important role in the structure and function of cells. When primary cilia are mutated and defective, it can cause various genetic disorders among individuals. This mutation of primary cilia can disrupt significant signaling pathways during the development of the fetus.\nMutations in these various genes are known to cause around 60-90% of Joubert Syndrome cases. In the remaining cases, the cause is unknown if not linked to a mutation of known genes.\nDiagnosis.\nThe disorder is characterized by the absence or underdevelopment of the cerebellar vermis and a malformed brain stem (molar tooth sign), both of which can be visualized on a transverse view of the head MRI scan. Together with this sign, the diagnosis is based on the physical symptoms and genetic testing for mutations. If the gene mutations have been identified in a family member, prenatal or carrier diagnosis can be pursued.\nJoubert Syndrome is known to affect 1 in 80,000-100,000 newborns. Due to the variety of genes this disorder involves, it is likely to be underdiagnosed. It is commonly found in Ashkenazi Jewish, French-Canadians, and Hutterite ethnic populations. Most cases of Joubert syndrome are autosomal recessive; in these cases, both parents are either carriers or affected. Rarely, Joubert syndrome is inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. In these cases, males are more commonly affected because they must have one X chromosome mutated, while affected females must have mutated genes on both X chromosomes.\nTreatment.\nTreatment for Joubert syndrome is symptomatic and supportive. Infants with abnormal breathing patterns should be monitored. The syndrome is associated with progressive worsening of the kidneys, the liver, and the eyes and thus requires regular monitoring.\nDelays in gross motor skills, fine motor skills, and speech development are seen in almost all individuals with Joubert syndrome. Delays can be due to low muscle tone as well as impaired motor coordination. Some children have also been noted to have visual impairment due to abnormal eye movements. Developmental delays are usually treated with physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy interventions. Most children diagnosed with Joubert syndrome can achieve standard milestones, although often at a much later age.\nPrognosis.\nIn a sample of 19 children, a 1997 study found that 3 died before the age of 3, and 2 never learned to walk. The children had various levels of delayed development with developmental quotients from 60 to 85.\nResearch.\nResearch has revealed that a number of genetic disorders, not previously thought to be related, may indeed be related as to their root cause. Joubert syndrome is one such disease. It is a member of an emerging class of diseases called ciliopathies.\nThe underlying cause of the ciliopathies may be a dysfunctional molecular mechanism in the primary cilia structures of the cell, organelles which are present in many cellular types throughout the human body. The cilia defects adversely affect \"numerous critical developmental signaling pathways\" essential to cellular development and thus offer a plausible hypothesis for the often multi-symptom nature of a large set of syndromes and diseases.\nCurrently recognized ciliopathies include Joubert syndrome, primary ciliary dyskinesia (also known as Kartagener Syndrome), Bardet\u2013Biedl syndrome, polycystic kidney disease and polycystic liver disease, nephronophthisis, Alstr\u00f6m syndrome, Meckel\u2013Gruber syndrome and some forms of retinal degeneration.\nJoubert syndrome type 2 is disproportionately frequent among people of Jewish descent.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56465", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56465", "title": "Cassava", "text": "Staple crop\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nManihot esculenta, commonly called cassava, manioc, or yuca (among numerous regional names), is a woody shrub of the spurge family, Euphorbiaceae, native to South America, from Brazil, Paraguay and parts of the Andes. Although a perennial plant, cassava is extensively cultivated in tropical and subtropical regions as an annual crop for its edible starchy tuberous root. Cassava is predominantly consumed in boiled form, but substantial quantities are processed to extract cassava starch, called tapioca, which is used for food, animal feed, and industrial purposes. The Brazilian , and the related \"garri\" of West Africa, is an edible coarse flour obtained by grating cassava roots, pressing moisture off the obtained grated pulp, and finally drying and roasting it.\nCassava is the third-largest source of carbohydrates in food in the tropics, after rice and maize, making it an important staple; more than 500 million people depend on it. It offers the advantage of being exceptionally drought-tolerant, and able to grow productively on poor soil. The largest producer is Nigeria, while Thailand is the largest exporter of cassava starch.\nCassava is grown in sweet and bitter varieties; both contain toxins, but the bitter varieties have them in much larger amounts. Cassava has to be prepared carefully for consumption, as improperly prepared material can contain sufficient cyanide to cause poisoning. The more toxic varieties of cassava have been used in some places as famine food during times of food insecurity. Farmers may however choose bitter cultivars to minimise crop losses.\nEtymology.\nThe generic name \"Manihot\" and the common name \"manioc\" both derive from the Guarani (Tupi) name \"mandioca\" or \"manioca\" for the plant. The specific name \"esculenta\" is Latin for 'edible'. The common name \"cassava\" is a 16th century word from the French or Portuguese \"cassave\", in turn from Ta\u00edno \"ca\u00e7abi\". The common name \"yuca\" or \"yucca\" is most likely also from Ta\u00edno, via Spanish \"yuca\" or \"juca\".\nDescription.\nThe harvested part of a cassava plant is the storage root. This is long and tapered, with an easily detached rough brown rind. The white or yellowish flesh is firm and even in texture. Commercial cultivars can be wide at the top, and some long, with a woody vascular bundle running down the middle. The tuberous roots are largely starch, with small amounts of calcium (16 milligrams per 100 grams), phosphorus (27\u00a0mg/100 g), and vitamin C (20.6\u00a0mg/100 g). Cassava roots contain little protein, whereas the leaves are rich in it, except for being low in methionine, an essential amino acid.\nGenome.\nThe complete and haplotype-resolved African cassava (TME204) genome has been reconstructed and made available using the Hi-C technology. The genome shows abundant novel gene loci with enriched functionality related to chromatin organization, meristem development, and cell responses. Differentially expressed transcripts of different haplotype origins were enriched for different functionality during tissue development. In each tissue, 20\u201330% of transcripts showed allele-specific expression differences with &lt;2% of direction-shifting. Despite high gene synteny, the HiFi genome assembly revealed extensive chromosome rearrangements and abundant intra-genomic and inter-genomic divergent sequences, with significant structural variations mostly related to long terminal repeat retrotransposons.\nAlthough smallholders are otherwise economically inefficient producers, they are vital to productivity at particular times. Small cassava farmers are no exception. Genetic diversity is vital when productivity has declined due to pests and diseases, and smallholders tend to retain less productive but more diverse gene pools.\nThe molecular genetics of starchy root development in cassava have been analyzed and compared to other root and tuber crops, including possible (unproven) roles for\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Flowering Locus T (FT) orthologs.\nHistory.\nWild populations of \"M. esculenta\" subspecies \"flabellifolia\", shown to be the progenitor of domesticated cassava, are centered in west-central Brazil, where it was likely first domesticated no more than 10,000 years ago. Forms of the modern domesticated species can also be found growing in the wild in the south of Brazil. By 4600 BC, cassava pollen appears in the Gulf of Mexico lowlands, at the San Andr\u00e9s archaeological site. The oldest direct evidence of cassava cultivation comes from a 1,400-year-old Maya site, Joya de Cer\u00e9n, in El Salvador. It became a staple food of the native populations of northern South America, southern Mesoamerica, and the Taino people in the Caribbean islands, who grew it using a high-yielding form of shifting agriculture by the time of European contact in 1492. Cassava was a staple food of pre-Columbian peoples in the Americas and is often portrayed in indigenous art. The Moche people often depicted cassava in their ceramics.\nSpaniards in their early occupation of Caribbean islands did not want to eat cassava or maize, which they considered insubstantial, dangerous, and not nutritious. They much preferred foods from Spain, specifically wheat bread, olive oil, red wine, and meat, and considered maize and cassava damaging to Europeans. The cultivation and consumption of cassava were nonetheless continued in both Portuguese and Spanish America. Mass production of cassava bread became the first Cuban industry established by the Spanish. Ships departing to Europe from Cuban ports such as Havana, Santiago, Bayamo, and Baracoa carried goods to Spain, but sailors needed to be provisioned for the voyage. The Spanish also needed to replenish their boats with dried meat, water, fruit, and large amounts of cassava bread. Sailors complained that it caused them digestive problems.\nPortuguese traders introduced cassava to Africa from Brazil in the 16th century. Around the same period, it was introduced to Asia through Columbian Exchange by Portuguese and Spanish traders, who planted it in their colonies in Goa, Malacca, Eastern Indonesia, Timor and the Philippines. Cassava has also become an important crop in Asia. While it is a valued food staple in parts of eastern Indonesia, it is primarily cultivated for starch extraction and bio-fuel production in Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam. Cassava is sometimes described as the \"bread of the tropics\" but should not be confused with the tropical and equatorial bread tree \"(Encephalartos)\", the breadfruit \"(Artocarpus altilis)\" or the African breadfruit \"(Treculia africana)\". This description definitely holds in Africa and parts of South America; in Asian countries such as Vietnam fresh cassava barely features in human diets.\nCassava was introduced to East Africa around 1850 by Arab and European settlers, who promoted its cultivation as a reliable crop to mitigate the effects of drought and famine.\nThere is a legend that cassava was introduced in 1880\u20131885 to the South Indian state of Kerala by the King of Travancore, Vishakham Thirunal Maharaja, after a great famine hit the kingdom, as a substitute for rice. However, cassava was cultivated in the state before that time. Cassava is called kappa or maricheeni in Malayalam, and tapioca in Indian English usage.\nCultivation.\nOptimal conditions for cassava cultivation are mean annual temperatures between , annual precipitation between , and an annual growth period of no less than 240 days. Cassava is propagated by cutting the stem into sections of approximately , these being planted prior to the wet season. Cassava growth is favorable under temperatures ranging from , but it can tolerate temperatures as low as and as high as . These conditions are found, among other places, in the northern part of the Gulf Coastal Plain in Mexico. In this part of Mexico the following soil types have been shown to be good for cassava cultivation: phaeozem, regosol, arenosol, andosol and luvisol.\nHarvesting.\nBefore harvest, the leafy stems are removed. The harvest is gathered by pulling up the base of the stem and cutting off the tuberous roots.\nHandling and storage.\nCassava deteriorates after harvest, when the tuberous roots are first cut. The healing mechanism produces coumaric acid, which oxidizes and blackens the roots, making them inedible after a few days. This deterioration is related to the accumulation of reactive oxygen species initiated by cyanide release during mechanical harvesting. Cassava shelf life may be increased up to three weeks by overexpressing a cyanide-insensitive alternative oxidase, which suppressed ROS by 10-fold. Post-harvest deterioration is a major obstacle to the export of cassava. Fresh cassava can be preserved like potato, using thiabendazole or bleach as a fungicide, then wrapping in plastic, freezing, or applying a wax coating.\nWhile alternative methods for controlling post-harvest deterioration have been proposed, such as preventing reactive oxygen species effects by using plastic bags during storage and transport, coating the roots with wax, or freezing roots, such strategies have proved to be economically or technically impractical, leading to breeding of cassava varieties with improved durability after harvest, achieved by different mechanisms. One approach used gamma rays to try to silence a gene involved in triggering deterioration; another strategy selected for plentiful carotenoids, antioxidants which may help to reduce oxidization after harvest.\nPests and diseases.\nCassava is subject to pests from multiple taxonomic groups, including nematodes, and insects, as well as diseases caused by viruses, bacteria, and fungi. All cause reductions in yield, and some cause serious losses of crops.\nViruses.\nSeveral viruses cause enough damage to cassava crops to be of economic importance. The African cassava mosaic virus causes the leaves of the cassava plant to wither, limiting the growth of the root. An outbreak of the virus in Africa in the 1920s led to a major famine. The virus is spread by the whitefly and by the transplanting of diseased plants into new fields. Sometime in the late-1980s, a mutation occurred in Uganda that made the virus even more harmful, causing the complete loss of leaves. This mutated virus spread at a rate of per year, and as of 2005 was found throughout Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic of the Congo. Viruses are a severe production limitation in the tropics. They are the primary reason for the complete lack of yield increases in the 25 years up to 2021[ [update]]. Cassava brown streak virus disease is a major threat to cultivation worldwide. Cassava mosaic virus (CMV) is widespread in Africa, causing cassava mosaic disease (CMD). Bredeson et al. 2016 find the \"M. esculenta\" cultivars most widely used on that continent have \"M. carthaginensis\" subsp. \"glaziovii\" genes of which some appear to be CMD resistance genes. Although the ongoing CMD pandemic affects both East and Central Africa, Legg \"et al.\" found that these two areas have two distinct subpopulations of the vector, \"Bemisia tabaci\" whiteflies. Genetically engineered cassava offers opportunities for the improvement of virus resistance, including CMV and CBSD resistance.\nBacteria.\nAmong the most serious bacterial pests is \"Xanthomonas axonopodis\" pv. \"manihotis\", which causes bacterial blight of cassava. This disease originated in South America and has followed cassava around the world. Bacterial blight has been responsible for near catastrophic losses and famine in past decades, and its mitigation requires active management practices. Several other bacteria attack cassava, including the related \"Xanthomonas campestris\" pv. \"cassavae\", which causes bacterial angular leaf spot.\nFungi and oomycetes.\nSeveral fungi and oomycetes bring about significant crop losses, one of the most serious being cassava root rot; the pathogens involved are species of \"Phytophthora\", the genus which causes potato blight. Cassava root rot can result in losses of as much as 80 percent of the crop. \nA major pest is a rust caused by \"Uromyces manihotis\". \nSuperelongation disease, caused by \"Elsino\u00eb brasiliensis\", can cause losses of over 80 percent of young cassava in Latin America and the Caribbean when temperature and rainfall are high.\nNematodes.\nNematode pests of cassava are thought to cause harms ranging from negligible to seriously damaging, making the choice of management methods difficult. A wide range of plant parasitic nematodes have been reported associated with cassava worldwide. These include \"Pratylenchus brachyurus\", \"Rotylenchulus reniformis\", \"Helicotylenchus\" spp., \"Scutellonema\" spp. and \"Meloidogyne\" spp., of which \"Meloidogyne incognita\" and \"Meloidogyne javanica\" are the most widely reported and economically important. \"Meloidogyne\" spp. feeding produces physically damaging galls with eggs inside them. Galls later merge as the females grow and enlarge, and they interfere with water and nutrient supply. Cassava roots become tough with age and restrict the movement of the juveniles and the egg release. It is therefore possible that extensive galling can be observed even at low densities following infection. Other pests and diseases can gain entry through the physical damage caused by gall formation, leading to rots. They have not been shown to cause direct damage to the enlarged tuberous roots, but plant height can be reduced if the root system is reduced.\nNematicides reduce the numbers of galls per feeder root, along with fewer rots in the tuberous roots. The organophosphorus nematicide fenamiphos does not reduce crop growth or harvest yield. Nematicide use in cassava does not increase harvested yield significantly, but lower infestation at harvest and lower subsequent storage loss provide a higher effective yield. The use of tolerant and resistant cultivars is the most practical management method in most locales.\nInsects.\nInsects such as stem borers and other beetles, moths including \"Chilomima clarkei\", scale insects, fruit flies, shootflies, burrower bugs, grasshoppers, leafhoppers, gall midges, leafcutter ants, and termites contribute to losses of cassava in the field, while others contribute to serious losses, between 19% and 30%, of dried cassava in storage. In Africa, a previous issue was the cassava mealybug (\"Phenacoccus manihoti\") and cassava green mite (\"Mononychellus tanajoa\"). These pests can cause up to 80 percent crop loss, which is extremely detrimental to the production of subsistence farmers. These pests were rampant in the 1970s and 1980s but were brought under control following the establishment of the Biological Control Centre for Africa of the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA) under the leadership of Hans Rudolf Herren. The Centre investigated biological control for cassava pests; two South American natural enemies \"Anagyrus lopezi\" (a parasitoid wasp) and \"Typhlodromalus aripo\" (a predatory mite) were found to effectively control the cassava mealybug and the cassava green mite, respectively.\nProduction.\nIn 2022, world production of cassava root was 330 million tonnes, led by Nigeria with 18% of the total (table). Other major growers were Democratic Republic of the Congo and Thailand.\nCassava is the third-largest source of carbohydrates in food in the tropics, after rice and maize. making it an important staple; more than 500 million people depend on it. It offers the advantage of being exceptionally drought-tolerant, and able to grow productively on poor soil. Cassava grows well within 30\u00b0 of the equator, where it can be produced at up to above sea level, and with of rain per year. These environmental tolerances suit it to conditions across much of South America and Africa.\nCassava yields a large amount of food energy per unit area of land per day \u2013 , as compared with for rice, for wheat and for maize.\nCassava, yams (\"Dioscorea\" spp.), and sweet potatoes (\"Ipomoea batatas\") are important sources of food in the tropics. The cassava plant gives the third-highest yield of carbohydrates per cultivated area among crop plants, after sugarcane and sugar beets. Cassava plays a particularly important role in agriculture in developing countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, because it does well on poor soils and with low rainfall, and because it is a perennial that can be harvested as required. Its wide harvesting window allows it to act as a famine reserve and is invaluable in managing labor schedules. It offers flexibility to resource-poor farmers because it serves as either a subsistence or a cash crop. Worldwide, 800 million people depend on cassava as their primary food staple.\nToxicity.\nCassava roots, peels and leaves are dangerous to eat raw because they contain linamarin and lotaustralin, which are toxic cyanogenic glycosides. These are decomposed by the cassava enzyme linamarase, releasing poisonous hydrogen cyanide. Cassava varieties are often categorized as either bitter (high in cyanogenic glycosides) or sweet (low in those bitter compounds). Sweet cultivars can contain as little as 20 milligrams of cyanide per kilogram of fresh roots, whereas bitter cultivars may contain as much as 1000 milligrams per kilogram. Cassavas grown during drought are especially high in these toxins. A dose of 25\u00a0mg of pure cassava cyanogenic glucoside, which contains 2.5\u00a0mg of cyanide, is sufficient to kill a rat. Excess cyanide residue from improper preparation causes goiters and acute cyanide poisoning, and is linked to ataxia (a neurological disorder affecting the ability to walk, also known as \"konzo\"). It has also been linked to tropical fibrocalcific pancreatitis in humans, leading to chronic pancreatitis.\nSymptoms of acute cyanide intoxication appear four or more hours after ingesting raw or poorly processed cassava: vertigo, vomiting, goiter, ataxia, partial paralysis, collapse, and death. It can be treated easily with an injection of thiosulfate (which makes sulfur available for the patient's body to detoxify by converting the poisonous cyanide into thiocyanate).\nChronic, low-level exposure to cyanide may contribute to both goiter and tropical ataxic neuropathy, also called konzo, which can be fatal. The risk is highest in famines, when as many as 3 percent of the population may be affected.\nLike many other root and tuber crops, both bitter and sweet varieties of cassava contain antinutritional factors and toxins; the bitter varieties contain much larger amounts. The more toxic varieties of cassava have been used in some places as famine food during times of food insecurity. For example, during the shortages in Venezuela in the late 2010s, dozens of deaths were reported due to Venezuelans resorting to eating bitter cassava in order to curb starvation. Cases of cassava poisoning were also documented during the famine accompanying the Great Leap Forward (1958\u20131962) in China. Farmers may select bitter cultivars to reduce crop losses.\nSocieties that traditionally eat cassava generally understand that processing (soaking, cooking, fermentation, etc.) is necessary to avoid getting sick. Brief soaking (four hours) of cassava is not sufficient, but soaking for 18\u201324 hours can remove up to half the level of cyanide. Drying may not be sufficient, either.\nIn many West African regions, especially Nigeria, bitter cassava roots are traditionally detoxified in a lengthy process. The roots are peeled and grated. The moist pulp is soaked (or \u201cretted\u201d) in water for 48 to 72 hours to initiate spontaneous fermentation. During this period endogenous linamarase acts on linamarin and lotaustralin; the resulting hydrogen cyanide dissolves or volatilises, reducing the cyanogenic potential by 85 \u2013 99 %.\nAfter soaking, the mash is pressed to expel liquid and boiled, roasted, or toasted to make foods such as gari, fufu, and lafun, further lowering residual cyanide to within the WHO safe limit of 10 mg HCN kg\u207b\u00b9.\nFor some smaller-rooted, sweet varieties, cooking is sufficient to eliminate all toxicity. The cyanide is carried away in the processing water and the amounts produced in domestic consumption are too small to have environmental impact. The larger-rooted, bitter varieties used for production of flour or starch must be processed to remove the cyanogenic glucosides. The large roots are peeled and then ground into flour, which is then soaked in water, squeezed dry several times, and toasted. The starch grains that flow with the water during the soaking process are also used in cooking. The flour is used throughout South America and the Caribbean. Industrial production of cassava flour, even at the cottage level, may generate enough cyanide and cyanogenic glycosides in the effluents to have a severe environmental impact.\nUses.\nFood and drink.\nThere are many ways of cooking cassava. It has to be prepared correctly to remove its toxicity. The root of the sweet variety is mild to the taste, like potatoes; Jewish households sometimes use it in cholent. It can be made into a flour that is used in breads, cakes and cookies. In Brazil, \"farofa\", a dry meal made from cooked powdered cassava, is roasted in butter, eaten as a side dish, or sprinkled on other food. In Taiwanese culture, later spread to the United States, cassava \"juices\" are dried to a fine powder and used to make tapioca, a popular starch used to make bubbles (tapioca pearl), a chewy topping in bubble tea.\nAlcoholic beverages made from cassava include cauim (Brazil), kasiri (Venezuela, Guyana, Suriname), parakari or kari (Venezuela, Guyana, Surinam), and nihamanchi (South America),\nPreparation of bitter cassava.\nAn ancestral method used by the indigenous people of the Caribbean to detoxify cassava is by peeling, grinding, and mashing; filtering the mash through a basket tube (sebucan or tipiti) to remove the hydrogen cyanide; and drying and sieving the mash for flour. The poisonous filtrate water was boiled to release the hydrogen cyanide, and used as a base for stews.\nA safe processing method known as the \"wetting method\" is to mix the cassava flour with water into a thick paste, spread it in a thin layer over a basket and then let it stand for five hours at 30\u00a0\u00b0C in the shade. In that time, about 83% of the cyanogenic glycosides are broken down by linamarase; the resulting hydrogen cyanide escapes to the atmosphere, making the flour safe for consumption the same evening.\nThe traditional method used in West Africa is to peel the roots and put them into water for three days to ferment. The roots are then dried or cooked. In Nigeria and several other west African countries, including Ghana, Cameroon, Benin, Togo, Ivory Coast, and Burkina Faso, they are usually grated and lightly fried in palm oil to preserve them. The result is a foodstuff called garri. Fermentation is also used in other places such as Indonesia, such as Tapai. The fermentation process also reduces the level of antinutrients, making the cassava a more nutritious food. The reliance on cassava as a food source and the resulting exposure to the goitrogenic effects of thiocyanate has been responsible for the endemic goiters seen in the Akoko area of southwestern Nigeria.\nBioengineering has been applied to grow cassava with lower cyanogenic glycosides combined with fortification of vitamin A, iron and protein to improve the nutrition of people in sub-Saharan Africa.\nIn Guyana the traditional cassareep is made from bitter cassava juice. The juice is boiled until it is reduced by half in volume, to the consistency of molasses and flavored with spices\u2014including cloves, cinnamon, salt, sugar, and cayenne pepper. Traditionally, cassareep was boiled in a soft pot, the actual \"pepper pot\", which would absorb the flavors and also impart them (even if dry) to foods such as rice and chicken cooked in it. The poisonous but volatile hydrogen cyanide is evaporated by heating. Nevertheless, improperly cooked cassava has been blamed for a number of deaths. Amerindians from Guyana reportedly made an antidote by steeping chili peppers in rum. The natives of Guyana traditionally brought the product to town in bottles, and it is available on the US market in bottled form.\nNutrition.\nRaw cassava is 60% water, 38% carbohydrates, 1% protein, and has negligible fat (table). In a reference serving, raw cassava provides of food energy and 23% of the Daily Value (DV) of vitamin C, but otherwise has no micronutrients in significant content (i.e., above 10% of the relevant DV).\nBiofuel.\nCassava has been studied as a feedstock to produce ethanol as a biofuel, including to improve the efficiency of conversion from cassava flour, and to convert crop residues such as stems and leaves as well as the more easily processed roots. China has created facilities to produce substantial amounts of ethanol fuel from cassava roots.\nAnimal feed.\nCassava roots and hay are used worldwide as animal feed. Young cassava hay is harvested at three to four month, when it reaches about above ground; it is dried in the sun until its dry matter content approaches 85 percent. The hay contains 20\u201327 percent protein and 1.5\u20134 percent tannin. It is valued as a source of roughage for ruminants such as cattle.\nLaundry starch.\nCassava is used in laundry products, especially as starch to stiffen shirts and other garments.\nFolklore.\nMan\u00ed, a Tup\u00ed myth of origins, is the name of an indigenous girl with very fair complexion. The Amazonian legend of Man\u00ed is related to the cult of Manioc, the native staple that sprang from her grave. Sometime later a crack opened on the earth and the people of the tribe found a fruit that resembled the white skin tone of the dead child's body. They picked up the fruit from the ground, peeled and cooked it, and for their surprise it tasted delicious. It even renewed their strength. They also prepared a drink which could easily put one to sleep. So, from this day on, they began using the root as their staple food and called it \"mandioca\", which in Tupy language means \"house (oca, in Tupi\u2013Guarani) of Mandi= Man\u00ed\".\nIn Java, a myth relates that food derives from the body of Dewi Teknowati, who killed herself rather than accept the advances of the god Batara Guru. She was buried, and her lower leg grew into a cassava plant.\nIn Trinidad, folk stories tell of a \"saapina\" or snake-woman; the word is related to \"sabada\", meaning to pound, for what is traditionally a woman's work of pounding cassava.\nThe identity of the Macushi people of Guyana is closely bound up with the growth and processing of cassava in their slash-and-burn subsistence lifestyle. A story tells that the great spirit Makunaima climbed a tree, cutting off pieces with his axe; when they landed on the ground, each piece became a type of animal. The opossum brought the people to the tree, where they found all the types of food, including bitter cassava. A bird told the people how to prepare the cassava safely.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56466", "revid": "36761478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56466", "title": "Neurofibromatosis", "text": "Three genetic disorders involving benign tumors of the nervous system\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nNeurofibromatosis (NF) refers to a group of three distinct genetic conditions in which tumors grow in the nervous system. The tumors are non-cancerous (benign) and often involve the skin or surrounding bone. Although symptoms are often mild, each condition presents differently. Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) is typically characterized by caf\u00e9 au lait spots (light-brown flat patches of skin), neurofibromas (small bumps in or under the skin), scoliosis (side-way curvature of the back), and headaches. Neurofibromatosis type II (NF2), on the other hand, may present with early-onset hearing loss, cataracts, tinnitus, difficulty walking or maintaining balance, and muscle atrophy. The third type is called schwannomatosis and often presents in early adulthood with widespread pain, numbness, or tingling due to nerve compression.\nThe cause is a genetic mutation in certain oncogenes. These can be inherited, or in about half of cases spontaneously occur during early development. Different mutations result in the three types of NF. Neurofibromatosis arise from the supporting cells of the nervous system rather than the neurons themselves. In NF1, the tumors are neurofibromas (tumors of the peripheral nerves), while in NF2 and schwannomatosis tumors of Schwann cells are more common. Diagnosis is typically based on symptoms, examination, medical imaging, and biopsy. Genetic testing may rarely be done to support the diagnosis.\nThere is no known prevention or cure. Surgery may be done to remove tumors that are causing problems or have become cancerous. Radiation and chemotherapy may also be used if cancer occurs. A cochlear implant or auditory brainstem implant may help some who have hearing loss due to the condition.\nIn the United States, about 1 in 3,500 people have NF1 and 1 in 25,000 have NF2. Males and females are affected equally often. In NF1, symptoms are often present at birth or develop before 10 years of age. While the condition typically worsens with time, most people with NF1 have a normal life expectancy. In NF2, symptoms may not become apparent until early adulthood. NF2 increases the risk of early death. Descriptions of the condition occur as far back as the 1st century. It was formally described by Friedrich Daniel von Recklinghausen in 1882, after whom it was previously named.\nSigns and symptoms.\nNeurofibromatosis type 1 in early life may cause learning and behavior problems \u2013 about 60% of children who have NF1 have mild difficulty in school. Signs the individual might have are as follows:\nPeople with neurofibromatosis type 2 can exhibit the same type of skin symptoms as type 1, but not necessarily in every case. Symptoms may include pain due to pressure on nerves, tinnitus, weakness in fingers, numbness, headaches. The symptom most characteristic of NF2 is hearing loss. The hearing loss occurs due to the pressure of tumors on the acoustic nerve. The same pressure can cause headaches, dizziness, and nausea.\nThe main symptom of schwannomatosis is localized pain. This pain is due to tissues and nerves experiencing more pressure because of nearby tumors.\nCause.\nThe three types of neurofibromatosis are caused by different mutations on chromosomes. NF1 is caused by a mutation on the NF1 gene on the arm of chromosome 17. NF2 is caused by a mutation on the NF2 tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 22. Schwannomatosis is caused by various mutations on chromosome 22.\nNeurofibromatosis is an autosomal dominant disorder, which means only one copy of the affected gene is needed for the disorder to develop. If one parent has neurofibromatosis, his or her children have a 50% chance of developing the condition as well. The severity of the parent's condition does not affect the child; the affected child may have mild NF1 even though it was inherited from a parent with a severe form of the disorder. The types of neurofibromatosis are:\nPathophysiology.\nThe pathophysiology is varied, and each NF type has a different one:\nDiagnosis.\nThe neurofibromatoses are considered as RASopathies and as members of the \"neurocutaneous syndromes\" (\"phakomatoses\").\nThe diagnosis of neurofibromatosis is done via the following means:\nDifferential diagnosis.\nConditions similar to NF include:\nTreatment.\nSurgical removal of tumors is an option; however, the risks involved should be assessed first. With regard to OPG (optic pathway gliomas), the preferred treatment is chemotherapy. However, radiotherapy is not recommended in children who present with this disorder. It is recommended that children diagnosed with NF1 at an early age have an examination each year, which allows any potential growths or changes related to the disorder to be monitored.\nPrognosis.\nIn most cases, symptoms of NF1 are mild, and individuals live normal and productive lives. In some cases, however, NF1 can be severely debilitating and may cause cosmetic and psychological issues. The course of NF2 varies greatly among individuals. In some cases of NF2, the damage to nearby vital structures, such as other cranial nerves and the brain stem, can be life-threatening. Most individuals with schwannomatosis have significant pain. In some extreme cases, the pain will be severe and disabling.\nEpidemiology.\nIn the United States, about 1 in 3,500 people have NF1, 1 in 25,000 have NF2, and 1 in 40,000 have schwannomatosis. Males and females are affected equally often in all three conditions. In NF1, symptoms are often present at birth or develop before 10 years of age. While the condition typically worsens with time, most people with NF1 have a normal life expectancy. In NF2, symptoms may not become apparent until early adulthood. NF2 increases the risk of early death. Schwannomatosis symptoms develop in early childhood and can worsen with time. Typically life expectancy is unaffected in those with schwannomatosis.\nHistory.\nDescriptions of what is believed to be the condition go as far back as the 1st century. The conditions were formally described by Friedrich Daniel von Recklinghausen in 1882, after whom it was previously named.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56467", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56467", "title": "London, Great Britain", "text": ""}
{"id": "56468", "revid": "45940103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56468", "title": "London, United Kingdom", "text": ""}
{"id": "56469", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56469", "title": "Pelizaeus\u2013Merzbacher disease", "text": "X-linked leukodystrophy\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nPelizaeus\u2013Merzbacher disease is an X-linked neurological disorder that damages oligodendrocytes in the central nervous system. It is caused by mutations in proteolipid protein 1 (\"PLP1\"), a major myelin protein. It is characterized by a decrease in the amount of insulating myelin surrounding the nerves (hypomyelination) and belongs to a group of genetic diseases referred to as leukodystrophies.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe hallmark signs and symptoms of Pelizaeus\u2013Merzbacher disease include little or no movement in the arms or legs, respiratory difficulties, and characteristic horizontal movements of the eyes left to right.\nThe onset of Pelizaeus\u2013Merzbacher disease is usually in early infancy. The most characteristic early signs are nystagmus (rapid, involuntary, rhythmic motion of the eyes) and low muscle tone. Motor abilities are delayed or never acquired, mostly depending upon the severity of the mutation. Most children with Pelizaeus\u2013Merzbacher disease learn to understand language, and usually have some speech. Other signs may include tremor, lack of coordination, involuntary movements, weakness, unsteady gait, and over time, spasticity in legs and arms. Muscle contractures often occur over time. Mental functions may deteriorate. Some patients may have convulsions and skeletal deformation, such as scoliosis, resulting from abnormal muscular stress on bones.\nCause.\nPelizaeus\u2013Merzbacher disease is caused by X-linked recessive mutations in the major myelin protein proteolipid protein 1 (\"PLP1\"). This causes hypomyelination in the central nervous system and severe neurological disease. The majority of mutations result in duplications of the entire \"PLP1\" gene. Deletions of \"PLP1\" locus (which are rare) cause a milder form of Pelizaeus\u2013Merzbacher disease than is observed with the typical duplication mutations, which demonstrates the critical importance of gene dosage at this locus for normal CNS function.\nDiagnosis.\nThe diagnosis of Pelizaeus\u2013Merzbacher disease is often first suggested after identification by magnetic resonance imaging of abnormal white matter (high T2 signal intensity, i.e. T2 lengthening) throughout the brain, which is typically evident by about 1 year of age, but more subtle abnormalities should be evident during infancy. Unless a family history consistent with sex-linked inheritance exists, the condition is often misdiagnosed as cerebral palsy. Once a \"PLP1\" mutation is identified, prenatal diagnosis or preimplantation genetic diagnostic testing is possible.\nClassification.\nThe disease is one in a group of genetic disorders collectively known as leukodystrophies that affect the growth of the myelin sheath, the fatty covering\u2014which acts as an insulator\u2014on nerve fibers in the central nervous system. The several forms of Pelizaeus\u2013Merzbacher disease include classic, congenital, transitional, and adult variants. Pelizaeus\u2013Merzbacher disease is the common name for hypomyelinating leukodystrophies (HLD). There are at least 26 HLD variants cataloged by the National Institutes of Health National Library of Medicine and the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) compendium of human genes and genetic phenotypes.\nMilder mutations of the \"PLP1\" gene that mainly cause leg weakness and spasticity, with little or no cerebral involvement, are classified as spastic paraplegia 2 (SPG2).\nTreatment.\nNo cure for Pelizaeus\u2013Merzbacher disease has been developed. Outcomes are variable: people with the most severe form of the disease do not usually survive to adolescence, although with milder forms, survival into adulthood is possible.\nIonis Pharmaceuticals is currently testing ION356, an antisense oligonucleotide targeted against \"PLP1\", in a Phase 1b trial in PMD patients.\nResearch.\nIn December 2008, StemCells, Inc received clearance in the United States to conduct a phase I clinical trials of human neural stem cell transplantation. The trial did not show meaningful efficacy and the company has since gone bankrupt.\nIn 2019 Paul Tesar, a professor at Case Western Reserve University, used CRISPR and antisense therapy in a mouse model of Pelizaeus\u2013Merzbacher with success. In 2022 Case Western Reserve University entered an exclusive licensing agreement with Ionis Pharmaceuticals to develop a human treatment for the disorder.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56470", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56470", "title": "Leopold I of Belgium", "text": "King of the Belgians from 1831 to 1865\nLeopold I (Leopold George Christian Frederick; 16 December 1790 \u2013 10 December 1865) was the first king of the Belgians, reigning from 21 July 1831 until his death in 1865.\nThe youngest son of Francis, Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, Leopold took a commission in the Imperial Russian Army and fought against Napoleon after French troops overran Saxe-Coburg during the Napoleonic Wars. After Napoleon's defeat, Leopold moved to the United Kingdom, where in 1816 he married Princess Charlotte of Wales, the only child of the British Prince Regent (later George IV). Leopold and Charlotte's marriage was happy, but it ended after a year and a half when Charlotte died after delivering a stillborn son. Leopold continued to enjoy considerable status in Britain.\nAfter the Greek War of Independence, Leopold was offered the throne of Greece under the 1830 London Protocol that created an independent Greek state, but turned it down, believing it to be too precarious. Instead, he accepted the throne of Belgium in 1831 following the country's independence in 1830. The Belgian government offered the position to Leopold because of his diplomatic connections with royal houses across Europe, and because as the British-backed candidate, he was not affiliated with other powers, such as France, which were believed to have territorial ambitions in Belgium which might threaten the European balance of power created by the 1815 Congress of Vienna.\nLeopold took his oath as King of the Belgians on 21 July 1831, an event commemorated annually as Belgian National Day. The following year, he married Princess Louise of Orl\u00e9ans, with whom he had four children. He also had two illegitimate sons by his mistress, Arcadie Claret. Leopold's reign was marked by attempts by the Dutch to recapture Belgium and, later, by internal political division between Liberals and Catholics. Leopold was considered a liberal Protestant ruler and encouraged economic modernisation, playing an important role in funding the creation of Belgium's first railway in 1835 and subsequent industrialisation. As a result of the ambiguities in the Belgian Constitution, Leopold was able to slightly expand the monarch's powers during his reign and assumed multiple ministries. He also played an important role in stopping the spread of the Revolutions of 1848 into Belgium. He died in 1865 and was succeeded by his son, Leopold II.\nEarly life.\nLeopold was born at Ehrenburg Palace in Coburg in the small German duchy of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld in modern-day Bavaria on 16 December 1790. He was the eighth child and youngest son of Francis, Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld by his second wife, Countess Augusta Reuss of Ebersdorf. In 1826, Saxe-Coburg had acquired the city of Gotha from the neighbouring Duchy of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg and gave up Saalfeld to Saxe-Meiningen, becoming Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. The dynasty of this name was therefore founded by Leopold's eldest brother, Ernest I, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, the father of Albert, Prince Consort of the United Kingdom. Leopold was baptised on 17 December 1790, with his baptismal name remaining the same as his birth name, in honour of Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor. Leopold's paternal grandmother, Princess Sophie Antoinette of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel, often assisted in parenting duties and signalled that he was her favourite grandson.\nFrom 1797, Leopold was tutored by Charles-Theodore Hoflender, a graduate of the University of Jena and a professor in Coburg. Under Hoflender, he studied Biblical history, Christianity, mathematics and languages, including Greek, Latin and Russian. In 1799, Leopold and his siblings also became tutored by Johann Philipp Hohnbaum, who specialised in teaching physical education and in teaching history of Great Britain, the Holy Roman Empire and Saxony. Hohnbaum cited that Leopold was fascinated by history and conflicts such as the Thirty Years War. Lutheran pastor Gottlieb Scheler taught Leopold catechism. Historian Olivier Defrance wrote that Scheler's teaching of Pietism had a lasting influence on Leopold. From 1804, aged thirteen, Leopold kept a diary and learnt English, French and Italian. Leopold often heard stories of military experience from his great-uncle, Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, and inherited his father's passion for pigeon racing and floriculture.\nPre-regnal years.\nMilitary career.\nRussian Imperial army.\nIn 1796, Leopold's older sister, Princess Juliane of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, married Grand Duke Konstantin Pavlovich of Russia, making the House of Romanov her house by marriage. The following year, at just six years old, Leopold received an honorary Russian military title in the \"Izmaylovsky\" Regiment, part of the Imperial Guard, in the Imperial Russian Army: the rank of captain on 7 May 1797 and subsequently colonel on 11 September 1798. Leopold also began to specialise in the Russian language. On 19 March 1801, he was transferred to the Imperial Guard Cavalry Regiment, when six years later, aged twelve, he received a promotion to the rank of major general.\nIn 1805, at fourteen years old, Leopold accompanied his older brother, Ernest, Hereditary Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, to Moravia, where the headquarters of Alexander I, Emperor of Russia were located; however, neither Leopold nor Ernest partook in combat. Following the Battle of Austerlitz, during the Napoleonic Wars, French troops occupied the Duchy of Saxe-Coburg in 1806. Leopold and his father, Francis, took refuge in Saalfeld; however, Francis died on 9 December 1806, six days before the Treaty of Poznan assigned the Duchy to the Confederation of the Rhine, thus abolishing the Duchy's sovereignty. When Napoleon learned that Ernest had previously fought against the French, he removed the Duchy from the Confederation, before seizing the properties of Leopold's family. Leopold and his mother were confined to a section of one of the confiscated castles and were not let out. During this time, Leopold wrote to his sister, Princess Sophie of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld: \"The poor country of Cobourg is terribly penalized; It must pay 981,000 francs; it's huge. Our coffers and our estates, in short all our income, were confiscated by the Emperor Napoleon. No appanage can be paid.\" After intervention by the Russian Emperor, Napoleon declared the Duchy to be part of the Confederation of the Rhine once more by adding it to the Treaty of Tilsit. Ernest as the new reigning Duke was allowed to return to Coburg in July 1807.\nLeopold soon went to Paris where he became part of the Imperial Court of Napoleon. Napoleon's wife, Jos\u00e9phine de Beauharnais, took a protective attitude of Leopold, who met Napoleon in October 1808. According to the historian Carlo Bronne, Napoleon was in awe of Leopold and briefly considered making him his aide-de-camp. In Spring 1808, Leopold contracted typhoid fever and when he recovered, he shortly became regent of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld when Ernest visited Russia. Napoleon later offered Leopold the position of adjutant, but he refused and instead went to Russia to take up a military career in the Imperial Russian cavalry, which then later went to war with France. Leopold accompanied Emperor Alexander I in September 1808 and represented his home Duchy at the Congress of Erfurt, where Napoleon failed to strengthen Franco-Russian relations while the Duchy's interests were ignored. He wrote to Alexander I for assistance, leading to Napoleon demanding that he resign from the Russian army.\nNapoleonic battles.\nIn Autumn 1810, Ernest asked Leopold to find financial aid for the Duchy, which was lacking soldiers and had been badly affected by war and its previous occupation. Leopold met Napoleon, who refused to aid the Duchy, but offered that Leopold join the French army. Leopold strongly refused. In May 1811, Leopold went to Munich and although he was unsuccessful in securing funding, he managed to persuade Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria to return small territories that Bavaria had previously annexed from the Duchy. Leopold was hailed in the media for this achievement. Following his visit to Munich, Leopold travelled to Vienna, then to various Italian cities during the winter. He wrote: \"The years of 1810 and 1811 were quite calm. I was disappointed to find myself forbidden from serving in Russia by Napoleon who held my brother responsible, because he knew that otherwise he would not have been able to prevent me.\" In March 1813, Leopold was finally allowed to rejoin the Russian Imperial army.\nDuring 1813, Leopold was an active member of the Russian army and participated in the liberation of German states from Napoleonic France. On 28 February 1813, after the signing of the Treaty of Kalisz, Leopold said to Emperor Alexander, \"I was the first German Prince who joined the liberating army\". Leopold participated in multiple conflicts against French troops, including the Battle of L\u00fctzen, Battle of Bautzen and Battle of Leipzig. He worked closely with his brother-in-law, Grand Duke Konstantin Pavlovich of Russia, during this time. On 26 August 1813, Leopold helped Duke Eugen of W\u00fcrttemberg escape his occupiers. Three days later, Leopold was nearly captured by French forces. Later, on 29 and 30 August 1813, Leopold fought in the Battle of Kulm as the head of his \"cuirassier\" division. The battle was a French loss, and Leopold was decorated for his participation with the Cross of St. George, the Order of St. Andrew, the Order of Alexander Nevsky, the Order of Saint Anna and the Kulm Cross. Additionally, he was promoted to Major General in the Russian Army.\nLeopold and Konstantin Pavlovich were unsuccessful in reuniting with Leopold's sister, Julianne, in Bern in January 1814. Leopold entered France with the Russian army on 30 January. On 1 February, he participated in the Battle of Brienne, which resulted in the occupation of Troyes. Additionally, during the Battle of Arcis-sur-Aube, Leopold commanded the right wing on the army, with France successfully defeated, before Paris was marched on four days later. On 31 March, Leopold too entered Paris, as Napoleon fell, to which Leopold commented: \"This is the extent to which prudence has humiliated this tyrant, to the horror of all those who would want to follow his example.\" Leopold and Ernest represented the Duchy of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld at the Congress of Vienna. The Kingdom of Prussia, which Leopold and the Russian Imperial army had fought alongside, was opposed to any gains made by the Duchy, which had been against the annexation of Saxony, an ally of France. During the Congress, Leopold held audience with Archduke John of Austria and Chancellor Klemens von Metternich. When Napoleon returned from exile in March 1815, Leopold commanded a Russian cavalry brigade as a lieutenant general, aged 25, on the outskirts of France, as Napoleon lost the Battle of Waterloo.\nMarriage to Charlotte of Wales.\nIn Spring 1814, Leopold accompanied Emperor Alexander to England, where Princess Charlotte of Wales was seeking a spouse. Charlotte was the only legitimate child of Prince George, Prince Regent (later George IV), and therefore second in line to the British throne. George had hoped Charlotte would marry William, Prince of Orange, but Charlotte favoured Leopold. Emperor Alexander was also opposed to Charlotte marrying William as he believed a future personal union between Great Britain and the Netherlands would become a maritime superpower and dominate the seas. Leopold and Charlotte lost contact for months, and the latter often wrote to the former asking that he return to Britain to propose to her. Leopold received British citizenship in March 1816. Finally, the pair married at Carlton House in London on 2 May 1816. Although George was displeased, he found Leopold to be charming and possessing every quality to make his daughter happy, and so approved their marriage. The same year Leopold received an honorary commission to the rank of Field Marshal and Knight of the Order of the Garter. The Regent also considered making Leopold a royal duke, the Duke of Kendal, though the plan was abandoned due to government fears that it would draw Leopold into party politics and would be viewed as a demotion for Charlotte. The couple lived initially at Camelford House in Park Lane, and then at Marlborough House in The Mall.\nLeopold and Charlotte moved into Claremont House in August 1816. When Charlotte later suffered a miscarriage, Leopold became concerned for her health. When Charlotte again fell pregnant, she was advised by her obstetrician, Sir Richard Croft, to drastically reduce her diet; however, Leopold's physician, Christian Stockmar, heavily disagreed with this advice. Charlotte gave birth to a stillborn son on 5 November 1817. She suffered complications and, just after midnight on 6 November, also died. Leopold was said to have been heartbroken by Charlotte's death.\nHad Charlotte survived, she would have become queen of the United Kingdom on the death of her father and Leopold presumably would have assumed the role of prince consort, later taken by his nephew Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. Stockmar, who became Leopold's private secretary, advised him to stay in Britain rather than returning to Coburg and despite Charlotte's death, George granted Leopold the British style of \"Royal Highness\" by Order in Council on 6 April 1818. However, the British public was opposed to the annuity of 50,000 pounds sterling paid by the British government to Leopold, who was no longer even a member of the British royal family. From 1828 to 1829, Leopold had an affair with the actress Caroline Bauer, who bore a striking resemblance to Charlotte. Caroline was a cousin of Stockmar. She came to England with her mother and took up residence at Longwood House, a few miles from Claremont House. But, by mid-1829, the liaison was over, and the actress and her mother returned to Berlin. Many years later, in memoirs published after her death, she declared that she and Leopold had engaged in a morganatic marriage and that he had bestowed upon her the title of Countess Montgomery. He would have broken this marriage when the possibility arose that he could become King of Greece. The son of Stockmar denied that these events ever happened, and indeed no records have been found of a civil or religious marriage with the actress.\nFollowing Charlotte's death, Leopold assisted members of his family in acceding to various European thrones. He encouraged his sister, Princess Victoria of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, to marry George's brother, Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn, after her first husband, Emich Carl, 2nd Prince of Leiningen, had died. Victoria and Edward were the parents of the future Queen Victoria, who was born in 1819 and lost her father in 1820. Leopold allowed her and her mother to live with him in Claremont House and convinced George, who was now monarch, that he should give apartments in Kensington Palace to them. Leopold went on to support George's wife, Caroline of Brunswick, in marital disputes and even visited Caroline during George's crowning, leading to disdain from George. Leopold nonetheless remained in Britain for another fourteen years after the death of Charlotte but regularly travelled Europe.\nIn 1819, Leopold received Niederf\u00fcllbach Castle in Coburg and began preparing to make it his main residence. Leopold's brother, Ernest, had married Princess Louise of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg, who went on to inherit the Duchy of Saxe-Gotha, though Ernest insisted he reigned over it. From there, Ernest's Duchy of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld and Louise's Duchy of Saxe-Gotha merged to form the Duchy of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. Before the couple divorced in 1826, Ernest and Louise had two sons, the future Ernest II, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, and Albert, who went on to marry Queen Victoria. Whilst in Paris, Leopold was encouraged to marry Marie-Caroline of Bourbon-Two Sicilies, Duchess of Berry, the widowed daughter-in-law of Charles X of France; however, Leopold declined due to differing views and opinions on matters with the French royal house.\nRefusal of the Greek throne.\nFollowing a Greek rebellion against the Ottoman Empire, Leopold was offered the throne of an independent Greece as part of the London Protocol of February 1830, which stipulated that the new monarch could not be of Great Britain, France or Russia.\nThough Leopold resided in Britain, he was not considered a member of the British royal family as he was not of the House of Hanover. He was quite popular across Europe for his role in the Napoleonic wars and, according to Defrance, was often mentioned in Greek \"anglophile circles\". Despite popularity, he was often in dispute with George and the British government, who supported Leopold as a candidate for the Greek throne and subsequently demanded he give up his British possessions. Leopold eventually agreed and accepted this offer from Duke of Wellington, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, and his Cabinet. However, Leopold was still anxious to accept the Greek throne and demanded certain conditions, including having the Greco-Ottoman border changed in Greece's favour by amending the border crossing the Achelous River and Valley, receiving financial and military aid while the state was being set up, and having protection of Greece by the Great Powers from foreign aggression. He argued that this zone of protection should be extended all the way to Samos and Crete, whose populations had been active in the Greek War of Independence. Most of his demands were agreed to in a series of discussions, with particular priority in protecting the majority Christian inhabitants of the Greek islands. With the Great Powers mainly satisfied, they signed new international protocol, officially giving Leopold, \"the son-in-law of George IV\", the title of \"Sovereign Prince of Greece\". A few days later, on 28 February 1830, Leopold officially accepted the Greek crown.\nLeopold contacted Ioannis Kapodistrias, the \"de facto\" Governor of the Greek State, who he had known since the Napoleonic Wars. Leopold asked of him in his letters to provide assistance in his accession to the throne; however, Kapodistrias' reply on 6 April was not of reassuring nature. Kapodistrias insisted that Leopold's border changes did not satisfy Greece, provoked the Ottoman Empire and would need to be ratified by the legislature. Contrary to historians Michel Lh\u00e9ritier and \u00c9douard Driault, Defrance claims that Kapodistrias's motive was to possibly intimidate Leopold. Kapodistrias also very strongly encouraged Leopold to convert to Greek Orthodoxy to the wishes of the Greek people, but Leopold was displeased by this. Later that month, the Greek Senate drafted a memorandum addressed to Leopold to welcome him and give a list of requests of the Greek people, including the border issue, the inclusion of Samos, Crete and Psara in the new Greek nation and the religion of Leopold. From London, Leopold worked to achieve these requests and even succeeded in increasing loans granted to Greece from 12 million to 60 million francs; however, he failed to resolve the border dispute and annex Crete from the Ottoman Empire. Feeling the Greek population was too demanding and precarious, Leopold turned down the offer to become King of Greece on 17 May 1830. The role would subsequently be accepted by Otto of Wittelsbach in May 1832 who ruled until he was finally deposed in October 1862. Otto would then be replaced by the House of Gl\u00fccksburg, with Prince Wilhelm of Denmark becoming George I of Greece.\nReign.\nAcceptance of the Belgian throne.\nSearch for a monarch.\nAt the end of August 1830, rebels in the Southern provinces (modern-day Belgium) of the United Netherlands rose up against Dutch rule. The rising, which began in Brussels, pushed the Dutch army back, and the rebels defended themselves against a Dutch attack. International powers meeting in London agreed to support the independence of Belgium, even though the Dutch refused to recognize the new state. In November 1830, a National Congress was established in Belgium to create a constitution for the new state. Fears of \"mob rule\" associated with republicanism after the French Revolution of 1789, as well as the example of the recent, liberal July Revolution in France, led the Congress to decide that Belgium would be a popular, constitutional monarchy. The choice of candidates for the position was one of the most controversial issues faced by the revolutionaries. The Congress refused to consider any candidate from the Dutch ruling house of Orange-Nassau. Some Orangists had hoped to offer the position to William I or his son, William, Prince of Orange, which would bring Belgium into personal union with the Netherlands like Luxembourg. The Great Powers also worried that a candidate from another state could risk destabilizing the international balance of power and lobbied for a neutral candidate.\nEventually the Congress was able to draw up a shortlist. The viable possibilities were felt to be Auguste of Leuchtenberg, son of Eug\u00e8ne de Beauharnais, and Louis, Duke of Nemours, son of Louis Philippe I of France. All the candidates were French and the choice between them was principally between choosing the Bonapartism of Beauharnais or Leuchtenberg and supporting the July Monarchy of Louis Philippe. Louis Philippe realized that the choice of either of the Bonapartists could be first stage of a coup against him, but that his son would also be unacceptable to other European powers suspicious of French intentions. Nemours refused the offer. With no definitive choice in sight, Catholics and Liberals united to elect Erasme Louis Surlet de Chokier, a minor Belgian nobleman, as regent to buy more time for a definitive decision in February 1831.\nDue to opposition of previous candidates, the Belgian Congress proposed Leopold, who had been proposed at an early stage, but had been dropped because of French opposition. The problems caused by the French candidates and the increased international pressure for a solution led to his reconsideration. Leopold was known by the Congress due to his military past and a delegation of Belgian representatives was sent to London to meet Leopold. On 22 April, he was finally approached by the delegation at Marlborough House to officially offer him the throne. Leopold read over the Treaty of the Eighteen Articles prior to it being signed on 9 July 1831, officially separating Belgium and the Netherlands. The treaty also included the possibility of a repurchase of Luxembourg by Belgium. Despite all this, Leopold remained reluctant to accept the Belgian throne.\nAccession.\nOn 16 July 1831, Leopold travelled from Dover to Calais on the royal yacht \"Crusader\", deciding to accept the throne. The next day he drove by carriage to Dunkirk and entered Belgium at De Panne. Whilst travelling to Brussels on horseback, he was greeted with patriotic enthusiasm along his route. The accession ceremony took place on 21 July on the Place Royale in Brussels. A stand had been erected on the steps of the Church of St. James on Coudenberg, surrounded by the names of revolutionaries fallen during the fighting in 1830. After a ceremony of resignation by the regent, Leopold, dressed in the uniform of a Belgian lieutenant-general, swore loyalty to the constitution, under the supervision of congressman Jean-Baptiste Nothomb, and became king. Leopold said in his speech: \"I have come hither to work for the welfare of this country, and to preserve, by my acceptance of the crown, the peace of Europe; whatever can contribute to these two things, I will do it; anything beyond that will be harmful.\" Leopold's enthronement has generally been used to mark the end of the revolution and the start of the Kingdom of Belgium and is celebrated each year as the Belgian national holiday.\nConsolidation of independence.\nAlthough the Belgian Constitution to which Leopold swore gave the monarch command of the army only as an honorary title, Leopold signalled on multiple occasions that he would personally place himself in charge of the army if Belgium were to be attacked. The Belgian population was widely content with this due to his previous military experience. Less than two weeks after Leopold's accession, on 2 August 1831, the Netherlands invaded Belgium, starting the Ten Days' Campaign. Leopold immediately requested that Belgian Prime Minister, Joseph Lebeau, contact the foreign offices in London and Paris for assistance. Leopold here followed the Constitution, which forbade him personally from calling upon foreign powers without permission from the legislature, which at this time had not yet been elected. The small Belgian army was overwhelmed by the Dutch assault and was pushed back, and Leopold took command of a small force that defended the outskirts of Brussels. Leopold once again appealed to the French for support. The French promised support, and the arrival of their \"\" in Belgium forced the Dutch to retreat. Great Britain refused to intervene. Eventually, the Netherlands accepted a diplomatic mediation and returned behind to the pre-war border. Skirmishes continued for eight years, but in April 1839, the two countries signed the Treaty of London, whereby the Dutch finally recognised Belgium's independence.\nLeopold's attitude during the war earned him both praise and criticism in the Belgian media. For example, an article in \"L'Ind\u00e9pendance Belge\" read, \"The King of the Belgians, [...] showed rare composure and intrepidity. Always in the most perilous places, he was often obliged to fulfil both the functions of generalissimo and those of second lieutenant.\" However, an article the following day critiqued, \"The approach of our troops repaired everything, but what is less repairable is the failure that the Belgians suffered in the opinion of Europe.\" Following the war and large losses that Belgium suffered, Leopold reorganised national defence, disbanded the \"Garde Civique\" and legislated the army's numbers at 80,000 men. When the Dutch abandoned Belgium, they left a garrison force that closed the Scheldt to Belgian shipping, meaning that the inland port of Antwerp was effectively useless. The Netherlands and the Dutch colonies in particular, which had been profitable markets for Belgian manufacturers before 1830, became totally closed to Belgian goods. The French Army of the North, which had helped Belgium considerably in the Ten Days' Campaign, defeated the Dutch army the following year and laid siege to Antwerp on 15 November 1832. However, the Dutch managed to burn down much of the city before its liberation, and subsequent fighting remained until the Netherlands was finally defeated on 23 December 1832. The Dutch government continued to refuse to recognise the Treaty of the Eighteen Articles and William I of the Netherlands organised in May 1833 an embargo of Dutch coasts. Belgian, British and Dutch delegations subsequently met in Zonhoven to resolve the matters, but Leopold left unsatisfied as no agreements were definitively made.\nIn April 1834, anti-Orangist riots broke out in Brussels and soon developed into protests in favour of Leopold. Several of the former residences of William's family in Belgium and hotels in Brussels were ransacked, leading to Leopold travelling in on horseback and convincing the protestors to disband by giving a speech. Leopold's advisers believed that peace had been restored and suggested he left, but soon after the Hotel of Trazegnies was also ransacked and the military were sent in. Over 115 people were arrested and seven were wounded, before the Belgian legislature passed a law punishing pro-Orangist propaganda. Subsequently, Leopold took charge of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to deal with diplomatic clashes with the Netherlands, including the matter of Belgian claims to Dutch Limburg, which Leopold was unable to obtain, thus ruining his prospect for a new railway line through the region. He was successful however in reducing the country's debt to the Netherlands from 8,400,000 to 5,400,000 florins. The Netherlands would finally go on to recognise Belgian independence by signing the Treaty of London in 1839. The Dutch-Belgian border was agreed to on 8 August 1843 with the Treaty of Maastricht.\nLeopold was generally unsatisfied with the amount of power allocated to the monarch in the Constitution, and sought to extend it wherever the Constitution was ambiguous or unclear while generally avoiding involvement in routine politics.\nMarriage, family and residences.\n Leopold on a 40 franc coin in 1835 \nThough Leopold was now monarch, there was concern over the issue of dynastic succession with Leopold having no issue because of his widowed status. To strengthen ties with France, Leopold considered marrying a French princess and approached the King of the French, Louis Philippe I, who agreed to Leopold marrying his daughter, Louise of Orl\u00e9ans. They married on 9 August 1832 at the Ch\u00e2teau de Compi\u00e8gne and participated in a civil ceremony, a Catholic service and a Lutheran blessing. Although the marriage was arranged, Patrick Roegiers writes that the pair found happiness in each other. Soon after their wedding, Leopold asked the government if Louise could be appointed regent while he travelled, but they unanimously opposed. Louise gave birth to their first son, Louis Philippe, on 24 July 1833; however, the infant died nine months later on 16 May 1834 from an inflammation of mucous membranes. Two years later, on 9 April 1835, Louise gave birth to a second son, Leopold. Two more children, Philippe and Charlotte, followed on 24 March 1837 and 7 June 1840 respectively.\nOf his three royal residences, the Royal Palace of Antwerp, the Royal Palace of Brussels and the Castle of Laeken, Leopold chose the latter as it reminded him of his erstwhile British residence, Claremont House. There, Leopold and Louise lived a generally relaxed and quiet life, with Louise stating that \"The King, his dog and I\" only lived there. According to Bronne, they would wake up mid-morning, attend mass and then read through their mail, which was sent in from Paris. Louise was often excited to read Parisian mail as it often came from her own family. When receiving politicians, officials and members of Belgian aristocracy, Leopold would often engage in cue sports.\nIn 1844, Leopold met Arcadie Claret, the eighteen-year-old daughter of an officer in the Belgian army. They very soon after had an affair and Leopold encouraged her to marry to avoid being caught out. Claret married Ferdinand Meyer in 1845, who managed the royal stables and agreed to be her husband in return for financial compensation. However, Meyer soon left for Coburg to allow Leopold and Claret to continue their relationship. Claret was placed in a house near the Royal Palace of Brussels and was discovered as Leopold's mistress by the media, which also highlights Louise's declining health. Claret's house was attacked by the public for her use of palace carriages when going out. Leopold, per his advisors, encouraged Claret to have more restraint when travelling, but she left Belgium for Germany in October 1850. She eventually returned to Belgium and moved into the Ch\u00e2teau of Stuyvenberg. Leopold had two illegitimate sons, George and Arthur, by Claret. George von Eppinghoven was born in 1849, and Arthur von Eppinghoven in 1852. At Leopold's request, in 1862 his two sons were created Freiherr von Eppinghoven by his nephew, Ernest II, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. In 1863, Claret was also created Baronin von Eppinghoven.\nDomestic policy, politics and infrastructure.\nWhile the drafters of the Belgian Constitution aimed to make Belgium a constitutional monarchy, making the monarch a neutral and impartial arbiter, Leopold had managed to assign himself significant powers, such as assuming multiple ministries and taking charge of many diplomatic, administrative and military domains. From 1831 to 1846, politics in Belgium was divided between Liberal and Catholic parties, along with unionist governments. Catholicism had always been the dominant religion in Belgium, yet Leopold had always refused to convert from his Lutheran faith and favoured the Liberals. To appease to the public, he sought to maintain cordial relations with the Holy See, though Louis de Lichtervelde suggests it may have been to reassure and consolidate his own power against \"the only other force\" (Catholicism) which was more popular than him. Leopold also believed that the Church would act as a means of unity for Belgium, which was linguistically divided.\nHistorians believe that the fall of the Theux government in April 1840 was feared by Leopold as it was it marked the first time in modern Belgian history, and under his reign, that a government had collapsed. Leopold was opposed to Lebeau forming government as his party had voted against Barth\u00e9l\u00e9my de Theux de Meylandt, which caused the government's collapse. In 1846, the Party for Freedom and Progress convened to strengthen the cooperation between the executive and legislature, and as a result of new Bills passed by Charles Rogier's government, the role of the monarch was reduced and Liberals dominated politics, advocating for free trade, freedoms, liberties and secularisation. During the second half of Leopold's reign, the Liberals remained in power. While meeting with the government, Leopold made it clear that he believed the appointment and dismissal of ministers was his prerogative under the Constitution, and demanded that he be informed in advance of all government, ministerial and administrative decisions.\nThroughout Leopold's reign, Belgium experienced economic and industrial progress, despite economic crises during the early decades of his reign. The period between 1845 and 1849 was particularly hard in Flanders, where harvests failed and a third of the population became dependent on poor relief, and has been described as the \"worst years of Flemish history\". The economic situation in Flanders also increased the internal migration to Brussels and the industrial areas of Wallonia, which continued throughout the period. Despite this, Leopold worked closely with the government to develop infrastructure, which he promised in his enthronement speech: \"Multiple efforts will be directed towards the improvement and extension of agriculture, commerce and industry; they contribute to spreading prosperity among the various classes of inhabitants and to cementing harmony.\" In 1842, Leopold failed to pass laws to regulate child and women labour. He wanted to ban them from working in certain industries, such as harvesting in which he believe they dominated; however, the Bill he proposed was defeated, and child labour continued to be abused. For example, in 1850, the coal industry employed nearly 3300 women, 4400 boys and 1221 girls under the age of sixteen in underground labour. In agriculture, similar statistics existed with harsh working conditions and low wages. An investigation was conducted in 1853 and 1854 by \u00c9douard Ducp\u00e9tiaux found that the average Belgian worker had to devote 65.8% of their wage to basic needs. Leopold never recognised or tended to the issue of low wages.\nLeopold was an early supporter of railways. Belgium's first stretch of railway, between northern Brussels and Mechelen, was completed in May 1835. It was the first steam passenger railway in Continental Europe. The development of railways allowed for the growth of the industry and in an 1847 speech, Leopold remarked: \"Freight transport and railway revenues continue to increase at a remarkable rate. Measures are being prepared to increase them further and to introduce improvements in the operation of this important service.\" Multiple historians attribute the development and production of cast iron, steel, coal, glassworks and cloth weaving to Leopold's reign. Earlier in 1835, Leopold had inaugurated the National Bank of Belgium, which solidified the 1832 creation and circulation of the Belgian franc. Leopold appeared on coinage and postage stamps, which had helped to congeal the legitimacy of his reign in the early years.\nRevolution of 1848.\nIn 1848, protests plagued the majority of Europe. The success of economic reforms partially mitigated the effects of the economic downturn and meant that Belgium was not as badly affected as its neighbours by the Revolutions of 1848. Nevertheless, in early 1848, a large number of radical publications appeared. The most serious threat of the 1848 revolutions in Belgium was posed by Belgian \u00e9migr\u00e9 groups. Shortly after the French Revolution of 1848, Belgian migrant workers living in Paris were encouraged to return to Belgium to overthrow the monarchy and establish a republic. Around 6000 armed \u00e9migr\u00e9s of the \"Belgian Legion\" attempted to cross the Belgian frontier. The first group, travelling by train, was stopped and quickly disarmed at Qui\u00e9vrain on 26 March 1848. The second group crossed the border on 29 March and headed for Brussels, and was confronted by Belgian troops at the hamlet of Risquons-Tout and, during fighting, seven \u00e9migr\u00e9s were killed and most of the rest were captured.\nIn order to defuse tension, the government adopted multiple measures aimed at liberalising the country and preventing it from being attacked by revolutionary ideas of its neighbours. For example, the stamp duty on newspapers was abolished and agents who the state believed could serve as potential disturbances to public order, such as Karl Marx, were expelled from Belgium in March. Ultimately, Leopold theatrically offered his abdication, if this was the wish of the majority of his people. Historians such as Stengers and \u00c9liane Gubin claim that it was the first time in his life that Leopold regretted not taking up the offer of the Greek throne. The defeat at Risquons-Tout effectively ended the revolutionary threat to Belgium, as the situation in Belgium began to recover that summer after a good harvest, and fresh elections returned a strong Liberal majority. At the end of 1848, Leopold commented on the situation: \"You know this country which, I can say without false modesty, has been administered in an exemplary manner for almost 18 years. It proved itself well during the crisis and despite the terrible neighbourhood of Paris. [...] After this trial by fire, the country became very solid [...], I gained the trust of most of the Cabinets and also of the people; I intend to use it and use it to the full for the benefit of Europe.\"\nForeign policy.\nRole in European affairs.\nFor his role in European affairs, Leopold was dubbed the \"Nestor of Europe\", after the wise mediator in Homer's \"Iliad\". This was also due to his connection to other monarchs. For example, Leopold's niece was Queen of the United Kingdom, his nephew was Prince Consort of the United Kingdom and his other nephew was the Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. He remained in close contact with his sovereign relatives, particularly Queen Victoria. Historian Jean Stengers records that Leopold's intervention in European affairs was to look after Belgian interests, to look after British interests and to encourage peace to maintain the conservative order. Not only did Leopold have high-level correspondence with other leaders, but he regularly travelled and made informal and state visits. Throughout his reign and particularly in the 1840s, a main goal of his was to repair Franco-British relations due to the Eastern question. He organised a meeting between his father-in-law, Louis Philippe I of France, and his niece, Queen Victoria, in 1843 at the Ch\u00e2teau d'Eu, marking the first time in thirteen years that the House of Orl\u00e9ans received a foreign monarch. The following year, Louis Philippe visited Victoria in Britain, with Leopold and Louise organising his itinerary. Moreover, with the rise of Prussia to the east of Belgium, Leopold worked to maintain amicable ties with the German states. In August 1843, along with members of the British royal family, Leopold travelled to Br\u00fchl and stayed at Stolzenfels Castle with the Prussian monarch and forty members of other German royalty. Notably, the Emperor of Russia, Nicholas I, did not attend despite his invitation. In 1844, per Jules Van Praet, Russia and Belgium established relations.\nThe rise of Prussia as the dominating German power continued throughout the decades of Leopold's reign. The new German Confederation's legislature became the Frankfurt Assembly, which was the first pan-German parliament with representatives from each German state, including the German-speaking areas of the Austrian Empire. Leopold's name was suggested as a potential candidate for the federal leader of the Confederation who would bear the imperial crown of Germany. Naturally, the entry of Belgium into the German Confederation was then discussed. Leopold was opposed to both of these propositions as it was contravene Belgium's status as a neutral power and would diminish the independence of the country. The German Confederation nonetheless soon disbanded, though German Unification would later occur after Leopold's death.\nWhen Louis Philippe was deposed in the 1848 French Revolution, Leopold remained neutral and was one of the first heads of state to recognise the new French Republic. While this pleased the new French government, it came as a shock to other European nations who had admired Belgian neutrality, imposed by Article VII of the Treaty of London (1839). While most historians have depicted Leopold as faithful to this, others have not, such as Belgian historian Jan Anckaer, who interprets Leopold's diplomatic efforts in the Second Egyptian-Ottoman War in 1840 and Belgium's manufacture of arms for Russia during the Crimean War as breaches of neutrality. Following the July Monarchy, the Second French Empire was created, which worried the Belgian government. Immediately following the 1851 French coup d'\u00e9tat, Leopold sent Prime Minister Henri de Brouck\u00e8re to Paris to meet the new Napoleon III to assure cordial relations. Leopold saw the new regime in France as a threat and began limiting the number of French political refugees to stay on the good side of Napoleon, whom Leopold met in Calais in 1854. The following year, Leopold sent his eldest son to Paris for an exhibition as part of the official Belgian delegation.\nFurthermore, despite initial skirmishes at the start of his tenure, Leopold wanted to repair relations with the Netherlands. In October 1859, Leopold sent his youngest son to The Hague on a state visit, where he met with the Dutch royal family. On 18 October 1861 in Li\u00e8ge, Leopold received William III of the Netherlands, who returned via Belgium after meeting with Napoleon III. The day before the Belgian and Dutch monarchs met, Leopold wrote to Victoria: \"He will be very well received, his process is rightly appreciated here. Being received in the very country where you were Crown Prince is a little painful and you feel slightly embarrassed.\" The meeting was successful.\nRole in colonial affairs.\nWhen Leopold swore allegiance to the Constitution, Belgium had no colonial possessions and could not lay claim to any Dutch colonies. However, Belgium did seek to develop its industry and trade, which it saw would require establishing commercial relations with non-European countries. Leopold also believed that acquiring a colony would solve the issue of rising poverty rates, an effect of rapid industrialisation and food shortages following war with the Netherlands. In attempting to set up colonies, Leopold engaged in multiple planning projects which he personally funded; however, they were all abandoned by the government. He proposed taking the Isle of Pines, Tortuga and other territories in the Antilles. Sweden made Belgium an offer to cede the island of Saint Barth\u00e9lemy, but France soon took it up. Other colonial prospects of Leopold's that resulted in failure included taking the Faroe Islands, setting up a Belgian protectorate in New Zealand, installing a Belgian trading post in Ethiopia, taking the Nicobar Islands per an English shipping company's suggestion, and establishing a consortium in the Philippines that would pay Spain at 5% interest.\nThe Belgian Colonisation Company was founded on 18 September 1841 and was funded by Leopold. Its objectives were to \"create agricultural, industrial and commercial establishments in different states of Central America and other places\" and \"to establish commercial relations between these countries and Belgium\". The company purchased 404,666 hectares of land in Santo Tom\u00e1s de Castilla (modern-day Guatemala) granted by the Guatemalan dictator Rafael Carrera. An exploration commission was sent on 9 November 1841 in order to finalise the purchase; however, Belgian delegates soon began leaving due to unsanitary conditions. Leopold pushed for the project to continue. Until 1847, Belgium sent ships full of settlers, served prisoners and working-class men to the territory, promising a more hopeful future; however, this failed due to harsh conditions leading to a high mortality rate. In 1855, Guatemala pulled out from the deal.\nDuring the Second Opium War, Great Britain and France sent expeditionary forces to China, bound for Beijing in 1859. Under Leopold's eldest son, Leopold, who held an interest in the Far East, Belgium sought to involve itself by sending volunteers so that the country would economically benefit and strengthen ties with Britain and France. Leopold contacted Napoleon III, and the two agreed to Belgian involvement; however, the government stated that it would pull out if conflict were to occur. In 1860, Leopold sent his youngest son, Philip, to Brazil so that he could marry one of the daughters of Emperor Pedro II. Pedro subsequently gifted Philip with multiple territories for European migrants to settle on. Leopold was eager for the marriage to work as it would establish a branch of his family in South America. However, Philip was unimpressed and abandoned the project. By the end of Leopold's reign, Belgium still lacked colonies; however, his son would soon acquire the Congo as his own personal private property before ceding it to Belgium in 1908.\nRole in family affairs and the death of Louise.\nAs a member of the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, Leopold was eager to his family's influence rise throughout Europe. He skillfully used his family connections and marriages to protect Belgium from French ambitions and the threat of annexation by Napoleon III. Leopold supported the marriage of his nephew, Ferdinand, to the Queen of Portugal, Maria II, in 1836. Portugal had a longstanding alliance with Great Britain and with his nephew now on the Portuguese throne \"jure uxoris\", Leopold hoped it would bring Belgium and Britain closer. In 1840, Leopold's nephew, Albert, married his first cousin and Leopold's niece, Queen Victoria, thus cementing Anglo-Belgian ties. In 1843, Leopold's nephew, Prince August of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, married Louise's sister, Princess Cl\u00e9mentine of Orl\u00e9ans, thus again uniting the two royal houses. Though Leopold had influenced all these royal marriages, he was not always as successful. In 1846, August's brother, Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, failed to marry Isabella II of Spain.\nMeanwhile, in France in 1850, Louise had caught a cold while attending a ceremony commemorating her recently deceased father. Though medical experts did not seem concerned, Louise died prematurely on 11 October 1850, aged 38. It was the second time Leopold was widowed and he became deeply saddened by this.\nPer Defrance, the mood in the royal court fell sombre dramatically after this. Leopold and Louise's children, who were barely teenagers, suffered in the absence of their mother and were often left to nannies. Louise had personally educated her children and now tutors needed to be found. Leopold became more reclusive and distanced from his family, with it becoming normal for their only form of communication to be by letter, either in French or German. Leopold found comfort in Louise's friend and his daughter's tutor, Countess Denise d'Hulst, and he attempted to father his two sons, who began regularly rebelling against him.\nAs his children aged, Leopold was gladdened to see his eldest son and daughter marry into the House of Habsburg-Lorraine, who served as the Emperors of Austria and previously of the Holy Roman Empire. In 1853, Leopold's eldest son married Marie Henriette of Austria, a first cousin of Emperor Franz Joseph I. Four years later, Leopold encouraged the matrimonial pairing of his daughter, Charlotte, with Archduke Maximilian of Austria, who was later appointed the Emperor of Mexico. Additionally, Leopold's great-nephew, Edward, Prince of Wales (the future Edward VII), married Alexandra of Denmark in 1862 under the auspices of Leopold. Edward's mother, Queen Victoria, continued Leopold's legacy of arranging royal marriages for the family, becoming nicknamed the \"grandmother of Europe\". However, Leopold's role in Belgian diplomacy diminished in favour of the government in the later years of his reign. In 1859, he failed to convince his Cabinet to send a Belgian brigade to support Anglo-French naval troops in China, and in 1863, he played little role in negotiations concerning the purchase of the Scheldt toll.\nLater reign.\nSilver Jubilee.\nIn Summer 1856, Leopold celebrated his Silver Jubilee, celebrating 25 years of his reign and since the inauguration of the first King of the Belgians. On 21 July 1856, Leopold travelled on horseback on the same route that he had taken when he first arrived in Belgium, through Laeken and then to the Royal Palace of Brussels. His two sons also travelled with him, and he attended a Te Deum of gratitude in his honour. While Leopold had become more reclusive as his reign continued, he was delighted with his jubilee and made many appearances. In the following months of the anniversary, Leopold and his sons visited each province of the country, where they stayed at each capital and attended processions, balls, banquets, Church services and factory tours. Stockmar, who was in retirement in Coburg, wrote in his diary his surprise of the use of the Dutch language during the tour.\nThe following year, Belgium faced a political crisis when Catholic Prime Minister Pierre de Decker introduced a new Bill into Parliament which he believed would act as a unifying force between the Catholics and the Liberals. The Bill was debated over 27 parliamentary sessions, as it was deemed controversial by the shadow ministry and Opposition. Protests by the public against the Bill soon broke out in the capital cities and demonstrators surrounded the Palace of the Nation. On 28 May, Leopold called in troops to calm the protests and angrily declared: \"I will ride on horseback if necessary to protect the national representation; I will not allow the majority to be outraged; I will crush these scoundrels.\" As rioting continued, Leopold suggested that the articles in the Bill be separated, but de Decker denounced him and soon abandoned it completely. Leopold sent him a letter, which was published in the \"Moniteur\", in which he criticised the government and wrote: \"It was not I who abandoned them in 1857, it was they who abandoned me. I was ready to ride a horse, I wouldn't have backed down. They left me in the presence of disorder; they reduced me to giving in to disorder and no one could understand how profound such humiliation was.\"\nOn 9 November 1857, after de Decker resigned and the government fell, Rogier returned to office and formed a Liberal government, which lasted for ten years and went on to outlive Leopold. Rogier also held the position of Minister of the Interior, with parliamentarians Walth\u00e8re Fr\u00e8re-Orban and Victor Tesch assuming other different ministries. This new government acted by the Constitution, but took an anticlerical attitude due to the protests. In 1861, the government introduced new legislation regarding scholarships, and took funding away from Catholic cemeteries as a punishment for the previous government who had done the same for atheist cemeteries. Leopold was strongly against these anti-religious stances taken by Rogier's Cabinet, but remained impartial per his constitutional role as a neutral figurehead, though he did threaten to override new changes if it was made clear they were not the will of the majority. However, after 1857, Leopold's main concern for Belgium was its defence and he was glad when Antwerp was chosen as the future development site of the National Redoubt.\nIn 1859, a statue of Leopold was erected at the top of the Congress Column to mark his earlier Silver Jubilee. On 12 June, Leopold was also delighted by the birth of his first grandson, Prince Leopold. Furthermore, in 1860, Leopold again visited each provincial capital city despite being ill and his declining health. Upon his return to Brussels in September 1860, Leopold decided to no longer preside over the Council of Ministers and to roll back on his other duties due to his aging condition. Additionally, all of Leopold's mail was now read by and responded to by Van Praet, instead of by Leopold directly.\nInterests in the Americas.\nUnlike Leopold's elder son, Leopold's daughter, Charlotte, personally chose her husband of Archduke Maximilian, the younger brother of Emperor Franz Joseph I. Leopold preferred that she married his great-nephew, Peter V of Portugal, but did not oppose her decision. A few weeks after their wedding, in September 1857, Maximilian was appointed Viceroy of the Kingdom of Lombardy\u2013Venetia. During the Austro-Sardinian War, Leopold gave unwanted strategic advice to Franz Joseph, who mocked and did not follow it. When Austria lost Lombardy, Leopold advised Prussia to assemble an army on the Rhine, which was seen as Leopold taking the Prussian side in the Austro-Prussian rivalry.\nIn 1861, the American Civil War broke out and despite Belgian neutrality, Leopold favoured the Confederate States due to the Union's imposition of economic blockades, including the refusal to export South American goods to Europe. According to historian Francis Balace, Leopold played an important role as a mediator between the United States and the rest of Europe, as well as in convincing other European states to back the South. In contrast, historian Jacques Portes has downplayed the significance of Leopold's role by painting him as an ineffective transmitter of correspondence between the two sides with little care for Belgium's impartiality.\nIn Mexico, President Benito Ju\u00e1rez suspended the country's payment of its foreign debt in July 1861, to the displeasure of Great Britain, France and Spain. Napoleon III took it as an opportunity to intervene in Mexico, aiming to spread Catholicism and the influence of the United States in the Americas. He offered the imperial crown of Mexico to Maximilian as an apology to Austria for earlier siding with Sardinia. Much to the delight of Leopold, Maximilian accepted and left Austria with Charlotte for Mexico, arriving in Mexico City on 12 June 1864 despite armed opposition from republicans. Leopold encouraged the sending of a Belgian Legion, composed of 4000 male volunteers, to support his daughter. The Legion was badly defeated by republican forces at the Battle of Tac\u00e1mbaro in April 1865, but was victorious in July under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Alfred van der Smissen. When the American Civil War ended, the United States government signalled its support for Ju\u00e1rez. Maximilian and Charlotte asked Leopold for some advice, but the helpless aging monarch merely replied, \"God bless you, I can no longer help you.\" The strong Mexican resistance and failure to push back against it led to Napoleon III abandoning Mexico on 15 January 1866. Charlotte escaped Mexico in July to get assistance from European states, who ignored her and left Maximilian, who refused to abdicate and was later executed on 18 June 1867.\nFinal years.\nUntil the age of 70, Leopold enjoyed relatively good health. However, in 1861, he faced several problems that severely affected him. His sister, Princess Victoria, died in March and his great-nephew, Peter V, aged 24, died of typhoid fever in November, only weeks before his brother, Infante Jo\u00e3o, Duke of Beja, also died. Additionally, his nephew, Albert, died in December. Leopold attended his funeral to support his niece, Queen Victoria, and during this time suffered from kidney stones. Leopold underwent a lithotripsy in the following March and many more in the subsequent months. Despite his health issues, Leopold was still able to engage in leisure activities, such as hunting; however, he suffered a stroke at the beginning of 1865. His health continued to decline for the remainder of the year.\nDeath and funeral.\nOn 23 November 1865, Leopold was urgently brought back from the Royal Ch\u00e2teau of Ardenne to Laeken due to health issues. He signed multiple royal decrees to hide his declining health, which was leaked to the public by the \"Moniteur\" on 2 December. Confined to his bed, Leopold summoned a pianist to play him the overture to \"Tannh\u00e4user\", as he was diagnosed with dysentery and had mobility struggles. On 9 December, Leopold was expected to die; however, he survived the night, and he was visited by his daughter-in-law, Marie Henriette of Austria, who knelt by his side and exchanged words with him. She convinced him to allow his family to visit, which they swiftly did, along with his personal chaplain, Pastor Frederick William Becker. Leopold said in their presence, \"Forgive me, my God, forgive me.\" Holding his daughter-in-law's hand, Leopold died on 10 December 1865 at 11:45\u00a0am at the age of 74. He was succeeded by his 30-year-old son, Leopold II.\nLeopold's state funeral was held on 16 December 1865, on what would have been his 75th birthday. He was initially buried next to Queen Louise in the Saint Barbara Chapel of the Notre-Dame de Laeken. On 20 April 1876, the couple's remains were moved to the Royal Crypt in the Church of Our Lady of Laeken. Over 500,000 people watched Leopold's funeral procession on 16 December 1865. Many members of European royalty were in attendance, including the Belgian royal family, Prince August of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha; Edward, Prince of Wales (later Edward VII); Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn; Prince George, Duke of Cambridge; Lu\u00eds I of Portugal; Archduke Joseph Karl of Austria; Louis III, Grand Duke of Hesse; Leopold, Hereditary Prince of Hohenzollern; Prince Louis, Duke of Nemours; Prince Henri, Duke of Aumale; Fran\u00e7ois d'Orl\u00e9ans, Prince of Joinville; Prince Nikolaus Wilhelm of Nassau; Frederick, Prince Royal of Prussia (later Frederick III); Prince Adalbert of Prussia; Frederick I, Grand Duke of Baden; Prince George of Saxony (later George I); and Charles I of W\u00fcrttemberg. Diplomats from France, Russia and the Ottoman Empire were also in attendance. Due to Leopold's Protestant faith, a Protestant version of the Church of Our Lady of Laeken was quickly built opposite Saint Barbara Chapel for the funeral. Leopold's coffin was placed in an ebony chest laced with gold, which was sealed by Tesch, the Minister of Justice.\nLegacy.\nCommemoration.\nBelgian National Day is celebrated annually to mark the anniversary of Leopold's pledge to the Constitution, oath and installation as King of the Belgians. Several monuments have been dedicated in Leopold's honour. The Monument to the Dynasty was erected in Brussels at the initiative of Leopold II. Other monuments built include his statue on top of the Congress Column in 1859, a monument in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, at the request of Queen Victoria in 1867, the Equestrian Statue of Leopold I in Leopold Square in Antwerp in 1872, the Monument to Leopold I in Mons in 1877, the Monument to Leopold I in the Park of Laeken in 1880, the Equestrian Statue of Leopold I in Ostend in 1901, and the Monument to Leopold I in La Panne in 1958. Additionally, several Belgian naval vessels have been named in his honour, including the \"Leopold I\", a frigate acquired by Belgium in 2007. His monogram features on the flag of the Flemish town of Leopoldsburg. His likeness has also appeared on postage stamps and commemorative coins issued since his death.\nHonours.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMarriages and issue.\nLeopold and his first wife, Princess Charlotte of Wales, had no surviving issue.\nLeopold and his second wife, Louise of Orl\u00e9ans, had issue:\nLeopold and his mistress, Arcadie Claret, had illegitimate issue:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56472", "revid": "44092845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56472", "title": "Benjamin Netanyahu", "text": "Prime Minister of Israel (1996\u20131999; 2009\u20132021; since 2022)\nBenjamin \"Bibi\" Netanyahu (born 21 October 1949) is an Israeli politician and diplomat who has served as Prime Minister of Israel since 2022. Having previously held office from 1996 to 1999 and from 2009 to 2021, Netanyahu is Israel's longest-serving prime minister.\nBorn in Tel Aviv, Netanyahu was raised in West Jerusalem and the United States. He returned to Israel in 1967 to join the Israel Defense Forces and served in the Sayeret Matkal special forces. In 1972, he returned to the US, and after graduating from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Netanyahu worked for the Boston Consulting Group. He moved back to Israel in 1978 and founded the Yonatan Netanyahu Anti-Terror Institute. Between 1984 and 1988 Netanyahu was Israel's ambassador to the United Nations. Netanyahu rose to prominence after his election as chair of Likud in 1993, becoming leader of the opposition. In the 1996 general election, Netanyahu became the first Israeli prime minister elected directly by popular vote. Netanyahu was defeated in the 1999 election and entered the private sector. He served as minister of foreign affairs and finance, initiating economic reforms, before resigning over the Gaza disengagement plan.\nNetanyahu returned to lead Likud in 2005, leading the opposition between 2006 and 2009. After the 2009 legislative election, Netanyahu formed a coalition and became prime minister again. Netanyahu made his closeness to Donald Trump central to his appeal from 2016. During Trump's first presidency, the US recognized Jerusalem as capital of Israel, Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights, and brokered the Abraham Accords between Israel and the Arab world. Netanyahu received criticism over expanding Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank, deemed illegal under international law. In 2019, Netanyahu was indicted on charges of breach of trust, bribery and fraud, and relinquished all ministerial posts except prime minister. The 2018\u20132022 Israeli political crisis resulted in a rotation agreement between Netanyahu and Benny Gantz. This collapsed in 2020, leading to a 2021 election. In June 2021, Netanyahu was removed from the premiership, before returning after the 2022 election.\nNetanyahu's premierships have been criticized for perceived democratic backsliding and an alleged shift towards authoritarianism. Netanyahu's coalition pursued judicial reform, which was met with large-scale protests in early 2023. The October 7 attacks by Hamas-led Palestinian groups in the same year triggered the Gaza war, with Netanyahu facing nationwide protests for the security lapse and failure to secure the return of Israeli hostages. In October 2024, he survived an assassination attempt and ordered an invasion of Lebanon with the stated goal of destroying the military capabilities of Hezbollah, a key ally of Hamas. After the fall of the Assad regime in December 2024, Netanyahu directed an invasion of Syria. He also presided over the 2025 Israeli strikes on Iran, which escalated into the Iran\u2013Israel war.\nNetanyahu's government has been accused of orchestrating the genocide in Gaza, culminating in the \"South Africa v. Israel\" case before the International Court of Justice in December 2023. The International Criminal Court (ICC) issued an arrest warrant in November 2024 for Netanyahu for alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity as part of the ICC investigation in Palestine.\nEarly life, education, and military career.\nNetanyahu was born in 1949 in Tel Aviv. His mother, Tzila Segal, was born in Petah Tikva in the Mutasarrifate of Jerusalem\u2014her family had migrated from Minneapolis in 1911, having relocated there from Lithuania in the 1870s\u2014and studied law at Gray's Inn, London. His father, Warsaw-born Benzion Netanyahu (n\u00e9 Mileikowsky), was a historian specializing in the Jewish Golden Age of Spain. His paternal grandfather, Nathan Mileikowsky, was a rabbi and Zionist writer. When Netanyahu's father immigrated to Mandatory Palestine, he adopted a Hebrew surname of \"Netanyahu\", meaning \"God has given.\" While his family is predominantly Ashkenazi, he has said that a DNA test revealed some Sephardic ancestry. He claims descent from the Vilna Gaon.\nNetanyahu was the second of three children. He was initially raised in Jerusalem, where he attended Henrietta Szold Elementary School. A copy of his evaluation from his 6th grade teacher Ruth Rubenstein indicated that Netanyahu was courteous, polite, and helpful; that he was \"responsible and punctual\"; and that he was friendly, disciplined, cheerful, brave, active, and obedient.\nBetween 1956 and 1958, and from 1963 to 1967, his family lived in the United States in Cheltenham Township, Pennsylvania, while father Benzion Netanyahu taught at Dropsie College.\nBenjamin graduated from Cheltenham High School and was active in the debate club, chess club, and soccer. He and his brother Yonatan grew dissatisfied with what they saw as the superficial way of life they encountered in the area, including the prevalent youth counterculture movement and the liberal sensibilities of the Reform synagogue, Temple Judea of Philadelphia, that the family attended.\nAfter graduating from high school in 1967, Netanyahu returned to Israel to enlist in the Israel Defense Forces. He trained as a combat soldier and served for five years in a special forces unit of the IDF, Sayeret Matkal. He took part in numerous cross-border raids during the 1967\u201370 War of Attrition, including the March 1968 Battle of Karameh, when the IDF attacked Jordan to capture PLO leader Yasser Arafat but were repulsed with heavy casualties. He became a team-leader in the unit. He was wounded in combat on multiple occasions. He was involved in many other missions, including the 1968 Israeli raid on Lebanon and the rescue of the hijacked Sabena Flight 571 in May 1972, in which he was shot in the shoulder. He was discharged from active service in 1972 but remained in the Sayeret Matkal reserves. Following his discharge, he left to study in the United States but returned in October 1973 to serve in the Yom Kippur War.\nHigher education.\nNetanyahu returned to the United States in late 1972 to study architecture at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). After returning to Israel to fight in the Yom Kippur War, he returned to the United States and, under the name Ben Nitay, completed a bachelor's degree in architecture in February 1975 and earned a master's degree from the MIT Sloan School of Management in 1976. Concurrently, he was studying towards a doctorate in political science. His studies were broken off by the death of his brother Yonatan who was leading the Entebbe raid.\nAt MIT, Netanyahu studied a double-load while taking courses at Harvard University, completing his bachelor's degree in architecture in two and a half years, despite taking a break to fight in the Yom Kippur War. Professor Leon B. Groisser at MIT recalled: \"He did superbly. He was very bright. Organized. Strong. Powerful. He knew what he wanted to do and how to get it done.\"\nAt that time he changed his name to Benjamin \"Ben\" Nitai (Nitai, a reference to both Mount Nitai and to the eponymous Jewish sage Nittai of Arbela, was a pen name often used by his father for articles). Years later, in an interview with the media, Netanyahu clarified that he decided to do so to make it easier for Americans to pronounce his name. This fact has been used by his political rivals to accuse him indirectly of a lack of Israeli national identity and loyalty.\nEarly career.\nNetanyahu worked as an economic consultant for the Boston Consulting Group in Boston, Massachusetts, working at the company between 1976 and 1978. At the Boston Consulting Group, he was a colleague of Mitt Romney, with whom he formed a lasting friendship. Romney described Netanyahu at the time as \"a strong personality with a distinct point of view\". Netanyahu said that their \"easy communication\" was a result of \"B.C.G.'s intellectually rigorous boot camp\".\nIn 1978, Netanyahu appeared on Boston local television, under the name \"Ben Nitay\", where he argued: \"The real core of the conflict is the unfortunate Arab refusal to accept the State of Israel... For 20 years the Arabs had both the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and if self-determination, as they now say, is the core of the conflict, they could have easily established a Palestinian state.\"\nIn 1978, Netanyahu returned to Israel. Between 1978 and 1980, he ran the Jonathan Netanyahu Anti-Terror Institute, a non-governmental organization devoted to the study of terrorism. From 1980 to 1982, he was director of marketing for Rim Industries in Jerusalem. \nMoshe Arens appointed him as his Deputy Chief of Mission at the Israeli Embassy in Washington, D.C., while Arens was ambassador to the United States, a position he held from 1982 until 1984. During the 1982 Lebanon War, he was called up for reserve duty in Sayeret Matkal and requested to be released from service, preferring to remain in the US and serve as a spokesperson for Israel in the wake of harsh international criticism of the war. He presented Israel's case to the media during the war and established a highly efficient public relations system in the Israeli embassy. Between 1984 and 1988, Netanyahu served as the Israeli ambassador to the United Nations. Netanyahu was influenced by Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson, with whom he formed a relationship during the 1980s. He referred to Schneerson as \"the most influential man of our time\". Also during the 1980s, Netanyahu became friends with Fred Trump, the father of future U.S. president Donald Trump.\nLeader of the Opposition (1993\u20131996).\nPrior to the 1988 Israeli legislative election, Netanyahu returned to Israel and joined the Likud party. In the Likud's internal elections, Netanyahu was placed fifth on the party list. Later on he was elected as a Knesset member of the 12th Knesset, and was appointed as a deputy of the foreign minister Moshe Arens, and later on David Levy. Netanyahu and Levy did not cooperate and the rivalry between the two only intensified afterwards. During the Gulf War in early 1991, the English-fluent Netanyahu emerged as the principal spokesman for Israel in media interviews on CNN and other news outlets. During the Madrid Conference of 1991 Netanyahu was a member of the Israeli delegation headed by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir. After the Madrid Conference Netanyahu was appointed as Deputy Minister in the Israeli Prime Minister's Office.\nFollowing the defeat of the Likud party in the 1992 Israeli legislative elections the Likud party held a party leadership election in 1993, and Netanyahu was victorious, defeating Benny Begin, son of the late prime minister Menachem Begin, and veteran politician David Levy (Sharon initially sought Likud party leadership as well, but quickly withdrew when it was evident that he was attracting minimal support). Shamir retired from politics shortly after the Likud's defeat in the 1992 elections.\nFollowing the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin at the end of a rally in support of the Oslo Accords, Rabin's temporary successor Shimon Peres decided to call early elections in order to give the government a mandate to advance the peace process. Netanyahu was the Likud's candidate for prime minister in the 1996 Israeli legislative election which took place on 29 May 1996 and were the first Israeli elections in which Israelis elected their prime minister directly. Netanyahu hired American political operative Arthur Finkelstein to run his campaign. Netanyahu won the 1996 election, becoming the youngest person in the history of the position and the first Israeli prime minister to be born in the State of Israel (Yitzhak Rabin was born in Jerusalem, under the British Mandate of Palestine, prior to the 1948 founding of the Israeli state).\nNetanyahu's victory over the pre-election favorite Shimon Peres surprised many. The main catalyst in the downfall of the latter was a wave of suicide bombings shortly before the elections; on 3 and 4 March 1996, Palestinians carried out two suicide bombings, killing 32 Israelis, with Peres seemingly unable to stop the attacks. During the campaign, Netanyahu stressed that progress in the peace process would be based on the Palestinian National Authority fulfilling its obligations \u2013 mainly fighting terrorism \u2013 and the Likud campaign slogan was, \"Netanyahu \u2013 making a safe peace\". Although Netanyahu won the election for prime minister, Peres's Israeli Labor Party received more seats in the Knesset elections. Netanyahu had to rely on a coalition with the ultra-Orthodox parties, Shas and UTJ in order to form a government.\nPrime Minister (1996\u20131999).\nFirst term.\nThe months leading up to the 1996 Israeli election were marred by a series of Hamas terrorist attacks in Israel. After the Shin Bet assassinated Hamas military leader Yahya Ayyash on 5 January 1996, Mohammed Deif, now commander of the Qassam Brigades, organized a bombing campaign inside Israel as retaliation, including the Dizengoff Center suicide bombing and Jaffa Road bus bombings. It has been alleged that Syria and Iran had helped in their planning and financing. According to a report, Syrian Defense Minister Mustafa Tlass instructed Ghazi Kanaan to establish links between Hezbollah and Hamas fighters, who were then trained both in Lebanon and Iran and participated in the retaliatory operations for the murder of Ayyash. According to Mike Kelly, Hamas operative Hassan Salameh, who planned three of the attacks, was trained in Iran.\nAccording to Ronen Bergman, Deif's bombing campaign and the Israeli intelligence services failure to prevent it, was a factor that led to the defeat of Prime Minister Shimon Peres and the Israeli Labor Party in the 1996 Israeli general election and the victory of the Likud party of Netanyahu, who opposed the Oslo Accords. Bergman writes that \"after the election, the attacks stopped for almost a year. Some said this was because of Arafat's campaign against Hamas, and the arrest of many members of its military wing. Others believed that Hamas no longer had any reason to carry out suicide attacks, because Netanyahu had already almost completely stopped the peace process, which was the short-term goal of the attacks anyway.\"\nNetanyahu first met Palestinian president Arafat on 4 September 1996. Prior to the meeting, the two leaders spoke by telephone. The meetings would continue through Autumn 1996. On their first meeting, Netanyahu said: \"I would like to emphasize that we have to take into account the needs and the requirements of both sides on the basis of reciprocity and the assurance of the security and well-being of both Israelis and Palestinian alike.\" Arafat said: \"We are determined to work with Mr. Netanyahu and with his government.\" The talks culminated on 14 January 1997, in the signing of the Hebron Protocol.\nIn 1996, Netanyahu and Jerusalem's mayor Ehud Olmert decided to open an exit in the Arab Quarter for the Western Wall Tunnel, which prior prime minister Shimon Peres had instructed to be put on hold for the sake of peace. This sparked three days of rioting by Palestinians, resulting in dozens of both Israelis and Palestinians being killed.\nEventually, the lack of progress of the peace process led to new negotiations which produced the Wye River Memorandum in 1998 which detailed the steps to be taken by the Israeli government and Palestinian Authority to implement the earlier Interim Agreement of 1995. It was signed by Netanyahu and PLO chairman Arafat, and on 17 November 1998, Israel's 120 member parliament, the Knesset, approved the Wye River Memorandum by a vote of 75\u201319. In a nod to the 1967 Khartoum conference, Netanyahu emphasized a policy of \"three no(s)\": no withdrawal from the Golan Heights, no discussion of the case of Jerusalem, no negotiations under any preconditions.\nIn 1997 Ali Fallahian, the Iranian Intelligence Minister, authorized a new Hamas bombing campaign to further disrupt the peace process, and Hamas leader Khaled Meshal, then living in Amman, Jordan, picked Mahmoud Abu Hanoud, an expert bomb-maker in the West Bank, to construct the bombs, and sent five suicide bombers to detonate them simultaneously in Jerusalem in the 30 July Mahane Yehuda market bombings and 4 September Ben Yehuda street bombings, killing 21 Israelis. In 1997, Netanyahu authorized a Mossad operation to assassinate Hamas leader Khaled Mashal in Jordan, just three years after the two countries had signed a peace treaty. The Mossad team, covering as five Canadian tourists, entered Jordan on 27 September 1997 and injected poison into Mashal's ears in a street in Amman. The plot was exposed and two agents were arrested by the Jordanian police while three others hid in the Israeli embassy which was then surrounded by troops. An angry King Hussein demanded Israel to give out the antidote and threatened to annul the peace treaty. Netanyahu relented to the demands after pressure by US President Bill Clinton and ordered the release of 61 Jordanian and Palestinian prisoners including Sheikh Ahmad Yassin. The incident sent the nascent Israeli-Jordanian relations plummeting.\nAccording to Bergman based on internal IDF sources, Mashal's antidote only secured the release of the two Mossad Kidon agents that were carrying out the assassination attempt. At least six other Mossad agents involved in the operations were holed up in the Israeli embassy. King Hussein would only release them if Israel released Ahmed Yassin and a large number of other Palestinian prisoners. Hussein needed the demands to be \"enough to enable the king to be able to publicly defend the release of the hit team.\"\nOn the same day that Hamas bombed Ben Yehuda street, Hezbollah executed the Ansariya ambush on the IDF's naval special forces Shayetet 13, killing 12 Israeli commandos. On 25 May 1998, the remains and body parts of at least three soldiers who died in the Ansariya ambush were exchanged for 65 Lebanese prisoners and the bodies of 40 Hizbullah fighters and Lebanese soldiers captured by Israel. Netanyahu called it \"one of the worst tragedies that has ever occurred to us\".\nDuring his term, Netanyahu also began a process of economic liberalization, taking steps towards a free-market economy. Under his watch, the government began selling its shares in banks and major state-run companies. Netanyahu also greatly eased Israel's strict foreign exchange controls, enabling Israelis to take an unrestricted amount of money out of the country, open foreign bank accounts, hold foreign currency, and invest freely in other countries.\nThroughout his term, Netanyahu was opposed by the political left wing in Israel and lost support from the right because of his concessions to the Palestinians in Hebron and elsewhere, and due to his negotiations with Arafat generally. Netanyahu lost favor with the Israeli public after a long chain of scandals involving his marriage and corruption charges. In 1997, police recommended that Netanyahu be indicted on corruption charges for influence-peddling. He was accused of appointing an attorney general who would reduce the charges but prosecutors ruled that there was insufficient evidence to go to trial. In 1999, Netanyahu faced another scandal when the Israel Police recommended that he be tried for corruption for $100,000 in free services from a government contractor; Israel's attorney general did not prosecute, citing difficulties with evidence. The major Israeli failures against Hamas and Hezbollah under Netanyahu's first premiership and their results in the subsequent releases of imprisoned Palestinian and Lebanese leaders from Israeli jails are thought to have dealt a blow to Netanyahu's rhetoric of a \"tough stance\" towards enemies of Israel, and to have played a role in his defeat in the 1999 Israeli general election.\nPolitical hiatus (1999\u20132003).\nAfter being defeated by Ehud Barak in the 1999 Israeli prime ministerial election, Netanyahu temporarily retired from politics. He subsequently served as a senior consultant with Israeli communications equipment manufacturer BATM Advanced Communications for two years.\nWith the fall of the Barak government in late 2000, Netanyahu expressed his desire to return to politics. By law, Barak's resignation was supposed to lead to elections for the prime minister position only. Netanyahu insisted that general elections should be held, claiming that otherwise it would be impossible to have a stable government. Netanyahu decided eventually not to run for the prime minister position, a move which facilitated the rise to power of Ariel Sharon, who at the time was considered less popular than Netanyahu. In 2002, after the Israeli Labor Party left the coalition and vacated the position of foreign minister, Prime Minister Ariel Sharon appointed Netanyahu as foreign minister. Netanyahu challenged Sharon for the leadership of the Likud party in the 2002 Likud leadership election, but failed to oust him.\nOn 9 September 2002, a scheduled speech by Netanyahu at Concordia University in Montreal, Quebec, Canada was canceled after hundreds of pro-Palestinian protesters overwhelmed security and smashed through a window. Netanyahu was not present at the protest, having remained at his hotel throughout the duration. He later accused the activists of supporting terrorism and \"mad zealotry\". Weeks later in October around 200 protesters met Netanyahu outside his Heinz Hall appearance in Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh Police, Israeli security and a Pittsburgh SWAT unit allowed his speeches to continue downtown at the hall and the Duquesne Club as well as suburban Robert Morris University.\nOn 12 September 2002, Netanyahu lobbied for the invasion of Iraq, testifying under oath as a private citizen before the U.S. House of Representatives Government Reform Committee regarding the alleged nuclear threat posed by the Iraqi r\u00e9gime: \"There is no question whatsoever that Saddam is seeking and is working and is advancing towards the development of nuclear weapons\u2026\" He also testified, \"If you take out Saddam, Saddam's regime, I guarantee you that it will have enormous positive reverberations on the region.\"\nMinister of Finance (2003\u20132005).\nAfter the 2003 Israeli legislative election, in what many observers regarded as a surprise move, Sharon offered the Foreign Ministry to Silvan Shalom and offered Netanyahu the Finance Ministry. Some pundits speculated that Sharon made the move because he deemed Netanyahu a political threat given his demonstrated effectiveness as foreign minister, and that by placing him in the Finance Ministry during a time of economic uncertainty, he could diminish Netanyahu's popularity. Netanyahu accepted the new appointment. Sharon and Netanyahu came to an agreement that Netanyahu would have complete freedom as finance minister and have Sharon back all of his reforms, in exchange for Netanyahu's silence over Sharon's management of Israel's military and foreign affairs.\nAs finance minister, Netanyahu undertook an economic plan in order to restore Israel's economy from its low point during the Second Intifada. Netanyahu claimed that a bloated public sector and excessive regulations were largely responsible for stifling economic growth. His plan involved a move toward more liberalized markets, although it was not without its critics. He instituted a program to end welfare dependency by requiring people to apply for jobs or training, reduced the size of the public sector, froze government spending for three years, and capped the budget deficit at 1%. The taxation system was streamlined and taxes were cut, with the top individual tax rate reduced from 64% to 44% and the corporate tax rate from 36% to 18%. A host of state assets worth billions of dollars were privatized, including banks, oil refineries, the El Al national airline, and Zim Integrated Shipping Services. The retirement ages for both men and women were raised, and currency exchange laws were further liberalized. Commercial banks were forced to spin off their long-term savings. In addition, Netanyahu attacked monopolies and cartels to increase competition. As the Israeli economy started booming and unemployment fell significantly, Netanyahu was widely credited by commentators as having performed an 'economic miracle' by the end of his tenure.\nHowever, opponents in the Labor party (and even a few within his own Likud) viewed Netanyahu's policies as \"Thatcherite\" attacks on the venerated Israeli social safety net. Ultimately, unemployment declined while economic growth soared, the debt-to-GDP ratio dropped to one of the lowest in the world, and foreign investment reached record highs.\nNetanyahu threatened to resign from office in 2004 unless the Gaza pullout plan was put to a referendum. He later modified the ultimatum and voted for the program in the Knesset, indicating immediately thereafter that he would resign unless a referendum was held within 14 days. He submitted his resignation letter on 7 August 2005, shortly before the Israeli cabinet voted 17 to 5 to approve the initial phase of withdrawal from Gaza.\nLeader of the Opposition (2006\u20132009).\nFollowing the withdrawal of Sharon from the Likud, Netanyahu was one of several candidates who vied for the Likud leadership. His most recent attempt prior to this was in September 2005 when he had tried to hold early primaries for the position of the head of the Likud party, while the party held the office of prime minister \u2013 thus effectively pushing Ariel Sharon out of office. The party rejected this initiative. Netanyahu retook the leadership on 20 December 2005, with 47% of the primary vote, to 32% for Silvan Shalom and 15% for Moshe Feiglin. In the March 2006 Knesset elections, Likud took the third place behind Kadima and Labor and Netanyahu served as Leader of the Opposition. On 14 August 2007, Netanyahu was reelected as chairman of the Likud and its candidate for the post of prime minister with 73% of the vote, against far-right candidate Moshe Feiglin and World Likud chairman Danny Danon. He opposed the 2008 Israel\u2013Hamas ceasefire, like others in the Knesset opposition. Specifically, Netanyahu said: \"This is not a relaxation, it's an Israeli agreement to the rearming of Hamas\u00a0... What are we getting for this?\"\nFollowing Tzipi Livni's election to head Kadima and Olmert's resignation from the post of prime minister, Netanyahu declined to join the coalition Livni was trying to form and supported new elections, which were held in February 2009. Netanyahu was the Likud's candidate for prime minister in the 2009 Israeli legislative election which took place on 10 February 2009, as Livni, the previous designated acting prime minister under the Olmert government, had been unable to form a viable governing coalition. Opinion polls showed Likud in the lead, but with as many as a third of Israeli voters undecided.\nIn the election itself, Likud won the second highest number of seats, Livni's party having outnumbered the Likud by one seat. A possible explanation for Likud's relatively poor showing is that some Likud supporters defected to Avigdor Lieberman's Yisrael Beiteinu party. Netanyahu, however, claimed victory on the basis that right-wing parties won the majority of the vote, and on 20 February 2009, Netanyahu was designated by Israeli President Shimon Peres to succeed Ehud Olmert as prime minister, and began his negotiations to form a coalition government.\nDespite right wing parties winning a majority of 65 seats in the Knesset, Netanyahu preferred a broader centrist coalition and turned to his Kadima rivals, chaired by Tzipi Livni, to join his government. This time it was Livni's turn to decline to join, with a difference of opinion on how to pursue the peace process being the stumbling block. Netanyahu did manage to entice a smaller rival, the Labor Party, chaired by Ehud Barak, to join his government, giving him a certain amount of centrist tone. Netanyahu presented his cabinet for a Knesset \"Vote of Confidence\" on 31 March 2009. The 32nd Government was approved that day by a majority of 69 lawmakers to 45 (with five abstaining) and the members were sworn in.\nPrime Minister (2009\u20132021).\nSecond term.\nIn 2009, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton voiced support for the establishment of a Palestinian state\u00a0\u2013 a solution not endorsed by prime minister-designate Netanyahu, with whom she had earlier pledged the United States' cooperation. Upon the arrival of President Obama administration's special envoy, George Mitchell, Netanyahu said that any furtherance of negotiations with the Palestinians would be conditioned on the Palestinians recognizing Israel as a Jewish state.\nDuring President Obama's Cairo speech on 4 June 2009 in which Obama addressed the Muslim world, Obama stated, among other things, \"The United States does not accept the legitimacy of continued Israeli settlements.\" Following Obama's Cairo speech Netanyahu immediately called a special government meeting. On 14 June, ten days after Obama's Cairo speech, Netanyahu gave a speech at Bar-Ilan University in which he endorsed a \"Demilitarized Palestinian State\". Netanyahu stated that he would accept a Palestinian state if Jerusalem were to remain the united capital of Israel, the Palestinians would have no army, and the Palestinians would give up their demand for a right of return. He also argued the right for a \"natural growth\" in the existing Jewish settlements in the West Bank while their permanent status is up to further negotiation. The speech was broadcast live in Israel and across parts of the Arab world. He endorsed for the first time the notion of a Palestinian state alongside Israel. He stated that he would be willing to meet with any \"Arab leader\" for negotiations without preconditions, specifically mentioning Syria, Saudi Arabia, and Lebanon. The address represented a new position for Netanyahu's government on the peace process.\nRight-wing members of Netanyahu's governing coalition criticized his remarks for the creation of a Palestinian State, believing all of the land should come under Israeli sovereignty. Likud MK Danny Danon said Netanyahu went \"against the Likud platform\", MK Uri Orbach of Habayit Hayehudi said it had \"dangerous implications\". Opposition party Kadima leader Tzipi Livni opined that Netanyahu did not really believe in the two-state solution and that his speech was a response to international pressure.\nNetanyahu's speech provoked mixed reaction internationally. The Palestinian National Authority rejected the conditions on a Palestinian State. Senior Palestinian official Saeb Erekat said that the speech had \"closed the door to permanent status negotiations\" due to Netanyahu's declarations on Jerusalem, refugees and settlements. Hamas spokesman Fawzi Barhoum said it was \"racist\" and called on Arab nations to \"form stronger opposition\". The Arab League dismissed the speech, declaring that \"Arabs would not make concessions regarding issues of Jerusalem and refugees\". The Czech Republic Foreign Minister Jan Kohout, whose country held the EU's presidency at the time, said \"...this is a step in the right direction. The acceptance of a Palestinian state was present there\". President Obama's press secretary, Robert Gibbs, said the speech was an \"important step forward\". Obama said \"this solution can and must ensure both Israel's security and the Palestinians' legitimate aspirations for a viable state\". France praised the speech and called on Israel to cease building settlements in the West Bank.\nThree months after starting his term, Netanyahu remarked that his cabinet already had achieved several successes, such as the establishment of a working national unity government, and a broad consensus for a \"two-state solution\". A July 2009 survey by Ha'aretz found that most Israelis supported the Netanyahu government, giving him a personal approval rating of about 49 percent. Netanyahu has lifted checkpoints in the West Bank in order to allow freedom of movement and a flow of imports; a step that resulted in an economic boost in the West Bank. In 2009, Netanyahu welcomed the Arab Peace initiative (also known as the \"Saudi Peace Initiative\") and lauded a call by Bahrain's Crown Prince Salman bin Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa to normalize relations with Israel.\nOn 9 August 2009, speaking at the opening of a government meeting, Netanyahu said: \"We want an agreement with two factors, the first of which is the recognition of Israel as the national state of the Jewish people and (the second of which is) a security settlement\". In August 2009, Palestinian Authority chairman Mahmoud Abbas declared that he would be willing to meet with Netanyahu at the UN General Assembly, where Netanyahu had accepted president Obama's invitation for a \"triple summit\", although he said it would not necessarily lead to negotiations. Netanyahu was reported to be in a pivotal moment over these understandings, that were reported to include a compromise over permission on continuing the already approved construction in the West Bank in exchange for freezing all settlements thereafter, as well as continuing building in East Jerusalem, and at the same time stopping the demolition of houses of Arab inhabitants there. On 4 September 2009, it was reported that Netanyahu was to agree to settlers' political demands to approve more settlement constructions before a temporary settlement freeze agreement took place. White House spokesman Robert Gibbs expressed \"regret\" over the move; however, one U.S. official said the move will not \"derail [the] train\".\nOn 7 September 2009, Netanyahu left his office without reporting his destination. The prime minister's military secretary later reported Netanyahu had visited a security facility in Israel. Various news agencies reported different stories about his whereabouts. On 9 September 2009, \"Yedioth Ahronoth\" reported that the Israeli leader had made a secret flight to Moscow to try to persuade Russian officials not to sell S-300 anti-aircraft missile systems to Iran. Headlines branded Netanyahu a \"liar\" and dubbed the affair a \"fiasco\". The PM's military secretary was later reportedly dismissed due to the affair. \"The Sunday Times\" reported that the trip was made to share the names of Russian scientists that Israel believes are abetting the alleged Iranian nuclear weapons program.\nOn 24 September 2009, in an address to the UN General Assembly in New York, Netanyahu said Iran poses a threat to the peace of the world and that it is incumbent on the world body to prevent the Islamic Republic from obtaining nuclear weapons. Waving the blueprints for Auschwitz and invoking the memory of his own family members murdered by the Nazis, Netanyahu delivered a passionate and public riposte to Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's questioning of the Holocaust, asking: \"Have you no shame?\"\nIn response to pressure from the Obama administration urging the resumption of peace talks, on 25 November 2009 Netanyahu announced a partial 10-month settlement construction freeze plan. The announced partial freeze had no significant effect on actual settlement construction, according to an analysis by \"Haaretz\". U.S. special envoy George Mitchell said, \"while the United States shares Arab concerns about the limitations of Israel's gesture, it is more than any Israeli government has ever done\". In his announcement Netanyahu called the move \"a painful step that will encourage the peace process\" and urged the Palestinians to respond. The Palestinians rejected the call, stating the gesture was \"insignificant\" in that thousands of recently approved settlement buildings in the West Bank would continue to be built and there would be no freeze of settlement activity in East Jerusalem.\nIn March 2010, Israel's government approved construction of an additional 1,600 apartments in a large Jewish housing development in northern East Jerusalem called Ramat Shlomo despite the position of the current U.S. Government that acts such as this thwart the peace talks. The Israeli government's announcement occurred during a visit by U.S. Vice-president Joe Biden and the U.S. government issued a strongly worded condemnation of the plan. Netanyahu issued a statement that all previous Israeli governments had continuously permitted construction in the neighborhood, and that certain neighborhoods such as Ramat Shlomo and Gilo have always been included as part of Israel in any final agreement plan that has been proposed by either side to date. Netanyahu regretted the timing of the announcement but asserted that \"our policy on Jerusalem is the same policy followed by all Israeli governments for the 42 years, and it has not changed.\"\nIn September 2010, Netanyahu agreed to enter direct talks, mediated by the Obama administration, with the Palestinians. The ultimate aim of these direct talks is to forge the framework of an official \"final status settlement\" to the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict by forming a two-state solution for the Jewish people and the Palestinian people. On 27 September, the 10-month settlement freeze ended, and the Israeli government approved new construction in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. On retiring from office in July 2011, former U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates said that Netanyahu was ungrateful to the United States and endangering Israel. Responding, the Likud party defended Netanyahu by saying that most Israelis supported the prime minister and that he had broad support in the United States.\nNetanyahu unsuccessfully called for the early release of Jonathan Pollard, an American serving a life sentence for passing secret U.S. documents to Israel in 1987. He has raised the issue at the Wye River Summit in 1998, where he claimed that U.S. president Bill Clinton had privately agreed to release Pollard. In 2002, Netanyahu visited Pollard at his North Carolina prison. The Israeli prime minister maintained contact with Pollard's wife, and was active in pressing the Obama administration to release Pollard.\nIn 2011, social justice protests broke out across Israel. Hundreds of thousands of people protested Israel's high cost of living throughout the country. In response, Netanyahu appointed the Trajtenberg Committee, headed by professor Manuel Trajtenberg, to examine the problems and propose solutions. The committee submitted recommendations to lower the high cost of living in September 2011. Although Netanyahu promised to push the proposed reforms through the cabinet in one piece, differences inside his coalition resulted in the reforms being gradually adopted.\nNetanyahu's cabinet also approved a plan to build a fiber-optic cable network across the country to bring cheap, high-speed fiber-optic Internet access to every home.\nIn 2012, Netanyahu initially planned to call early elections, but subsequently oversaw the creation of a government of national unity to see Israel through until the national elections of 2013. In May 2012, Netanyahu officially recognized for the first time the right for Palestinians to have their own state in an official document, a letter to Mahmoud Abbas, though as before he declared it would have to be demilitarized. On 25 October 2012, Netanyahu and Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman announced that their respective political parties, Likud and Yisrael Beiteinu, had merged and would run together on a single ballot in Israel's 22 January 2013 general elections.\nThird term.\nThe 2013 election returned Netanyahu's Likud Beiteinu coalition with 11 fewer seats than the combined Likud and Yisrael Beiteinu parties had going into the vote. Israeli president Shimon Peres charged Netanyahu with the task of forming the Thirty-third government of Israel. During Netanyahu's third term, he continued his policy of economic liberalization. In December 2013, the Knesset approved the Business Concentration Law, which intended to open Israel's highly concentrated economy to competition to lower consumer prices, reduce income inequality, and increase economic growth. Netanyahu had formed the Concentration Committee in 2010, and the bill, which was pushed forward by his government, implemented its recommendations. The new law banned multi-tiered corporate holding structures, in which a CEO's family members or other affiliated individuals held public companies which in turn owned other public companies, and who were thus able to engage in price gouging. Under the law, corporations were banned from owning more than two tiers of publicly listed companies and from holding both financial and non-financial enterprises. All conglomerates were given four to six years to sell excess holdings. Netanyahu also began a campaign of port privatization to break what he viewed as the monopoly held by workers of the Israel Port Authority, so as to lower consumer prices and increase exports. In July 2013, he issued tenders for the construction of private ports in Haifa and Ashdod. Netanyahu has also pledged to curb excess bureaucracy and regulations to ease the burden on industry.\nIn April and June 2014, Netanyahu spoke of his deep concerns when Hamas and the Palestinian Authority agreed and then formed a unity government, and was severely critical of both the United States and European governments' decision to work with the Palestinian coalition government. He blamed Hamas for the kidnapping and murder of three Israeli teenagers in June 2014, and launched a massive search and arrest operation on the West Bank, targeting members of Hamas in particular, and over the following weeks hit 60 targets in Gaza. Missile and rocket exchanges between Gaza militants and the IDF escalated after the bodies of the teenagers, who had been killed almost immediately as the government had good reasons to suspect, were discovered on 30 June 2014. After several Hamas operatives were killed, Hamas officially declared it would launch rockets from Gaza into Israel, and Israel started Operation Protective Edge in the Gaza Strip, formally ending the November 2012 ceasefire agreement. The prime minister did a round of television shows in the United States and described Hamas as \"genocidal terrorists\" in an interview on CNN. When asked if Gazan casualties from the operation might spark \"a third intifada\", Netanyahu replied that Hamas was working towards that goal.\nIn October 2014, Netanyahu's government approved a privatization plan to reduce corruption and politicization in government companies, and strengthen Israel's capital market. Under the plan, minority stakes of up to 49% in state-owned companies, including arms manufacturers, energy, postal, water, and railway companies, as well as the ports of Haifa and Ashdod. That same month, Netanyahu called criticism of settlements \"against the American values\", which earned him rebuke from the White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest, who said that American values had resulted in Israel receiving consistent funding and protective technology such as Iron Dome. Netanyahu explained that he does not accept residency restrictions for Jews, and said that Jerusalem's Arabs and Jews should be able to buy homes wherever they want. He said he was \"baffled\" by the American condemnation. \"It's against the American values. And it doesn't bode well for peace. The idea that we'd have this ethnic purification as a condition for peace, I think it's anti-peace.\" Later, Jeffrey Goldberg of \"The Atlantic\" reported that the relationship between Netanyahu and the White House had reached a new low, with the U.S. administration angry over Israel's settlement policies, and Netanyahu expressing contempt for the American administration's grasp of the Middle East.\nOn 2 December 2014, Netanyahu fired ministers Yair Lapid, head of Yesh Atid, and Tzipi Livni, head of Hatnua. The changes led to the dissolution of the government, with new elections on 17 March 2015.\nBenjamin Netanyahu's 2015 address to the United States Congress marked Netanyahu's third speech to a joint session of Congress. The day before announcing he would address Congress, \"Time\" reported that he tried to derail a meeting between U.S. lawmakers and the head of Mossad, Tamir Pardo, who intended warning them against imposing further sanctions against Iran, a move that might derail nuclear talks. Leading up to the speech, Israeli consuls general in the United States \"expect[ed] fierce negative reaction from U.S. Jewish communities and Israel's allies\". Objections included the arrangement of the speech without the support and engagement of the Obama administration and the timing of the speech before Israel's March 2015 election. Seven American Jewish lawmakers met with Ron Dermer, Israel's ambassador to the U.S. and recommended that Netanyahu instead meet with lawmakers privately to discuss Iran. In making the speech, Netanyahu claimed to speak for all Jews worldwide, a claim disputed by others in the Jewish community.\nAs election day approached in what was perceived to be a close race in the 2015 Israeli elections, Netanyahu answered 'indeed' when asked whether a Palestinian state would not be established in his term. He said that support of a Palestinian state is tantamount to yielding territory for radical Islamic terrorists to attack Israel. However, Netanyahu reiterated \"I don't want a one-state solution. I want a peaceful, sustainable two-state solution. I have not changed my policy.\"\nFourth term.\nIn the 2015 election, Netanyahu returned with his party Likud leading the elections with 30 mandates, making it the single highest number of seats for the Knesset. President Rivlin granted Netanyahu an extension until 6 May 2015 to build a coalition when one had not been finalized in the first four weeks of negotiations. He formed a coalition government within two hours of the midnight 6 May deadline. His Likud party formed the coalition with Jewish Home, United Torah Judaism, Kulanu, and Shas.\nIn August 2015, Netanyahu's government approved a two-year budget that would see agricultural reforms and lowering of import duties to reduce food prices, deregulation of the approval process in construction to lower housing costs and speed up infrastructure building, and reforms in the financial sector to boost competition and lower fees for financial services. In the end, the government was forced to compromise by removing some key agricultural reforms.\nIn October 2015, Netanyahu caused commotion for saying the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, Haj Amin al-Husseini gave Adolf Hitler the idea of exterminating Jews rather than expelling them during the Second World War. This claim is dismissed by most historians, who say that al-Husseini's meeting with Hitler took place approximately five months after the mass murder of Jews began. Some of the strongest criticism came from Israeli academics: Yehuda Bauer said Netanyahu's claim was \"completely idiotic\". Moshe Zimmermann stated that \"any attempt to deflect the burden from Hitler to others is a form of Holocaust denial.\"\nIn March 2016, Netanyahu's coalition faced a potential crisis as ultra-Orthodox members threatened to withdraw over the government's proposed steps to create non-Orthodox prayer space at the Western Wall. They have stated they will leave the coalition if the government offers any further official state recognition of Conservative and Reform Judaism.\nOn 23 December 2016, the United States, under the Obama Administration, abstained from United Nations Security Council Resolution 2334, effectively allowing it to pass. On 28 December, U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry strongly criticized Israel and its settlement policies in a speech. Netanyahu strongly criticized both the UN Resolution and Kerry's speech in response. On 6 January 2017, the Israeli government withdrew its annual dues from the organization, which totaled $6\u00a0million in United States dollars.\nIn February 2017, Netanyahu became the first serving prime minister of Israel to visit Australia. He was accompanied by his wife, Sara. The three-day official visit included a delegation of business representatives, and Netanyahu and Prime Minister of Australia Malcolm Turnbull were scheduled to sign several bilateral agreements. Netanyahu recalled that it was the Australian Light Horse regiments that liberated Beersheba during World War I, and this began what has been a relationship of 100 years between the countries.\nIn October 2017, shortly after the US announced the same action, Netanyahu's government announced it was leaving UNESCO due to what it saw as anti-Israel actions by the agency, and it made that decision official in December 2017. The Israeli government officially notified UNESCO of the withdrawal in late December 2017.\nIn April 2018, Netanyahu accused Iran of not holding up its end of the Iran nuclear deal after presenting a cache of over 100,000 documents detailing the extent of Iran's nuclear program. Iran denounced Netanyahu's presentation as \"propaganda\".\nNetanyahu praised the 2018 North Korea\u2013United States Singapore Summit. He said in a statement, \"I commend US President Donald Trump on the historic summit in Singapore. This is an important step in the effort to rid the Korean peninsula of nuclear weapons.\"\nIn July 2018, the Knesset passed the , a Basic Law supported by Netanyahu's coalition government. Analysts saw the bill as a sign of Netanyahu's coalition advancing a right-wing agenda.\nPrior to the April 2019 Israeli legislative election, Netanyahu helped broker a deal that united the Jewish Home party with the far-right Otzma Yehudit party, in order to form the Union of the Right-Wing Parties. The motivation of the deal was to overcome the electoral threshold for smaller parties. The deal was criticized in the media, as Otzma is widely characterized as racist and traces its origins to the extremist Kahanist movement.\nCriminal investigations and indictment.\nSince January 2017, Netanyahu has been investigated by Israeli police in two connected cases, \"Case 1000\" and \"Case 2000\". In Case 1000, Netanyahu is suspected of having obtained inappropriate favors from businessmen, including James Packer and Hollywood producer Arnon Milchan. Case 2000 involves alleged attempts to strike a deal with the publisher of the \"Yedioth Ahronot\" newspaper group, Arnon Mozes, to promote legislation to weaken \"Yedioth's\" main competitor in exchange for more favorable political coverage.\nIn August 2017, Israeli police confirmed that Netanyahu was suspected of crimes involving fraud, breach of trust, and bribes in the two cases. The next day, it was reported that the prime minister's former chief of staff, Ari Harow, had signed a deal with prosecutors to testify against Netanyahu.\nIn February 2018, Israeli police recommended that Netanyahu be charged with corruption. According to a police statement, sufficient evidence exists to indict the prime minister on charges of bribery, fraud, and breach of trust in the two cases. Netanyahu responded that the allegations were baseless and that he would continue as prime minister. In November 2018, it was reported that Economic Crimes Division Director Liat Ben-Ari recommended indictment for both cases.\nIn 2018 Netanyahu was also investigated in \"Case 4000\", where he was suspected of giving regulatory favors to Shaul Elovitch, owner of Bezeq telecommunication company, in exchange for positive publications in news website Walla!.\nIn February 2019, the Israeli attorney general announced his intent to file indictments against Netanyahu on bribe and fraud charges in the three cases. Netanyahu was formally indicted on 21 November 2019. If convicted, he could face up to 10 years in prison for bribery and a maximum of three years for fraud and breach of trust. He is the first sitting prime minister in Israel's history to be charged with a crime. On 23 November 2019, it was announced that Netanyahu, in compliance with legal precedent set by the Israeli Supreme Court in 1993, would relinquish his agriculture, health, social affairs and diaspora affairs portfolios. The matter of forcing a prime minister to resign due to an indictment has yet to be tested in court. He was officially charged on 28 January 2020.\nNetanyahu's criminal trial was set to begin on 24 May 2020, having been initially scheduled for March of that year but delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As of April 2023, the criminal trial was still ongoing.\nOn 30 November 2025, Netanyahu formally asked for a pardon from president Isaac Herzog.\nFifth term.\nOn 17 May 2020, Netanyahu was sworn in for a fifth term as prime minister in a coalition with Benny Gantz. Against a background of the COVID-19 pandemic in Israel and Netanyahu's criminal trial, protests broke out against him in front of the prime minister's residence. Following this, Netanyahu ordered to disperse the demonstrations using COVID-19 special regulations, limiting them to 20 people and at a distance of 1,000 meters from their homes. However, the exact opposite was achieved; the demonstrations were enlarged and dispersed to over 1,000 centers. By March 2021, Israel became the country with the highest vaccinated population per capita in the world against COVID-19.\nAfter tensions escalated in Jerusalem in May 2021, Hamas fired rockets on Israel from Gaza, which prompted Netanyahu to initiate Operation Guardian of the Walls, lasting eleven days. After the operation, Israeli politician and leader of the Yamina alliance Naftali Bennett announced that he had agreed to a deal with Leader of the Opposition Yair Lapid to form a rotation government that would oust Netanyahu from his position as prime minister. On 13 June 2021, Bennett and Lapid formed a coalition government, and Netanyahu was ousted as prime minister, ending his 12-year tenure.\nLeader of the Opposition (2021\u20132022).\nAfter the end of his second premiership, Netanyahu began his third stint as the leader of the opposition. Likud remained the largest party in the twenty-fourth Knesset.\nHe led the opposition into the 2022 Israeli legislative election.\nPrime Minister (2022\u2013present).\nSixth term.\nAfter the 2022 election, Netanyahu was sworn in as prime minister again as the leader of a hardline coalition. He officially started his sixth term on 29 December 2022.\nThe first months of Netanyahu's sixth term were centered around a proposed reform package in the judicial branch. Critics highlighted the negative effects it would have on the separation of powers, the office of the Attorney General, the economy, public health, women and minorities, workers' rights, scientific research, the overall strength of Israel's democracy and its foreign relations. After weeks of public protests on Israel's streets, joined by a growing number of military reservists, Minister of Defense Yoav Gallant spoke against the reform on 25 March, calling for a halt of the legislative process \"for the sake of Israel's security\". Netanyahu announced his intention to remove Gallant from his post the following day, sparking further protests across Israel and leading to Netanyahu agreeing to delay the legislation for a month.\nIn February 2023, the new government under Netanyahu approved the legalization of nine settler outposts in the occupied West Bank. Finance Minister Bezalel Smotrich took charge of most of the Civil Administration, obtaining broad authority over civilian issues in the West Bank. Israeli peace groups condemned the move as \"de jure\" annexation of the occupied territories. In March 2023, Netanyahu's government repealed a 2005 law whereby four Israeli settlements, Homesh, Sa-Nur, Ganim and Kadim, were dismantled as part of the Israeli disengagement from Gaza. In June 2023, Netanyahu's coalition shortened the procedure of approving settlement construction and gave Finance Minister Smotrich the authority to approve one of the stages, changing the system operating for the last 27 years. In its first six months, construction of 13,000 housing units in settlements, almost triple the amount advanced in the whole of 2022.\nIsrael refused to send lethal weapons to Ukraine. In June 2023, Netanyahu said that Israel is concerned \"with the possibility that systems that we would give to Ukraine would fall into Iranian hands and could be reverse engineered, and we would find ourselves facing Israeli systems used against Israel.\"\nOn 7 October 2023, after Palestinian militants from Gaza launched a major surprise attack, Netanyahu announced that Israel would enter in a state of war against Hamas. He threatened to \"turn all the places where Hamas is organized and hiding into cities of ruins\", called Gaza \"the city of evil\", and urged its residents to \"leave now\". He later proposed that opposition parties Yesh Atid and National Unity enter an emergency unity government amid the conflict, after Leader of the Opposition Lapid urged Netanyahu put \"aside our differences and form an emergency, narrow, professional government.\"\nNetanyahu was criticized for presiding over Israel's biggest intelligence failure in 50 years, and has faced protests calling for his removal. The outbreak of war led to increased opposition to Netanyahu and the government from Israeli citizens due to a perceived failure to anticipate the Hamas-led attack, with increased calls for Netanyahu's resignation. A poll in 2023 showed that 56% of Israelis believed that Netanyahu must resign after the war, with 86% of respondents holding the country's leadership responsible for the security failings that led to the attack. On 28 October 2023, Netanyahu was accused of using \"dangerous rhetoric\" when comparing Hamas to Amalek, stating: \"You must remember what Amalek has done to you, says our Holy Bible. And we do remember.\" On 29 October, Netanyahu blamed Israel's security chiefs for Hamas's attack in a post on X (formerly Twitter); this was later deleted following criticism. A subsequent investigation carried out by Shin Bet acknowledged the agency's failures but also found that Shin Bet warned the prime minister that Hamas was not deterred and objected to the divide-and-rule policy vis-a-vis Hamas and the Palestinian Authority.\nIn November 2023, he rejected calls for a ceasefire in the war and warned that Israel will \"stand firm against the world if necessary.\" He said the Israel Defense Forces would remain in Gaza \"as long as necessary\" and Israel would prevent the Palestinian Authority from returning to Gaza. Netanyahu called allegations that Israel is breaking international law \"hogwash\" and described Palestinian civilian casualties as \"collateral damage.\" In December 2023, he faced criticism during a meeting with released Israeli hostages. One of the hostages accused him of putting politics \"above the return of the kidnapped.\" In December 2023, Netanyahu said that Israel should support the \"voluntary migration\" of Palestinians from Gaza. Israel under Netanyahu has been accused of committing genocide in Gaza in the \"South Africa v. Israel\" case before the International Court of Justice in December 2023.\nIn May 2024, Karim Khan, the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, announced his intention to apply for an arrest warrant for Netanyahu on several counts of alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity.\nIn July 2024, Netanyahu addressed another joint session of the United States Congress, amidst widespread protest, to solicit support for the Gaza war. He called protesters \"useful idiots\" and pledged a \"total victory\" in Gaza. He met with 2024 Republican nominee for president Donald Trump at his Mar-a-Lago residence where he criticized presumptive Democratic nominee for President Kamala Harris for vowing that she \"will not be silent\" about atrocities in Gaza.\nIn October 2024, a drone attack believed to have originated from Lebanon was made on Netanyahu's residence in Caesarea. Netanyahu was not in the residence at the time, and no casualties were reported. Netanyahu accused Hezbollah of trying to assassinate him in the attack.\nOn 5 November 2024, Netanyahu fired defense minister Gallant, who had advocated for a short-term diplomatic deal. The firing triggered protests throughout Israel. On 21 November 2024, the International Criminal Court issued arrest warrants for Netanyahu, Gallant and Hamas military commander Mohammed Deif for alleged war crimes committed during the Gaza war. Netanyahu described the ruling as \"absurd and false lies\" and said the decision is \"antisemitic\".\nOn the night of 18 March 2025, Israel launched a surprise attack on the Gaza Strip, effectively ending the January 2025 Gaza war ceasefire. Netanyahu was scheduled on 18 March to testify in his corruption trial, but as a result of the attacks, the legal proceedings were postponed. In March 2025, Netanyahu fired Ronen Bar, chief of Shin Bet, citing a loss of confidence. Bar accused the government of firing him for investigating Qatar's involvement and influence in the Prime Minister's Office, in a case known as the Qatari connection affair.\nIn May 2025, Netanyahu stated that the destruction of homes in Gaza would lead to the forced emigration of Palestinians.\nOn 13 June, Netanyahu authorized airstrikes against Iran, marking the beginning of the Iran\u2013Israel war. Within a week, Netanyahu publicly commented on the effects of the war: \"Each of us bears a personal cost, and my family has not been exempt\", as he cited that it was \"the second time that my son Avner has cancelled a wedding due to missile threats.\" In July, Netanyahu was criticized for deciding to increase Gaza aid distribution by some members of his cabinet who rejected the U.S. ceasefire proposal.\nIn August 2025, Netanyahu said in an interview with i24NEWS that he was on a \"historic and spiritual mission\" and that he is \"very\" attached to the vision of Greater Israel, which includes the Palestinian territories. On 21 September 2025, Netanyahu rejected the existence of a Palestinian state west of the Jordan River, saying, \"For years, I have prevented the establishment of this terrorist state facing tremendous pressures at home and abroad.\"\nIn Netanyahu's address to the United Nations General Assembly in New York, he opposed international recognition of a Palestinian state. As Netanyahu commenced his speech, dozens of individuals in New York exited the hall in protest.\nOn 7 November 2025, the Chief Public Prosecutor's Office in Turkey issued international arrest warrants for Netanyahu and 36 other Israeli officials, accusing them of genocide and crimes against humanity in Gaza. The charges were based on Israel's attacks on Palestinian civilians, hospitals, infrastructure and the Global Sumud Flotilla, which was intercepted by the Israeli navy while delivering aid to Gaza.\nPolitical positions.\nAuthoritarianism.\nIn the years under Netanyahu's rule, Israel experienced authoritarianism, democratic backsliding, corruption, and expansionism. The Israeli Military Censor had long been recorded to have censored thousands of news articles annually. During the Gaza war, Israel had intensified protest and news media censorship, including with reports about the humanitarian crisis in Gaza. Netanyahu's repeated attempts to revamp judicial systems have been accused of being efforts to elevate authoritarianism and protect the prime minister from corruption charges; he in turn accused the \"leftist Deep state\" of attempting to weaponize the justice system against him and the people of Israel. He additionally has spoken populist statements regarding anti-Arab racism involving narratives of conflict with Jews, in particular of anti-Palestinianism. Netanyahu's administration in recent years has been tailored towards far-right politics and has been described as the most far-right government in Israeli history. He has also allied his nation with other illiberal, authoritarian leaders from Hungary, Russia, and the United States.\nIsraeli\u2013Palestinian conflict.\nNetanyahu opposed the Oslo Accords from their inception. In 1993, he dedicated a chapter, entitled \"Trojan Horse\", of his book \"A Place Among the Nations\" to argue against the Oslo peace process. He asserted that Amin al-Husseini had been one of the masterminds of the Holocaust, and that Yasser Arafat was heir to the former's \"alleged exterminationist Nazism\". During his term as prime minister in the late 1990s, Netanyahu consistently reneged on commitments made by previous Israeli governments as part of the Oslo peace process, leading American peace envoy Dennis Ross to note that \"neither President Clinton nor Secretary [of State Madeleine] Albright believed that Bibi had any real interest in pursuing peace.\" In a 2001 video, Netanyahu, reportedly unaware he was being recorded, said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They asked me before the election if I'd honor [the Oslo Accords] [\u2026]\u00a0I said I would, but\u00a0... I'm going to interpret the accords in such a way that would allow me to put an end to this galloping forward to the '67 borders. How did we do it? Nobody said what defined military zones were. Defined military zones are security zones; as far as I'm concerned, the entire Jordan Valley is a defined military zone. Go argue.\nOn 9 August 2009, speaking at the opening of his weekly cabinet meeting, Netanyahu promised not to repeat the \"mistake\" of the Gaza pullout, adding that \"the unilateral evacuation brought neither peace nor security. On the contrary\". He also said, \"Should we achieve a turn toward peace with the more moderate partners, we will insist on the recognition of the State of Israel and the demilitarization of the future Palestinian state\". In 2014, Netanyahu said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We don't just hand over territory, close our eyes and hope for the best. We did that in Lebanon and we got thousands of rockets. We did that in Gaza, we got Hamas and 15,000 rockets. So we're not gonna just replicate that. We want to see genuine recognition of the Jewish state and rock solid security arrangements on the ground. That's the position I've held, and it's only become firmer.\nNetanyahu had previously called U.S.-backed peace talks a waste of time and refused to commit to the same two-state solution as had other Israeli leaders until a speech in June 2009. He repeatedly made public statements which advocated an \"economic peace\" approach, meaning an approach based on economic cooperation and joint effort rather than continuous contention over political and diplomatic issues. This is in line with many significant ideas from the Peace Valley plan. He raised these ideas during discussions with former U.S. secretary of state Condoleezza Rice. Netanyahu continued to advocate these ideas as the Israeli elections approached. Netanyahu has said:\n Right now, the peace talks are based on only one thing, only on peace talks. It makes no sense at this point to talk about the most contractible issue. It's Jerusalem or bust, or right of return or bust. That has led to failure and is likely to lead to failure again\u00a0... We must weave an economic peace alongside a political process. That means that we have to strengthen the moderate parts of the Palestinian economy by handing rapid growth in those areas, rapid economic growth that gives a stake for peace for the ordinary Palestinians.\"\nIn January 2009, Netanyahu informed Middle East envoy Tony Blair that he would continue the policy of the Israeli governments of Ariel Sharon and Ehud Olmert by expanding West Bank settlements, in contravention of the Road Map, but not building new ones.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnyone who wants to thwart the establishment of a Palestinian state has to support bolstering Hamas and transferring money to Hamas. This is part of our strategy \u2013 to isolate the Palestinians in Gaza from the Palestinians in the West Bank.\nBenjamin Netanyahu, 2019\nIn 2013, Netanyahu denied reports that his government would agree to peace talks on the basis of the green line. In 2014 he agreed to the American framework based on the green line and said that Jewish settlers must be allowed the option of staying in their settlements under Palestinian rule.\nIn 2014, Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat criticized Netanyahu, calling him \"ideologically corrupt\" and a war criminal.\nFor years, Netanyahu backed Qatari transfers of hundreds of millions of dollars to Gaza, in the hope that it would pacify Gaza, turn Hamas into an effective counterweight to the Palestinian Authority and prevent the establishment of a Palestinian state. In 2019, Netanyahu said at a private Likud party meeting, \"Anyone who wants to thwart the establishment of a Palestinian state has to support bolstering Hamas and transferring money to Hamas. This is part of our strategy \u2013 to isolate the Palestinians in Gaza from the Palestinians in the West Bank.\" Often, cash was delivered in suitcases by a Qatari official who was escorted by Israeli intelligence officers. According to the \"New York Times\", Netanyahu continued backing the payments in response to Qatari questions as late as September 2023. In 2025, Shin Beth started an investigation into the alleged ties between Netanyahu's advisors and Qatar.\nIn January 2020, Netanyahu publicly supported Trump's Israeli-Palestinian peace plan. After the peace proposal failed, Trump said Netanyahu \"never wanted peace\" with the Palestinians.\nFormer United States Secretary of State Rex Tillerson stated that on 22 May 2017, Netanyahu showed Trump a fake and altered video of Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas calling for the killing of children. This was at a time when Trump was considering if Israel was the obstacle to peace. Netanyahu had showed Trump the fake video to change his position in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.\nThe U.S.-brokered Abraham Accords agreed to the full normalization of relations between Israel and the United Arab Emirates (the Israel\u2013United Arab Emirates normalization agreement) and Bahrain, respectively (the Bahrain\u2013Israel normalization agreement). This was the first time any Arab country had normalized relations with Israel since Jordan in 1994. The accords were signed by Bahrain's foreign minister, UAE's foreign minister and Netanyahu on 15 September 2020 at the South Lawn of the White House in Washington, D.C.\nOn 23 October 2020, U.S. president Trump announced that Sudan will start to normalize ties with Israel, making it the third Arab state to do so as part of the Trump administration-brokered Abraham Accords. Sudan fought in wars against Israel in 1948 and 1967. Netanyahu thanked \"President Trump and his team above all\", saying that \"together with him we are changing history\u00a0... despite all the experts and commentators who said it was impossible. Israel was completely isolated and they told us we were heading into a political tsunami. What's happening is the absolute opposite.\" This was followed by Morocco establishing relations with Israel in December. In July 2024, Pakistan officially designated him a \"terrorist\", calling him responsible for the atrocities in Gaza.\nEconomic views.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nYou want to have a meritocracy. You want to have initiative, risk, talent, the ability to create new products, new services to be rewarded\u00a0... It's always been about competition. That's what human progress is about. You want to siphon it into productive ways.\nBenjamin Netanyahu, \"The Marker\", 2014\nBy 1998, Netanyahu had acquired a reputation as \"the advocate of the free-market\" and in 1999 told the \"Jerusalem Post\": \"Peace is an end of itself [...] peace, without free markets, will not produce growth. But free markets without peace do produce growth.\" As prime minister in his first term, he significantly reformed the banking sector, removing barriers to investment abroad, mandatory purchases of government securities and direct credit. As minister of finance (2003\u20132005), Netanyahu introduced a major overhaul of the Israeli economy. He introduced a welfare to work program, he led a program of privatization, reduced the size of the public sector, reformed and streamlined the taxation system and passed laws against monopolies and cartels with the aim of increasing competition. Netanyahu extended capital gains taxes from companies to individuals, which allowed him to enlarge the tax base while reducing taxes on incomes. As the Israeli economy started booming and unemployment fell significantly, Netanyahu was widely credited by commentators as having performed an 'economic miracle' by the end of his tenure. Direct investment in the Israeli economy had increased by an annualized 380%. On the other hand, his critics have labelled his economic views as Margaret Thatcher-inspired \"popular capitalism\".\nNetanyahu defines capitalism as \"the ability to have individual initiative and competition to produce goods and services with profit, but not to shut out somebody else from trying to do the same\". He says that his views developed while he was working as an economic consult for Boston Consulting Group: \"It was the first time that the Boston Consulting Group looked at governments and worked for governments. They wanted to do a strategic plan for the government of Sweden. I was on that case and looked at other governments. So I went around to other governments in Europe in 1976 and I was looking at Britain. I was looking at France. I was looking at other countries, and I could see that they were stymied by concentrations of power that prevented competition. And I thought, hmm, as bad as they are, ours was worse because we had very little room for private sector competition to the extent that we had government-controlled or union-controlled companies, and so you really didn't get the competition or the growth\u00a0... And I said, well, if I ever have a chance, I'll change that.\"\nViews on counter-terrorism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe essence of democratic societies, and that which distinguishes them from dictatorships, is the commitment to resolve conflict in a nonviolent fashion by settling issues through argument and debate\u00a0... The salient point that has to be underlined again and again is that nothing justifies terrorism, that it is evil per se \u2013 that the various real or imagined reasons proffered by the terrorists to justify their actions are meaningless.\nBenjamin Netanyahu, 1995\nNetanyahu has said his own \"hard line against all terrorists\" came as a result of his brother's death. Yoni Netanyahu had been killed while leading the hostage-rescue mission at Operation Entebbe.\nIn addition to having taken part in counter-terrorist operations during his service in the military, Netanyahu has published three books on the subject of fighting terrorism. He identifies terrorism as a form of totalitarianism, writing: The more far removed the target of the attack from any connection to the grievance enunciated by the terrorists, the greater the terror\u00a0... Yet for terrorism to have any impact, it is precisely the lack of connection, the lack of any possible involvement or \"complicity\" of the chosen victims in the cause the terrorists seek to attack, that produces the desired fear. For terrorism's underlying message is that every member of society is \"guilty\", that anyone can be a victim, and that therefore no one is safe... In fact, the methods reveal the totalitarian strain that runs through all terrorist groups... It is not only that the ends of the terrorists do not succeed in justifying the means they choose; their choice of means indicate what their true ends are. Far from being fighters for freedom, terrorists are the forerunners of tyranny. Terrorists use the techniques of violent coercion in order to achieve a regime of violent coercion.Netanyahu cautions that:The trouble with active anti-terror activities... is that they do constitute a substantial intrusion on the lives of those being monitored.He believes there is a balance between civil liberties and security, which should depend on the level of sustained terrorist attacks in a country. During periods of sustained attack, there should be shift towards security, due to \"the monstrous violation of personal rights which is the lot of the victims of terror and their families\". But this should be regularly reviewed, with an emphasis on guarding civil liberties and individual privacy wherever and whenever security considerations allow: \"The concern of civil libertarians over possible infringements of the rights of innocent citizens is well placed, and all additional powers granted the security services should require annual renewal by the legislature, this in addition to judicial oversight of actions as they are taken in the field.\"\nHe advises tighter immigration laws as an essential tool to preemptively combat terrorism: \"This era of immigration free-for-all should be brought to an end. An important aspect of taking control of the immigration situation is stricter background checks of potential immigrants, coupled with the real possibility of deportation.\"\nHe also cautions that it is essential that governments do not conflate terrorists with those legitimate political groups that may or may not hold extremist views, but which advance their positions by means of debate and argument. Ronald Reagan was an admirer of Netanyahu's work on counter-terrorism, and Reagan recommended Netanyahu's book \"Terrorism: How the West Can Win\" to all senior figures in his administration.\nDeath penalty.\nIn 2017, Netanyahu called for the death penalty to be imposed on the perpetrator of the 2017 Halamish stabbing attack. Representatives in his government introduced a bill which would allow the death penalty for terrorism to the Knesset. In a preliminary vote in January 2018, 52 of 120 members of the Israeli parliament voted in favor while 49 opposed, to make it easier for judges to hand down the death penalty. The amendment to the penal code would still require three more readings if it is to become law.\nLGBT rights.\nNetanyahu supports equal rights for LGBT persons. He said: \"The struggle for every person to be recognized as equal before the law is a long struggle, and there is still a long way to go\u00a0... I am proud that Israel is among the most open countries in the world in relation to the LGBT community discourse.\" During an event held for the annual community rights day at the Knesset, Netanyahu said that he was \"asked to come here in the middle of my busy schedule to say one thing to the male and female members of the LGBT community: We must be guided by the conviction that every person is created in the image of God.\" However, some of his coalition government's party members opposed same-sex marriage.\nEthiopian Jewish integration.\nIn 2015, after Ethiopian Jewish protests against police brutality, Netanyahu said: \"We will bring a comprehensive plan to the government to assist you in every way. There is no room for racism and discrimination in our society, none\u00a0... We will turn racism into something contemptible and despicable.\"\nAfrican Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem.\nNetanyahu supports the integration of the African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem into Israeli society, and takes part in celebrations in honor of this community's \"exodus\" from America to Israel, which occurred in 1967. In 2012, Netanyahu expressed appreciation towards \"the cooperative society that is working towards the inclusion of the Hebrew Israelite community in Israeli society at large,\" and declared that the experience of the community in the land of Israel is \"an integral part of the Israeli experience.\"\nIran.\nIn a March 2007 CNN interview, Netanyahu said that \"there is only one difference between Nazi Germany and the Islamic Republic of Iran, namely that the first entered a worldwide conflict and then sought atomic weapons, while the latter is first seeking atomic weapons and, once it has them, will then start a world war.\" Netanyahu repeated these remarks at a news conference in April 2008. This was similar to earlier remarks that \"it's 1938, and Iran is Germany, and Iran is racing to arm itself with atomic bombs\".\nIn February 2009, after being asked to be the prime minister of Israel, Netanyahu described Iran as the greatest threat that Israel has ever faced: \"Iran is seeking to obtain a nuclear weapon and constitutes the gravest threat to our existence since the war of independence.\" Speaking before the UN General Assembly in New York on 24 September 2009, Netanyahu expressed a different opinion than Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's speech at the forum, saying those who believe Tehran is a threat only to Israel are wrong. \"The Iranian regime\", he said, \"is motivated by fanaticism\u00a0... They want to see us go back to medieval times. The struggle against Iran pits civilization against barbarism. This Iranian regime is fueled by extreme fundamentalism.\" \"By focusing solely on Iran\", columnist Yossi Melman speculated that Netanyahu's foreign policy, \"...\u00a0took the Palestinian issue off the world agenda.\" After four days of shelling from the Iranian-funded Palestinian Islamic Jihad, Melman asked, \"Is it worth initiating a crisis with Iran? Will the Israeli public be able to cope with Iran's response?\"\nAccording to Uzi Eilam, Netanyahu is using the threat of atomic Iran as a means of reaching his own goals. He said: \"Netanyahu is using the Iranian threat to achieve a variety of political objectives.\" He also said: \"These declarations are unnecessarily scaring Israel's citizens, given Israel is not party to the negotiations to determine whether Iran will or will not dismantle its nuclear program.\"\nBy 2012, Netanyahu is reported to have formed a close, confidential relationship with Defense Minister Ehud Barak as the two men considered possible Israeli military action against Iran's nuclear facilities, following Israel's established Begin Doctrine. The pair were accused of acting on \"messianic\" impulses by Yuval Diskin, former head of the Shin Bet, who added that their warmongering rhetoric appealed to \"the idiots within the Israeli public\". Diskin's remarks were supported by former Mossad chief Meir Dagan, who himself had previously said that an attack on Iran was \"the stupidest thing I have ever heard\". A few weeks later, the RAND Corporation also openly disagreed with Netanyahu's belligerent stance.\nEarly in 2012, he used the opening ceremony for Israel's Holocaust Remembrance Day to warn against the dangers of an Iranian nuclear bomb, saying he was following the example of Jewish leaders during World War II who struggled to raise the alarm about the Nazis' genocidal intentions. Israeli academic Avner Cohen accused Netanyahu of showing \"contempt\" for the Holocaust by putting it to \"political use\", and former Israeli foreign minister Shlomo Ben-Ami similarly condemned Netanyahu's \"vulgar manipulation of the memory of the Holocaust\". Immediately after the 2012 Burgas bus bombing, Netanyahu confirmed that the attack had been undertaken in coordination with Iran.\nNetanyahu opined during a July meeting that \"all the sanctions and diplomacy so far have not set back the Iranian programme by one iota\". In August he stated that the United States only might respond to a massive attack against Israel. On 28 September 2012, Netanyahu gave a speech to the UN General Assembly in which he set forward a \"red line\" of 90% uranium enrichment, stating that if Iran were to reach this level, it would become an intolerable risk for Israel. Netanyahu used a cartoon graphic of a bomb to illustrate his point, indicating three stages of uranium enrichment, saying that Iran had already completed the first stage, and stating that \"By next spring, at most by next summer at current enrichment rates, [Iran] will have finished the medium enrichment and move on to the final stage. From there, it's only a few months, possibly a few weeks before they get enough enriched uranium for the first bomb.\" At the time, according to cables leaked in 2015, Mossad's assessment was that Iran did not appear ready to enrich uranium to levels required for a nuclear bomb.\nIn an October 2013 interview with BBC Persian Service, Netanyahu praised the history of Persia and said: \"If the Iranian regime has nuclear weapons, the Iranian people will never be free of dictatorship and will live in eternal servitude.\"\nThe U.S. military's 2020 Baghdad International Airport airstrike, which killed the high-level Iranian General Qasem Soleimani, brought strong reactions from around the world. Netanyahu praised the air strike, saying that Trump had acted \"swiftly, forcefully and decisively\".\nOn 13 June 2025, Netanyahu authorized airstrikes against Iran, marking the beginning of the Iran\u2013Israel war. Netanyahu stated the goal of the operation was to dismantle Iran's nuclear capabilities, which he described as a \"clear and present danger to Israel's very survival.\". He additionally framed the campaign as an opportunity for regime change, aligning with exiled Crown Prince Reza Pahlavi\u2019s call for a national uprising.\nBank of China terror financing case.\nIn 2013, Netanyahu found himself caught between conflicting commitments made to the family of American terror victim Daniel Wultz and the Chinese government. Although Netanyahu was reported to have previously promised U.S. Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen that Israel would fully cooperate in the terror-financing case against Bank of China in U.S. District Court, the prime minister reportedly made a conflicting promise to the Government of China prior to a state visit to China in May 2013. Attorney David Boies, lead counsel for the Wultz family, told \"The Wall Street Journal\", \"While we are respectful of China's interests, and of the diplomatic pressure to which Israel has been subjected, those interests and that pressure cannot be permitted to obstruct the ability of American courts to hear critical evidence.\"\nIn August 2013, Ros-Lehtinen, chair of the House Middle East and South Asia subcommittee, told the \"Miami Herald\" she raised the issue while leading a congressional delegation to Israel, stressing to Israeli officials the importance of them providing the Wultz family what they need for their lawsuit. \"I am hopeful that we can bring this case to a conclusion that is satisfactory to the family, but we need community support to not waver at this critical time,\" Ros-Lehtinen said.\nU.S. Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz, chair of the Democratic National Committee, also spoke out on the issue with the \"Miami Herald\": \"In South Florida, we all know too well of the tragic circumstances surrounding the cowardly terrorist attack that took Daniel Wultz's innocent life. I have been working, hand in hand with the Wultz family and the state of Israel to ensure any and all of those involved in this terrorist activity, including the Bank of China, pay for their crimes so that justice can be served.\"\nDefense and security.\nIn 2011, Netanyahu arranged for 1000 Hamas and Fatah prisoners to be swapped for Gilad Shalit, including terrorists with \"blood on their hands\". Israeli officials estimate that 60% of those who are released \"resume terrorism attacks\".\nIn 2011, Israeli General Staff concluded that the armed forces cannot maintain their battle readiness under Netanyahu's proposed cuts. Netanyahu decided to cut social programs instead and promised to increase the defense budget by about six percent. The Israeli military still fell NIS 3.7\u00a0million short from its projected budget, which could damage their war capabilities. According to a U.S. State Department representative in November 2011, under the leadership of Netanyahu and Obama, Israel and the United States have enjoyed unprecedented security cooperation.\nUnder Netanyahu's leadership, the Israeli National Security Council has seen an expanded role in foreign policy planning and decision-making.\nDuring the Gaza war he called for Israel to assume \"overall security responsibility\" over the Gaza Strip, saying \"we've seen what happens when we don't have it [...] what we have is the eruption of Hamas terror on a scale that we couldn't imagine\".\nIllegal immigration.\nIn his 1995 book \"Fighting Terrorism: How Democracies Can Defeat Domestic and International Terrorism\", Netanyahu strongly argued that tightening immigration laws in the West is the most effective method to combat terrorism. \"This era of immigration free-for-all should be brought to an end\", he wrote in 1995.\nIn 2012, the Netanyahu government passed the \"Prevention of Infiltration Law\", which mandated automatic detention of all people, including asylum-seekers, who enter Israel without permission. Amnesty International called it \"an affront to international law\". Between 2009 and 2013, approximately 60,000 people crossed into Israel from various African countries. Netanyahu said that \"this phenomenon is very grave and threatens the social fabric of society, our national security and our national identity.\" Many of these migrants are held in detention camps in the Negev desert. When the Supreme Court of Israel declared the \"Prevention of Infiltration Law\" illegal for permitting immediate and indefinite detention of asylum seekers from Africa, Netanyahu requested new legislation to work around the Supreme Court ruling.\nNetanyahu is critical of what he sees as the overly open immigration policy of EU nations. Netanyahu has urged the leaders of Hungary, Slovakia, Czech Republic and Poland to close their borders to illegal immigration.\nRelations with foreign leaders.\nServing as prime minister in three nonconsecutive periods since the 1990s, he developed close relationships with foreign leaders. Netanyahu has a close relationship with Hungarian prime minister Viktor Orb\u00e1n, their having known each other for decades due to the privileged relationship between the Likud Party and the EPP, the European People's Party. Orban particularly admired Netanyahu while he was working as finance minister, and received advice from him while Netanyahu was Finance Minister of Israel.\nNetanyahu has been noted for his close and friendly relationship with former-late Italian prime minister Silvio Berlusconi. Netanyahu has said of Berlusconi: \"We are lucky that there is a leader such as yourself.\" Netanyahu has described Berlusconi as \"one of the greatest friends\".\nNetanyahu and Indian prime minister Narendra Modi developed a close relationship and ties between India and Israel increased during their rule.\nNetanyahu had a warm relationship and \"personal friendship\" with Russian president Vladimir Putin. In his 2022 book, Netanyahu wrote positively about Putin and describes him as \"smart, sophisticated and focused on one goal \u2013 returning Russia to its historical greatness\". Their relationship has been strained since the start of the Gaza war. \nIn early 2018, the Polish parliament adopted a new Polish law criminalizing suggestions that Poles were collectively complicit in Holocaust-related or other war crimes that had been committed during World War II by the Axis powers. Later that year at the Munich Security Conference, Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki said \"it is not going to be seen as criminal to say that there were Polish perpetrators, as there were Jewish perpetrators\u00a0... not only German perpetrators\" implicated in the Jewish Holocaust. Netanyahu called his Polish counterpart's comment \"outrageous\" for saying that Jews had been among the Holocaust's perpetrators. The resulting crisis in Israel\u2013Poland relations was resolved in late June that year when the two prime ministers issued a joint communiqu\u00e9 endorsing research into the Jewish Holocaust and condemning the misnomer \"Polish concentration camps\".\nAccording to Efraim Zuroff of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, during the visit of Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko in Jerusalem, Netanyahu failed to publicly address Ukraine's official policy of rehabilitating local Nazi collaborators like UPA leader Roman Shukhevych, who had participated in the murder of Jews.\nNetanyahu has developed a close relationship with Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro following Bolsonaro's 2018 election. Netanyahu has also developed a good relationship with Argentinian president Javier Milei, having called him a \"great friend of the Jewish State\", shortly after Milei started his presidential tenure.\nSince 2023, Netanyahu and Chinese president Xi Jinping have been engaged in diplomacy, arising due to strained ties between the US and Israel. The diplomatic situation has been made complicated due to the Gaza war, where China has remained neutral.\nNetanyahu and Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan have tense relations. In March 2019, after being denounced by Turkey as a racist for saying that Israel was the nation-state of the Jewish people only, Netanyahu called Erdo\u011fan a dictator and mocked him for imprisoning journalists in a tweet. In response, Erdo\u011fan called Netanyahu as \"the thief who heads Israel\", referencing the ongoing corruption scandals against Netanyahu. In the same speech, Erdo\u011fan further escalated the spat by addressing to Netanyahu directly, saying, \"you are a tyrant. You are a tyrant who slaughters 7-year-old Palestinian kids\", and further in April 2018, calling Israel \"terror state\" and Netanyahu \"terrorist\". Netanyahu tweeted that \"Erdo\u011fan is among Hamas's biggest supporters and there is no doubt that he well understands terrorism and slaughter.\" Netanyahu condemned the 2019 Turkish offensive into north-eastern Syria and warned against ethnic cleansing of Kurds by Turkey and its proxies.\nUS leaders.\nNetanyahu has close ties with the congressional leadership of the U.S. Republican Party and with its 2012 presidential candidate, Mitt Romney. He and Romney first became acquainted when both worked at the Boston Consulting Group in the mid-1970s.\nDuring the 2011 G-20 Cannes summit, then-French president Nicolas Sarkozy was overheard saying to then-U.S. president Barack Obama, \"I cannot bear Netanyahu, he's a liar\", and Obama reportedly responded, \"You're fed up with him, but I have to deal with him every day.\"\nIn October 2014, author Jeffrey Goldberg related a conversation in which Goldberg said that a senior official of the Obama administration called Netanyahu a \"chickenshit\" after Netanyahu accused U.S. president Barack Obama of \"acting contrary to American values\". Goldberg went on to say that Netanyahu and his cabinet were largely to blame for the tensions between the Netanyahu and Obama governments. Secretary of State John Kerry phoned Netanyahu to clarify that \"such statements are disgraceful, unacceptable and damaging\" and \"do not reflect the position of the United States\". Netanyahu responded by saying \"I'm being attacked because of my determination to defend Israel's interests. The safety of Israel is not important to those who attack me anonymously and personally.\" Because of evident rifts between Netanyahu and members of the Obama administration, observers have characterized the relationship as having reached a crisis level by October 2014. The relationship between Netanyahu and the Obama administration had become problematic enough that Goldberg reported that his conversations with Netanyahu and other Israeli officials indicated that Israel would wait until after the 2016 presidential election before attempting to repair the relationship with the White House. According to Alon Pinkas, \"Netanyahu's self-righteousness that this resolution is going to be changed or reversed by Trump is totally unfounded.\"\nOn 23 December 2016, the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution calling for an end to Israeli settlements. In a departure from longstanding American policy, the U.S., under the Obama administration, abstained from the vote and did not exercise its veto power. At the behest of the Netanyahu government, President-elect Trump attempted to intercede by publicly advocating for the resolution to be vetoed, as well as successfully persuading Egypt's Abdel Fattah el-Sisi to temporarily withdraw it from consideration. The resolution was then \"proposed again by Malaysia, New Zealand, Senegal and Venezuela\"\u00a0\u2013 and passed 14 to 0. Netanyahu's office alleged that \"the Obama administration not only failed to protect Israel against this gang-up at the UN, it colluded with it behind the scenes\", adding: \"Israel looks forward to working with President-elect Trump and with all our friends in Congress, Republicans and Democrats alike, to negate the harmful effects of this absurd resolution.\"\nNetanyahu and U.S. president Donald Trump have known each other for many years. Netanyahu had been a friend of Donald Trump's father, Fred, when Netanyahu lived in New York during the 1980s, serving as UN ambassador. In 2013, Trump made a video endorsing Netanyahu during the Israeli elections saying, \"vote for Benjamin \u2013 terrific guy, terrific leader, great for Israel\". In June 2019, Netanyahu officially renamed a settlement in the disputed Golan Heights after Donald Trump. However, Trump aide Jared Kushner has claimed that in January 2020, Trump became frustrated with Netanyahu's rhetoric regarding annexation of the Jordan Valley, and considered endorsing his political opponent, Benny Gantz. Following Netanyahu's congratulations for Joe Biden after the 2020 U.S. presidential election, the relationship deteriorated, with Trump accusing him of disloyalty and stating Netanyahu had \"made a terrible mistake\".\nU.S. president Joe Biden, a Democrat, has been friendly with Netanyahu for many years. In November 2011 and in the 2012 U.S. vice presidential debate, Biden stated that the relationship has lasted for 39 years. In March 2010, Netanyahu remarked during a joint statement with Biden during his visit Israel that their friendship had started almost three decades prior. During Spring 2024, the relationship between the two leaders had become strained over Israel's Rafah offensive.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and relationships.\nNetanyahu has been married three times and has been involved in multiple extramarital affairs. Netanyahu's first marriage was to Miriam Weizmann, whom he met in Israel. Weizmann lived near Yonatan Netanyahu's apartment in Jerusalem, where Netanyahu was based during his military service. By the time Netanyahu's service was finished, Weizmann had completed her own military service as well as a degree in chemistry from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. In 1972, they both left to study in the United States, where she enrolled in Brandeis University, while Netanyahu studied at MIT. They married soon afterward. The couple had one daughter, Noa (born 29 April 1978).\nIn 1978, while Weizmann was pregnant, Netanyahu met a non-Jewish British student named Fleur Cates at the university library, and began an affair. His marriage ended in divorce soon after Miriam discovered the affair. In 1981, Netanyahu married Cates, and she converted to Judaism. After moving with Netanyahu to Israel, Cates sued for divorce in 1988.\nHis third wife, Sara Ben-Artzi, was working as a flight attendant on an El Al flight from New York to Israel when they met. She was in the process of completing a master's degree in psychology. The couple married in 1991. They have two sons: Yair (born 26 July 1991), a former soldier in the IDF Spokesperson's Unit, and Avner (born 10 October 1994), a national Bible champion, winner of the National Bible Quiz for Youth in Kiryat Shmona, and former soldier in the IDF Combat Intelligence Collection Corps.\nIn 1993, Netanyahu confessed on live television to having an affair with Ruth Bar, his public relations adviser. He said that a political rival had planted a secret video camera that had recorded him in a sexually compromising position with Bar, and that he had been threatened with the release of the tape to the press unless he quit the Likud leadership race. Netanyahu and Sara repaired their marriage, and he was elected to the leadership of Likud. In 1996, the media reported that he had a 20-year friendship with Katherine Price-Mondadori, an Italian-American woman.\nHealth.\nNetanyahu has been suffering from right bundle branch block (RBBB) since around 2003. In the first half of 2008, doctors removed a small colon polyp that proved to be benign. On 22 July 2023, a pacemaker was implanted in his body. A hernia was discovered on him in March 2024. In December 2024, his prostate was removed following a urinary tract infection caused by an enlargement.\nHis personal physician and close friend is the Romanian-born pediatrist Herman Berkovits.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "56474", "revid": "50937336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56474", "title": "Kingston upon Hull", "text": "City in the East Riding of Yorkshire, England\nKingston upon Hull, usually shortened to Hull, is a port city and unitary authority area in the East Riding of Yorkshire, England. It lies upon the River Hull at its confluence with the Humber Estuary, inland from the North Sea. It is a tightly bounded city which excludes the majority of its suburbs; with a population of 275,401 (2024), it is the fourth-largest city in the Yorkshire and the Humber region. The built-up area has a population of 436,300.\nHull has more than 800 years of seafaring history and is known as Yorkshire's maritime city. The town of Wyke on Hull was founded late in the 12th\u00a0century by the monks of Meaux Abbey as a port from which to export their wool. Renamed \"Kings-town upon Hull\" in 1299, Hull had been a market town, military supply port, trading centre, fishing and whaling centre and industrial metropolis.\nHull was an early theatre of battle in the English Civil Wars. Its 18th-century Member of Parliament, William Wilberforce, took a prominent part in the abolition of the slave trade in Britain.\nThe city offers a variety of museums and art galleries, a city centre marina and historic old town, stunning architecture, and a thriving arts scene. Due to Hull's growing appeal as an outdoor film location, particularly for period dramas using the Old Town's historic streets and buildings, plans for a purpose-built film studio complex have been approved by Hull City Council. The \u00a33m complex could open by the end of 2025. The city has earned the nickname \"Hullywood\" in recent years, after productions including \"The Crown\", \"Enola Holmes 2\", \"The Personal History of David Copperfield\", \"Victoria\" and \"Blitz\" have been filmed in the city.\nIn 2017, it was the UK City of Culture and hosted the Turner Prize at the city's Ferens Art Gallery. Other notable landmarks in the city are the Minster, the tidal surge barrier, the Paragon Interchange and The Deep Hull's award-winning aquarium. Areas of the town centre include the old town (including its museum quarter) and the marina. The University of Hull\nwas founded in 1927 and had over 16,000 students in 2022. Rugby league football teams include clubs Hull F.C. and Hull Kingston Rovers. The city's association football club is Hull City (EFL Championship). Hull RUFC and Hull Ionians both play in the National League 2 North of rugby union.\nThe city came 2nd in the \"Time Out\" list of the 15 best places to visit in the UK in 2024, with the guide commenting that the city has got \"The Deep, an enormous aquarium with 3,000 species, a picturesque old town which survived the city's relentless WWII bombings, and lots of up and coming indie art galleries like Ground and Artlink. Don't sleep on Hull\". In 2016, it was named as one of the top 10 cities in the world to visit by Rough Guides alongside cities such as Seoul, Vancouver, Amsterdam and Reykjavik. In 2017, the city was featured in The Sunday Times Best Places to Live Guide and in 2024 was named as one of the UK's most \"up and coming\" places to move to. however, Kingston upon Hull has been ranked as one of the most deprived cities in the UK and the fourth most deprived local authority in the country. The city also has a lower than average life expectancy than the majority of the Uk.\nHistory.\nWyke and wool trade.\nKingston upon Hull stands on the north bank of the Humber Estuary at the mouth of its tributary, the River Hull. The valley of the River Hull has been inhabited since the early Neolithic period but there is little evidence of a substantial settlement in the area of the present city. The area was attractive to people because it gave access to a prosperous hinterland and navigable rivers but the site was poor, being remote, low-lying and with no fresh water. It was originally an outlying part of the hamlet of Myton, named Wyke. The name is thought to originate either from a Scandinavian word \"Vik\" meaning inlet or from the Saxon \"Wic\" meaning dwelling place or refuge.\nThe River Hull was a good haven for shipping, whose trade included the export of wool from Meaux Abbey, which owned Myton. In 1293, the town of Wyke was acquired from the abbey by King Edward I, who, on 1 April 1299, granted it a royal charter that renamed the settlement \"King's town upon Hull\" or Kingston upon Hull. The charter is preserved in the archives of the Guildhall. When first created, the borough straddled the ancient parishes of Hessle and North Ferriby, but was remote from either parish church. A chapel of ease dedicated to Holy Trinity was built to serve the part of the borough in Hessle parish; that church subsequently became Hull Minster. St Mary's Church similarly began as a chapel of ease for the part of the borough in North Ferriby parish.\nIn 1440, a further charter incorporated the town and instituted local government consisting of a mayor, a sheriff and twelve aldermen.\nIn his \"Guide to Hull (1817)\", J. C. Craggs provides a colourful background to Edward's acquisition and naming of the town. He writes that the King and a hunting party started a hare which \"led them along the delightful banks of the River Hull to the hamlet of Wyke ... [Edward], charmed with the scene before him, viewed with delight the advantageous situation of this hitherto neglected and obscure corner. He foresaw it might become subservient both to render the kingdom more secure against foreign invasion, and at the same time greatly to enforce its commerce\". Pursuant to these thoughts, Craggs continues, Edward purchased the land from the Abbot of Meaux, had a manor hall built for himself, issued proclamations encouraging development within the town, and bestowed upon it the royal appellation, \"King's Town\".\nProspering port.\nThe port served as a base for Edward I during the First War of Scottish Independence and later developed into the foremost port on the east coast of England. It prospered by exporting wool and woollen cloth, and importing wine and timber. Hull also established a flourishing commerce with the Baltic ports of the Hanseatic League.\nFrom its medieval beginnings, Hull's main trading links were with Scotland and northern Europe. Scandinavia, the Baltic and the Low Countries were all key trading areas for Hull's merchants. In addition, there was trade with France, Spain and Portugal.\nSir William de la Pole was the town's first mayor. A prosperous merchant, de la Pole founded a family that became prominent in government. Another successful son of a Hull trading family was bishop John Alcock, who founded Jesus College, Cambridge and was a patron of the grammar school in Hull. The increase in trade after the discovery of the Americas and the town's maritime connections are thought to have played a part in the introduction of a virulent strain of syphilis through Hull and on into Europe from the New World.\nThe town prospered during the 16th and early 17th\u00a0centuries, and Hull's affluence at this time is preserved in the form of several well-maintained buildings from the period, including Wilberforce House, now a museum documenting the life of William Wilberforce.\nDuring the English Civil War, Hull became strategically important because of the large arsenal located there. Very early in the war, on 11 January 1642, the king named the Earl of Newcastle governor of Hull while Parliament nominated Sir John Hotham and asked his son, Captain John Hotham, to secure the town at once. Sir John Hotham and Hull corporation declared support for Parliament and denied Charles I entry into the town. Charles I responded to these events by besieging the town. This siege helped precipitate open conflict between the forces of Parliament and those of the Royalists.\nAfter the Civil War, docks were built along the route of the town walls, which were demolished. The first dock (1778, renamed Queen's Dock in 1854) was built in the area occupied by Beverley and North gates, and the intermediate walls, which were demolished, a second dock (Humber Dock, 1809) was built on the land between Hessle and Myton gates, and a third dock between the two was opened 1829 as Junction Dock (later Prince's Dock).\nWhaling played a major role in the town's fortunes until the mid-19th\u00a0century. As sail power gave way to steam, Hull's trading links extended throughout the world. Docks were opened to serve the frozen meat trade of Australia, New Zealand and South America. Hull was also the centre of a thriving inland and coastal trading network, serving the whole of the United Kingdom.\nCity status.\nThroughout the second half of the 19th\u00a0century and leading up to the First World War, the Port of Hull played a major role in the emigration of Northern European settlers to the New World, with thousands of emigrants sailing to Hull and stopping for administrative purposes before travelling on to Liverpool and then North America.\nParallel to this growth in passenger shipping was the emergence of the Wilson Line of Hull (which had been founded in 1825 by Thomas Wilson). By the early 20th\u00a0century, the company had grown \u2013 largely through its monopolisation of North Sea passenger routes and later mergers and acquisitions \u2013 to be the largest privately owned shipping company in the world, with over 100 ships sailing to different parts of the globe. The Wilson Line was sold to the Ellerman Lines \u2013 which itself was owned by Hull-born magnate (and the richest man in Britain at the time) Sir John Ellerman.\nHull's prosperity peaked in the decades just before the First World War; it was during this time, in 1897, that city status was granted. Many of the suburban areas on the western side of Hull were built in the 1930s, particularly Willerby Road and Anlaby Park, as well as most of Willerby itself. \nWartime bombing.\nThe city's port and industrial facilities, its proximity to mainland Europe and ease of location being on a big estuary, led to much damage from bombing during the Second World War; much of the city centre was destroyed. Hull had 95 per cent of its houses damaged or destroyed, making it the second most severely bombed British city or town by number of damaged or destroyed buildings, after London, during the Second World War. More than 1,200 people died in air raids on the city and some 3,000 others were injured.\nThe worst of the bombing occurred in 1941. Little was known about this destruction by the rest of the country at the time, since most of the radio and newspaper reports did not reveal Hull by name but referred to it as \"a North-East town\" or \"a northern coastal town\". Most of the city centre was rebuilt after the war. In 2006 researchers found documents in the local archives that suggested an unexploded wartime bomb might be buried beneath the Boom, in Hull a redevelopment.\nAfter the decline of the whaling industry after the Second World War, emphasis shifted to deep-sea trawling until the Anglo-Icelandic Cod War of 1975\u20131976. The conditions set at the end of this dispute started Hull's economic decline.\nCity of Culture.\nIn 2017 Hull was awarded the title of 'City of Culture' by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport. There were festivals in public spaces to promote the city and its new title. At the start of the year there was a huge firework display attracting a crowd of 25,000.\nGovernance.\nMunicipal.\nFollowing the Local Government Act 1888, Hull became a county borough, a local government district independent of the East Riding of Yorkshire. This district was dissolved under the Local Government Act 1972, on 1 April 1974 when it became a non-metropolitan district of the newly created shire county of Humberside. Humberside (and its county council) was abolished on 1 April 1996 and Hull was made a unitary authority area.\nThe single-tier local authority of the city is now Hull City Council (officially Kingston upon Hull City Council), headquartered in the Guildhall in the city centre. The council was designated as the UK's worst performing authority in both 2004 and 2005, but in 2006 was rated as a two star 'improving adequate' council and in 2007 it retained its two stars with an 'improving well' status. In the 2008 corporate performance assessment the city retained its \"improving well\" status but was upgraded to a three star rating.\nThe Liberal Democrats won overall control of the City Council in the 2007 local elections, ending several years in which no single party had a majority. They retained control in the 2008 local elections by an increased majority and in the 2010 local elections. Following the UK's local elections of 2011, the Labour Party gained control of the council, increasing their majority in the 2012 and retained this following the 2014 local elections. They increased their majority by one in the 2015 local elections, but lost it in the \n2016 local elections. In the 2018 local elections all of the council was up for election following boundary changes that reduced the number of seats by 2. Labour retained control of the council but with a much reduced majority, while in the 2019 local elections there was no change to the make-up of the council. In the 2021 local elections the Liberal Democrats gained a couple of seats but Labour retained control by just three seats. On 3 March 2022, Labour councillor Julia Conner defected to the Liberal Democrats, reducing the Labour majority to one. The Liberal Democrats won overall control of the City Council in the 2022 local elections to end ten years of Labour rule, increasing their majority in the 2023 local elections.\nParliament.\nThe city returned three members of parliament to the House of Commons and at the last general election, in 2024, elected three Labour MPs: Emma Hardy, Diana Johnson\nand Karl Turner.\nWilliam Wilberforce is the most celebrated of Hull's former MPs. He was a native of the city and the member for Hull from 1780 to 1784 when he was elected as an Independent member for Yorkshire.\nGeography.\nKingston upon Hull is on the northern bank of the Humber Estuary. The city centre is west of the River Hull and close to the Humber. The city is built upon alluvial and glacial deposits which overlie chalk rocks but the underlying chalk has no influence on the topography. The land within the city is generally very flat and is only 2 to 4\u00a0metres (6.5 to 13\u00a0ft) above sea level. Because of the relative flatness of the site there are few physical constraints upon building and many open areas are the subject of pressures to build.\nThe parishes of Drypool, Marfleet, Sculcoates, and most of Sutton parish, were absorbed within the borough of Hull in the 19th and 20th\u00a0centuries. Much of their area has been built over, and socially and economically they have long been inseparable from the city. Only Sutton retained a recognisable village centre in the late 20th\u00a0century, but on the south and east the advancing suburbs had already reached it. The four villages were, nevertheless, distinct communities, of a largely rural character, until their absorption in the borough\u2014Drypool and Sculcoates in 1837, Marfleet in 1882, and Sutton in 1929. The current boundaries of the city are tightly drawn and exclude many of the metropolitan area's nearby villages, of which Cottingham is the largest. The city is surrounded by the rural East Riding of Yorkshire.\nSome areas of Hull lie on reclaimed land at or below sea level. The Hull Tidal Surge Barrier is at the point where the River Hull joins the Humber Estuary and is lowered at times when unusually high tides are expected. It is used between 8 and 12 times per year and protects the homes of approximately 10,000 people from flooding. Due to its low level, Hull is expected to be at increasing levels of risk from flooding due to global warming.\nHistorically, Hull has been affected by tidal and storm flooding from the Humber; the last serious floods were in the 1950s, in 1953, 1954 and the winter of 1959.\nMany areas of Hull were flooded during the June 2007 United Kingdom floods, with 8,600 homes and 1,300 businesses affected.\nFurther flooding occurred in 2013, resulting in a new flood defence scheme to protect homes and businesses, stretching from St Andrews Quay Retail Park to Victoria Dock, linking to other defences at Paull and Hessle. Started in 2016, it was completed in early 2021. The scheme was officially opened on 3 March 2022, by Rebecca Pow.\nAt around 00:56 GMT on 27 February 2008, Hull was north of the epicentre of an earthquake measuring 5.3 on the Richter Scale which lasted for nearly 10 seconds. This was an unusually large earthquake for this part of the world. Another notable quake occurred early in the morning of 10 June 2018.\nClimate.\nLocated in Northern England, Hull has a temperate maritime climate which is dominated by the passage of mid-latitude depressions. The weather is very changeable from day to day and the warming influence of the Gulf Stream makes the region mild for its latitude. Locally, the area is sunnier than most areas this far north in the British Isles, and also considerably drier, due to the rain shadowing effect of the Pennines. It is somewhat warmer than west coast areas at a similar latitude such as Liverpool in summer due to stronger shielding from maritime air but also colder in winter and North Sea breezes keep the city cooler than inland areas during summer. It is also one of the most northerly areas where the July average maximum temperature exceeds , although this appears to be very localised around the city. Flooding in June 2007 caused significant damage to areas of the city. Droughts and heatwaves also occur such as in 2003, 2006 and recently in 2018.\nThe absolute maximum temperature recorded is , set in July 2022. Typically, the warmest day should reach , though slightly over 10 days should achieve a temperature of or more in an \"average\" year. All averages refer to the 1991\u20132020 period.\nThe absolute minimum temperature is , recorded during January 1982. Winters are generally mild for the latitude with snow only occurring a couple of times a year on average and mostly only staying for a day or two before melting. It is frequently cloudy and the North Sea winds make it feel colder than it actually is. An average of 29 nights should report an air frost. Heavy snowfalls do occasionally occur such as in 2010.\nOn 23 November 1981, during the record-breaking nationwide tornado outbreak, Hull was struck by two tornadoes which passed through, and caused damage to residential buildings across the north-eastern suburbs of Hull and uprooted trees.\nDemography.\nAccording to the 2001 UK census, Hull had a population of 243,589 living in 104,288 households. The population density was 34.1 per hectare. Of the total number of homes 47.85% were rented compared with a national figure of 31.38% rented. The population had declined by 7.5% since the 1991 UK census, and has been officially estimated as 256,200 in July 2006.\nIn 2001, approximately 53,000 people were aged under 16, 174,000 were aged 16\u201374, and 17,000 aged 75 and over. Of the total population 97.7% were white and the largest minority ethnic group was of 749 people who considered themselves to be ethnically Chinese. There were 3% of people living in Hull who were born outside the United Kingdom. In 2006, the largest minority ethnic grouping was Iraqi Kurds who were estimated at 3,000. Most of these people were placed in the city by the Home Office while their applications for asylum were being processed. In 2001, the city was 71.7% Christian. A further 18% of the population indicated they were of no religion while 8.4% did not specify any religious affiliation.\nHistorically, minorities of many faiths and nationalities have lived around the docks, Old Town and City Centre, coming in from European ports like Hamburg, aided by continental railways and steam-ships from the mid-1800s. Over 2\u00a0million passed through Hull between 1850 and 1914, on the way to a new life in America and elsewhere, but some planned or decided to stay. Dutch, Jews, Germans, Scandinavians and others were sometimes prominently involved in the life of the port city. They found opportunity but endured discrimination at times, such that these communities have now largely dispersed.\nAlso in 2001, the city had a high proportion, at 6.2%, of people of working age who were unemployed, ranking 354th out of 376 local and unitary authorities within England and Wales. The distance travelled to work was less than for 64,578 out of 95,957 employed people. A further 18,031 travelled between 3.1 and 6.2\u00a0miles (5 and 10\u00a0km) to their place of employment. The number of people using public transport to get to work was 12,915 while the number travelling by car was 53,443.\nMen in the University ward had the fourth lowest life expectancy at birth, 69.4 years, of any ward in England and Wales in 2016.\nIndustry.\nThe traditional industries of Hull are seafaring (whaling and later seafishing) and later heavy industry which both have since declined in the city. Companies BP and Reckitt Benckiser, have facilities in Hull. The city is part of the Humber Enterprise Zone.\nPort.\nAlthough the fishing industry, including oilseed production, declined in the 1970s due to the Cod Wars, the city remains a busy port, handling 13\u00a0million tonnes of cargo per year. The port operations run by Associated British Ports and other companies in the port employ 5,000 people. A further 18,000 are employed as a direct result of the port's activities. The port freight railway line, the Hull Docks Branch, operates 22 trains per day.\nEnergy.\nIn January 2011 Siemens Wind Power and Associated British Ports signed a memorandum of understanding concerning the construction of a wind turbine blade manufacturing plant at Alexander Dock. The plan would require some modification of the dock to allow the ships, used for transporting the wind turbine blades, to dock and be loaded. Planning applications for the plant were submitted in December 2011, and affirmed in 2014, concerning blades for the 6\u00a0MW offshore model.\nA site waste-to-energy centre costing in the region of \u00a3150\u00a0million is also planned to be built by the Spencer Group. Announced in mid-2011, and named 'Energy Works', the proposed plant would process up to 200,000 tonnes of organic material per year, with energy produced via a waste gasification process. Commissioning of the plant was undertaken in 2019 with full operation expected to be late 2019.\nOther.\nHull Marina was developed on land formerly occupied by the railway docks in the centre of the city. It was rebuilt and opened in 1983, it has 270 berths for yachts and small sailing craft.\nIn July 2014, the former Fruit Market was demolished with a technology hub C4DI (Centre for Digital Innovation) built in December 2015.\nThe city has chemical and health care sectors, Smith &amp; Nephew's founder Thomas James Smith being from the city. The health care sector has research facilities provided by the University of Hull through the Institute of Woundcare and the Hull York Medical School partnerships. \nFerry services started after the decline in fishing by the introduction of Roll-on Roll-off ferry services to the continent of Europe. These ferries handle over a million passengers each year.\nCommerce.\nTrade.\nMerchant's houses such as Blaydes House and some warehouses survive in the Old Town, where trade was centred on the River Hull, later shifting to the Humber docks. \nHumber Quays incorporates the World Trade Centre Hull &amp; Humber and offices for The Spencer Group, RBS, and Jonathan Oliver Lee.\nThe quays was a late 2000s development costing \u00a3165\u00a0million with office buildings, housing, a 200-bedroom hotel and a restaurant.\nRetail.\nIn March 2017, the Old Town area was designated as one of 10\u00a0Heritage Action Zones by Historic England with the benefit that the area would get a share of \u00a36\u00a0million.\nRetailers such as Heron Foods, and Jacksons began their operations in Hull. The former electrical retailer Comet was founded in the city as \"Comet Battery Stores Limited\" in 1933; the company's first superstore was opened in Hull in 1968. \nHull has many shopping streets, both inside and outside the city centre. The main non-city-centre shopping streets are Hessle Road, Holderness Road, Chanterlands Avenue, Beverley Road, Princes Avenue, and Newland Avenue. \nAdditionally, two covered shopping arcades, Paragon and Hepworth. The latter was modernised and renovated in the late 2000s. The city also has the Trinity Market Hall,&lt;ref name=\"NHLE/1283105\" &gt;&lt;/ref&gt; a grade II listed building Edwardian era indoor hall with 50 stalls, it was last renovated in 2016.\nThe city centre has three shopping centres, St Stephen's, Princes Quay, and the Prospect Centre. The \"Prospect Centre\" on Prospect Street is the smaller and older shopping centre which benefits from large footfall; having chain stores, banks, fashion retailers and the city's main post office. \n\"Princes Quay Shopping Centre\" was built in 1991 on stilts over the closed Prince's Dock. It has a mixture chain stores and food outlets. It was built with four retail floors, known as \"decks\", with the uppermost deck converted to a cinema from December 2007.\nThe \"St Stephen's\" shopping centre development on Ferensway adjacent to Hull Paragon Interchange is a scheme, that opened in 2007. It is anchored by a superstore and provides many shop units, food outlets, a hotel, and a 7-screen cinema. Since its opening, shopping patterns within the city centre have shifted to the centre from around Princes Quay.\nThe \"North Point Shopping Centre\" (also known by as Bransholme Shopping Centre which is the area of the city it's in) contains a similar range of popular chain and budget retailers including Boyes and Heron Foods. There are also other outer centres for shopping and retail parks, including St Andrews Quay retail park on the Humber bank and Kingswood retail park (Kingswood).\nNightlife, bars and pubs.\nThe main drinking area in the city centre is the Old Town. One pub has Hull's smallest window (The George Hotel).\nSpiders, which opened in 1979, is an alternative rock nightclub on Cleveland Street, situated in a building that was once The Hope and Anchor pub.\n'ATIK' nightclub (formerly The Sugarmill) is situated adjacent to Princes Quay shopping centre and the historic Princes Dock which dated back to 1829.\nCulture.\nHull has several museums of national importance. The city has a theatrical tradition with some famous actors and writers having been born and lived in Hull. The city's arts and heritage have played a role in attracting visitors and encouraging tourism in recent efforts at regeneration. Hull has a diverse range of architecture and this is complemented by parks and squares and a number of statues and modern sculptures. The city has inspired author Val Wood who has set many of her best-selling novels in the city. The Wilberforce Lecture and award of the Wilberforce Medallion, which has taken place annually since 1995, celebrates the historic role of Hull and William Wilberforce in combating the abuse of human rights.\nIn April 2013 Hull put forward a bid to be the UK City of Culture in 2017, reaching the shortlist of four in June 2013 along with Dundee, Leicester and Swansea Bay. On 20 November 2013, Maria Miller, the Culture Secretary, announced that Hull had won the award to become the UK City of Culture 2017.\nMonopoly have released a version focusing on Hull, with attractions such as the Deep and St Stephens included.\nMuseums.\nThe Museums Quarter is a development on the High Street in the heart of the Old Town. It combines four museums around a leisure garden. The work cost \u00a35.1\u00a0million and was carried out from 1998 to 2003, being formally opened by the Duke of Gloucester.\nThe Museums are Wilberforce House, the birthplace of William Wilberforce (1759\u20131833), the British politician, abolitionist and social reformer; the Arctic Corsair, a deep-sea trawler that was converted to a museum ship in 1999, on the adjacent River Hull; the Hull and East Riding Museum, showing the archaeology and history of the region; and the Streetlife Museum of Transport, which includes a sizeable collection of vintage cars, preserved public transport vehicles and horse-drawn carriages.\nOther museums include the Hull Maritime Museum in Victoria Square, the Spurn Lightship, and The Deep, a public aquarium.\nArt and galleries.\nThe civic art gallery is the Ferens Art Gallery on Queen Victoria Square, a Grade II listed building. It is named after Thomas Ferens who provided the funds for it. Other galleries include the three-storey Humber Street Gallery, in the former Fruit Market building which was opened in 2017 as part of Hull City of Culture. There are other smaller exhibition spaces.\nCreations.\nMarine painter John Ward (1798\u20131849) was born, worked and died in Hull and a leading ship artist of his day.\nArtist and Royal Academician David Remfry (born 1942) grew up in Hull and studied at the Hull College of Art (now part of Lincoln University) from 1959 to 1964. His tutor, Gerald T Harding, trained at the Royal College of Art, London and was awarded the Abbey Minor Travelling Scholarship in 1957 by the British School in Rome. Remfry has had two solo exhibitions at the Ferens Art Gallery in 1975 and 2005.\nHull has a number of historical statues such as the Wilberforce Memorial in Queen's Gardens and the gilded King William III statue on Market Place (known locally as \"King Billy\"). There is a statue of Hull-born Amy Johnson in Prospect Street and Hull's Paragon Interchange has a statue of Philip Larkin, the latter unveiled on 2 December 2010.\nIn 2010 a public art event in Hull city centre entitled \"Larkin with Toads\" displayed 40 individually decorated giant toad models as the centrepiece of the Larkin 25 festival. Most of these sculptures have since been sold off for charity and transported to their new owners.\nIn recent years a number of modern art sculptures and heritage trails have been installed around Hull. These include a figure looking out to the Humber called 'Voyage' which has a twin in Iceland. In July 2011, this artwork was reported stolen. There is a shark sculpture outside The Deep and a fountain and installation called 'Tower of Light' outside Britannia House on the corner of Spring Bank.\nThe Seven Seas Fish Trail marks Hull's fishing heritage, leading its followers through old and new sections of the city, following a wide variety of sealife engraved in the pavement. Running along Spring Bank there is also an elephant trail, with stone pavers carved by a local artist to the designs of members of the community. This trail commemorates the Victorian Zoological Gardens and the route taken daily by the elephant as it walked from its house down Spring Bank to the zoo and back, stopping for gingerbread at a shop on the way. The animals are further represented on the Albany Street 'Home Zone' a project involving local residents and resulting in sculptures of a hippo ('Water Horse') at the bottom of Albany Street; an elephant balancing on its trunk on an island in the middle; and two bears climbing poles and reaching out to each other to form an open archway across the entrance to Albany Street from Spring Bank. Other sculptural details of animals along the street represent the participation of street residents, either through workshops with artists and makers, or through independent work of their own.\nIn 2019 a series of blue plaques appeared around Hull as part of the \"Alternative Heritage\" project.\nThe art project was designed to celebrate the little known and quirky facts that make Hull the city it is. A variety of tongue in cheek and humorous blue plaques appeared over night celebrating everything from Chip Spice to The Beautiful South. New plaques continue to appear on a regular basis and their content has occasionally divided opinion in the city.\nThe \"Dead Bod\", a graffito originally painted on the Alexandria Dock, became a local landmark. It is now located in the Humber Street Gallery.\nThree Ships mural.\nThe mural is on a curved screen attached to the end-wall of the old city centre Co-operative store building sited at the intersection where Jameson Street meets King Edward Street, now a mainly pedestrianised area created for the City of Culture 2017.\nBuilt by 1963 and later home to BHS, the building closed in 2016 with the collapse of BHS retail stores and was scheduled for demolition due to asbestos content. The building was listed as Grade II after lobbying by local pressure group Hull Heritage Action Group, potentially preventing demolition of the mural-wall. Specialist spraying to seal the building's internal structure has enabled moves to determine the actual level of asbestos in the mural-wall itself and provided a possible solution to incorporate the wall into a new development.\nTheatres.\nThe city has two main theatres. Hull New Theatre, which opened in 1939, with a \u00a316\u00a0million refurbishment in 2016\u201317, is the largest venue which features musicals, opera, ballet, drama, children's shows and pantomime.\nThe Hull Truck Theatre is a smaller independent theatre, established in 1971,\nthat regularly features plays, notably those written by John Godber.\nSince April 2009, the Hull Truck Theatre has had a new \u00a314.5\u00a0million, 440\u00a0seat venue in the St Stephen's Hull development. This replaced the former home of the Hull Truck Theatre on Spring Street, a complex of buildings demolished in 2011. The playwright Alan Plater was brought up in Hull and was associated with Hull Truck Theatre.\nHull has produced several veteran stage and TV actors. Sir Tom Courtenay, Ian Carmichael and Maureen Lipman were born and brought up in Hull. Younger actors Reece Shearsmith and Debra Stephenson were also born in Hull.\nIn 1914, there were 29 cinemas in Hull but most of these have now closed. The first purpose-built cinema was the Prince's Hall in George Street which was opened in 1910 by Hull's theatre magnate, William Morton. It was subsequently renamed the Curzon.\nOn 25 July 2018, a new 3,000 seat arena was opened to the public in the centre of the city. It was officially opened on 20 August 2018, with a Van Morrison concert.\nFestivals.\n\"The Humber Mouth\" literature festival is an annual event and the 2012 season featured artists such as John Cooper Clarke, Kevin MacNeil and Miriam Margolyes. \nThe annual Hull Jazz Festival takes place around the Marina area for a week at the beginning of August.\nFrom 2008 Hull has also held its Freedom Festival, an annual free arts and live music event that celebrates freedom in all its forms. Performers have included Pixie Lott, JLS and Martha Reeves and The Vandellas, Public Service Broadcasting and The 1975 as well as featuring a torchlight procession, local bands like The Talks and Happy Endings from Fruit Trade Music label and a Ziggy Stardust photo exhibition including photos of the late-Hull-born Mick Ronson who worked with David Bowie. Former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan was awarded the Wilberforce Medallion at the 2017 festival.\nEarly October sees the arrival of Hull Fair which is one of Europe's largest travelling funfairs and takes place on land adjacent to the MKM Stadium.\nThe city's Pride in Hull festival is one of the largest free-to-attend LGBT+ Pride events in the UK, attracting in excess of 50,000 attendees. Headline performers have included Adore Delano, Louise Redknapp, Marc Almond, Nadine Coyle of Girls Aloud, and B*Witched.\nThe Hull Global Food Festival held its third annual event in the city's Queen Victoria Square for three days \u2013 4\u20136 September 2009. According to officials, the event in 2007 attracted 125,000 visitors and brought some \u00a35\u00a0million in revenue to the area.\nIn 2007 the Hull Metalfest began in the Welly Club, it featured major label bands from the United States, Canada and Italy, as well as the UK.\nThe first Hull Comedy Festival, which included performers such as Stewart Lee and Russell Howard was held in 2007.\nIn 2010, Hull marked the 25th anniversary of the death of the poet Philip Larkin with the Larkin 25 Festival. This included the popular \"Larkin with Toads\" public art event. The 40 Larkin toads were displayed around Hull and later sold off in a charity auction. A charity appeal raised funds to cast a life-size bronze statue of Philip Larkin, to a design by Martin Jennings, at Hull Paragon Interchange. The statue was unveiled at a ceremony attended by the Lord Mayor of Hull on 2 December 2010, the 25th anniversary of Larkin's death. It bears an inscription drawn from the first line of Larkin's poem, 'The Whitsun Weddings'.\nIn 2013, from 29 April to 5 May, Hull Fashion Week took place with various events happening in venues in and around Hull's City centre. It finished with a finale on 5 May at Hull Paragon Interchange, when recently reformed pop group Atomic Kitten appeared in a celebrity fashion show.\nThe first Yellow Day Hull event, organised by Hull-born Preston Likely, was staged on 24 June 2017. Likely invited everybody in the city to participate in the event, encouraging all participants to either wear, carry or make something yellow in order to celebrate the city's history and culture.\nOn 3 August 2013, the second Humber Street Sesh Festival took place celebrating local music talent and arts, with several stages showcasing bands and artists from the Fruit Trade Music Label, Humber Street Sesh and Purple Worm Records. The festival has taken place yearly, with the exception of 2021 where the festival took place in September being renamed 'Inner City Sesh' and taking place in Queens Gardens.\nIn 2018, the 16th Pride in Hull festival saw attendees take part in the annual celebration of LGBT+ culture.\nCharity.\nKingston is home to the charity group The Society of M.I.C.E., modelled after the Grand Order of Water Rats. MICE stands for Men In Charitable Endeavour.\nCultural references.\nPoetry.\nHull has attracted the attention of poets to the extent that Australian author Peter Porter described it as \"the most poetic city in England\".\nPhilip Larkin set many of his poems in Hull, including \"The Whitsun Weddings\", \"Toads\", and \"Here\". Scottish-born Douglas Dunn's \"Terry Street\", a portrait of working-class Hull life, is one of the outstanding poetry collections of the 1970s.\nDunn forged close associations with such Hull poets as Peter Didsbury and Sean O'Brien. The works of some of these writers appear in the 1982 Bloodaxe anthology \"A Rumoured City\", which Dunn edited. Andrew Motion, past Poet Laureate, lectured at the University of Hull between 1976 and 1981, and Roger McGough studied there. Both poets spoke at the Humber Mouth Festival in 2010. Contemporary poets associated with Hull are Maggie Hannan, David Wheatley, and Caitriona O'Reilly.\n17th-century metaphysical poet and parliamentarian Andrew Marvell was born nearby, and grew up and received his education in the city. There is a statue in his honour in the Market Square (Trinity Square), set against the backdrop of his alma mater Hull Grammar School.\nMusic.\nClassical.\nIn the field of classical music, Hull is home to Sinfonia UK Collective (formerly Hull Sinfonietta, founded in 2004), a national and international touring group that serves Hull and its surrounding regions in its role as Ensemble in Residence at University of Hull, and also the Hull Philharmonic Orchestra, one of the oldest amateur orchestras in the country. and formerly The Hull Philharmonic Youth Orchestra, established in 1952,\nthe Hull Choral Union, the Hull Bach Choir \u2013 which specialises in the performance of 17th- and 18th-century choral music \u2013 the Hull Male Voice Choir, the Arterian Singers and two Gilbert &amp; Sullivan Societies: the Dagger Lane Operatic Society and the Hull Savoyards are also based in Hull. There are two brass bands, the East Yorkshire Motor Services Band, who are the current North of England Area Brass Band Champions, and East Riding of Yorkshire Band who are the 2014 North of England Regional Champions within their section.\nHull City Hall annually plays host to major British and European symphony Orchestras with its 'International Masters' orchestral concert season. During the 2009\u201310 season visiting orchestras included the St Petersburg Symphony Orchestra and the Czech National Symphony Orchestra. Internationally renowned touring pop, rock, and comedy acts also regularly play the City Hall.\nIn September 2013 a five-year partnership with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra was announced by the City Council.\nRock, pop and folk.\nOn the popular music scene, in the 1960s, Mick Ronson of the Hull band \"Rats\" worked closely with David Bowie and was heavily involved in production of the album \"The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars\". Ronson later went on to record with Lou Reed, Bob Dylan, Morrissey and the Wildhearts. There is a Mick Ronson Memorial Stage in Queen's Gardens in Hull. The 1960s were also notable for the revival of English folk music, of which the Hull-based quartet, the Watersons were prominent exponents. The Who performed and recorded a concert, at the Hull City Hall, on 15 February 1970.\nIn the 1980s, Hull groups such as the Red Guitars, the Housemartins and Everything but the Girl found mainstream success, followed by Kingmaker in the 1990s. Paul Heaton, former member of the Housemartins went on to front the Beautiful South. Another former member of the Housemartins, Norman Cook, now performs as Fatboy Slim. In 1982, Hull-born Paul Anthony Cook, Stuart Matthewman and Paul Spencer Denman formed the group Sade. In 1984, the singer Helen Adu signed to CBS Records and the group released the album \"Diamond Life\". The album had sales of four\u00a0million copies.\nThe pioneering industrial band Throbbing Gristle formed in Hull; Genesis P-Orridge (Neil Megson) attended Hull University between 1968 and 1969, where he met Cosey Fanni Tutti (Christine Newby), who was born in the city, and first became part of the Hull performance art group COUM Transmissions in 1970.\nThe record label Pork Recordings started in Hull in the mid-1990s, and has released music by Fila Brazillia.\nThe New Adelphi is a popular local venue for alternative live music in the city, and has achieved notability outside Hull, having hosted such bands as the Stone Roses, Radiohead, Green Day, and Oasis in its history, while the Springhead caters to a variety of bands and has been recognised nationally as a 'Live Music Pub of the Year'.\nIn the 2000s, Hull indie rock band the Paddingtons saw mainstream success with two UK Top 40 singles in 2005, later reforming in 2014 and performing at the Humber Street Sesh. \nIn the 1990s, the duo Scarlet from Hull had two Top 40 hits with \"Independent Love Song\" and \"I Wanna Be Free (To Be With Him)\" in 1995.\nThe Humber Street Sesh night has released four DIY compilations featuring the cream of Hull's live music scene, and there are currently a few labels emerging in the city, including Purple Worm Records based at Hull College, with bands such as The Blackbirds showing a promising future.\nReligion.\nUnlike many other English cities, Hull has no cathedral. Since 13 May 2017, the Holy Trinity Church (dating back to 1300) became a Minster, known as Hull Minster. It is a part of the Anglican Diocese of York and has a suffragan bishop.\nHull forms part of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Middlesbrough's southern vicariate. St Charles Borromeo is the oldest post-Reformation Roman Catholic church in the city.\nThere are several seamen's missions and churches in Hull. The Mission to Seafarers has a centre at West King George Dock and the St Nikolaj Danish Seamen's Church is located in Osborne Street.\nParks and green spaces.\nHull has a large number of parks and green spaces. These include East Park, Pearson Park, Pickering Park, Peter Pan Park (Costello Playing fields), and West Park. West Park is home to Hull's MKM Stadium. Pearson Park contains a lake and a 'Victorian Conservatory' housing birds and reptiles. East Park has a large boating lake and a collection of birds and animals, the latest additions being a pair of rehomed Shetland ponies. East Park and Pearson Park are registered Grade II listed sites by Historic England.\nThe city centre has the large Queen's Gardens parkland at its heart. This was originally built as formal ornamental gardens used to fill in the former Queen's Dock. It is now a more flexible grassed and landscaped area used for concerts and festivals, but retains a large ornamental flower circus and fountain at its western end. In February 2022, the first phase of a \u00a311.7\u00a0million redevelopment of the gardens began. The second phase started in June 2023 and is expected to take 14 months to complete.\nA report by The Countryside Charity in October 2023 found that no Local Green Space designations had been made to protect any of the cities open spaces, but Hull City Council indicated that protection was offered in the 2017 Hull Local Plan.\nThe streets of Hull's suburban areas also lined with large numbers of trees, particularly the Avenues area around Princes Avenue, and Boulevard to the west. Many of the old trees in the Avenues district have been felled in recent years with the stumps carved into a variety of 'living sculptures'. \nWest Hull has a district known as 'Botanic'. This recalls the short-lived Botanic Garden that once existed on the site now occupied by Hymers College. Elephants once lived nearby in the former Zoological Gardens on Spring Bank and were paraded in the local streets. The land has since been redeveloped. There was also a former Botanic Garden between Hessle Road and the Anlaby Road commemorated by Linnaeus Street.\nMedia.\nHull's local daily newspaper is the \"Hull Daily Mail\".\nThe city was once served by three competing daily newspapers, all operating from the Whitefriargate area \"Eastern Morning News\", \"Hull News\" and \"Hull and East Yorkshire Times\". On 17 April 1930 the last edition of \"Evening News\" was published after the paper was taken over by the \"Hull Daily Mail\".\nLocal listings and what's-on guides include \"Tenfoot City Magazine\" and \"Sandman Magazine\". The BBC has its \"Yorkshire and Lincolnshire\" regional headquarters at Queen's Gardens.\nRadio services broadcasting from the city are community radio stations, Hull's 107FM, 106.9 West Hull FM (formerly WHCR FM) and hospital radio station Kingstown Radio. The BBC's regional station BBC Radio Humberside is based in Hull and broadcasts to East Yorkshire &amp; Northern Lincolnshire. Commercial stations for the city Hits Radio East Yorkshire &amp; North Lincolnshire (formerly Viking FM) and Nation Radio East Yorkshire (formerly KCFM) broadcast from outside of Hull and are now part of a national network like Capital Yorkshire which has a base over away in Leeds.\nThe Hull University Union's student radio station Jam 1575, stopped broadcasting on MW.\nSport.\nSports in the city include professional football, rugby league, rugby union, golf, darts, athletics, and watersports.\nThe city's professional football club, Hull City A.F.C., play in the Championship, the second tier of the English football league system, after promotion, as champions, from League One, at the first time of asking, in the 2020\u201321 season. The team play at the MKM Stadium. There are also two non-league clubs based in the city, Hall Road Rangers, and Hull United, who play at Haworth Park. The latter play in the Humber Premier League.\nA popular sport in Hull is rugby league, with the city supplying two teams in to the Super League competition. The first is Hull FC, who were founded in 1865, and are one of the founding clubs of rugby league. They play at the MKM Stadium. Also in Super League are Hull Kingston Rovers, who play at Sewell Group Craven Park Stadium in East Hull, following promotion from the Championship in 2017.\nThere are also several lower league teams in the city, such as East Hull, West Hull, Hull Dockers and Hull Isberg, who all play in the National Conference League.\nRugby union is catered for by Hull Ionians who play at Brantingham Park. and Hull RUFC who are based in the city. From the 2023\u201304 season, both clubs will play in the National League 2 North.\nThe city has two athletics clubs based at the Costello Stadium in the west of the city \u2013 Kingston upon Hull Athletics Club and Hull Achilles Athletics Club.\nHull Cycle Speedway Club is at the Hessle raceway near the Humber bridge. The side race in the sports Northern league and won both the league titles in 2008. Other cycling clubs also operate including Hull Thursday, the area's road racing group.\nHull Arena, is an ice rink and concert venue, which is home to the Hull Seahawks ice hockey team who play in the NIHL National Division for the 2022\u201323 season. It is also home to the Kingston Kestrels ice sledge hockey team. In August 2010, \"Hull Daily Mail\" reported that Hull Stingrays was facing closure, following a financial crisis. The club was subsequently saved from closure following a takeover by Coventry Blaze. But on 24 June 2015, the club announced on its official website that it has been placed into liquidation.\nThe Hull Hornets American football existed from 2005 until 2011. The club, which acquired full member status in the British American Football League on 5 November 2006, played in the BAFL Division 2 Central league for 5 years. The Humber Warhawks formed in 2013 became Hull's American football team. Greyhound racing returned to the city on 25 October 2007 when The Boulevard stadium re-opened as a venue for the sport.\nIn mid-2006 Hull was home to the professional wrestling company One Pro Wrestling, which held the Devils Due event on 27 July in the Gemtec Arena. From 16 May 2008, Hull gained its own homegrown wrestling company based at the Eastmount Recreation Centre\u2014New Generation Wrestling\u2014that have featured El Ligero, Kris Travis, and Alex Shane.\nHull Lacrosse Club was formed in 2008 and was in 2012 playing in the Premier 3 division of the North of England Men's Lacrosse Association.\nThe city played host to the Clipper Round the World Yacht Race for the 2009\u201310 race around the globe, which started on 13 September 2009 and finished on 17 July 2010. The locally named yacht, Hull and Humber, captained by Danny Watson, achieved second place in the 2007\u20132008 race.\nThe city hosted The British Open Squash Championships at the KC Stadium in 2013 and 2014, before moving to the adjacent Airco Arena in 2015, as part of a three-year deal.\nSwimming is hosted at Beverley Road Baths, Woodford Leisure Centre, the Ennerdale Centre, and Albert Avenue Baths. Albert Avenue pools were established in 1933, with an outdoor pool which shut to swimmers in 1995, but has been used for canoe training. A major refurbishment to upgrade the complex and return outdoor swimming was announced in 2021, this included a fitness studio, gym and general upgrades. The \u00a310.5\u00a0million refurbished facilities opened in August 2023.\nTransport.\nHull Paragon Interchange, opened on 16 September 2007,\nis the city's transport hub, combining the existing main bus and rail termini in an integrated complex. In 2009, it was expected to have 24,000 people passing through the complex each day. \nRailway.\nHull Paragon Exchange is served by four train operating companies: \nIn the 1960s, Hull and Hornsea Railway and Hull and Holderness Railway branch lines closed, with all goods traffic transferred to the high-level line that circles the city.\nBuses.\nBus services in and around the city are provided by East Yorkshire, a Go-Ahead Group company which was previously known as \"East Yorkshire Motor Services\", and by Stagecoach in Hull.\nTo provide greater travel flexibility, bus users can obtain a \"Hull Card\" which can be used on services run by either operator.\nBridges.\nHull is close to the Humber Bridge, which provides links to south of the river Humber. It was built between 1972 and 1981, and at that time was the longest single-span suspension bridge in the world. It is, as of 2024, twelfth on the list. Before the bridge was built, those wishing to cross the Humber had to either take a Humber Ferry or travel inland as far as Goole.\nIn March 2021, a new footbridge was opened connecting the city to Princes Quay waterfront, marina and fruit market over Castle Street, a dual carriageway road also designated A63. Named \"Murdoch's Connection\" after Hull's first female doctor, GP Mary Murdoch, the name was nominated by pupils from Newland School for Girls in Newland, Hull. Works began in autumn 2018 but progress was delayed due to the coronavirus pandemic. There was no opening ceremony due to distancing restrictions; instead, videos were compiled. Members of the public have been requested not to attach love locks.\nPorts.\nP&amp;O Ferries provide daily overnight ferry services from King George Dock in Hull to Rotterdam.\nServices to Rotterdam are worked by ferries MS \"Pride of Rotterdam\" and . Previous Services to Zeebrugge were worked by ferries MS \"Pride of Bruges\" and MS \"Pride of York\" (previously named ). Both \"Pride of Rotterdam\" and \"Pride of Hull\" are too wide to pass through the lock at Hull. Associated British Ports built a new terminal at Hull to accommodate the passengers using these two ferries. The Rotterdam Terminal at the Port of Hull, was built at a cost of \u00a314.3\u00a0million. In January 2021, P&amp;O Ferries ceased their overnight ferry to Zeebrugge.\nAirports.\nThe nearest airport is Humberside Airport, away in Lincolnshire, which provides a few charter flights but also has high-frequency flights to Amsterdam with KLM and Aberdeen with Eastern Airways each day.\nThe nearest airport with intercontinental flights is Leeds Bradford Airport is away.\nCycling.\nAccording to the 2001 census data cycling in the city is well above the national average of 2%, with a 12% share of the travel to work traffic. A report by the University of East London in 2011 ranked Hull as the fourth-best cycling city in the United Kingdom.\nRoads.\nThe main road into and out of Hull is the M62 motorway/A63 road, one of the main east\u2013west routes in Northern England. It provides a link to the cities of Leeds, Manchester and Liverpool, as well as the rest of the country via the UK motorway network. The motorway itself ends some distance from the city; the rest of the route is along the A63 dual carriageway. This east\u2013west route forms a small part of the European road route E20. \nRoad transport in Hull suffers from delays caused both by the many bridges over the navigable River Hull, which bisects the city and can cause disruption at busy times. \nThe city has three railway level crossings in the city; it formerly had more with bridges built to go over the tracks on Hessle Road in 1962 and Anlaby Road in 1964. A nearby road was renamed from Garrison Road to Roger Millward Way in 2018, after rugby player Roger Millward who played for Hull Kingston Rovers. The developments are part of a wider improvement and redevelopment scheme.\nInfrastructure.\nTelephone system.\nHull is the only city in the UK with its own independent telephone network company, KCOM, formerly KC and Kingston Communications, a subsidiary of KCOM Group. Its distinctive cream telephone boxes can be seen across the city. KCOM produces its own 'White Pages' telephone directory for Hull and the wider KC area. Colour Pages is KCOM's business directory, the counterpart to Yellow Pages. The company was formed in 1902 as a municipal department by the City Council and is an early example of municipal enterprise. It remains the only locally operated telephone company in the UK, although it is now privatised. KCOM's Internet brands are Karoo Broadband (ISP serving Hull) and Eclipse (national ISP).\nInitially Hull City Council retained a 44.9 per cent interest in the company and used the proceeds from the sale of shares to fund the city's sports venue, the MKM Stadium, among other things. On 24 May 2007 it sold its remaining stake in the company for over \u00a3107\u00a0million.\nKCOM (Kingston Communications) was one of the first telecoms operators in Europe to offer ADSL to business users, and the first in the world to run an interactive television service using ADSL, known as Kingston Interactive TV (KiT), which has since been discontinued due to financial problems. In the last decade, the KCOM Group has expanded beyond Hull and diversified its service portfolio to become a nationwide provider of telephone, television, and Internet access services, having close to 180,000 customers projected for 2007. After its ambitious programme of expansion, KCOM has struggled in recent years and now has partnerships with other telecommunications firms such as BT who are contracted to manage its national infrastructure. Telephone House, on Carr Lane, the firm's 1960s-built headquarters, in stark modernist style, is a local landmark.\nIn October 2019, Hull became the first UK city to have full fibre broadband available for all residents.\nHydraulic power.\nThe first public hydraulic power network, supplying many companies, was constructed in Hull. The Hull Hydraulic Power Company began operation in 1877, with Edward B. Ellington as its engineer and the main pumping station (now a Grade II listed building) in Catherine Street. Ellington was involved in most British networks, including those in London, Liverpool, Birmingham, Manchester and Glasgow, but the advent of electrical power combined with wartime damage meant the Hull company was wound up in 1947.\nPublic services.\nPolicing in Kingston upon Hull is provided by Humberside Police. In October 2006 the force was named (jointly with Northamptonshire Police) as the worst-performing police force in the United Kingdom, based on data released from the Home Office. However, after a year of \"major improvements\", the Home Office list released in October 2007 shows the force rising several places (although still among the bottom six of 43 forces rated). Humberside Police received ratings of \"good\" or \"fair\" in most categories.\nHM Prison Hull is located in the city and is operated by HM Prison Service. It caters for up to 1,000 Category B/C adult male prisoners.\nStatutory emergency fire and rescue service is provided by the Humberside Fire and Rescue Service, which has its headquarters near Hessle and five fire stations in Hull. This service was formed in 1974 following local government reorganisation from the amalgamation of the East Riding of Yorkshire County Fire Service, Grimsby Borough Fire and Rescue Service, Kingston Upon Hull City Fire Brigade and part of the Lincoln (Lindsey) Fire Brigade and a small part of the West Riding of Yorkshire County Fire and Rescue Service.\nHull and East Yorkshire Hospitals NHS Trust provides healthcare from three sites, Hull Royal Infirmary, Castle Hill Hospital and, until 2008, Princess Royal Hospital and there are several private hospitals including ones run by Bupa and Nuffield Hospitals. The Yorkshire Ambulance Service provides emergency patient transport. NHS primary health care services are commissioned by the Hull Clinical Commissioning Group and are provided at several smaller clinics and general practitioner surgeries across the city. NHS Mental health services in Hull are provided by Humber NHS Foundation Trust. It runs a memory clinic in Coltman Street, west Hull designed to help older people with early onset dementia.\nWaste management is co-ordinated by the local authority. The Waste Recycling Group is a company which works in partnership with the Hull City and East Riding of Yorkshire councils to deal with the waste produced by residents. The company plans to build an energy from waste plant at Salt End to deal with 240,000 tonnes of rubbish and put waste to a productive use by providing power for the equivalent of 20,000 houses. Hull's distribution network operator for electricity is CE Electric UK (YEDL); there are no power stations in the city. Yorkshire Water manages Hull's drinking and waste water. Drinking water is provided by boreholes and aquifers in the East Riding of Yorkshire, and it is abstracted from the River Hull at Tophill Low, near Hutton Cranswick. Should either supply experience difficulty meeting demand, water abstracted from the River Derwent at both Elvington and Loftsome Bridge can be moved to Hull via the Yorkshire water grid. There are many reservoirs in the area for storage of potable and non-potable water. Waste water and sewage has to be transported in a wholly pumped system because of the flat nature of the terrain to a sewage treatment works at Salt End. The treatment works is partly powered by both a wind turbine and a biogas CHP engine.\nEducation.\nHigher education.\nUniversity of Hull.\nKingston upon Hull is home to the University of Hull, which was founded in 1927 and received its Royal Charter in 1954. It now has a total student population of around 20,000 across its main campuses in Hull and Scarborough. The main University campus is in North Hull, on Cottingham Road. Notable alumni include former Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott, social scientist Lord Anthony Giddens, \"Woman's Hour\" presenter and writer Jenni Murray, Professor of Vaccinology at the University of Oxford and co-developer of the Oxford-AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine Dame Sarah Gilbert, Nobel Prize laureate and Professor of Economics at Stanford Graduate School of Business Guido Imbens, and the Oscar winning film director Anthony Minghella. The University of Hull is a partner in the new University Centre of the Grimsby Institute of Further and Higher Education (GIFE) being built in Grimsby, North Lincolnshire.\nUniversity of Lincoln.\nThe University of Lincoln grew out of the University of Humberside, a former polytechnic based in Hull. In the 1990s the focus of the institution moved to nearby Lincoln and the administrative headquarters and management moved in 2001. The University of Lincoln has retained a campus in George Street in Hull city centre whilst Hull University purchased the adjacent University of Lincoln campus site on Cottingham Road.\nSpecialist.\nHull York Medical School is a joint venture between the University of Hull and the University of York. It first admitted students in 2003 as a part of the British government's attempts to train more doctors.\nThe Northern Academy of Performing Arts and Northern Theatre School both provide education in musical theatre, performance and dance.\nThe Hull School of Art, founded in 1861, is regarded nationally and internationally for its excellence as a specialist creative centre for higher education.\nColleges.\nThere is a further education college, Hull College, and two large sixth form colleges, Wyke College and Wilberforce College. East Riding College operates a small adult education campus in the city, and Endeavour Learning and Skills Centre is an adult education provision operated by Hull Training &amp; Adult Education.\nSchools.\nHull has over 100 local schools; of these, Hull City Council supports 14 secondary and 71 primary schools. The highest achieving state school in Hull is Malet Lambert School, Schools which are independent of the City Council include Hymers College and Tranby School. The latter, which is run by the United Church Schools Trust, was formed by the merging of Hull Grammar School and Hull High School. Hull Trinity House Academy has been offering pre-sea training to prospective mariners since 1787, which was a boys only school until September 2022, when it began to admit girls. This left Newland School for Girls the only single-sex school in the city.\nThe city has had a poor examination success rate for many years and is often at the bottom of government GCSE league tables.\nIn 2007 the city moved off the bottom of these tables for pupils who achieve five A* to C grades, including English and Maths, at General Certificate of Secondary Education by just one place when it came 149th out of 150 local education authorities. However, the improvement rate of 4.1 per cent, from 25.9 per cent in 2006 to 30 per cent in summer 2007, was among the best in the country.\nThey returned to the bottom of the table in 2008 when 29.3 per cent achieved five A* to C grades which is well below the national average of 47.2 per cent. There are insufficient places in referral units for school children with special needs or challenging behaviour due to squeezed budgets and cuts to children's services.\nDialect and accent.\nThe local accent is quite distinctive and noticeably different from the rest of the East Riding; however it is still categorised among Yorkshire accents. The most notable feature of the accent is the strong I-mutation in words like \"goat\", which is in standard English and across most of Yorkshire, becomes (\"gert\") in and around parts of Hull (cf. similar \"refined\" pronunciations in Leeds/York), although there is variation across areas and generations.\nIn common with much of England (outside of the far north), another feature is dropping the H from the start of words, for example Hull is more often pronounced 'Ull in the city. The vowel in \"Hull\" is pronounced the same way as in northern English, however, and not as the very short that exists in Lincolnshire. Though the rhythm of the accent is more like that of northern Lincolnshire than that of the rural East Riding, which is perhaps due to migration from Lincolnshire to the city during its industrial growth, one feature that it does share with the surrounding rural area is that an sound in the middle of a word often becomes an : for example, \"five\" may sound like \"fahve\", \"time\" like \"tahme\".\nThe SQUARE\u2013NURSE merger is a feature of Hull's dialect. The vowel sound in words such as \"burnt, nurse, first\" is pronounced with an sound, as is also heard in Middlesbrough and in areas of Liverpool yet this sound is very uncommon in most of Yorkshire. The word pairs spur/spare and fur/fair illustrate this.\nThe generational and/or geographic variation can be heard in word pairs like pork/poke or cork/coke, or hall/hole, which some people pronounce almost identically, sounding to non-locals like they are using the second of the two variations \u2013 while others make more of a vocal distinction; anyone called \"Paul\" (for example) soon becomes aware of this (pall/pole).\n\"Most of the notable people associated with the city can be found in the and categories.\"\nNotable people.\nPeople from Hull are called \"Hullensians\" and the city has been the birthplace and home to many notable people. Amongst those of historic significance with a connection to Hull are former city MP William Wilberforce who was instrumental in the abolition of slavery\nand Amy Johnson, aviator who was the first woman to fly solo from England to Australia.\nHullensian entertainers include Dorothy Mackaill, 1950s singer David Whitfield, sports commentator Tony Green, actors Sir Tom Courtenay, Ian Carmichael, John Alderton, actress Maureen Lipman and Reece Shearsmith.\nPlaywrights Richard Bean, John Godber and Alan Plater have close connections with Hull.\nNotable Hullensian musicians include Paul Heaton of the bands The Housemartins and The Beautiful South,\nguitarist Mick Ronson and bassist Trevor Bolder, who worked with David Bowie and best known for his long association with London's Uriah Heep, and 2000s indie rock band The Paddingtons. Verulamian rock band Enter Shikari has a song called \"the Paddington Frisk\", named after the 2000s Hullensian rock band. Other Hullensian bands include Red Guitars, the Rats, Nyam Nyam, the Favours, Fonda 500, the Aces and the Planet Wilson.\nThe astrophysicist Edward Arthur Milne and logician John Venn both hailed from Hull. The poet Philip Larkin lived in Hull for 30 years and wrote much of his mature work in the city. An earlier poet, Andrew Marvell represented the city in Parliament during the 17th century. Artist David Remfry RA studied at Hull College of Art before moving to London and New York.\nChemist George Gray, who had a 45-year career at the university, developed the first stable liquid crystals that became an immediate success for the screens of all sorts of electronic gadgets.\nRobert Russell Race (1907\u20131984), medical doctor and human geneticist, was born in Hull. \nNotable sportspeople include Ebenezer Cobb Morley (16 August 1831 \u2013 20 November 1924), an English sportsman who is regarded as the father of the Football Association and modern football. Clive Sullivan, rugby league player, who played for both of Hull's professional rugby league teams, was the first black Briton to captain any national representative team. The main A63 road into the city from the Humber Bridge is named after him (Clive Sullivan Way). Nick Barmby played for Tottenham Hotspur, Middlesbrough, Everton, Liverpool, and Leeds United before returning to play for his hometown club Hull City. He also won 23 England caps and played in the famous 5\u20131 victory over Germany in 2001. Another footballer is Dean Windass, who had two spells with Hull City.\nHull-born Karl Bushby is a British author and ex-paratrooper, walking from Punta Arenas to Hull.\nOn accepting a peerage, Welsh-born Baron Prescott of Kingston-upon-Hull (former MP and Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott) took his title from his adopted home city of Hull.\nInternational relations.\nHull has formal twinning arrangements with:\nThe following cities are named directly after Hull:\nFreedom of the City.\nThe following people and military units have received the Freedom of the City of Kingston upon Hull.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;a There was no census in 1941: figures are from National Register. United Kingdom and Isle of Man. Statistics of Population on 29 September 1939 by Sex, Age and Marital Condition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;b The \"Hull Daily Mail\" article indicates the 1991 population was 254,117.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;c There is a discrepancy of 6 between Office for National Statistics figures (quoted before) and those on the \"Vision of Britain\" website (quoted here).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;d The \"Hull Daily Mail\" article indicates the 2001 population was 246,355.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56475", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56475", "title": "Post-Polio syndrome", "text": ""}
{"id": "56476", "revid": "173996", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56476", "title": "Rett syndrome", "text": "Genetic brain disorder\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nRett syndrome (RTT) is a genetic disorder that typically becomes apparent after 6\u201318 months of age and almost exclusively in girls. Symptoms include impairments in language and coordination, and repetitive movements. Those affected often have slower growth, difficulty walking, and a smaller head size. Complications of Rett syndrome can include seizures, scoliosis, and sleeping problems. The severity of the condition is variable.\nRett syndrome is due to a genetic mutation in the \"MECP2\" gene, on the X chromosome. It almost always occurs as a new mutation, with less than one percent of cases being inherited. It occurs almost exclusively in girls; boys who have a similar mutation typically die shortly after birth. Diagnosis is based on the symptoms and can be confirmed with genetic testing.\nThere is no known cure for Rett syndrome. Treatment is directed at improving symptoms. Anticonvulsants may be used to help with seizures. Special education, physiotherapy, and leg braces may also be useful depending on the needs of the child. Many of those with the condition live into middle age.\nThe condition affects about 1 in 8,500 females. In 1999, Lebanese-American physician Huda Zoghbi discovered the mutation that causes the condition.\nSigns and symptoms.\nStage I.\nStage I, called early-onset, typically begins between 6 and 18 months of age. This stage is often overlooked because symptoms of the disorder may be somewhat vague, and parents and doctors may not notice the subtle slowing of development at first. The infant may begin to show less eye contact and have reduced interest in toys. There may be delays in gross motor skills such as sitting or crawling. Hand-wringing and decreasing head growth may occur, but not enough to draw attention. This stage usually lasts for a few months but can continue for more than a year.\nStage II.\nStage II, or the rapid destructive stage, usually begins between ages 1 and 4 and may last for weeks or months. Its onset may be rapid or gradual as the child loses purposeful hand skills and spoken language. Characteristic hand movements such as wringing, washing, clapping, or tapping, as well as repeatedly moving the hands to the mouth often begin during this stage which is called mouthing. The child may hold the hands clasped behind the back or held at the sides, with random touching, grasping, and releasing. The movements continue while the child is awake but disappear during sleep. Breathing irregularities such as episodes of apnea and hyperventilation may occur, although breathing usually improves during sleep. Some girls also display autistic-like symptoms such as loss of social interaction and communication. Walking may be unsteady and initiating motor movements can be difficult. Slowed head growth is usually noticed during this stage.\nStage III.\nStage III, or the plateau or pseudo-stationary stage, usually begins between ages 2 and 10 and can last for years. Apraxia, motor problems, and seizures are prominent during this stage. However, there may be improvement in behavior, with less irritability, crying, and autistic-like features. In stage III there may be more interest in the surroundings and alertness, attention span, and communication skills may improve. Many girls remain in this stage for most of their lives.\nStage IV.\nStage IV, or the late motor deterioration stage, can last for years or decades. Prominent features include reduced mobility, curvature of the spine, and muscle weakness, rigidity, spasticity, and increased muscle tone with abnormal posturing of an arm or leg. Girls who were previously able to walk may stop walking. Cognition, communication, or hand skills generally do not decline in stage IV. Repetitive hand movements may decrease and eye gaze usually improves.\nVariants.\nThe signs and symptoms of the typical form of the Rett syndrome are well described.\nIn addition to the classical form of Rett syndrome, several atypical forms have been described over the years; the main groups are:\nThe definition itself of the Rett syndrome has been refined over the years: as the atypical forms subsist near to the classical form (Hagberg &amp; Gillberg, 1993), the \"Rett Complex\" terminology has been introduced.\nCause.\nGenetically, Rett syndrome (RTT) is often caused by mutations in the gene MECP2 located on the X chromosome (which is involved in transcriptional silencing and epigenetic regulation of methylated DNA), and can arise sporadically or from germline mutations. In less than 10% of RTT cases, mutations in the genes CDKL5 or FOXG1 have also been found to resemble it. Rett syndrome is initially diagnosed by clinical observation, and is commonly associated with a genetic defect in the MECP2 gene.\nA 2021 study by scholars based at Scottish universities states that Rett syndrome is in fact a neurodevelopmental condition as opposed to a neurodegenerative condition. One piece of evidence for this is that mice with induced Rett syndrome show no neuronal death, and some studies have suggested that their phenotypes can be partially rescued by adding functional MECP2 gene back when they are adults. This information has also helped lead to further studies aiming to treat the disorder.\nSporadic mutations.\nIn at least 95% of Rett syndrome cases, the cause is a \"de novo\" mutation in the child, almost exclusively from a de novo mutation on the male copy of the X chromosome. It is not yet known what causes the sperm to mutate, and such mutations are rare.\nGermline mutations.\nIt can also be inherited from phenotypically normal mothers who have a germline mutation in the gene encoding \"methyl-CpG-binding protein-2\", MeCP2. In these cases, inheritance follows an X-linked dominant pattern and is seen almost exclusively in females, as most males die \"in utero\" or shortly after birth. MECP2 is found near the end of the long arm of the X chromosome at Xq28. An atypical form of RTT, characterized by infantile spasms or early onset epilepsy, can also be caused by a mutation to the gene encoding \"cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5\" (CDKL5). As stated by Aine Merwick, Margaret O'Brien, and Norman Delanty in an article on gene disorders titled \"Complex single gene disorders and epilepsy\", \"Rett syndrome affects one in every 12,500 female live births by age 12 years.\"\nMechanism.\nPontine noradrenergic deficits.\nBrain levels of norepinephrine are lower in people with Rett syndrome (reviewed in). The genetic loss of \"MECP2\" changes the properties of cells in the locus coeruleus, the exclusive source of noradrenergic innervation to the cerebral cortex and hippocampus. These changes include hyperexcitability and decreased functioning of its noradrenergic innervation. Moreover, a reduction of the tyrosine hydroxylase (Th) mRNA level, the rate-limiting enzyme in catecholamine synthesis, was detected in the whole pons of \"MECP2\"-null male as well as in adult heterozygous (\"MECP2\"+/-) female mice. Using immunoquantitative techniques, a decrease of Th protein staining level, number of locus coeruleus Th-expressing neurons and density of dendritic arborization surrounding the structure was shown in symptomatic \"MeCP2\"-deficient mice. However, locus coeruleus cells are not dying, but are more likely losing their fully mature phenotype, since no apoptotic neurons in the pons were detected.\nResearchers have concluded that \"Because these neurons are a pivotal source of norepinephrine throughout the brainstem and forebrain and are involved in the regulation of diverse functions disrupted in Rett syndrome, such as respiration and cognition, we hypothesize that the locus coeruleus is a critical site at which loss of \"MECP2\" results in CNS dysfunction.\" The restoration of normal locus coeruleus function may therefore be of potential therapeutic value in the treatment of Rett syndrome.\nMidbrain dopaminergic disturbances.\nThe majority of dopamine in the mammalian brain is synthesized by nuclei located in the mesencephalon. The substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc), the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and the retrorubral field (RRF) contain dopaminergic neurons expressing tyrosine hydroxylase (Th, i.e. the rate-limiting enzyme in catecholamine synthesis).\nThe nigro-striatal pathway originates from the SNpc; its principal rostral target is the caudate-putamen (CPu), which it irradiates through the median forebrain bundle (MFB). This connection is involved in the tight modulation of motor strategies computed by a cortico-basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop.\nIndeed, based on the canonical anatomofunctional model of basal ganglia, nigrostriatal dopamine is able to modulate the motor loop by acting on dopaminergic receptors located on striatal GABAergic medium spiny neurons.\nDysregulation of the nigrostriatal pathway is causative from Parkinson disease (PD) in humans. Toxic and/or genetic ablation of SNpc neurons produces experimental parkinsonism in mice and primates. The common features of PD and PD animal models are motor impairments (hypotonia, bradykinesia, hypokinesia).\nRTT pathology, in some aspects, overlaps the motor phenotype observed in PD patients. Several neuropathological studies on postmortem brain samples argued for an SNpc alteration, evidenced by neuromelanin hypopigmentation, reduction in the structure area, and even, controversially, signs of apoptosis. In parallel, a hypometabolism was underlined by a reduction of several catecholamines (dopamine, noradrenaline, adrenaline) and their principal metabolic by-products. Mouse models of RTT are available; the most studied are constitutively deleted \"Mecp2\" mice developed by Adrian Bird or Katelyn McCormick laboratories.\nIn accordance with the motor spectrum of the RTT phenotype, \"Mecp2\"-null mice show motor abnormalities from postnatal day 30 that worsen until death. These models offer a crucial substrate to elucidate the molecular and neuroanatomical correlates of \"MeCP2\"-deficiency. Recently (2008), it was shown that the conditional deletion of \"Mecp2\" in catecholaminergic neurons (by crossing of Th-Cre mice with loxP-flanked \"Mecp2\" ones) recapitulates a motor symptomatology; it was further documented that brain levels of Th in mice lacking \"MeCP2\" in catecholaminergic neurons only are reduced, participating to the motor phenotype.\nHowever, the most studied model for the evaluation of therapeutics is the \"Mecp2\"-null mouse (totally devoid of \"MeCP2\"). In this context, a reduction in the number and soma size of Th-expressing neurons is present from 5 weeks of age and is accompanied by a decrease of Th immunoreactivity in the caudate-putamen, the principal target of dopaminergic neurons arising from the SNpc. Moreover, a neurochemical analysis of dopaminergic contents in microdissected midbrain and striatal areas revealed a reduction of dopamine at five and nine weeks of age. It is noteworthy that later on (at nine weeks), the morphological parameters remain altered but not worsened, whereas the phenotype progresses and behavioral deficits are more severe. The amount of fully activated Th (Serine40-phosphorylated isoform) in neurons that remain in the SNpc is mildly affected at 5 weeks but severely impaired by 9 weeks. Finally, using a chronic and oral L-Dopa treatment on \"MeCP2\"-deficient mice, authors reported an amelioration of some of the motor deficits previously identified. Altogether, these results argue for an alteration of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway in \"MeCP2\"-deficient animals as a contributor of the neuromotor deficits.\nThere is an association of Rett syndrome with brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF).\nMolecular functions of MECP2 in Rett syndrome pathology.\nAs reviewed by Sharifi and Yasui, MECP2 protein, encoded by the \"MECP2\" gene binds to DNA with a high affinity for CpG methylated DNA sites and affects transcription. MECP2 can bind to 5mc (5-methylcytosine) and 5hmc (5-hydroxymethylcytosine) with similar affinity, and these dinucleotides account for the majority of MECP2 binding sites in the mammalian genome. MECP2 is involved in higher order chromatin organization and appears necessary for compacting chromosomes. MECP2 binding to DNA influences mRNA splicing events. MECP2 also appears to function in DNA repair processes. \"MECP2-/+\" deficient female mice have elevated rates of cell death when exposed to DNA damaging agents and are prone to early senescence.\nInteractive pathway map.\nAn has been published.\nDiagnosis.\nPrior to the discovery of a genetic cause, Rett syndrome had been designated as a pervasive developmental disorder by the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\" (DSM), together with the autism spectrum disorders. Some argued against this conclusive assignment because RTT resembles non-autistic disorders such as fragile X syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, or Down syndrome that also exhibit autistic features.\nAfter research proved the molecular mechanism, in 2013 the DSM-5 removed the syndrome altogether from classification as a mental disorder.\nRett syndrome diagnosis involves close observation of the child's growth and development to observe any abnormalities in regards to developmental milestones. A diagnosis is considered when decreased head growth is observed. Conditions with similar symptoms must first be ruled out.\nThere are certain criteria that must be met for the diagnosis. A blood test can rule in or rule out the presence of the MECP2 mutation, however, this mutation is present in other conditions as well.\nFor a classic diagnosis, all four criteria for ruling in a diagnosis must be met, as well as the two criteria for ruling out a diagnosis. Supportive criteria may also be present, but are not required for diagnosis. For an atypical or variant diagnosis, at least two of the four criteria for ruling in the diagnosis must be met, as well as five of the eleven supportive criteria. A period of symptom regression followed by recovery or symptom stabilization must also occur. Children are often misdiagnosed as having autism, cerebral palsy, or another form of developmental delay. A positive test for the MECP2 mutation is not enough to make a diagnosis.\nRuling in\nRuling out\nSupportive criteria\nDifferential diagnosis.\nSigns of Rett syndrome that are similar to autism:\nSigns of Rett syndrome that are also present in cerebral palsy:\nTreatment.\nThere is no cure for Rett syndrome. Treatment is directed towards improving function and addressing symptoms. A multi-disciplinary team approach is typically used to treat the person throughout life. This team may include a primary care physician, physical therapist, occupational therapist, speech-language pathologist, nutritionist, and support services in academic and occupational settings. Some children may require special equipment and aids such as braces to arrest scoliosis, splints to modify hand movements, and nutritional programs to help them maintain adequate weight.\nBecause of the increased risk of sudden cardiac death, when long QT syndrome is found on an annual screening EKG it is treated with an anti-arrhythmic such as a beta-blocker. There is some evidence that phenytoin may be more effective than a beta-blocker.\nWhile medicinal interventions to mitigate breathing challenges in children with Rett Syndrome (RTT) are still being developed, children with RTT may be prescribed rebreathing techniques (e.g., rebreathing masks), oxygen delivery, or non-invasive ventilation as preventative or rescue breathing treatments. High oxidative stress levels in individuals with RTT have exacerbated effects on their cardiorespiratory health and functionality, dramatically increasing the risk for sudden cardiac death\u2014an anomaly that has an associated 300x increased occurrence risk in children with Rett Syndrome. Due to this, it is vital to closely monitor atypical breathing behaviors in children with RTT, making sure to effectively use lifesaving respiratory improvement devices and strategies as prescribed. \u00a0\nPrescribed treatment methods may vary depending on the breathing characteristic phenotype expressed by the child. Physicians have identified three major RTT breathing phenotypes; forceful breathers, feeble breathers, and apneustic breathers. For forceful breathers, for example, rebreathing masks may be used while the child is awake.\nPrognosis.\nMale fetuses with the disorder rarely survive to term. Because the disease-causing gene is located on the X chromosome, a female born with an MECP2 mutation on her X chromosome has another X chromosome with an ostensibly normal copy of the same gene, while a male with the mutation on his X chromosome has no other X chromosome, only a Y chromosome; thus, he has no normal gene. Without a normal gene to provide normal proteins in addition to the abnormal proteins caused by a MECP2 mutation, the XY karyotype male fetus is unable to slow the development of the disease, hence the failure of many male fetuses with a MECP2 mutation to survive to term. Males with pathogenic \"MECP2\" mutations usually die within the first 2 years from severe encephalopathy, unless they have one or more extra X chromosomes, or have somatic mosaicism.\nFemales with a MECP2 mutation, however, have a non-mutant chromosome that provides them enough normal protein to survive longer. Research shows that males with Rett syndrome may result from Klinefelter's syndrome, in which the male has an XXY karyotype. Thus, a non-mutant \"MECP2\" gene is necessary for a Rett's-affected embryo to survive in most cases, and the embryo, male or female, must have another X chromosome.\nThere have, however, been several cases of 46,XY karyotype males with a MECP2 mutation (associated with classical Rett syndrome in females) carried to term, who were affected by neonatal encephalopathy and died before 2 years of age. The incidence of Rett syndrome in males is unknown, partly owing to the low survival of male fetuses with the Rett syndrome-associated MECP2 mutations, and partly to differences between signs caused by MECP2 mutations and those caused by Rett's.\nFemales can live up to 40 years or more. Laboratory studies on Rett syndrome may show abnormalities such as:\nA high proportion of deaths are abrupt, but most have no identifiable cause; in some instances death is the result most likely of:\nHistory.\nAndreas Rett, a pediatrician in Vienna Austria, first described the condition in 1966. As his writings were in German, they did not become widely known in most of the medical world. Bengt Hagberg, a Swedish pediatrician, published an English article in 1983 and named the condition after Rett. In 1999, Lebanese-American physician Huda Zoghbi discovered the mutation that causes the condition.\nResearch.\nGene therapy is under study in animal models to achieve regulated expression of a normal MECP2 gene. In March 2022, Taysha Gene Therapies announced that they had received Clinical Trial Application (CTA) approval from Health Canada for a clinical trial of their investigational gene therapy for women with Rett Syndrome.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56477", "revid": "124371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56477", "title": "Partitioning (IBM PC)", "text": ""}
{"id": "56478", "revid": "47023628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56478", "title": "North", "text": "One of the four cardinal directions\nNorth is one of the four compass points or cardinal directions. It is the opposite of south and is perpendicular to east and west. \"North\" is a noun, adjective, or adverb indicating direction or geography. \nEtymology.\nThe word \"north\" is related to the Old High German \"nord\", both descending from the Proto-Indo-European unit *\"ner-\", meaning \"left; below\" as north is to left when facing the rising sun. Similarly, the other cardinal directions are also related to the sun's position.\nThe Latin word \"borealis\" comes from the Greek \"boreas\" \"north wind, north\" which, according to Ovid, was personified as the wind-god Boreas, the father of Calais and Zetes. \"Septentrionalis\" is from \"septentriones\", \"the seven plow oxen\", a name of \"Ursa Major\". The Greek \u1f00\u03c1\u03ba\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2 (\"arktik\u00f3s\") is named for the same constellation, and is the source of the English word \"Arctic\".\nOther languages have other derivations. For example, in Lezgian, \"kefer\" can mean both \"disbelief\" and \"north\", since to the north of the Muslim Lezgian homeland there are areas formerly inhabited by non-Muslim Caucasian and Turkic peoples. In many languages of Mesoamerica, \"north\" also means \"up\". \nIn Romanian the old word for north is \"m\u012daz\u0103noapte\", from Latin \"mediam noctem\" meaning \"midnight\" and in \nHungarian is \"\u00e9szak\", which is derived from \"\u00e9jszaka\" (\"night\"), since between the Tropic of Cancer and the Arctic Circle the Sun never shines from the north.\nNorth is sometimes abbreviated as N.\nMapping and navigation.\nBy convention, the \"top or upward-facing\" side of a map is north.\nTo go north using a compass for navigation, set a bearing or azimuth of 0\u00b0 or 360\u00b0. Traveling directly north traces a meridian line upwards.\nNorth is specifically the direction that, in Western culture, is considered \"the\" fundamental direction:\nMagnetic north and declination.\nMagnetic north is of interest because it is the direction indicated as north on a properly functioning (but uncorrected) magnetic compass. The difference between it and true north is called the magnetic declination (or simply the declination where the context is clear). For many purposes and physical circumstances, the error in direction that results from ignoring the distinction is tolerable; in others a mental or instrument compensation, based on assumed knowledge of the applicable declination, can solve all the problems. But simple generalizations on the subject should be treated as unsound, and as likely to reflect popular misconceptions about terrestrial magnetism.\nMaps intended for usage in orienteering by compass will clearly indicate the local declination for easy correction to true north. Maps may also indicate grid north, which is a navigational term referring to the direction northwards along the grid lines of a map projection.\nRoles of north as prime direction.\nThe visible rotation of the night sky around the visible celestial pole provides a vivid metaphor of that direction corresponding to \"up\". Thus, the choice of the north as corresponding to \"up\" in the Northern Hemisphere, or of south in that role in the southern, is, before worldwide communication, anything but an arbitrary one - at least for night-time astronomers. (Note: the Southern Hemisphere lacks a prominent visible analog to the northern Pole Star.) On the contrary, Chinese and Islamic cultures considered south as the proper \"top\" end for maps. In the cultures of Polynesia, where navigation played an important role, winds - prevailing local or ancestral - can define cardinal points.\nIn Western culture:\nNorth is quite often associated with colder climates because most of the world's populated land at high latitudes is located in the Northern Hemisphere. The Arctic Circle passes through the Arctic Ocean, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Russia, the United States (Alaska), Canada (Yukon, Northwest Territories and Nunavut), Denmark (Greenland) and Iceland.\nRoles of east and west as inherently subsidiary directions.\nWhile the choice of north over south as prime direction reflects quite arbitrary historical factors, east and west are not nearly as natural alternatives as first glance might suggest. Their folk definitions are, respectively, \"where the sun rises\" and \"where it sets\". Except on the Equator, however, these definitions, taken together, would imply that\nReasonably accurate folk astronomy, such as is usually attributed to Stone Age peoples or later Celts, would arrive at east and west by noting the directions of rising and setting (preferably more than once each) and choosing as prime direction one of the two mutually opposite directions that lie halfway between those two. The true folk-astronomical definitions of east and west are \"the directions, a right angle from the prime direction, that are closest to the rising and setting, respectively, of the sun (or moon).\nCultural references.\nBeing the \"default\" direction on the compass, north is referred to frequently in Western popular culture. Some examples include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56479", "revid": "50132161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56479", "title": "Theaetetus (dialogue)", "text": "Socratic dialogue by Plato concerning the nature of knowledge\nThe Theaetetus (; \"Thea\u00edt\u0113tos\", lat. \"Theaetetus\") is a philosophical work written by Plato in the early-middle 4th century BCE that investigates the nature of knowledge, and is considered one of the founding works of epistemology. Like many of Plato's works, the \"Theaetetus\" is written in the form of a dialogue, in this case between Socrates and the young mathematician Theaetetus and his teacher Theodorus of Cyrene. \nIn the dialogue, Socrates and Theaetetus attempt to come up with a definition of \"episteme\", or knowledge, and discuss three definitions of knowledge: knowledge as nothing but \"perception\", knowledge as \"true judgment\", and, finally, knowledge as a \"true judgment with an account.\" Each of these definitions is shown to be unsatisfactory as the dialogue ends in aporia as Socrates leaves to face a hearing for his trial for impiety.\nAs one of the major works of Plato's theory of knowledge, the \"Theaetetus\" was influential on Platonism from at least the time of the Skeptical Academy of the 3rd century BCE through the Neoplatonism of the 6th century CE. It has also been the subject of increased attention in modern times as a result of its influence on Edmund Gettier, who challenged the existing definitions of knowledge as a \"justified true belief\" in a paper that investigated Plato's theory of knowledge as outlined in this work.\nDate and setting.\nThe \"Theaetetus\" is one of the few works of Plato that gives contextual clues on the timeline of its authorship: the dialogue is framed by a brief scene in which Euclid of Megara and his friend Terpsion witness a wounded Theataetus returning on his way home after from fighting in an Athenian battle at Corinth, from which he apparently died of his wounds. Euclid tells his friend that he has a written record of a dialogue between Socrates and Theaetetus, which occurred when Theaetetus was quite a young man. The dialogue is then read aloud to the two men by a slave owned by Euclid.\nThe exact timeline of which battle at Corinth has been a matter of some disagreement between scholars: it has generally been presumed that the battle occurred in 369 BC; when Theaetetus would have been in his late forties, but more recently, scholars including Debra Nails have argued that the battle referenced in the dialogue was a different battle in Corinth that occurred much earlier, in 391 BC, when Theatetus would have been in his late 20s. \nAs far as internal characteristics, the dialogue is considered to be similar to the \"earlier\" dialogues of Plato, such as the \"Euthyphro\" or the \"Crito\", in that Plato's Socrates discusses the nature of knowledge in the Theaetetus without giving any of his own views, and the dialogue ultimately ends in aporia without a satisfying answer. However, it also resembles many of the more philosophically complex \"later\" dialogues such as \"Parmenides\", \"Phaedrus\" and the dialogues \"Sophist\" and \"Statesman\" which serve as a narrative sequel.\nCharacters of the dialogue.\nSocrates, Theaetetus, and Theodorus reappear the following day in the \"Sophist\" an apparent continuation of the conversation contained within the book of Euclid, where they are also joined by an unnamed Eleatic stranger and a boy also named Socrates.\nOutline.\nThe narrative of the dialogue is set in a wrestling school. Socrates asks Theodorus if he knows of any geometry students who show particular promise. Theodorus assures him that he does, but that he does not want to over-praise the boy, lest anyone suspect he is in love with him. He says that the boy, Theaetetus, is a young Socrates look-alike, rather homely, with a snub-nose and protruding eyes. The two older men spot Theaetetus rubbing himself down with oil, and Theodorus reviews the facts about him, that he is intelligent, virile, and an orphan whose inheritance has been squandered by trustees. Socrates declares Theaetetus will have benefited from discovering what he does not know, and that he may be better able to approach the topic in the future. The conversation ends with Socrates' announcement that he has to go to court to face a criminal indictment.\nSocrates tells Theaetetus that he cannot make out what knowledge is, and is looking for a simple formula for it. Theaetetus says he really has no idea how to answer the question, and Socrates tells him that he is there to help. Socrates says he has modelled his career after his midwife mother. She delivered babies and for his part, Socrates can tell when a young man is in the throes of trying to give birth to a thought. Socrates considers his philosophical work as midwifery (Maieutics). This method, later also called Socratic method, consists in eliciting knowledge by a series of questions and answers.\nProtagoras' theory of knowledge.\nSocrates thinks that the idea that knowledge is perception must be identical in meaning, if not in actual words, to Protagoras' famous maxim \"Man is the measure of all things.\" \nSocrates wrestles to conflate the two ideas, and stirs in for good measure a claim about Homer being the captain of a team of Heraclitan flux theorists. Socrates dictates a complete textbook of logical fallacies to the bewildered Theaetetus. When Socrates tells the child that he (Socrates) will later be smaller \"without losing an inch\" because Theaetetus will have grown relative to him, the child complains of dizziness. In an often quoted line, Socrates says with delight that \"wonder (thaumazein) belongs to the philosopher\". He admonishes the boy to be patient and bear with his questions, so that his hidden beliefs may be yanked out into the bright light of day. When Socrates sums up what they have agreed on so far, it becomes problematic that knowledge is sense perception, for Socrates raises the question that \"When the same wind blows, one of us feels cold and the other not?\" As a result, he introduces the idea of Heraclitean flux to act as a defense to the wind objection. Heracliteanism shows that \"Nothing is in itself just one thing... Everything is in a process of coming to be\". Thus as there is no fixed meaning in things, but they draw their meaning in a referential difference to other things, the wind objection can be incorporated into Theaetetus's claim that \"Knowledge is sense perception\". As a result, they can then continue their inquiry as to the truth of this claim. It is important to note that the Heraclitean doctrine of Flux is not the same as the Protagorean doctrine. The Protagorean is radical truth relativism whereas the Heraclitean is radical reality relativism. It serves as a supporting theory to the Protagorean interpretation of Theaetetus's claim, in order that they might fully inquire as to the validity of this premise. Socrates admits that it is unfortunate that Protagoras is dead and cannot defend his idea against people such as himself. He says that the two of them are \"trampling on his orphan\" but the charge remains. Since Protagoras is dead, Socrates puts himself in the sophist's shoes and tries to do him the favor of defending his idea. Socrates concedes that if Protagoras were still alive, he would have more to say in his own defense, and that they are now essentially mistreating \"his orphan child.\" Putting words in the dead sophist's mouth, Socrates declares that Protagoras asserts with his maxim that all things are in motion and whatever seems to be the case, is the case for the perceiver, whether the individual or the state. At the end of his speech, Socrates admits to Theodorus that Protagoras would have done a far better job of defending his own ideas. Theodorus tells Socrates that he must be kidding, that he has come to the task with boyish vigor. Theodorus does not claim to be a disciple of Protagoras, but states that he was a friend. Socrates invites Theodorus to put up a more vigorous defense of Protagoras, as he does not want it suggested that he has used the child's timidity (of Theaetetus) to aid him in his argument against the doctrine of Protagoras. Socrates, not at all certain that he has not misrepresented Protagoras in making each man the measure of his own wisdom, presses Theodorus on the question of whether any follower of Protagoras (himself included) would contend that nobody thinks anyone else is wrong. Theodorus proves to be helpless against Socrates' arguments. He agrees that Protagoras concedes that those who disagree with him are correct. In making Protagoras a complete epistemological relativist, where every person's individual perceptions are his reality and his truth, both Socrates and Theodorus paint Protagoras as maintaining an absurd position.\nSocrates then proceeds to explain why philosophers seem clumsy and stupid to the common lot of humanity. Socrates explains that philosophers are open to mockery because they are not concerned about what interests most people: they could not care less about the scandals in their neighbor's house, the tracing of one's ancestry to Heracles, and so on. In contrast, the philosopher is concerned with things that \"are\", such as beauty and knowledge, which are \"truly higher up\". It is here that Socrates draws the classic portrait of the absent-minded intellectual who cannot make his bed or cook a meal (175e). Socrates adds a big bifurcation to this speech, saying that there are only two kinds of lives to be lived: a divinely happy one, lived by righteous philosophers or a godless, miserable one, such as most people live. Socrates admits this was a digression that threatens to drown his original project, which was to define knowledge. Theodorus, the old geometer, tells Socrates that he finds this sort of thing easier to follow than his earlier arguments. Socrates says that the men of flux, like Homer and Heraclitus, are really hard to talk to because you can't pin them down. When you ask them a question, he says, they pluck from their quiver a little aphorism to let fly at you, and as you try to figure that one out, they wing another one at you. They leave nothing settled either in discourse, or in their own minds. Socrates adds that the opposite school of thought, that teaches of the \"immovable whole\" is just as hard to talk to. Socrates says he met the father of the idea, Parmenides, when he was quite young, but does not want to get into another digression over it.\nDefinitions of knowledge.\nSocrates compares the human mind to an aviary. Socrates draws the distinction between \"having\" and \"possessing\"; the former typically implies the latter, though on the other hand, one can possess something, such as a bird, without actually having it (with them at any moment). Socrates says that as a man goes hunting about in his mind for knowledge of something, he might grab hold of the wrong thing. He says that mistaking \"eleven\" for \"twelve\" is like going in for a pigeon and coming up with a dove, Theaetetus joins in the game, and says that to complete the picture, you need to envision pieces of ignorance flying around in there with the birds. But if this is the case, how would you be able to distinguish between the birds representing real knowledge and the ones representing false ones? Are there other birds that represent this type of knowledge? Socrates comes to the conclusion that this is absurd and therefore he discards the aviary analogy. After discarding the bird-cage analogy, Socrates and Theaetetus return to the definition of knowledge as 'true judgement'. This, Theaetetus argues, is true because it is 'free from mistakes.' However Socrates introduces an example of a jury in the law-courts, being persuaded of an opinion by a lawyer. This persuasion is not the same as knowing the truth, as all is produced is 'conviction' in judging whatever the lawyers want. Although Theaetetus hopes it is possible the lawyer will be able to 'persuade' the jury of the truth, Socrates is unsatisfied as if they are justly persuaded, they will have true knowledge. However, in Socrates' belief, they cannot make a correct judgement as they would not have true knowledge. With this conflict, Socrates decides that true judgement and knowledge must be different things. After distinguishing between knowledge and true judgement, Theaetetus recalls being told that true judgement 'with an account (\"logos\") equates to knowledge. Things without an account are 'unknowable', while things with an account are 'knowable'.\nSocrates responds by telling of a dream, in which he overheard people talking of primary elements. These primary elements can only be named, they cannot be thought of as existing or not - he gives examples of words like 'itself, or that, each, alone or this.' While they can be added to other words, they by themselves are just a name. When these elements are added together, Socrates says that a 'complex' is formed. The primary elements are 'unaccountable and unknowable, but perceivable' while the complexes are 'knowable and expressible' and so can be objects of 'true judgement'. He concludes his dream by agreeing with Theaetetus that knowledge is 'true judgement with an account.' However, Socrates exposes some difficulties by examining letters. He takes the first two letters of his name, S and O to wonder if the syllable 'So' is knowable while the individual letters are not. Theaetetus finds the idea strange, so Socrates deduces that in order to know the syllable, the letters must be known first. Socrates proposes that the syllable can be a 'single form' produced from the letters. With this in mind, Socrates considers whether the 'sum' and the 'whole' are the same. Theaetetus initially says they are not, but changes his mind in confusion when Socrates leads him through maths and the different ways of expressing the number six. After agreeing this, Socrates returns to the subject of syllables and letters to conclude from Theaetetus' answers that syllables are different from letters and cannot contain letters. Theaetetus admits this idea is ridiculous. Socrates returns to talking about elements and complexes to propose that they are in the same class, as they have 'no parts and [are] a single form.' Socrates sums up this reversal by remarking that if anyone tries to tell them the complex is knowable and expressable while the element is the opposite, 'we had better not listen to him'. He cites the example of a musician distinguishing individual notes (conceded to be elements of music) to propose that elements are 'much more clearly known.' Socrates proposes an account to be 'making one's thought apparent vocally by means of words and verbal expressions.' However, he wonders if that is so, everyone will be able to make judgement 'with an account' as they can all (except for the deaf and dumb) vocalize and express opinions on matters. Socrates examines it further by suggesting that a man who can vocalize his judgement must be able to make reference to the primary elements of the subject. Giving an example of defining a wagon by its individual parts, agreement is reached that an account is 'going through a thing element by element.' Socrates questions Theaetetus by drawing on his learning of how to write, and the idea that if you misplace individual elements (letters) of a name, that does not mean you have knowledge of it. This finishes Socrates' second definition of an account as 'the way to the whole through the elements'. \nThe third definition Socrates offers is 'being able to tell some mark by which the object you are asked about differs from all other things', giving the example that the Sun is distinct for its brightness. However, this definition of an account fails as by getting to know the differentness of an object, you have to acquire knowledge about it. Thus the answer to the initial question 'What is knowledge' would be heavily circuitous - correct judgement accompanied by 'knowledge' of the differentness, which Socrates admits is 'silly'. \nSocrates concludes the dialogue by announcing that all the two have produced are mere \"wind-eggs\" and that he must be getting on now to the courthouse to face his trial being brought against him by Meletus.\nSignificant references in the dialogue.\nIn this dialogue, Socrates refers to Epicharmus of Kos as \"the prince of Comedy\" and Homer as \"the prince of Tragedy\", and both as \"great masters of either kind of poetry\". This is significant because it is one of the very few extant references in greater antiquity (fourth century BCE) to Epicharmus and his work. Another reference is in Plato's \"Gorgias\" dialogue.\nThe dialogue references the Trial of Socrates, which takes place in 399 BCE and which the main dialogue immediately precedes. At the end of the dialogue, as Socrates is leaving to face a hearing at the Porch of the King Archon, he agrees to meet Theaetetus and Theodorus in the same place the following day, a conversation that is recounted in the \"Sophist\" and \"Statesman\" dialogues. The dialogue \"Euthyphro\" also is set on the same day, and would have occurred immediately after the Theaetetus, as it occurs outside the Porch of the King Archon as Socrates awaits his hearing.\nThe dialogue includes the earliest reference to The Astrologer who Fell into a Well, one of Aesop's fables, in which the pre-Socratic philosopher Thales, who is known for his work in astronomy and his successful prediction of a solar eclipse, is so distracted by the stars that he forgets the ground below him, and proceeds to trip over a well.\nLegacy.\nLater Platonism.\nThe Theaetetus was a popular dialogue in classical antiquity. Writing in the 1st century BCE, the Middle Platonist Eudorus of Alexandria references the definition of a philosopher as a \"likeness to a god\" and uses it to justify his synthesis of Platonism with Pythagorean teachings on virtue. One of Eudorus's contemporaries, Philo of Alexandria also quoted from it frequently, implying that he considered it an important work. The Theaetetus was also the subject of many philosophical commentaries. The earliest surviving Platonic commentary, dating from between the 1st century BCE and the 2nd century CE, is an anonymous commentary on the Theaetetus, which goes into detail on the nature of knowledge outlined in the work and compares it to the definitions of knowledge outlined in the Meno. The Theaetetus is also referenced frequently by Alcinous in his \"Handbook of Platonism\".\nIn Late antiquity, the work was included in the Neoplatonic curriculum of twelve dialogues developed by Iamblichus, where it was preceded by the Cratylus, and considered a theoretical work on logic.\nGettier problems.\nIn the 20th century, the dialogue and its definition of knowledge as a \"Justified True Belief\" were investigated by Edmund Gettier, who investigated Platonic epistemology as related in the Theaetetus and the \"Meno\" is his work \"Is Justified True Belief Knowledge (1963)\" where he develops the Gettier problem, an example of the type of scenario which challenges the notion that a justified true belief is the same thing as knowledge.\nWittgenstein.\nIn the later years of his philosophy Wittgenstein took an interest in the Theaetetus. He sent a copy of it to his friend Maurice O'Connor Drury and told him that \"Plato in this dialogue is occupied with the same problems that I am writing about\". He later quoted the text in Philosophical Investigations. Although he found that the text was preoccupied with the same problems he was dealing with, he critiqued what he considered the false pretence of discussion, telling O.K. Bouwsma that \"The young man Theaetetus is introduced as a promising, bright youngster, but he shows none of this. He has no fight in him at all. Why doesn't he make a stand? Socrates arguing with these weaklings!\"\nTexts and translations.\nThe Theaetetus has been translated into English along with the rest of the Works of Plato\nNotes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStephanus numbers.\nAs is standard for the works of Plato, reference numbers are to the page numbers of the 1572 edition of Henri Estienne (Stephanus). Quotations are to the edition by Benjamin Jowett, which is freely available and in the public domain.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56480", "revid": "50579825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56480", "title": "Q fever", "text": "Coxiella burnetii infection\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nQ\u00a0fever or query fever is a disease caused by infection with \"Coxiella burnetii\", a bacterium that affects humans and other animals. This organism is uncommon, but may be found in cattle, sheep, goats, and other domestic mammals, including cats and dogs. The infection results from inhalation of a spore-like small-cell variant, and from contact with the milk, urine, feces, vaginal mucus, or semen of infected animals. Rarely, the disease is tick-borne. The incubation period can range from 9 to 40 days. Humans are vulnerable to Q\u00a0fever, and infection can result from even a few organisms. The bacterium is an obligate intracellular pathogenic parasite.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe incubation period is usually two to three weeks. The most common manifestation is flu-like symptoms: abrupt onset of fever usually around 40 \u00b0C/104 \u00b0F, malaise, profuse perspiration, severe headache, muscle pain, joint pain, loss of appetite, upper respiratory problems, dry cough, pleuritic pain, chills, confusion, and gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. About half of infected individuals exhibit no symptoms.\nDuring its course, the disease can progress to an atypical pneumonia, which can result in a life-threatening acute respiratory distress syndrome, usually occurring during the first four to five days of infection.\nLess often, Q\u00a0fever causes (granulomatous) hepatitis, which may be asymptomatic or become symptomatic with malaise, fever, liver enlargement, and pain in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. This hepatitis often results in the elevation of transaminase values, although jaundice is uncommon. Q fever can also rarely result in retinal vasculitis.\nThe chronic form of Q\u00a0fever is virtually identical to endocarditis (i.e. inflammation of the inner lining of the heart), which can occur months or decades following the infection. It is usually fatal if untreated. However, with appropriate treatment, the mortality falls to around 10%.\nA minority of Q fever survivors develop Q fever fatigue syndrome after acute infection, one of the more well-studied post-acute infection syndromes. Q fever fatigue syndrome is characterised by post-exertional malaise and debilitating fatigue. People with Q fever fatigue syndrome frequently meet the diagnostic criteria for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Symptoms often persist years after the initial infection.\nDiagnosis.\nDiagnosis is usually based on serology (looking for an antibody response) rather than looking for the organism itself. Serology allows the detection of chronic infection by the appearance of high levels of the antibody against the virulent form of the bacterium. Molecular detection of bacterial DNA is increasingly used. Contrary to most obligate intracellular parasites, \"Coxiella burnetii\" can be grown in an axenic culture, but its culture is technically difficult and not routinely available in most microbiology laboratories.\nQ\u00a0fever can cause infective endocarditis (infection of the heart valves), which may require transoesophageal echocardiography to diagnose. Q\u00a0fever hepatitis manifests as an elevation of alanine transaminase and aspartate transaminase, but a definitive diagnosis is only possible on liver biopsy, which shows the characteristic fibrin ring granulomas.\nPrevention.\nResearch done in the 1960s\u20131970s by French Canadian-American microbiologist and virologist Paul Fiset was instrumental in the development of the first successful Q fever vaccine.\nProtection is offered by Q-Vax, a whole-cell, inactivated vaccine developed by an Australian vaccine manufacturing company, CSL Limited. The intradermal vaccination is composed of killed \"C.\u00a0burnetii\" organisms. Skin and blood tests should be done before vaccination to identify pre-existing immunity because vaccinating people who already have immunity can result in a severe local reaction. After a single dose of vaccine, protective immunity lasts for many years. Revaccination is not generally required. Annual screening is typically recommended.\nIn 2001, Australia introduced a national Q\u00a0fever vaccination program for people working in \"at-risk\" occupations. Vaccinated or previously exposed people may have their status recorded on the Australian Q\u00a0Fever Register, which may be a condition of employment in the meat processing industry or in veterinary research. An earlier killed vaccine had been developed in the Soviet Union, but its side effects prevented its licensing abroad.\nPreliminary results suggest vaccination of animals may be a method of control. Published trials proved that use of a registered phase vaccine (Coxevac) on infected farms is a tool of major interest to manage or prevent early or late abortion, repeat breeding, anoestrus, silent oestrus, metritis, and decreases in milk yield when \"C.\u00a0burnetii\" is the major cause of these problems.\nQ fever is primarily transmitted to humans through inhalation of aerosols contaminated with Coxiella burnetii from infected animals, notably cattle, sheep, and goats. Occupational groups such as farmers, veterinarians, and abattoir workers are at heightened risk. Preventive strategies include:\nTreatment.\nTreatment of acute Q\u00a0fever with antibiotics is very effective. Commonly used antibiotics include doxycycline, tetracycline, chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, and ofloxacin; the antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine is also used. Chronic Q\u00a0fever is more difficult to treat and can require up to four years of treatment with doxycycline and quinolones or doxycycline with hydroxychloroquine. If a person has chronic Q fever, doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine will be prescribed for at least 18 months. Q\u00a0fever in pregnancy is especially difficult to treat because doxycycline and ciprofloxacin are contraindicated in pregnancy. The preferred treatment for pregnancy and children under the age of eight is co-trimoxazole.\nEpidemiology.\nQ fever is a globally distributed zoonotic disease caused by a highly sustainable and virulent bacterium. The pathogenic agent is found worldwide, except New Zealand and Antarctica. Understanding the transmission and risk factors of Q fever is crucial for public health due to its potential to cause widespread infection.\nRecent data indicate that Q fever remains a significant public health concern worldwide. In 2019, the United States reported 178 acute Q fever cases and 34 chronic cases. Notably, in 2024, the state of Victoria, Australia, experienced a marked increase in Q fever cases, with 77 reported instances\u2014a significant rise compared to the previous five years. This surge prompted health authorities to issue alerts emphasizing the importance of preventive measures and awareness.\nTransmission and occupational risks.\nTransmission primarily occurs through the inhalation of contaminated dust, contact with contaminated milk, meat, or wool, and particularly birthing products. Ticks can transfer the pathogenic agent to other animals. While human-to-human transmission is rare, often associated with the transmission of birth products, sexual contact, and blood transfusion, certain occupations pose higher risks for Q fever:\nIt is important to note that anyone who has contact with animals infected with Q fever bacteria, especially people who work on farms or with animals, is at an increased risk of contracting the disease. Understanding these occupational risks is crucial for public health.\nPrevalence and risk factors.\nStudies indicate a higher prevalence of Q fever in men than in women, potentially linked to occupational exposure rates. Other contributing risk factors include geography, age, and occupational exposure. Diagnosis relies on blood compatibility testing, with treatment varying for acute and chronic cases. Acute disease often responds to doxycycline, while chronic cases may require a combination of doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine. It is worth noting that Q fever was officially reported in the United States as a notifiable disease in 1999 due to its potential biowarfare agent status.\nQ fever exhibits global epidemiological patterns, with higher incidence rates reported in certain countries. In Africa, wild animals in rainforests primarily transmit the disease, making it endemic. Unique patterns are observed in Latin America, but reporting is sporadic and inconsistent between and among countries, making it difficult to track and address.\nRecent outbreaks in European countries, including the Netherlands and France, have been linked to urbanized goat farming, raising concerns about the safety of intensive livestock farming practices and the potential risks of zoonotic diseases. Similarly, in the United States, Q fever is more common in livestock farming regions, especially in the West and the Great Plains. California, Texas, and Iowa account for almost 40% of reported cases, with a higher incidence during the spring and early summer when livestock are breeding, regardless of whether the infection is acute or chronic.\nThese outbreaks have affected a significant number of people, with immunocompromised individuals being more severely impacted. The global nature of Q fever and its association with livestock farming highlight the importance of implementing measures to prevent and control the spread of the disease, particularly in high-risk regions.\nAge and occupational exposure.\nOlder men in the West and Great Plains regions, involved in close contact with livestock management, are at a higher risk of contracting chronic Q fever. This risk may be further increased for those with a history of cardiac problems. The disease can manifest years after the initial infection, presenting symptoms such as non-specific fatigue, fever, weight loss, and endocarditis. Additionally, certain populations are more vulnerable to Q fever, including children living in farming communities, who may experience similar symptoms as adults. There have also been reported cases of Q fever among United States military service members, particularly those deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan, which further highlights the importance of understanding and addressing the occupational risks associated with Q fever.\nPrevention and public health education.\nProper public health education is crucial in reducing the number of Q fever cases. Raising awareness about transmission routes, occupational risks, and preventive measures can help prevent the spread of disease.\nInterdisciplinary collaboration between medical personnel and farmers is critical when developing strategies for control and prevention in a community. Awareness campaigns should particularly target occupations that work with livestock, focusing on risk-reduction procedures such as herd monitoring, implementing sanitation practices and personal protective equipment, and vaccinating animals. Locating livestock farms at least 500 meters away from residential areas can also help reduce animal-to-human transmission.\nHistory.\nQ\u00a0fever was first described in 1935 by Edward Holbrook Derrick in slaughterhouse workers in Brisbane, Queensland. The \"Q\" stands for \"query\" and was applied at a time when the causative agent was unknown; it was chosen over suggestions of abattoir fever and Queensland rickettsial fever, to avoid directing negative connotations at either the cattle industry or the state of Queensland.\nThe pathogen of Q\u00a0fever was discovered in 1937, when Frank Macfarlane Burnet and Mavis Freeman isolated the bacterium from one of Derrick's patients. It was originally identified as a species of \"Rickettsia\". H.R. Cox and Gordon Davis elucidated the transmission when they isolated it from ticks found in the US state of Montana in 1938. It is a zoonotic disease whose most common animal reservoirs are cattle, sheep, and goats. \"Coxiella burnetii\" \u2013 named for Cox and Burnet \u2013 is no longer regarded as closely related to the Rickettsiae, but as similar to \"Legionella\" and \"Francisella\", and is a Gammaproteobacterium.\nSociety and culture.\nAn early mention of Q\u00a0fever was important in one of the early Dr. Kildare films (1939, \"Calling Dr. Kildare\"). Kildare's mentor Dr.\u00a0Gillespie (Lionel Barrymore) tires of his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 working fruitlessly on \"exotic diagnoses\" (\"I think it's Q\u00a0fever!\") and sends him to work in a neighborhood clinic, instead.\nBiological warfare.\n\"C.\u00a0burnetii\" has been used to develop biological weapons.\nThe United States investigated it as a potential biological warfare agent in the 1950s, with eventual standardization as agent\u00a0OU. At Fort Detrick and Dugway Proving Ground, human trials were conducted on Whitecoat volunteers to determine the median infective dose (18\u00a0MICLD50/person i.h.) and course of infection. The Deseret Test Center dispensed biological Agent\u00a0OU with ships and aircraft, during Project 112 and Project SHAD. As a standardized biological, it was manufactured in large quantities at Pine Bluff Arsenal, with 5,098\u00a0gallons in the arsenal in bulk at the time of demilitarization in 1970.\n\"C.\u00a0burnetii\" is currently ranked as a \"category\u00a0B\" bioterrorism agent by the CDC. It can be contagious and is very stable in aerosols in a wide range of temperatures. Q\u00a0fever microorganisms may survive on surfaces for up to 60\u00a0days. It is considered a good agent in part because its ID50 (number of bacilli needed to infect 50% of individuals) is considered to be one, making it the lowest known.\nIn animals.\nQ fever can affect many species of domestic and wild animals, including ruminants (cattle, sheep, goats, bison, deer species...), carnivores (dogs, cats, seals...), rodents, reptiles and birds. However, ruminants (cattle, goats, and sheep) are the most frequently affected animals and can serve as a reservoir for the bacteria.\nClinical signs.\nIn contrast to humans, though a respiratory and cardiac infection could be experimentally reproduced in cattle, the clinical signs mainly affect the reproductive system. Q fever in ruminants is, therefore, mainly responsible for abortions, metritis, retained placenta, and infertility.\nThe clinical signs vary between species. In small ruminants (sheep and goats), it is dominated by abortions, premature births, stillbirths, and the birth of weak lambs or kids. One of the characteristics of abortions in goats is that they are very frequent and clustered in the first year or two after contamination of the farm. This is known as an abortion storm.\nIn cattle, although abortions also occur, they are less frequent and more sporadic. The clinical picture is rather dominated by nonspecific signs such as placental retentions, metritis, and consequent fertility disorders.\nEpidemiology.\nExcept for New Zealand, which is currently free of Q fever, the disease is present globally. Numerous epidemiological surveys have been carried out. They have shown that about one in three cattle farms and one in four sheep or goat farms are infected, but wide variations are seen between studies and countries. In China, Iran, Great Britain, Germany, Hungary, the Netherlands, Spain, the US, Belgium, Denmark, Croatia, Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Serbia, Slovenia, and Jordan, for example, more than 50% of cattle herds were infected with Q fever.\nInfected animals shed the bacteria by three routes - genital discharge, faeces, and milk. Excretion is greatest at the time of parturition or abortion, and placentas and aborted fetuses are the main sources of bacteria, particularly in goats.\nAs \"C. burnetii\" is small and resistant in the environment, it is easily airborne and can be transmitted from one farm to another, even if several kilometres away.\nControl.\nBiosecurity measures.\nBased on the epidemiological data, biosecurity measures can be derived:\nMedical measures.\nA vaccine for cattle, goats, and sheep exists. It reduces clinical expression, such as abortions, and decreases the excretion of the bacteria by the animals, leading to control of Q fever in herds.\nVaccination of herds against Q fever has been shown to reduce the risk of human infection.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56481", "revid": "50702791", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56481", "title": "Tay\u2013Sachs disease", "text": "Rare, severe disease of lysosomal storage\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nTay\u2013Sachs disease is an inherited fatal lysosomal storage disease that results in the destruction of nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord. The most common form is infantile Tay\u2013Sachs disease, which becomes apparent around the age of three to six months of age, with the infant losing the ability to turn over, sit, or crawl. This is then followed by seizures, hearing loss, and inability to move, with death usually occurring by the age of three to five. Less commonly, the disease may occur later in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood (juvenile or late-onset). These forms tend to be less severe, but the juvenile form typically results in death by the age of 15.\nTay\u2013Sachs disease is caused by a genetic mutation in the \"HEXA\" gene on chromosome 15, which codes a subunit of the hexosaminidase enzyme known as hexosaminidase A. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. The mutation disrupts the activity of the enzyme, which results in the build-up of the molecule GM2 ganglioside within cells, leading to toxicity. Diagnosis may be supported by measuring the blood hexosaminidase A level or genetic testing. Tay\u2013Sachs disease is a type of GM2 gangliosidosis and sphingolipidosis.\nThe treatment of Tay\u2013Sachs disease is supportive in nature. This may involve multiple specialties as well as psychosocial support for the family. The disease is rare in the general population. In Ashkenazi Jews, French Canadians of southeastern Quebec, the Irish, the Old Order Amish of Pennsylvania, and the Cajuns of southern Louisiana, the condition is more common. Approximately 1 in 3,600 Ashkenazi Jews at birth are affected.\nThe disease is named after British ophthalmologist Waren Tay, who in 1881 first described a symptomatic red spot on the retina of the eye; and American neurologist Bernard Sachs, who described in 1887 the cellular changes and noted an increased rate of disease in Ashkenazi Jews. Carriers of a single Tay\u2013Sachs allele are typically normal. It has been hypothesized that being a carrier may confer protection from tuberculosis, explaining the persistence of the allele in certain populations. Researchers are looking at gene therapy or enzyme replacement therapy as possible treatments.\nSigns and symptoms.\nTay\u2013Sachs disease is typically first noticed in infants around 6 months old displaying an abnormally strong response to sudden noises or other stimuli, known as the \"startle response\". There may also be listlessness or muscle stiffness (hypertonia). The disease is classified into several forms, which are differentiated based on the onset age of neurological symptoms.\nInfantile.\nInfants with Tay\u2013Sachs disease appear to develop normally for the first six months after birth. Then, as neurons become distended with GM2 gangliosides, a relentless deterioration of mental and physical abilities begins. The child may become blind, deaf, unable to swallow, atrophied, and paralytic. Death usually occurs before the age of four.\nJuvenile.\nJuvenile Tay\u2013Sachs disease is rarer than other forms of Tay\u2013Sachs and usually is initially seen in children between two and ten years old. People with Tay\u2013Sachs disease experience cognitive and motor skill deterioration, dysarthria, dysphagia, ataxia, and spasticity. Death usually occurs between the ages of five and fifteen years.\nLate-onset.\nA rare form of this disease, known as Adult-Onset or Late-Onset Tay\u2013Sachs disease, usually has its first symptoms during the 30s or 40s. In contrast to the other forms, late-onset Tay\u2013Sachs disease is usually not fatal as the effects can stop progressing. It is frequently misdiagnosed. It is characterized by unsteadiness of gait and progressive neurological deterioration. Symptoms of late-onset Tay\u2013Sachs\u00a0\u2013 which typically begin to be seen in adolescence or early adulthood\u00a0\u2013 include speech and swallowing difficulties, unsteadiness of gait, spasticity, cognitive decline, and psychiatric illness, particularly a schizophrenia-like psychosis. Late-onset Tay\u2013Sachs patients may become fully wheelchair-bound.\nUntil the 1970s and 1980s, when the disease's molecular genetics became known, the juvenile and adult forms of the disease were not always recognized as variants of Tay\u2013Sachs disease. Post-infantile Tay\u2013Sachs was often misdiagnosed as another neurological disorder, such as Friedreich's ataxia.\nGenetics.\nTay\u2013Sachs disease is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder, meaning that when both parents are carriers, there is a 25% risk of giving birth to an affected child with each pregnancy. The affected child would have received a mutated copy of the gene from each parent. A person with one mutated copy and one normal copy is a carrier, like the parent they received the mutant copy from. Tay\u2013Sachs carriers are known to be more resistant to infections of mycobacteria, including tuberculosis, compared to a person with two normal copies of the gene.\nTay\u2013Sachs results from mutations in the \"HEXA\" gene on chromosome 15, which encodes the alpha-subunit of beta-N-acetylhexosaminidase\u00a0A, a lysosomal enzyme. By 2000, more than 100 different mutations had been identified in the human \"HEXA\" gene. These mutations have included single base insertions and deletions, splice phase mutations, missense mutations, and other more complex patterns. Each of these mutations alters the gene's protein product (i.e., the enzyme), sometimes severely inhibiting its function. In recent years, population studies and pedigree analysis have shown how such mutations arise and spread within small founder populations. Initial research focused on several such founder populations:\nIn the 1960s and early 1970s, when the biochemical basis of Tay\u2013Sachs disease was first becoming known, no mutations had been sequenced directly for genetic diseases. Researchers of that era did not yet know how common polymorphisms would prove to be. The \"Jewish Fur Trader Hypothesis\", with its implication that a single mutation must have spread from one population into another, reflected the knowledge at the time. Subsequent research, however, has proven that a large variety of different \"HEXA\" mutations can cause the disease. Because Tay\u2013Sachs was one of the first genetic disorders for which widespread genetic screening was possible, it is one of the first genetic disorders in which the prevalence of compound heterozygosity has been demonstrated.\nCompound heterozygosity ultimately explains the disease's variability, including the late-onset forms. The disease can potentially result from the inheritance of two unrelated mutations in the \"HEXA\" gene, one from each parent. Classic infantile Tay\u2013Sachs disease results when a child has inherited mutations from both parents that completely stop the biodegradation of gangliosides. Late-onset forms occur due to the diverse mutation base\u00a0\u2013 people with Tay\u2013Sachs disease may technically be heterozygotes, with two differing \"HEXA\" mutations that both inactivate, alter, or inhibit enzyme activity. When a patient has at least one \"HEXA\" copy that still enables some hexosaminidase\u00a0A activity, a later onset disease form occurs. When disease occurs because of two unrelated mutations, the patient is said to be a compound heterozygote.\nHeterozygous carriers (individuals who inherit one mutant allele) show reduced overall enzyme activity but manifest no disease symptoms. This phenomenon is called dominance; the biochemical reason for wild-type alleles' dominance over nonfunctional mutant alleles in inborn errors of metabolism comes from how enzymes function. Enzymes are protein catalysts for chemical reactions; as catalysts, they speed up reactions without being used up in the process, so only small enzyme quantities are required to carry out a reaction. Someone homozygous for a nonfunctional mutation in the enzyme-encoding gene has little or no enzyme activity, so will manifest the abnormal phenotype (i.e. will develop full-blown disease). A normal: mutated heterozygote (heterozygous individual, also known as a 'carrier') has at least half of the normal enzyme activity level, due to the expression of the wild-type allele. This level is normally enough to enable normal functioning and thus prevent phenotypic expression (i.e. a normal: mutated carrier will not become ill).\nPathophysiology.\nTay\u2013Sachs disease is caused by insufficient activity of the enzyme hexosaminidase\u00a0A. Hexosaminidase\u00a0A is a vital hydrolytic enzyme, found in the lysosomes, that breaks down sphingolipids. When hexosaminidase\u00a0A is no longer functioning properly, the lipids accumulate in the brain and interfere with normal biological processes. Hexosaminidase\u00a0A specifically breaks down fatty acid derivatives called gangliosides; these are made and biodegraded rapidly in early life as the brain develops. Patients with and carriers of Tay\u2013Sachs can be identified by a simple blood test that measures hexosaminidase\u00a0A activity.\nThe hydrolysis of GM2-ganglioside requires three proteins. Two of them are subunits of hexosaminidase\u00a0A; the third is a small glycolipid transport protein, the GM2 activator protein (GM2A), which acts as a substrate-specific cofactor for the enzyme. Deficiency in any one of these proteins leads to ganglioside storage, primarily in the lysosomes of neurons. Tay\u2013Sachs disease (along with AB-variant GM2-gangliosidosis and Sandhoff disease) occurs because a mutation inherited from both parents deactivates or inhibits this process. Most Tay\u2013Sachs mutations probably do not directly affect protein functional elements (e.g., the active site). Instead, they cause incorrect folding (disrupting function) or disable intracellular transport.\nDiagnosis.\nIn patients with a clinical suspicion of Tay\u2013Sachs disease, with any age of onset, the initial testing involves an enzyme assay to measure the activity of hexosaminidase in serum, fibroblasts, or leukocytes. Total hexosaminidase enzyme activity is decreased in individuals with Tay\u2013Sachs as is the percentage of hexosaminidase A. After confirmation of decreased enzyme activity in an individual, confirmation by molecular analysis can be pursued. All patients with infantile-onset Tay\u2013Sachs disease have a \"cherry red\" macula in the retina, easily observable by a physician using an ophthalmoscope. This red spot is a retinal area that appears red because of gangliosides in the surrounding retinal ganglion cells. The choroidal circulation is showing through \"red\" in this foveal region where all retinal ganglion cells are pushed aside to increase visual acuity. Thus, this cherry-red spot is the only normal part of the retina; it shows up in contrast to the rest of the retina. Microscopic analysis of the retinal neurons shows they are distended from excess ganglioside storage. Unlike other lysosomal storage diseases (e.g., Gaucher disease, Niemann\u2013Pick disease, and Sandhoff disease), hepatosplenomegaly (liver and spleen enlargement) is not seen in Tay\u2013Sachs.\nPrevention.\nThree main approaches have been used to prevent or reduce the incidence of Tay\u2013Sachs:\nManagement.\nAs of 2010, no treatment addressed the cause of Tay\u2013Sachs disease or could slow its progression; people receive supportive care to ease the symptoms and extend life by reducing the chance of contracting infections. Infants are given feeding tubes when they can no longer swallow. In late-onset Tay\u2013Sachs, medication (e.g., lithium for depression) can sometimes control psychiatric symptoms and seizures, although some medications (e.g., tricyclic antidepressants, phenothiazines, haloperidol, and risperidone) are associated with significant adverse effects.\nOutcomes.\nAs of 2010, even with the best care, children with infantile Tay\u2013Sachs disease usually die by the age of 4. Children with the juvenile form are likely to die between the ages of 5\u201315, while the lifespans of those with the adult form will probably not be affected.\nEpidemiology.\nAshkenazi Jews have a high incidence of Tay\u2013Sachs and other lipid storage diseases. In the United States, about 1 in 27 to 1 in 30 Ashkenazi Jews is a recessive carrier. The disease incidence is about 1 in every 3,500 newborns among Ashkenazi Jews. French Canadians and the Cajun community of Louisiana have an occurrence similar to the Ashkenazi Jews. Irish Americans have a 1 in 50 chance of being a carrier. In the general population, the incidence of carriers as heterozygotes is about 1 in 300. The incidence is approximately 1 in 320,000 newborns in the general population in the United States.\nThree general classes of theories have been proposed to explain the high frequency of Tay\u2013Sachs carriers in the Ashkenazi Jewish population:\nTay\u2013Sachs disease was one of the first genetic disorders for which epidemiology was studied using molecular data. Studies of Tay\u2013Sachs mutations using new molecular techniques such as linkage disequilibrium and coalescence analysis have brought an emerging consensus among researchers supporting the founder effect theory.\nHistory.\nWaren Tay and Bernard Sachs were two physicians. They described the disease's progression and provided differential diagnostic criteria to distinguish it from other neurological disorders with similar symptoms.\nBoth Tay and Sachs reported their first cases among Ashkenazi Jewish families. Tay reported his observations in 1881 in the first volume of the proceedings of the British Ophthalmological Society, of which he was a founding member. By 1884, he had seen three cases in a single family. Years later, Bernard Sachs, an American neurologist, reported similar findings when he reported a case of \"arrested cerebral development\" to other New York Neurological Society members.\nSachs, who recognized that the disease had a familial basis, proposed that the disease should be called \"amaurotic familial idiocy\". However, its genetic basis was still poorly understood. Although Gregor Mendel had published his article on the genetics of peas in 1865, Mendel's paper was largely forgotten for more than a generation\u00a0\u2013 not rediscovered by other scientists until 1899. Thus, the Mendelian model for explaining Tay\u2013Sachs was unavailable to scientists and doctors of the time. The first edition of the Jewish Encyclopedia, published in 12 volumes between 1901 and 1906, described what was then known about the disease:\nIt is a curious fact that amaurotic family idiocy, a rare and fatal disease of children, occurs mostly among Jews. The largest number of cases has been observed in the United States\u2014over thirty in number. It was at first thought that this was an exclusively Jewish disease because most of the cases at first reported were between Russian and Polish Jews, but recently there have been reported cases occurring in non-Jewish children. The chief characteristics of the disease are progressive mental and physical enfeeblement; weakness and paralysis of all the extremities; and marasmus, associated with symmetrical changes in the macula lutea. On investigation of the reported cases, they found that neither consanguinity nor syphilitic, alcoholic, or nervous antecedents in the family history are factors in the etiology of the disease. No preventive measures have as yet been discovered, and no treatment has been of benefit, all the cases having terminated fatally.\nJewish immigration to the United States peaked in the period 1880\u20131924, with the immigrants arriving from Russia and countries in Eastern Europe; this was also a period of nativism (hostility to immigrants) in the United States. Opponents of immigration often questioned whether immigrants from southern and eastern Europe could be assimilated into American society. Reports of Tay\u2013Sachs disease contributed to a perception among nativists that Jews were an inferior race.\nIn 1969, Shintaro Okada and John S. O'Brien showed that Tay\u2013Sachs disease was caused by an enzyme defect; they also proved that Tay\u2013Sachs patients could be diagnosed by an assay of hexosaminidase\u00a0A activity. The further development of enzyme assays demonstrated that levels of hexosaminidases A and B could be measured in patients and carriers, allowing the reliable detection of heterozygotes. During the early 1970s, researchers developed protocols for newborn testing, carrier screening, and prenatal diagnosis. By the end of 1979, researchers had identified three variant forms of GM2 gangliosidosis, including Sandhoff disease and the AB variant of GM2-gangliosidosis, accounting for false negatives in carrier testing.\nSociety and culture.\nSince carrier testing for Tay\u2013Sachs began in 1971, millions of Ashkenazi Jews have been screened as carriers. Jewish communities embraced the cause of genetic screening from the 1970s on. The success with Tay\u2013Sachs disease has led Israel to become the first country that offers free genetic screening and counseling for all couples and opened discussions about the proper scope of genetic testing for other disorders in Israel.\nBecause Tay\u2013Sachs disease was one of the first autosomal recessive genetic disorders for which there was an enzyme assay test (before polymerase chain reaction testing methods), it was intensely studied as a model for all such diseases, and researchers sought evidence of a selective process. A continuing controversy is whether heterozygotes (carriers) have or had a selective advantage. The presence of four different lysosomal storage disorders in the Ashkenazi Jewish population suggests a past selective advantage for heterozygous carriers of these conditions.\"\nThis controversy among researchers has reflected various debates among geneticists at large:\nResearch directions.\nEnzyme replacement therapy.\nEnzyme replacement therapy techniques have been investigated for lysosomal storage disorders, and could potentially be used to treat Tay\u2013Sachs as well. The goal would be to replace the nonfunctional enzyme, a process similar to insulin injections for diabetes. However, in previous studies, the \"HEXA\" enzyme itself has been thought to be too large to pass through the specialized cell layer in the blood vessels that form the blood\u2013brain barrier in humans.\nResearchers have also tried directly instilling the deficient enzyme hexosaminidase\u00a0A into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) which bathes the brain. However, intracerebral neurons seem unable to take up this physically large molecule efficiently even when it is directly by them. Therefore, this approach to treatment of Tay\u2013Sachs disease has also been ineffective so far.\nJacob sheep model.\nTay\u2013Sachs disease exists in Jacob sheep. The biochemical mechanism for this disease in the Jacob sheep is virtually identical to that in humans, wherein diminished activity of hexosaminidase\u00a0A results in increased concentrations of GM2 ganglioside in the affected animal. Sequencing of the \"HEXA\" gene cDNA of affected Jacobs sheep reveal an identical number of nucleotides and exons as in the human \"HEXA\" gene, and 86% nucleotide sequence identity. A missense mutation (G444R) was found in the \"HEXA\" cDNA of the affected sheep. This mutation is a single nucleotide change at the end of exon 11, resulting in that exon's deletion (before translation) via splicing. The Tay\u2013Sachs model provided by the Jacob sheep is the first to offer promise as a means for gene therapy clinical trials, which may prove useful for disease treatment in humans.\nSubstrate reduction therapy.\nOther experimental methods being researched involve substrate reduction therapy, which attempts to use alternative enzymes to increase the brain's catabolism of GM2 gangliosides to a point where residual degradative activity is sufficient to prevent substrate accumulation. One experiment has demonstrated that using the enzyme sialidase allows the genetic defect to be effectively bypassed, and as a consequence, GM2 gangliosides are metabolized so that their levels become almost inconsequential. If a safe pharmacological treatment can be developed\u00a0\u2013 one that increases expression of lysosomal sialidase in neurons without other toxicity\u00a0\u2013 then this new form of therapy could essentially cure the disease.\nAnother metabolic therapy under investigation for Tay\u2013Sachs disease uses miglustat. This drug is a reversible inhibitor of the enzyme glucosylceramide synthase, which catalyzes the first step in synthesizing glucose-based glycosphingolipids like GM2 ganglioside.\nIncreasing \u03b2-hexosaminidase A activity.\nAs Tay\u2013Sachs disease is a deficiency of \u03b2-hexosaminidase A, deterioration of affected individuals could be slowed or stopped through the use of a substance that increases its activity. However, since in infantile Tay\u2013Sachs disease there is no \u03b2-hexosaminidase A, the treatment would be ineffective, but for people affected by Late-Onset Tay\u2013Sachs disease, \u03b2-hexosaminidase A is present, so the treatment may be effective. The drug pyrimethamine has been shown to increase activity of \u03b2-hexosaminidase A. However, the increased levels of \u03b2-hexosaminidase A still fall far short of the desired \"10% of normal HEXA\", above which the phenotypic symptoms begin to disappear.\nCord blood transplant.\nThis is a highly invasive procedure that involves destroying the patient's blood system with chemotherapy and administering cord blood. Of five people who had received the treatment as of 2008, two were still alive after five years and they still had a great deal of health problems.\nCritics point to the procedure's harsh nature\u2014and the fact that it is unapproved. Other significant issues involve the difficulty in crossing the blood\u2013brain barrier, as well as the great expense, as each unit of cord blood costs $25,000, and adult recipients need many units.\nGene therapy.\nOn 10 February 2022, the first-ever gene therapy was announced, it uses an adeno-associated virus (AAV) to deliver the correct instruction for the HEXA gene on brain cells which causes the disease. Only two children were part of a compassionate trial presenting improvements over the natural course of the disease and no vector-related adverse events.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56482", "revid": "4", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56482", "title": "Nerve cell", "text": ""}
{"id": "56483", "revid": "878749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56483", "title": "Tourette syndrome", "text": "Neurodevelopmental disorder involving motor and vocal tics\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nTourette syndrome (TS), or simply Tourette's, is a common neurodevelopmental disorder that begins in childhood or adolescence. It is characterized by multiple movement (motor) tics and at least one vocal (phonic) tic. Common tics are blinking, coughing, throat clearing, sniffing, and facial movements. Tics are typically preceded by an unwanted urge or sensation in the affected area known as a premonitory urge, can sometimes be suppressed temporarily, and characteristically change in location, strength, and frequency. Tourette's is at the more severe end of the spectrum of tic disorders. The tics often go unnoticed by casual observers.\nTourette's was once regarded as a rare and bizarre syndrome and has popularly been associated with coprolalia (the utterance of obscene words or socially inappropriate and derogatory remarks). It is no longer considered rare; about 1% of school-age children and adolescents are estimated to have Tourette's, though coprolalia occurs only in a minority. There are no specific tests for diagnosing Tourette's; it is not always correctly identified, because most cases are mild, and the severity of tics decreases for most children as they pass through adolescence. Therefore, many go undiagnosed or may never seek medical attention. Extreme Tourette's in adulthood, often sensationalized in the media, is rare, but for a small minority, severely debilitating tics can persist into adulthood. \nThere is no cure for Tourette's and no single most effective medication. In most cases, medication for tics is not necessary, and behavioral therapies are the first-line treatment. Education is an important part of any treatment plan, and explanation alone often provides sufficient reassurance that no other treatment is necessary. Other conditions, such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder (OCD), are more likely to be present among those who are referred to specialty clinics than they are among the broader population of persons with Tourette's. These co-occurring conditions often cause more impairment to the individual than the tics; hence it is important to correctly distinguish co-occurring conditions and treat them.\nTourette syndrome was named by French neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot for his intern, Georges Gilles de la Tourette, who published in 1885 an account of nine patients with a \"convulsive tic disorder\". While the exact cause is unknown, it is believed to involve a combination of genetic and environmental factors. The mechanism appears to involve dysfunction in neural circuits between the basal ganglia and related structures in the brain.\nClassification.\nMost published research on Tourette syndrome originates in the United States; in international TS research and clinical practice, the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\" (DSM) is preferred over the World Health Organization (WHO) classification, which is criticized in the 2021 European Clinical Guidelines.\nIn the fifth version of the DSM (DSM-5), published in 2013, Tourette syndrome is classified as a motor disorder (a disorder of the nervous system that causes abnormal and involuntary movements). It is listed in the neurodevelopmental disorder category. Tourette's is at the more severe end of the spectrum of tic disorders; its diagnosis requires multiple motor tics and at least one vocal tic to be present for more than a year, and these first occurring before the age of 18. Tics are sudden, repetitive, nonrhythmic movements that involve discrete muscle groups, while vocal (phonic) tics involve laryngeal, pharyngeal, oral, nasal or respiratory muscles to produce sounds. The tics must not be explained by other medical conditions or substance use.\nOther tic disorders include persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tics, in which one type of tic (motor or vocal, but not both) has been present for more than a year; and provisional tic disorder, in which motor or vocal tics have been present for less than one year. The fifth edition of the DSM replaced what had been called \"transient tic disorder\" with \"provisional tic disorder\", recognizing that \"transient\" can only be defined in retrospect. Some experts believe that TS and persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder should be considered the same condition, because vocal tics are also motor tics in the sense that they are muscular contractions of nasal or respiratory muscles.\nTourette syndrome is defined only slightly differently by the WHO; in its ICD-11, the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, Tourette syndrome is classified as a disease of the nervous system and a neurodevelopmental disorder, and only one motor tic and one or more vocal tics are required for diagnosis. Older versions of the ICD called it \"combined vocal and multiple motor tic disorder [de la Tourette]\".\nGenetic studies indicate that tic disorders cover a spectrum that is not recognized by the clear-cut distinctions in the current diagnostic framework. Since 2008, studies have suggested that Tourette's is not a unitary condition with a distinct mechanism, as described in the existing classification systems. Instead, the studies suggest that subtypes should be recognized to distinguish \"pure TS\" from TS that is accompanied by attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder (OCD) or other disorders, similar to the way that subtypes have been established for other conditions, such as type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Elucidation of these subtypes awaits fuller understanding of the genetic and other causes of tic disorders.\nCharacteristics.\nTics.\nTics are movements or sounds that take place \"intermittently and unpredictably out of a background of normal motor activity\", having the appearance of \"normal behaviors gone wrong\". The tics associated with Tourette's wax and wane; they change in number, frequency, severity, anatomical location, and complexity; each person experiences a unique pattern of fluctuation in their severity and frequency. Tics may also occur in \"bouts of bouts\", which also vary among people. The variation in tic severity may occur over hours, days, or weeks. Tics may increase when someone is experiencing stress, fatigue, anxiety, or illness, or when engaged in relaxing activities like watching TV. They sometimes decrease when an individual is engrossed in or focused on an activity like playing a musical instrument.\nIn contrast to the abnormal movements associated with other movement disorders, the tics of Tourette's are nonrhythmic, often preceded by an unwanted urge, and temporarily suppressible. Over time, about 90% of individuals with Tourette's feel an urge preceding the tic, similar to the urge to sneeze or scratch an itch. The urges and sensations that precede the expression of a tic are referred to as premonitory sensory phenomena or premonitory urges. People describe the urge to express the tic as a buildup of tension, pressure, or energy which they ultimately choose consciously to release, as if they \"had to do it\" to relieve the sensation or until it feels \"just right\". The urge may cause a distressing sensation in the part of the body associated with the resulting tic; the tic is a response that relieves the urge in the anatomical location of the tic. Examples of this urge are the feeling of having something in one's throat, leading to a tic to clear one's throat, or a localized discomfort in the shoulders leading to shrugging the shoulders. The actual tic may be felt as relieving this tension or sensation, similar to scratching an itch or blinking to relieve an uncomfortable feeling in the eye. Some people with Tourette's may not be aware of the premonitory urge associated with tics. Children may be less aware of it than are adults, but their awareness tends to increase with maturity; by the age of ten, most children recognize the premonitory urge.\nPremonitory urges which precede the tic make suppression of the impending tic possible. Because of the urges that precede them, tics are described as semi-voluntary or \"unvoluntary\", rather than specifically \"involuntary\"; they may be experienced as a \"voluntary\", suppressible response to the unwanted premonitory urge. The ability to suppress tics varies among individuals, and may be more developed in adults than children. People with tics are sometimes able to suppress them for limited periods of time, but doing so often results in tension or mental exhaustion. People with Tourette's may seek a secluded spot to release the suppressed urge, or there may be a marked increase in tics after a period of suppression at school or work. Children may suppress tics while in the doctor's office, so they may need to be observed when not aware of being watched.\nComplex tics related to speech include coprolalia, echolalia and palilalia. Coprolalia is the spontaneous utterance of socially objectionable or taboo words or phrases. Although it is the most publicized symptom of Tourette's, only about 10% of people with Tourette's exhibit it, and it is not required for a diagnosis. Echolalia (repeating the words of others) and palilalia (repeating one's own words) occur in a minority of cases. Complex motor tics include copropraxia (obscene or forbidden gestures, or inappropriate touching), echopraxia (repetition or imitation of another person's actions) and palipraxia (repeating one's own movements).\nOnset and progression.\nThere is no typical case of Tourette syndrome, but the age of onset and the severity of symptoms follow a fairly reliable course. Although onset may occur anytime before eighteen years, the typical age of onset of tics is from five to seven, and is usually before adolescence. A 1998 study from the Yale Child Study Center showed that tic severity increased with age until it reached its highest point between ages eight and twelve. Severity declines steadily for most children as they pass through adolescence, when half to two-thirds of children see a dramatic decrease in tics.\nIn people with TS, the first tics to appear usually affect the head, face, and shoulders, and include blinking, facial movements, sniffing and throat clearing. Vocal tics often appear months or years after motor tics but can appear first. Among people who experience more severe tics, complex tics may develop, including \"arm straightening, touching, tapping, jumping, hopping and twirling\". There are different movements in contrasting disorders (for example, the autism spectrum disorders), such as self-stimulation and stereotypies.\nThe severity of symptoms varies widely among people with Tourette's, and many cases may be undetected. Most cases are mild and almost unnoticeable; many people with TS may not realize they have tics. Because tics are more commonly expressed in private, Tourette syndrome may go unrecognized, and casual observers might not notice tics. Most studies of TS involve males, who have a higher prevalence of TS than females, and gender-based differences are not well studied; a 2021 review suggested that the characteristics and progression for females, particularly in adulthood, may differ and better studies are needed.\nMost adults with TS have mild symptoms and do not seek medical attention. While tics subside for the majority after adolescence, some of the \"most severe and debilitating forms of tic disorder are encountered\" in adults. In some cases, what appear to be adult-onset tics can be childhood tics re-surfacing.\nCo-occurring conditions.\nBecause people with milder symptoms are unlikely to be referred to specialty clinics, studies of Tourette's have an inherent bias towards more severe cases. When symptoms are severe enough to warrant referral to clinics, ADHD and OCD are often also found. In specialty clinics, 30% of those with TS also have mood or anxiety disorders or disruptive behaviors. In the absence of ADHD, tic disorders do not appear to be associated with disruptive behavior or functional impairment, while impairment in school, family, or peer relations is greater in those who have more comorbid conditions. When ADHD is present along with tics, the occurrence of conduct disorder and oppositional defiant disorder increases. Aggressive behaviors and angry outbursts in people with TS are not well understood; they are not associated with severe tics, but are connected with the presence of ADHD. ADHD may also contribute to higher rates of anxiety, and aggression and anger control problems are more likely when both OCD and ADHD co-occur with Tourette's.\nCompulsions that resemble tics are present in some individuals with OCD; \"tic-related OCD\" is hypothesized to be a subgroup of OCD, distinguished from non-tic related OCD by the type and nature of obsessions and compulsions. Compared to the more typical compulsions of OCD without tics that relate to contamination, tic-related OCD presents with more \"counting, aggressive thoughts, symmetry and touching\" compulsions. Compulsions associated with OCD without tics are usually related to obsessions and anxiety, while those in tic-related OCD are more likely to be a response to a premonitory urge. There are increased rates of anxiety and depression in those adults with TS who also have OCD.\nAmong individuals with TS studied in clinics, between 2.9% and 20% had autism spectrum disorders, but one study indicates that a high association of autism and TS may be partly due to difficulties distinguishing between tics and tic-like behaviors or OCD symptoms seen in autistic people.\nNot all people with Tourette's have ADHD or OCD or other comorbid conditions, and estimates of the rate of pure TS or TS-only vary from 15% to 57%; in clinical populations, a high percentage of those under care do have ADHD. Children and adolescents with pure TS are not significantly different from their peers without TS on ratings of aggressive behaviors or conduct disorders, or on measures of social adaptation. Similarly, adults with pure TS do not appear to have the social difficulties present in those with TS plus ADHD.\nAmong those with an older age of onset, more substance abuse and mood disorders are found, and there may be self-injurious tics. Adults who have severe, often treatment-resistant tics are more likely to also have mood disorders and OCD. Coprolalia is more likely in people with severe tics plus multiple comorbid conditions.\nNeuropsychological function.\nThere are no major impairments in neuropsychological function among people with Tourette's, but conditions that occur along with tics can cause variation in neurocognitive function. A better understanding of comorbid conditions is needed to untangle any neuropsychological differences between TS-only individuals and those with comorbid conditions.\nOnly slight impairments are found in intellectual ability, attentional ability, and nonverbal memory\u2014but ADHD, other comorbid disorders, or tic severity could account for these differences. In contrast with earlier findings, visual motor integration and visuoconstructive skills are not found to be impaired, while comorbid conditions may have a small effect on motor skills. Comorbid conditions and severity of tics may account for variable results in verbal fluency, which can be slightly impaired. There might be slight impairment in social cognition, but not in the ability to plan or make decisions. Children with TS-only do not show cognitive deficits. They are faster than average for their age on timed tests of motor coordination, and constant tic suppression may lead to an advantage in switching between tasks because of increased inhibitory control.\nLearning disabilities may be present, but whether they are due to tics or comorbid conditions is controversial; older studies that reported higher rates of learning disability did not control well for the presence of comorbid conditions. There are often difficulties with handwriting, and disabilities in written expression and math are reported in those with TS plus other conditions.\nCauses.\nThe exact cause of Tourette's is unknown, but it is well established that both genetic and environmental factors are involved. Genetic epidemiology studies have shown that Tourette's is highly heritable, and 10 to 100 times more likely to be found among close family members than in the general population. The exact mode of inheritance is not known; no single gene has been identified, and hundreds of genes are likely involved. Genome-wide association studies were published in 2013 and 2015 in which no finding reached a threshold for significance; a 2019 meta-analysis found only a single genome-wide significant locus on chromosome 13, but that result was not found in broader samples. Twin studies show that 50 to 77% of identical twins share a TS diagnosis, while only 10 to 23% of fraternal twins do. But not everyone who inherits the genetic vulnerability will show symptoms. A few rare highly penetrant genetic mutations have been found that explain only a small number of cases in single families (the \"SLITRK1, HDC\", and \"CNTNAP2\" genes).\nPsychosocial or other non-genetic factors\u2014while not causing Tourette's\u2014can affect the severity of TS in vulnerable individuals and influence the expression of the inherited genes. Pre-natal and peri-natal events increase the risk that a tic disorder or comorbid OCD will be expressed in those with the genetic vulnerability. These include paternal age; forceps delivery; stress or severe nausea during pregnancy; and use of tobacco, caffeine, alcohol, and cannabis during pregnancy. Babies who are born premature with low birthweight, or who have low Apgar scores, are also at increased risk; in premature twins, the lower birthweight twin is more likely to develop TS.\nAutoimmune processes may affect the onset of tics or exacerbate them. Both OCD and tic disorders are hypothesized to arise in a subset of children as a result of a post-streptococcal autoimmune process. Its potential effect is described by the controversial hypothesis called PANDAS (pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections), which proposes five criteria for diagnosis in children. PANDAS and the newer pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric syndrome (PANS) hypotheses are the focus of clinical and laboratory research, but remain unproven. There is also a broader hypothesis that links immune-system abnormalities and immune dysregulation with TS.\nSome forms of OCD may be genetically linked to Tourette's, although the genetic factors in OCD with and without tics may differ. The genetic relationship of ADHD to Tourette syndrome, however, has not been fully established. A genetic link between autism and Tourette's has not been established as of 2017.\nMechanism.\nThe exact mechanism affecting the inherited vulnerability to Tourette's is not well established. Tics are believed to result from dysfunction in cortical and subcortical brain regions: the thalamus, basal ganglia and frontal cortex. Neuroanatomic models suggest failures in circuits connecting the brain's cortex and subcortex; imaging techniques implicate the frontal cortex and basal ganglia. In the 2010s, neuroimaging and postmortem brain studies, as well as animal and genetic studies, made progress towards better understanding the neurobiological mechanisms leading to Tourette's. These studies support the basal ganglia model, in which neurons in the striatum are activated and inhibit outputs from the basal ganglia.\nCortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) circuits, or neural pathways, provide inputs to the basal ganglia from the cortex. These circuits connect the basal ganglia with other areas of the brain to transfer information that regulates planning and control of movements, behavior, decision-making, and learning. Behavior is regulated by cross-connections that \"allow the integration of information\" from these circuits. Involuntary movements may result from impairments in these CSTC circuits, including the sensorimotor, limbic, language and decision making pathways. Abnormalities in these circuits may be responsible for tics and premonitory urges.\nThe caudate nuclei may be smaller in subjects with tics compared to those without tics, supporting the hypothesis of pathology in CSTC circuits in Tourette's. The ability to suppress tics depends on brain circuits that \"regulate response inhibition and cognitive control of motor behavior\". Children with TS are found to have a larger prefrontal cortex, which may be the result of an adaptation to help regulate tics. It is likely that tics decrease with age as the capacity of the frontal cortex increases. Cortico-basal ganglia (CBG) circuits may also be impaired, contributing to \"sensory, limbic and executive\" features. The release of dopamine in the basal ganglia is higher in people with Tourette's, implicating biochemical changes from \"overactive and dysregulated dopaminergic transmissions\".\nHistamine and the H3 receptor may play a role in the alterations of neural circuitry. A reduced level of histamine in the H3 receptor may result in an increase in other neurotransmitters, causing tics. Postmortem studies have also implicated \"dysregulation of neuroinflammatory processes\".\nDiagnosis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMain screening and assessment tools\nAccording to the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\" (DSM-5), Tourette's may be diagnosed when a person exhibits both multiple motor tics and one or more vocal tics over a period of one year. The motor and vocal tics need not be concurrent. The onset must have occurred before the age of 18 and cannot be attributed to the effects of another condition or substance (such as cocaine). Hence, other medical conditions that include tics or tic-like movements\u2014for example, autism or other causes of tics\u2014must be ruled out.\nPatients referred for a tic disorder are assessed based on their family history of tics, vulnerability to ADHD, obsessive\u2013compulsive symptoms, and a number of other chronic medical, psychiatric and neurological conditions. In individuals with a typical onset and a family history of tics or OCD, a basic physical and neurological examination may be sufficient. There are no specific medical or screening tests that can be used to diagnose Tourette's; the diagnosis is usually made based on observation of the individual's symptoms and family history, and after ruling out secondary causes of tic disorders (tourettism).\nDelayed diagnosis often occurs because professionals mistakenly believe that TS is rare, always involves coprolalia, or must be severely impairing. The DSM has recognized since 2000 that many individuals with Tourette's do not have significant impairment; diagnosis does not require the presence of coprolalia or a comorbid condition, such as ADHD or OCD. Tourette's may be misdiagnosed because of the wide expression of severity, ranging from mild (in the majority of cases) or moderate, to severe (the rare but more widely recognized and publicized cases). About 20% of people with Tourette syndrome do not realize that they have tics.\nTics that appear early in the course of TS are often confused with allergies, asthma, vision problems, and other conditions. Pediatricians, allergists and ophthalmologists are among the first to see or identify a child as having tics, although the majority of tics are first identified by the child's parents. Coughing, blinking, and tics that mimic unrelated conditions such as asthma are commonly misdiagnosed. In the UK, there is an average delay of three years between symptom onset and diagnosis. \nDifferential diagnosis.\nTics that may appear to mimic those of Tourette's\u2014but are associated with disorders other than Tourette's\u2014are known as tourettism and are ruled out in the differential diagnosis for Tourette syndrome. The abnormal movements associated with choreas, dystonias, myoclonus, and dyskinesias are distinct from the tics of Tourette's in that they are more rhythmic, not suppressible, and not preceded by an unwanted urge. Developmental and autism spectrum disorders may manifest tics, other stereotyped movements, and stereotypic movement disorder. The stereotyped movements associated with autism typically have an earlier age of onset; are more symmetrical, rhythmical and bilateral; and involve the extremities (for example, flapping the hands).\nIf another condition might better explain the tics, tests may be done; for example, if there is diagnostic confusion between tics and seizure activity, an EEG may be ordered. An MRI can rule out brain abnormalities, but such brain imaging studies are not usually warranted. Measuring thyroid-stimulating hormone blood levels can rule out hypothyroidism, which can be a cause of tics. If there is a family history of liver disease, serum copper and ceruloplasmin levels can rule out Wilson's disease. The typical age of onset of TS is before adolescence. In teenagers and adults with an abrupt onset of tics and other behavioral symptoms, a urine drug screen for stimulants might be requested.\nIncreasing episodes of tic-like behavior among teenagers (predominantly adolescent girls) were reported in several countries during the COVID-19 pandemic. Researchers linked their occurrence to followers of certain TikTok or YouTube artists. Described in 2006 as \"psychogenic\", abrupt-onset movements resembling tics are referred to as a \"functional movement disorder\" or \"functional tic-like movements\". Functional tic-like movements can be difficult to distinguish from tics that have an organic (rather than psychological) cause. They may occur alone or co-exist in individuals with tic disorders. These tics are inconsistent with the classic tics of TS in several ways: the premonitory urge (present in 90% of those with tics disorders) is absent in functional tic-like movements; the suppressibility seen in tic disorders is lacking; there is no family or childhood history of tics and there is a female predominance in functional tics, with a later-than-typical age of first presentation; onset is more abrupt than typical with movements that are more suggestible; and there is less co-occurring OCD or ADHD and more co-occurring disorders. Functional tics are \"not fully stereotypical\", do not respond to medications, do not demonstrate the classic waxing and waning pattern of Tourettic tics, and do not progress in the typical fashion, in which tics often first appear in the face and gradually move to limbs.\nOther conditions that may manifest tics include Sydenham's chorea; idiopathic dystonia; and genetic conditions such as Huntington's disease, neuroacanthocytosis, pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Wilson's disease, and tuberous sclerosis. Other possibilities include chromosomal disorders such as Down syndrome, Klinefelter syndrome, XYY syndrome and fragile X syndrome. Acquired causes of tics include drug-induced tics, head trauma, encephalitis, stroke, and carbon monoxide poisoning. The extreme self-injurious behaviors of Lesch-Nyhan syndrome may be confused with Tourette syndrome or stereotypies, but self-injury is rare in TS even in cases of violent tics. Most of these conditions are rarer than tic disorders and a thorough history and examination may be enough to rule them out without medical or screening tests.\nScreening for other conditions.\nAlthough not all those with Tourette's have comorbid conditions, most presenting for clinical care exhibit symptoms of other conditions along with their tics. ADHD and OCD are the most common, but autism spectrum disorders or anxiety, mood, personality, oppositional defiant, and conduct disorders may also be present. Learning disabilities and sleep disorders may be present; higher rates of sleep disturbance and migraine than in the general population are reported. A thorough evaluation for comorbidity is called for when symptoms and impairment warrant, and careful assessment of people with TS includes comprehensive screening for these conditions.\nComorbid conditions such as OCD and ADHD can be more impairing than tics, and cause greater impact on overall functioning. Disruptive behaviors, impaired functioning, or cognitive impairment in individuals with comorbid Tourette's and ADHD may be accounted for by the ADHD, highlighting the importance of identifying comorbid conditions. Children and adolescents with TS who have learning difficulties are candidates for psychoeducational testing, particularly if the child also has ADHD.\nManagement.\nThere is no cure for Tourette's. There is no single most effective medication, and no one medication effectively treats all symptoms. Most medications prescribed for tics have not been approved for that use, and no medication is without the risk of significant adverse effects. Treatment is focused on identifying the most troubling or impairing symptoms and helping the individual manage them. Because comorbid conditions are often a larger source of impairment than tics, they are a priority in treatment. The management of Tourette's is individualized and involves shared decision-making between the clinician, patient, family and caregivers. Practice guidelines for the treatment of tics were published by the American Academy of Neurology in 2019.\nEducation, reassurance and psychobehavioral therapy are often sufficient for the majority of cases. In particular, psychoeducation targeting the patient and their family and surrounding community is a key management strategy. Watchful waiting \"is an acceptable approach\" for those who are not functionally impaired. Symptom management may include behavioral, psychological and pharmacological therapies. Pharmacological intervention is reserved for more severe symptoms, while psychotherapy or cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) may ameliorate depression and social isolation, and improve family support. The decision to use behavioral or pharmacological treatment is \"usually made after the educational and supportive interventions have been in place for a period of months, and it is clear that the tic symptoms are persistently severe and are themselves a source of impairment in terms of self-esteem, relationships with the family or peers, or school performance\".\nPsychoeducation and social support.\nKnowledge, education and understanding are uppermost in management plans for tic disorders, and psychoeducation is the first step. A child's parents are typically the first to notice their tics; they may feel worried, imagine that they are somehow responsible, or feel burdened by misinformation about Tourette's. Effectively educating parents about the diagnosis and providing social support can ease their anxiety. This support can also lower the chance that their child will be unnecessarily medicated or experience an exacerbation of tics due to their parents' emotional state.\nPeople with Tourette's may suffer socially if their tics are viewed as \"bizarre\". If a child has disabling tics, or tics that interfere with social or academic functioning, supportive psychotherapy or school accommodations can be helpful. Even children with milder tics may be angry, depressed or have low self-esteem as a result of increased teasing, bullying, rejection by peers or social stigmatization, and this can lead to social withdrawal. Some children feel empowered by presenting a peer awareness program to their classmates. It can be helpful to educate teachers and school staff about typical tics, how they fluctuate during the day, how they impact the child, and how to distinguish tics from naughty behavior. By learning to identify tics, adults can refrain from asking or expecting a child to stop ticcing, because \"tic suppression can be exhausting, unpleasant, and attention-demanding and can result in a subsequent rebound bout of tics\".\nAdults with TS may withdraw socially to avoid stigmatization and discrimination because of their tics. Depending on their country's healthcare system, they may receive social services or help from support groups.\nBehavioral.\nBehavioral therapies using habit reversal training (HRT) and exposure and response prevention (ERP) are first-line interventions in the management of Tourette syndrome, and have been shown to be effective. Because tics are somewhat suppressible, when people with TS are aware of the premonitory urge that precedes a tic, they can be trained to develop a response to the urge that competes with the tic. Comprehensive behavioral intervention for tics (CBIT) is based on HRT, the best researched behavioral therapy for tics. TS experts debate whether increasing a child's awareness of tics with HRT/CBIT (as opposed to ignoring tics) can lead to more tics later in life.\nWhen disruptive behaviors related to comorbid conditions exist, anger control training and parent management training can be effective. CBT is a useful treatment when OCD is present. Relaxation techniques, such as exercise, yoga and meditation may be useful in relieving the stress that can aggravate tics. Beyond HRT, the majority of behavioral interventions for Tourette's (for example, relaxation training and biofeedback) have not been systematically evaluated and are not empirically supported.\nMedication.\nChildren with tics typically present when their tics are most severe, but because the condition waxes and wanes, medication is not started immediately or changed often. Tics may subside with education, reassurance and a supportive environment. When medication is used, the goal is not to eliminate symptoms. Instead, the lowest dose that manages symptoms without adverse effects is used, because adverse effects may be more disturbing than the symptoms being treated with medication.\nThe classes of medication with proven efficacy in treating tics\u2014typical and atypical neuroleptics\u2014can have long-term and short-term adverse effects. Some antihypertensive agents are also used to treat tics; studies show variable efficacy but a lower side effect profile than the neuroleptics. The antihypertensives clonidine and guanfacine are typically tried first in children; they can also help with ADHD symptoms, but there is less evidence that they are effective for adults. The neuroleptics risperidone and aripiprazole are tried when antihypertensives are not effective, and are generally tried first for adults. Because of lower side effects, aripiprazole is preferred over other antipsychotics. The most effective medication for tics is haloperidol, but it has a higher risk of side effects. Methylphenidate can be used to treat ADHD that co-occurs with tics, and can be used in combination with clonidine. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are used to manage anxiety and OCD.\nOther.\nComplementary and alternative medicine approaches, such as dietary modification, neurofeedback and allergy testing and control have popular appeal, but they have no proven benefit in the management of Tourette syndrome. Despite this lack of evidence, up to two-thirds of parents, caregivers and individuals with TS use dietary approaches and alternative treatments and do not always inform their physicians.\nThere is low confidence that tics are reduced with tetrahydrocannabinol, and insufficient evidence for other cannabis-based medications in the treatment of Tourette's. There is no good evidence supporting the use of acupuncture or transcranial magnetic stimulation; neither is there evidence supporting intravenous immunoglobulin, plasma exchange, or antibiotics for the treatment of PANDAS.\nDeep brain stimulation (DBS) has become a valid option for individuals with severe symptoms that do not respond to conventional therapy and management, although it is an experimental treatment. Selecting candidates who may benefit from DBS is challenging, and the appropriate lower age range for surgery is unclear; it is potentially useful in less than 3% of individuals. The ideal brain location to target has not been identified as of 2019.\nPregnancy.\nA quarter of women report that their tics increase before menstruation; however, studies have not shown consistent evidence of a change in frequency or severity of tics related to pregnancy or hormonal levels. Overall, symptoms in women respond better to haloperidol than they do for men.\nMost women find they can withdraw from medication during pregnancy without much trouble. When needed, medications are used at the lowest doses possible. During pregnancy, neuroleptic medications are avoided when possible because of the risk of pregnancy complications. When needed, olanzapine, risperidone and quetiapine are most often used as they have not been shown to cause fetal abnormalities. One report found that haloperidol could be used during pregnancy, although it may cross the placenta.\nIf severe tics might interfere with administration of local anesthesia, other anesthesia options are considered. Neuroleptics in low doses may not affect the breastfed infant, but most medications are avoided. Clonidine and amphetamines may be present in breast milk.\nPrognosis.\nTourette syndrome is a spectrum disorder\u2014its severity ranges from mild to severe. Symptoms typically subside as children pass through adolescence. In a group of ten children at the average age of highest tic severity (around ten or eleven), almost four will see complete remission by adulthood. Another four will have minimal or mild tics in adulthood, but not complete remission. The remaining two will have moderate or severe tics as adults, but only rarely will their symptoms in adulthood be more severe than in childhood.\nRegardless of symptom severity, individuals with Tourette's have a normal life span. Symptoms may be lifelong and chronic for some, but the condition is not degenerative or life-threatening. Intelligence among those with pure TS follows a normal curve, although there may be small differences in intelligence in those with comorbid conditions. The severity of tics early in life does not predict their severity in later life. There is no reliable means of predicting the course of symptoms for a particular individual, but the prognosis is generally favorable. By the age of fourteen to sixteen, when the highest tic severity has typically passed, a more reliable prognosis might be made.\nTics may be at their highest severity when they are diagnosed, and often improve as an individual's family and friends come to better understand the condition. Studies report that almost eight out of ten children with Tourette's experience a reduction in the severity of their tics by adulthood, and some adults who still have tics may not be aware that they have them. A study that used video to record tics in adults found that nine out of ten adults still had tics, and half of the adults who considered themselves tic-free displayed evidence of mild tics.\nQuality of life.\nPeople with Tourette's are affected by the consequences of tics and by the efforts to suppress them. Head and eye tics can interfere with reading or lead to headaches, and forceful tics can lead to repetitive strain injury. Severe tics can lead to pain or injuries; as an example, a rare cervical disc herniation was reported from a neck tic. Some people may learn to camouflage socially inappropriate tics or channel the energy of their tics into a functional endeavor.\nA supportive family and environment generally give those with Tourette's the skills to manage the disorder. Outcomes in adulthood are associated more with the perceived significance of having tics as a child than with the actual severity of the tics. A person who was misunderstood, punished or teased at home or at school is likely to fare worse than a child who enjoyed an understanding environment. The long-lasting effects of bullying and teasing can influence self-esteem, self-confidence, and even employment choices and opportunities. Comorbid ADHD can severely affect the child's well-being in all realms, and extend into adulthood.\nFactors impacting quality of life change over time, given the natural fluctuating course of tic disorders, the development of coping strategies, and a person's age. As ADHD symptoms improve with maturity, adults report less negative impact in their occupational lives than do children in their educational lives. Tics have a greater impact on adults' psychosocial function, including financial burdens, than they do on children. Adults are more likely to report a reduced quality of life due to depression or anxiety; depression contributes a greater burden than tics to adults' quality of life compared to children. As coping strategies become more effective with age, the impact of OCD symptoms seems to diminish.\nEpidemiology.\nTourette syndrome is a common but underdiagnosed condition that reaches across all social, racial and ethnic groups. It is three to four times more frequent in males than in females. Observed prevalence rates are higher among children than adults because tics tend to remit or subside with maturity and a diagnosis may no longer be warranted for many adults. Up to 1% of the overall population experiences tic disorders, including chronic tics and transient (provisional or unspecified) tics in childhood. Chronic tics affect 5% of children and transient tics affect up to 20%.\nMany individuals with tics do not know they have tics, or do not seek a diagnosis, so epidemiological studies of TS \"reflect a strong ascertainment bias\" towards those with co-occurring conditions. The reported prevalence of TS varies \"according to the source, age, and sex of the sample; the ascertainment procedures; and diagnostic system\", with a range reported between 0.15% and 3.0% for children and adolescents. Sukhodolsky, et al. wrote in 2017 that the best estimate of TS prevalence in children was 1.4%. Both Robertson and Stern state that the prevalence in children is 1%. The prevalence of TS in the general population is estimated as 0.3% to 1.0%. According to turn of the century census data, these prevalence estimates translated to half a million children in the US with TS and half a million people in the UK with TS, although symptoms in many older individuals would be almost unrecognizable.\nTourette syndrome was once thought to be rare: in 1972, the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) believed there were fewer than 100\u00a0cases in the United States, and a 1973 registry reported only 485\u00a0cases worldwide. However, numerous studies published since 2000 have consistently demonstrated that the prevalence is much higher. Recognizing that tics may often be undiagnosed and hard to detect, newer studies use direct classroom observation and multiple informants (parents, teachers and trained observers), and therefore record more cases than older studies. As the diagnostic threshold and assessment methodology have moved towards recognition of milder cases, the estimated prevalence has increased.\nBecause of the high male prevalence of TS, there is limited data on females from which conclusion about gender-based differences can be drawn; caution may be warranted in extending conclusions to females regarding the characteristics and treatment of tics based on studies of mostly males. A 2021 review stated that females may see a later peak than males in symptoms, with less remission over time, along with a higher prevalence of anxiety and mood disorders.\nHistory.\nA French doctor, Jean Marc Gaspard Itard, reported the first case of Tourette syndrome in 1825, describing the Marquise de Dampierre, an important woman of nobility in her time. In 1884, Jean-Martin Charcot, an influential French physician, assigned his student and intern Georges Gilles de la Tourette, to study patients with movement disorders at the Salp\u00eatri\u00e8re Hospital, with the goal of defining a condition distinct from hysteria and chorea. In 1885, Gilles de la Tourette published an account in \"Study of a Nervous Affliction\" of nine people with \"convulsive tic disorder\", concluding that a new clinical category should be defined. The eponym was bestowed by Charcot after and on behalf of Gilles de la Tourette, who later became Charcot's senior resident.\nFollowing the 19th-century descriptions, a psychogenic view prevailed and little progress was made in explaining or treating tics until well into the 20th century. The possibility that movement disorders, including Tourette syndrome, might have an organic origin was raised when an encephalitis lethargica epidemic from 1918 to 1926 was linked to an increase in tic disorders.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, as the beneficial effects of haloperidol on tics became known, the psychoanalytic approach to Tourette syndrome was questioned. The turning point came in 1965, when Arthur K. Shapiro\u2014described as \"the father of modern tic disorder research\"\u2014used haloperidol to treat a person with Tourette's, and published a paper criticizing the psychoanalytic approach. In 1975, \"The New York Times\" headlined an article with \"Bizarre outbursts of Tourette's disease victims linked to chemical disorder in brain\", and Shapiro said: \"The bizarre symptoms of this illness are rivaled only by the bizarre treatments used to treat it.\"\nDuring the 1990s, a more neutral view of Tourette's emerged, in which a genetic predisposition is seen to interact with non-genetic and environmental factors. The fourth revision of the DSM (DSM-IV) in 1994 added a diagnostic requirement for \"marked distress or significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning\", which led to an outcry from TS experts and researchers, who noted that many people were not even aware they had TS, nor were they distressed by their tics; clinicians and researchers resorted to using the older criteria in research and practice. In 2000, the American Psychiatric Association revised its diagnostic criteria in the fourth text revision of the DSM (DSM-IV-TR) to remove the impairment requirement, recognizing that clinicians often see people who have Tourette's without distress or impairment.\nSociety and culture.\nNot everyone with Tourette's wants treatment or a cure, especially if that means they may lose something else in the process. The researchers Leckman and Cohen believe that there may be latent advantages associated with an individual's genetic vulnerability to developing Tourette syndrome that may have adaptive value, such as heightened awareness and increased attention to detail and surroundings.\nAccomplished musicians, athletes, public speakers and professionals from all walks of life are found among people with Tourette's. The athlete Tim Howard, described by the \"Chicago Tribune\" as the \"rarest of creatures\u2014an American soccer hero\", and by the Tourette Syndrome Association as the \"most notable individual with Tourette Syndrome around the world\", says that his neurological makeup gave him an enhanced perception and an acute focus that contributed to his success on the field.\nSamuel Johnson is a historical figure who likely had Tourette syndrome, as evidenced by the writings of his friend James Boswell. Johnson wrote \"A Dictionary of the English Language\" in 1747, and was a prolific writer, poet, and critic. There is little support for speculation that Mozart had Tourette's: the potentially coprolalic aspect of vocal tics is not transferred to writing, so Mozart's scatological writings are not relevant; the composer's available medical history is not thorough; the side effects of other conditions may be misinterpreted; and \"the evidence of motor tics in Mozart's life is doubtful\".\nLikely portrayals of TS or tic disorders in fiction predating Gilles de la Tourette's work are \"Mr. Pancks\" in Charles Dickens's \"Little Dorrit\" and \"Nikolai Levin\" in Leo Tolstoy's \"Anna Karenina\". The entertainment industry has been criticized for depicting those with Tourette syndrome as social misfits whose only tic is coprolalia, which has furthered the public's misunderstanding and stigmatization of those with Tourette's. The coprolalic symptoms of Tourette's are also fodder for radio and television talk shows in the US and for the British media. High-profile media coverage focuses on treatments that do not have established safety or efficacy, such as deep brain stimulation, and alternative therapies involving unstudied efficacy and side effects are pursued by many parents.\nResearch directions.\nResearch since 1999 has advanced knowledge of Tourette's in the areas of genetics, neuroimaging, neurophysiology, and neuropathology, but questions remain about how best to classify it and how closely it is related to other movement or psychiatric disorders. Modeled after genetic breakthroughs seen with large-scale efforts in other neurodevelopmental disorders, three groups are collaborating in research of the genetics of Tourette's:\nCompared to the progress made in gene discovery in certain neurodevelopmental or mental health disorders\u2014autism, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder\u2014the scale of related TS research is lagging in the United States due to funding.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBook sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56484", "revid": "1728614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56484", "title": "Low-pass filter", "text": "Type of signal filter\nA low-pass filter is a filter that passes signals with a frequency lower than a selected cutoff frequency and attenuates signals with frequencies higher than the cutoff frequency. The exact frequency response of the filter depends on the filter design. The filter is sometimes called a high-cut filter, or treble-cut filter in audio applications. A low-pass filter is the complement of a high-pass filter.\nIn optics, high-pass and low-pass may have different meanings, depending on whether referring to the frequency or wavelength of light, since these variables are inversely related. High-pass frequency filters would act as low-pass wavelength filters, and vice versa. For this reason, it is a good practice to refer to wavelength filters as \"short-pass\" and \"long-pass\" to avoid confusion, which would correspond to \"high-pass\" and \"low-pass\" frequencies.\nLow-pass filters exist in many different forms, including electronic circuits such as a \"hiss filter\" used in audio, anti-aliasing filters for conditioning signals before analog-to-digital conversion, digital filters for smoothing sets of data, acoustic barriers, blurring of images, and so on. The moving average operation used in fields such as finance is a particular kind of low-pass filter and can be analyzed with the same signal processing techniques as are used for other low-pass filters. Low-pass filters provide a smoother form of a signal, removing the short-term fluctuations and leaving the longer-term trend.\nFilter designers will often use the low-pass form as a prototype filter. That is a filter with unity bandwidth and impedance. The desired filter is obtained from the prototype by scaling for the desired bandwidth and impedance and transforming into the desired bandform (that is, low-pass, high-pass, band-pass or band-stop).\nExamples.\nExamples of low-pass filters occur in acoustics, optics and electronics.\nA stiff physical barrier tends to reflect higher sound frequencies, acting as an acoustic low-pass filter for transmitting sound. When music is playing in another room, the low notes are easily heard, while the high notes are attenuated.\nAn optical filter with the same function can correctly be called a low-pass filter, but conventionally is called a \"longpass\" filter (low frequency is long wavelength), to avoid confusion.\nIn an electronic low-pass RC filter for voltage signals, high frequencies in the input signal are attenuated, but the filter has little attenuation below the cutoff frequency determined by its RC time constant. For current signals, a similar circuit, using a resistor and capacitor in parallel, works in a similar manner. (See current divider discussed in more detail below.)\nElectronic low-pass filters are used on inputs to subwoofers and other types of loudspeakers, to block high pitches that they cannot efficiently reproduce. Radio transmitters use low-pass filters to block harmonic emissions that might interfere with other communications. The tone knob on many electric guitars is a low-pass filter used to reduce the amount of treble in the sound. An integrator is another time constant low-pass filter.\nTelephone lines fitted with DSL splitters use low-pass filters to separate DSL from POTS signals (and high-pass vice versa), which share the same pair of wires (\"transmission channel\").\nLow-pass filters also play a significant role in the sculpting of sound created by analogue and virtual analogue synthesisers. \"See subtractive synthesis.\"\nA low-pass filter is used as an anti-aliasing filter before sampling and for reconstruction in digital-to-analog conversion.\nIdeal and real filters.\nAn ideal low-pass filter completely eliminates all frequencies above the cutoff frequency while passing those below unchanged; its frequency response is a rectangular function and is a brick-wall filter. The transition region present in practical filters does not exist in an ideal filter. An ideal low-pass filter can be realized mathematically (theoretically) by multiplying a signal by the rectangular function in the frequency domain or, equivalently, convolution with its impulse response, a sinc function, in the time domain.\nHowever, the ideal filter is impossible to realize without also having signals of infinite extent in time, and so generally needs to be approximated for real ongoing signals, because the sinc function's support region extends to all past and future times. The filter would therefore need to have infinite delay, or knowledge of the infinite future and past, to perform the convolution. It is effectively realizable for pre-recorded digital signals by assuming extensions of zero into the past and future, or, more typically, by making the signal repetitive and using Fourier analysis.\nReal filters for real-time applications approximate the ideal filter by truncating and windowing the infinite impulse response to make a finite impulse response; applying that filter requires delaying the signal for a moderate period of time, allowing the computation to \"see\" a little bit into the future. This delay is manifested as phase shift. Greater accuracy in approximation requires a longer delay.\nTruncating an ideal low-pass filter result in ringing artifacts via the Gibbs phenomenon, which can be reduced or worsened by the choice of windowing function. Design and choice of real filters involves understanding and minimizing these artifacts. For example, simple truncation of the sinc function will create severe ringing artifacts, which can be reduced using window functions that drop off more smoothly at the edges.\nThe Whittaker\u2013Shannon interpolation formula describes how to use a perfect low-pass filter to reconstruct a continuous signal from a sampled digital signal. Real digital-to-analog converters uses real filter approximations.\nTime response.\nThe time response of a low-pass filter is found by solving the response to the simple low-pass RC filter.\nUsing Kirchhoff's Laws we arrive at the differential equation\nformula_1\nStep input response example.\nIf we let formula_2 be a step function of magnitude formula_3 then the differential equation has the solution\nformula_4\nwhere formula_5 is the cutoff frequency of the filter.\nFrequency response.\nThe most common way to characterize the frequency response of a circuit is to find its Laplace transform transfer function, formula_6. Taking the Laplace transform of our differential equation and solving for formula_7 we get\nformula_8\nDifference equation through discrete time sampling.\nA discrete difference equation is easily obtained by sampling the step input response above at regular intervals of formula_9 where formula_10 and formula_11 is the time between samples. Taking the difference between two consecutive samples we have\nformula_12\nSolving for formula_13 we get\nformula_14\nWhere formula_15\nUsing the notation formula_16 and formula_17, and substituting our sampled value, formula_18, we get the difference equation\nformula_19\nError analysis.\nComparing the reconstructed output signal from the difference equation, formula_19, to the step input response, formula_21, we find that there is an exact reconstruction (0% error). This is the reconstructed output for a time-invariant input. However, if the input is \"time variant\", such as formula_22, this model approximates the input signal as a series of step functions with duration formula_11 producing an error in the reconstructed output signal. The error produced from \"time variant\" inputs is difficult to quantify but decreases as formula_24.\nDiscrete-time realization.\nMany digital filters are designed to give low-pass characteristics. Both infinite impulse response and finite impulse response low pass filters, as well as filters using Fourier transforms, are widely used.\nSimple infinite impulse response filter.\nThe effect of an infinite impulse response low-pass filter can be simulated on a computer by analyzing an RC filter's behavior in the time domain, and then discretizing the model.\nFrom the circuit diagram to the right, according to Kirchhoff's Laws and the definition of capacitance:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_25 is the charge stored in the capacitor at time t. Substituting equation Q into equation I gives formula_26, which can be substituted into equation V so that\nformula_27\nThis equation can be discretized. For simplicity, assume that samples of the input and output are taken at evenly spaced points in time separated by formula_28 time. Let the samples of formula_29 be represented by the sequence formula_30, and let formula_31 be represented by the sequence formula_32, which correspond to the same points in time. Making these substitutions,\nformula_33\nRearranging terms gives the recurrence relation\nformula_34\nThat is, this discrete-time implementation of a simple \"RC\" low-pass filter is the exponentially weighted moving average\nformula_35\nBy definition, the \"smoothing factor\" is within the range formula_36. The expression for \u03b1 yields the equivalent time constant \"RC\" in terms of the sampling period formula_28 and smoothing factor \u03b1,\nformula_38\nRecalling that\nformula_39 so formula_40\nnote \u03b1 and formula_41 are related by,\nformula_42\nand\nformula_43\nIf \u03b1=0.5, then the \"RC\" time constant equals the sampling period. If formula_44, then \"RC\" is significantly larger than the sampling interval, and formula_45.\nThe filter recurrence relation provides a way to determine the output samples in terms of the input samples and the preceding output. The following pseudocode algorithm simulates the effect of a low-pass filter on a series of digital samples:\n // Return RC low-pass filter output samples, given input samples,\n // time interval \"dt\", and time constant \"RC\"\n function lowpass(\"real[1..n]\" x, \"real\" dt, \"real\" RC)\n var \"real[1..n]\" y\n var \"real\" \u03b1 := dt / (RC + dt)\n y[1] := \u03b1 * x[1]\n for i from 2 to n\n y[i] := \u03b1 * x[i] + (1-\u03b1) * y[i-1]\n return y\nThe loop that calculates each of the \"n\" outputs can be refactored into the equivalent:\n for i from 2 to n\n y[i] := y[i-1] + \u03b1 * (x[i] - y[i-1])\nThat is, the change from one filter output to the next is proportional to the difference between the previous output and the next input. This exponential smoothing property matches the exponential decay seen in the continuous-time system. As expected, as the time constant \"RC\" increases, the discrete-time smoothing parameter formula_46 decreases, and the output samples formula_32 respond more slowly to a change in the input samples formula_48; the system has more \"inertia\". This filter is an infinite-impulse-response (IIR) single-pole low-pass filter.\nFinite impulse response.\nFinite-impulse-response filters can be built that approximate the sinc function time-domain response of an ideal sharp-cutoff low-pass filter. For minimum distortion, the finite impulse response filter has an unbounded number of coefficients operating on an unbounded signal. In practice, the time-domain response must be time truncated and is often of a simplified shape; in the simplest case, a running average can be used, giving a square time response.\nFourier transform.\nFor non-realtime filtering, to achieve a low pass filter, the entire signal is usually taken as a looped signal, the Fourier transform is taken, filtered in the frequency domain, followed by an inverse Fourier transform. Only O(n log(n)) operations are required compared to O(n2) for the time domain filtering algorithm.\nThis can also sometimes be done in real time, where the signal is delayed long enough to perform the Fourier transformation on shorter, overlapping blocks.\nContinuous-time realization.\nThere are many different types of filter circuits, with different responses to changing frequency. The frequency response of a filter is generally represented using a Bode plot, and the filter is characterized by its cutoff frequency and rate of frequency rolloff. In all cases, at the \"cutoff frequency,\" the filter attenuates the input power by half or 3\u00a0dB. So the order of the filter determines the amount of additional attenuation for frequencies higher than the cutoff frequency.\nOn any Butterworth filter, if one extends the horizontal line to the right and the diagonal line to the upper-left (the asymptotes of the function), they intersect at exactly the \"cutoff frequency\", 3\u00a0dB below the horizontal line. The various types of filters (Butterworth filter, Chebyshev filter, Bessel filter, etc.) all have different-looking \"knee curves\". Many second-order filters have \"peaking\" or resonance that puts their frequency response \"above\" the horizontal line at this peak.\nThe meanings of 'low' and 'high'\u2014that is, the cutoff frequency\u2014depend on the characteristics of the filter. The term \"low-pass filter\" merely refers to the shape of the filter's response; a high-pass filter could be built that cuts off at a lower frequency than any low-pass filter\u2014it is their responses that set them apart. Electronic circuits can be devised for any desired frequency range, right up through microwave frequencies (above 1\u00a0GHz) and higher.\nLaplace notation.\nContinuous-time filters can also be described in terms of the Laplace transform of their impulse response, in a way that makes it easy to analyze all characteristics of the filter by considering the pattern of poles and zeros of the Laplace transform in the complex plane. (In discrete time, one can similarly consider the Z-transform of the impulse response.)\nFor example, a first-order low-pass filter can be described by the continuous time transfer function, in the Laplace domain, as:\nformula_49\nwhere \"H\" is the transfer function, \"s\" is the Laplace transform variable (complex angular frequency), \"\u03c4\" is the filter time constant, formula_50 is the cutoff frequency, and \"K\" is the gain of the filter in the passband. The cutoff frequency is related to the time constant by:\nformula_51\nElectronic low-pass filters.\nFirst-order passive.\nRC filter.\nOne simple low-pass filter circuit consists of a resistor in series with a load, and a capacitor in parallel with the load. The capacitor exhibits reactance, and blocks low-frequency signals, forcing them through the load instead. At higher frequencies, the reactance drops, and the capacitor effectively functions as a short circuit. The combination of resistance and capacitance gives the time constant of the filter formula_52 (represented by the Greek letter tau). The break frequency, also called the turnover frequency, corner frequency, or cutoff frequency (in hertz), is determined by the time constant:\nformula_53\nor equivalently (in radians per second):\nformula_54\nThis circuit may be understood by considering the time the capacitor needs to charge or discharge through the resistor:\nAnother way to understand this circuit is through the concept of reactance at a particular frequency:\nThe capacitor is not an \"on/off\" object (like the block or pass fluidic explanation above). The capacitor variably acts between these two extremes. It is the Bode plot and frequency response that show this variability.\nRL filter.\nA resistor\u2013inductor circuit or RL filter is an electric circuit composed of resistors and inductors driven by a voltage or current source. A first-order RL circuit is composed of one resistor and one inductor and is the simplest type of RL circuit.\nA first-order RL circuit is one of the simplest analogue infinite impulse response electronic filters. It consists of a resistor and an inductor, either in series driven by a voltage source or in parallel driven by a current source.\nSecond-order passive.\nRLC filter.\nAn RLC circuit (the letters R, L, and C can be in a different sequence) is an electrical circuit consisting of a resistor, an inductor, and a capacitor, connected in series or in parallel. The RLC part of the name is due to those letters being the usual electrical symbols for resistance, inductance, and capacitance, respectively. The circuit forms a harmonic oscillator for current and will resonate in a similar way as an LC circuit will. The main difference that the presence of the resistor makes is that any oscillation induced in the circuit will die away over time if it is not kept going by a source. This effect of the resistor is called damping. The presence of the resistance also reduces the peak resonant frequency somewhat. Some resistance is unavoidable in real circuits, even if a resistor is not specifically included as a component. An ideal, pure LC circuit is an abstraction for the purpose of theory.\nThere are many applications for this circuit. They are used in many different types of oscillator circuits. Another important application is for tuning, such as in radio receivers or television sets, where they are used to select a narrow range of frequencies from the ambient radio waves. In this role, the circuit is often called a tuned circuit. An RLC circuit can be used as a band-pass filter, band-stop filter, low-pass filter, or high-pass filter. The RLC filter is described as a \"second-order\" circuit, meaning that any voltage or current in the circuit can be described by a second-order differential equation in circuit analysis.\nSecond-order low-pass filter in standard form.\nThe transfer function formula_56 of a second-order low-pass filter can be expressed as a function of frequency formula_57 as shown in Equation 1, the Second-Order Low-Pass Filter Standard Form.\nformula_58\nIn this equation, formula_57 is the frequency variable, formula_41 is the cutoff frequency, formula_61 is the frequency scaling factor, and formula_62 is the quality factor. Equation 1 describes three regions of operation: below cutoff, in the area of cutoff, and above cutoff. For each area, Equation 1 reduces to:\nWith attenuation at frequencies above formula_41 increasing by a power of two, the last formula describes a second-order low-pass filter. The frequency scaling factor formula_61 is used to scale the cutoff frequency of the filter so that it follows the definitions given before.\nHigher order passive filters.\nHigher-order passive filters can also be constructed (see diagram for a third-order example).\nFirst order active.\nAn \"active\" low-pass filter adds an active device to create an active filter that allows for gain in the passband.\nIn the operational amplifier circuit shown in the figure, the cutoff frequency (in hertz) is defined as:\nformula_73\nor equivalently (in radians per second):\nformula_74\nThe gain in the passband is \u2212\"R\"2/\"R\"1, and the stopband drops off at \u22126\u00a0dB per octave (that is \u221220\u00a0dB per decade) as it is a first-order filter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56486", "revid": "48507606", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56486", "title": "High-pass filter", "text": "Type of electronic circuit or optical filter\nA high-pass filter (HPF) is an electronic filter that passes signals with a frequency higher than a certain cutoff frequency and attenuates signals with frequencies lower than the cutoff frequency. The amount of attenuation for each frequency depends on the filter design. A high-pass filter is usually modeled as a linear time-invariant system. It is sometimes called a low-cut filter or bass-cut filter in the context of audio engineering. High-pass filters have many uses, such as blocking DC from circuitry sensitive to non-zero average voltages or radio frequency devices. They can also be used in conjunction with a low-pass filter to produce a band-pass filter.\nIn the optical domain filters are often characterised by wavelength rather than frequency. High-pass and low-pass have the opposite meanings, with a \"high-pass\" filter (more commonly \"short-pass\") passing only \"shorter\" wavelengths (higher frequencies), and vice versa for \"low-pass\" (more commonly \"long-pass\").\nDescription.\nIn electronics, a filter is a two-port electronic circuit which removes frequency components from a signal (time-varying voltage or current) applied to its input port. A high-pass filter attenuates frequency components below a certain frequency, called its cutoff frequency, allowing higher frequency components to pass through. This contrasts with a low-pass filter, which attenuates frequencies higher than a certain frequency, and a bandpass filter, which allows a certain band of frequencies through and attenuates frequencies both higher and lower than the band. \nIn optics a high pass filter is a transparent or translucent window of colored material that allows light longer than a certain wavelength to pass through and attenuates light of shorter wavelengths. Since light is often measured not by frequency but by wavelength, which is inversely related to frequency, a high pass optical filter, which attenuates light frequencies below a cutoff frequency, is often called a short-pass filter; it attenuates longer wavelengths.\nContinuous-time circuits.\nFirst-order passive.\nA resistor and either a capacitor or an inductor can be configured as a first-order high-pass filter. The simple first-order capacitive high-pass filter shown in Figure\u00a01 is implemented by placing an input voltage across the series combination of a capacitor and a resistor and using the voltage across the resistor as an output. The transfer function of this linear time-invariant system is:\nformula_1\nThe product of the resistance and capacitance (\"R\"\u00d7\"C\") is the time constant (\u03c4); it is inversely proportional to the cutoff frequency \"f\"\"c\", that is,\nformula_2\nwhere \"f\"\"c\" is in hertz, \"\u03c4\" is in seconds, \"R\" is in ohms, and \"C\" is in farads. At the cutoff frequency, the filter's frequency response reaches -3dB referenced to the gain at an infinite frequency.\nFirst-order active.\nFigure\u00a02 shows an active electronic implementation of a first-order high-pass filter using an operational amplifier. The transfer function of this linear time-invariant system is:\nformula_3\nIn this case, the filter has a passband gain of \u2212\"R\"2/\"R\"1 and has a cutoff frequency of\nformula_4\nBecause this filter is active, it may have non-unity passband gain. That is, high-frequency signals are inverted and amplified by \"R\"2/\"R\"1.\nAll of these first-order high-pass filters are called differentiators, because they perform differentiation for signals whose frequency band is well below the filter's cutoff frequency.\nHigher orders.\nFilters of higher order have steeper slope in the stopband, such that the slope of nth-order filters equals 20n\u00a0dB per decade. Higher order filters can be achieved simply by cascading these first order filters. While impedance matching and loading must be taken into account when chaining passive filters, active filters can be easily chained because the signal is restored by the output of the op amp at each stage. Various filter topologies and network synthesis filters for higher orders exist, which ease design.\nDiscrete-time realization.\nDiscrete-time high-pass filters can also be designed. Discrete-time filter design is beyond the scope of this article; however, a simple example comes from the conversion of the continuous-time high-pass filter above to a discrete-time realization. That is, the continuous-time behavior can be discretized.\nFrom the circuit in Figure 1 above, according to Kirchhoff's Laws and the definition of capacitance:\nformula_5\nwhere formula_6 is the charge stored in the capacitor at time formula_7. Substituting Equation\u00a0(Q) into Equation\u00a0(I) and then Equation\u00a0(I) into Equation\u00a0(V) gives:\nformula_8\nThis equation can be discretized. For simplicity, assume that samples of the input and output are taken at evenly spaced points in time separated by formula_9 time. Let the samples of formula_10 be represented by the sequence formula_11, and let formula_12 be represented by the sequence formula_13 which correspond to the same points in time. Making these substitutions:\nformula_14\nAnd rearranging terms gives the recurrence relation\nformula_15\nThat is, this discrete-time implementation of a simple continuous-time RC high-pass filter is\nformula_16\nBy definition, formula_17. The expression for parameter formula_18 yields the equivalent time constant formula_19 in terms of the sampling period formula_9 and formula_18:\nformula_22.\nRecalling that\nformula_23 so formula_24\nthen formula_18 and formula_26 are related by:\nformula_27\nand\nformula_28.\nIf formula_29, then the formula_19 time constant equal to the sampling period. If formula_31, then formula_19 is significantly smaller than the sampling interval, and formula_33.\nAlgorithmic implementation.\nThe filter recurrence relation provides a way to determine the output samples in terms of the input samples and the preceding output. The following pseudocode algorithm will simulate the effect of a high-pass filter on a series of digital samples, assuming equally spaced samples:\n // Return RC high-pass filter output samples, given input samples,\n // time interval \"dt\", and time constant \"RC\"\n function highpass(\"real[1..n]\" x, \"real\" dt, \"real\" RC)\n var \"real[1..n]\" y\n var \"real\" \u03b1 := RC / (RC + dt)\n y[1] := x[1]\n for i from 2 to n\n y[i] := \u03b1 \u00d7 y[i\u22121] + \u03b1 \u00d7 (x[i] \u2212 x[i\u22121])\n return y\nThe loop which calculates each of the formula_34 outputs can be refactored into the equivalent:\n for i from 2 to n\n y[i] := \u03b1 \u00d7 (y[i\u22121] + x[i] \u2212 x[i\u22121])\nHowever, the earlier form shows how the parameter \u03b1 changes the impact of the prior output y[i-1] and current \"change\" in input (x[i] - x[i-1]). In particular,\nApplications.\nAudio.\nHigh-pass filters have many applications. They are used as part of an audio crossover to direct high frequencies to a tweeter while attenuating bass signals which could interfere with, or damage, the speaker. When such a filter is built into a loudspeaker cabinet it is normally a passive filter that also includes a low-pass filter for the woofer and so often employs both a capacitor and inductor (although very simple high-pass filters for tweeters can consist of a series capacitor and nothing else).\nAs an example, the formula above, applied to a tweeter with a resistance of 10\u00a0\u03a9, will determine the capacitor value for a cut-off frequency of 5\u00a0kHz.\nformula_41, or approx 3.2\u00a0\u03bcF.\nAn alternative, which provides good quality sound without inductors (which are prone to parasitic coupling, are expensive, and may have significant internal resistance) is to employ bi-amplification with active RC filters or active digital filters with separate power amplifiers for each loudspeaker. Such low-current and low-voltage line level crossovers are called active crossovers.\nRumble filters are high-pass filters applied to the removal of unwanted sounds near to the lower end of the audible range or below. For example, noises (e.g., footsteps, or motor noises from record players and tape decks) may be removed because they are undesired or may overload the RIAA equalization circuit of the preamp.\nHigh-pass filters are also used for AC coupling at the inputs of many audio power amplifiers, for preventing the amplification of DC currents which may harm the amplifier, rob the amplifier of headroom, and generate waste heat at the loudspeakers voice coil. One amplifier, the professional audio model DC300 made by Crown International beginning in the 1960s, did not have high-pass filtering at all, and could be used to amplify the DC signal of a common 9-volt battery at the input to supply 18 volts DC in an emergency for mixing console power. However, that model's basic design has been superseded by newer designs such as the Crown Macro-Tech series developed in the late 1980s which included 10\u00a0Hz high-pass filtering on the inputs and switchable 35\u00a0Hz high-pass filtering on the outputs. Another example is the QSC Audio PLX amplifier series which includes an internal 5\u00a0Hz high-pass filter which is applied to the inputs whenever the optional 50 and 30\u00a0Hz high-pass filters are turned off.\nMixing consoles often include high-pass filtering at each channel strip. Some models have fixed-slope, fixed-frequency high-pass filters at 80 or 100\u00a0Hz that can be engaged; other models have sweepable high-pass filters, filters of fixed slope that can be set within a specified frequency range, such as from 20 to 400\u00a0Hz on the Midas Heritage 3000, or 20 to 20,000\u00a0Hz on the Yamaha M7CL digital mixing console. Veteran systems engineer and live sound mixer Bruce Main recommends that high-pass filters be engaged for most mixer input sources, except for those such as kick drum, bass guitar and piano, sources which will have useful low-frequency sounds. Main writes that DI unit inputs (as opposed to microphone inputs) do not need high-pass filtering as they are not subject to modulation by low-frequency stage wash\u2014low frequency sounds coming from the subwoofers or the public address system and wrapping around to the stage. Main indicates that high-pass filters are commonly used for directional microphones which have a proximity effect\u2014a low-frequency boost for very close sources. This low-frequency boost commonly causes problems up to 200 or 300\u00a0Hz, but Main notes that he has seen microphones that benefit from a 500\u00a0Hz high-pass filter setting on the console.\nImage.\nHigh-pass and low-pass filters are also used in digital image processing to perform image modifications, enhancements, noise reduction, etc., using designs done in either the spatial domain or the frequency domain. The unsharp masking, or sharpening, operation used in image editing software is a high-boost filter, a generalization of high-pass.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56487", "revid": "13127810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56487", "title": "Sax Rohmer", "text": "English novelist (1883\u20131959)\nArthur Henry \"Sarsfield\" Ward (15 February 1883 \u2013 1 June 1959), better known as Sax Rohmer, was an English novelist. He is best remembered for his series of novels featuring the master criminal Fu Manchu.\nLife and work.\nBorn in Birmingham to working class Irish parents William Ward (c. 1850\u20131932), a clerk, and Margaret Mary (n\u00e9e Furey; c. 1850\u20131901), Arthur Ward initially pursued a career as a civil servant before concentrating on writing full-time. He worked as a poet, songwriter and comedy sketch writer for music hall performers before creating the Sax Rohmer persona and pursuing a career writing fiction.\nLike his contemporaries Algernon Blackwood and Arthur Machen, Rohmer claimed membership to one of the factions of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. Rohmer also claimed ties to the Rosicrucians, but the validity of his claims has been questioned. His doctor and family friend Dr. Richard Watson Councell may have been his only legitimate connection to such organisations.\nHis first published work was issued in 1903, when the short story \"The Mysterious Mummy\" was sold to \"Pearson's Weekly\". Rohmer's main literary influences seem to have been Edgar Allan Poe, Arthur Conan Doyle and M. P. Shiel. He gradually transitioned from writing for music hall performers to concentrating on short stories and serials for magazine publication. In 1909 he married Rose Elizabeth Knox.\nHe published his first book \"Pause!\" anonymously in 1910.\nIn 1934, Sax Rohmer moved into a newly refurbished house, Little Gatton in Gatton Road, Reigate, Surrey, where he lived until 1946.\nHe died after succumbing to Asian flu in 1959.\nThe Fu Manchu series.\nAfter penning \"Little Tich\" in 1911 (as ghostwriter for the music hall entertainer of the same name) he wrote the first Fu Manchu novel, \"The Mystery of Dr. Fu-Manchu\", first published in a serialisation from October 1912 to June 1913. It was an immediate success, with its story of Denis Nayland Smith and Dr. Petrie facing the supposed worldwide conspiracy of the \"Yellow Peril\". The Fu Manchu stories, together with his more conventional detective series characters \u2014 Paul Harley, Gaston Max, Red Kerry, Morris Klaw (an occult detective), and the Crime Magnet \u2014 made Rohmer one of the most successful and financially well-off authors of the 1920s and 1930s.\nRohmer believed that conditions for launching a Chinese villain were ideal because the Boxer Rebellion had \"started off rumors of a Yellow Peril which had not yet died down.41 \nThe first three Fu Manchu books were published in the four years between 1913 and 1917; but it was not until 1931 (some 14 years after the third book in the series) that Rohmer returned to the series with \"Daughter of Fu Manchu\". The reason for the long interval was that Rohmer wanted to be rid of the series after \"The Si-Fan Mysteries\". The first three books had been successfully filmed by Stoll in the twenties as a pair of serials. \nRohmer's first effort at reviving the Fu Manchu property was ultimately reworked as \"The Emperor of America\". The original intent had been for the head of the organisation to be Fu Manchu's daughter. He kept Head Centre as a female criminal mastermind to combat Drake Roscoe, but was very unhappy with the book both as it started and in its finished form. He would later return to Drake Roscoe and his female supervillain for the Sumuru series. In the meantime, he tried again to focus his energies on what was first titled \"Fu Manchu's Daughter\" for \"Collier's\" in 1930, but with an older (now knighted) Denis Nayland Smith as the protagonist once more. The results were infinitely better and jump-started the series in the process.\nIn the 28 years from 1931 to 1959, Rohmer added a further 10 books to the Fu Manchu series, meaning the series totals 13 books in all (not counting the posthumous short story collection \"The Wrath of Fu Manchu and Other Stories\"). The Fu Manchu series was criticised by the Chinese government and Chinese communities in the U.S. for what was perceived as negative ethnic stereotyping. Sociologist Virginia Berridge has stated that Rohmer created a false image of London's Chinese community as crime-ridden, further claiming that the Limehouse Chinese were one of the most law-abiding of London's ethnic minorities. Critic Jack Adrian has written: \"Rohmer's own racism was careless and casual, a mere symptom of his times\". Colin Watson commented: \"So vehement and repetitive were Sax Rohmer's references to Asiatic plotting against 'white' civilisation that they cannot be explained simply as the frills of melodramatic narration.\"\nOther work.\nRohmer became a friend of escapologist Harry Houdini, who wrote to him in praise of Rohmer's \"The Romance of Sorcery\". Rohmer based his mystery-solving magician character Bazarada on Houdini.\n\"The Orchard of Tears\" is an odd book in the context of Sax Rohmer's other work. There are no Oriental villains or exotic locations; rather, there are gentle rabbits and lambs in pastoral settings and a great deal of philosophical musing. As much as he enjoyed Fu Manchu\u2014and the notoriety and income the character provided\u2014Rohmer had other interests and a markedly serious side. The departure from his expected subject matter is plainly signalled by the book's dedication: \"To the slaves of the pomegranate, sons of Adam and daughters of Eve, who drink at the fountain of life, this chalice is offered as a loving-cup\".\nIn \"The Quest of the Sacred Slipper\" (1919) terror comes to Britain when a self-centred archaeologist unearths one of Islam's holiest relics\u2014the sacred slipper of the prophet Mohammed. Until it is returned to its rightful people, the implacable Hassan of Aleppo vows his reign of death and destruction shall not cease. Behind these inhuman outrages is a secret group of fanatics. Not even the best men of Scotland Yard seem able to apprehend them.\n\"Tales of Chinatown\" (1922) is a collection of 10 short stories published in hardcover by Cassell in 1922 and Doubleday, Page and Company in 1922. All of the stories first appeared in magazine format. This collection includes a story that is considered to be one of his best and also has been anthologised many times; \"Tcheriapin\". The story \"The Hand of the Mandarin Quong\" was rewritten for this book; first published as \"Hand of the White Sheikh\", Rohmer changed the setting to a Chinatown background and published it as \"The Mystery of the Shriveled Hand\"; the title was then changed again for this collection.\nRohmer also wrote several novels of supernatural horror, including \"Brood of the Witch-Queen\", described by Adrian as \"Rohmer's masterpiece\". Rohmer was very poor at managing his wealth, however, and made several disastrous business decisions that hampered him throughout his career.\nHis final success came with a 1946\u20131949 BBC Light Programme radio series that led to a series of 1950s novels featuring a female variation on Fu Manchu, Sumuru. The Sumuru series consists of five books. Two films featuring the character played by Shirley Eaton were also produced by Harry Alan Towers, as was a 2003 British\u2013South African\u2013German film, \"Sumuru\".\nRohmer also wrote numerous short stories; \"The Master of Hollow Grange\" (1920) is a homage to M. R. James' story \"Lost Hearts\", featuring a mad scientist who preys on children.\nRohmer's work was banned in Nazi Germany, causing Rohmer to complain that he could not understand such censorship, stating \"my stories are not inimical to Nazi ideals\".\nAfter World War II, Rohmer and his wife moved to New York, only returning to London shortly before his death. He died in 1959 at the age of 76, due to an outbreak of Asian flu.\nHis wife, Rose Elizabeth (Knox) Ward (1886\u20131979), published her own mystery novel, \"Bianca in Black\", in 1958 under the pen name Elizabeth Sax Rohmer. Some editions of the book mistakenly credit her as Rohmer's daughter. She and Cay Van Ash (1918\u20131994), her husband's former assistant, wrote a biography of the author, \"Master of Villainy: A Biography of Sax Rohmer\", published in 1972.\nWorks.\nFor Rohmer's bibliography, see his full list of work.\nRelated works:\nA note on texts: U.S. editions of the Sumuru books (Gold Medal/Fawcett paperbacks) have texts which were frequently corrupted.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56488", "revid": "473593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56488", "title": "Regina Mar\u0161\u00edkov\u00e1", "text": "Czechoslovak tennis player\nRegina Mar\u0161\u00edkov\u00e1 (born 11 December 1958) is a retired tennis player from Czechoslovakia, present-day Czech Republic.\nCareer.\nMar\u0161\u00edkov\u00e1 won the French Junior Championships in 1975. She had career wins over Martina Navratilova, Billie Jean King, Evonne Goolagong, Hana Mandl\u00edkov\u00e1, Tracy Austin, and Virginia Wade.\nHer best performances in Grand Slam singles events included three consecutive semifinals at the French Open from 1977 to 1979. She won the 1977 French Open women's doubles title with Pam Teeguarden.\nMar\u0161\u00edkov\u00e1 was involved in an automobile accident in September 1981 near Prague, Czechoslovakia that caused a fatality. She lost her drivers license and visa and served several months in detention. She was not allowed to leave the Eastern Bloc until early 1985. Mar\u0161\u00edkov\u00e1 rejoined the WTA Tour in April that year at the Tournament of Champions in Florida.\nShe won 11 singles titles and six doubles titles. She reached a career-high singles ranking of world no. 11 in 1981.\nGrand Slam singles tournament timeline.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Performance key/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;(W) winner; (F) finalist; (SF) semifinalist; (QF) quarterfinalist; (#R) rounds 4, 3, 2, 1; (RR) round-robin stage; (Q#) qualification round; (DNQ) did not qualify; (A) absent; (NH) not held; (SR) strike rate (events won / competed); (W\u2013L) win\u2013loss record.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56490", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56490", "title": "\u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik, Sweden", "text": ""}
{"id": "56491", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56491", "title": "Ornskoldsvik", "text": ""}
{"id": "56492", "revid": "191757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56492", "title": "Aalesund, Norway", "text": ""}
{"id": "56493", "revid": "191757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56493", "title": "Aalesund", "text": ""}
{"id": "56494", "revid": "49291118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56494", "title": "Bergen", "text": "City and municipality in Vestland, Norway\nBergen (, ) is a city and municipality in Vestland county on the west coast of Norway. Bergen is the second-largest city in Norway after the capital Oslo. \nIn May 2025, the population was 294,029, according to Statistics Norway. The municipality covers and is on the peninsula of Bergenshalv\u00f8yen. The city centre and northern neighbourhoods are on Byfjorden, 'the city fjord'. The city is surrounded by mountains, causing Bergen to be called the \"city of seven mountains\". Many of the extra-municipal suburbs are on islands. Bergen is the administrative centre of Vestland county. The city consists of eight boroughs: Arna, Bergenhus, Fana, Fyllingsdalen, Laksev\u00e5g, Ytrebygda, \u00c5rstad, and \u00c5sane.\nTrading in Bergen may have started as early as the 1020s. According to tradition, the city was founded in 1070 by King Olav Kyrre and was named Bj\u00f8rgvin, 'the green meadow among the mountains'. It served as Norway's capital in the 13th century, and from the end of the 13th century became a bureau city of the Hanseatic League. Until 1789, Bergen enjoyed exclusive rights to mediate trade between Northern Norway and abroad, and it was the largest city in Norway until the 1830s when it was overtaken by the capital, Christiania (now known as Oslo). What remains of the quays, Bryggen, is a World Heritage Site. The city was hit by numerous fires over the years. The Bergen School of Meteorology was developed at the Geophysical Institute starting in 1917, the Norwegian School of Economics was founded in 1936, and the University of Bergen in 1946. From 1831 to 1972, Bergen was its own county. In 1972 the municipality absorbed four surrounding municipalities and became a part of Hordaland county.\nThe city is an international centre for aquaculture, shipping, the offshore petroleum industry and subsea technology, and a national centre for higher education, media, tourism and finance. Bergen Port is Norway's busiest in terms of both freight and passengers, with over 300 cruise ship calls a year bringing nearly half a million passengers to Bergen, a number that has doubled in 10 years. Almost half of the passengers are German or British. The city's main football team is SK Brann and a unique tradition of the city is the buekorps, which are traditional marching neighbourhood youth organisations. Natives speak a distinct dialect, known as Bergensk. The city features Bergen Airport, Flesland and Bergen Light Rail, and is the terminus of the Bergen Line. Four large bridges connect Bergen to its suburban municipalities.\nBergen has a mild winter climate, though with significant precipitation. From December to March, Bergen can, in rare cases, be up to warmer than Oslo, even though both cities are at about 60\u00b0 North. In summer however, Bergen is several degrees cooler than Oslo due to the same maritime effects. The Gulf Stream keeps the sea relatively warm, considering the latitude, and the mountains protect the city from cold winds from the north, north-east and east.\nHistory.\nThe city of Bergen was traditionally thought to have been founded by king Olav Kyrre, son of Harald Hardr\u00e5de in 1070AD, four years after the Viking Age in England ended with the Battle of Stamford Bridge. Modern research has, however, discovered that a trading settlement had already been established in the 1020s or 1030s.\nBergen gradually assumed the function of capital of Norway in the early 13th century, as the first city where a rudimentary central administration was established. The city's cathedral was the site of the first royal coronation in Norway in the 1150s, and continued to host royal coronations throughout the 13th century. Bergenhus fortress dates from the 1240s and guards the entrance to the harbour in Bergen. The functions of the capital city were lost to Oslo during the reign of King Haakon V (1299\u20131319).\nDuring the 14th century, North German merchants, who had already been present in substantial numbers since the 13th century, founded one of the four \"\" of the Hanseatic League at Bryggen in Bergen. The principal export traded from Bergen was dried cod from the northern Norwegian coast, which started c.\u20091100. The city was granted a monopoly for trade from the north of Norway by King H\u00e5kon H\u00e5konsson (1217\u20131263). Stockfish was the main reason that the city became one of North Europe's largest centres for trade. By the late 14th century, Bergen had established itself as the centre of the trade in Norway. The Hanseatic merchants lived in their own separate quarter of the town, where Middle Low German was used, enjoying exclusive rights to trade with the northern fishermen who each summer sailed to Bergen. The Hansa community resented Scottish merchants who settled in Bergen, and on 9 November 1523 several Scottish households were targeted by German residents. Today, Bergen's old quayside, Bryggen, is on UNESCO's list of World Heritage Sites. \nIn 1349, the Black Death was brought to Norway by an English ship arriving in Bergen. Later outbreaks occurred in 1618, 1629 and 1637, on each occasion taking about 3,000 lives. In the 15th century, the city was attacked several times by the Victual Brothers, and in 1429 they succeeded in burning the royal castle and much of the city. In 1665, the city's harbour was the site of the Battle of V\u00e5gen, when an English naval flotilla attacked a Dutch merchant and treasure fleet supported by the city's garrison. Accidental fires sometimes got out of control, and one in 1702 reduced most of the town to ashes.\nThroughout the 15th and 16th centuries, Bergen remained one of the largest cities in Scandinavia, and it was Norway's biggest city until the 1830s, being overtaken by the capital city of Oslo. From around 1600, the Hanseatic dominance of the city's trade gradually declined in favour of Norwegian merchants (often of Hanseatic ancestry), and in the 1750s, the ', or major trading post of the Hanseatic League, finally closed. During the 17th and 18th centuries, Bergen was involved in the Atlantic slave trade. Bergen-based slave trader J\u00f8rgen Thorm\u00f8hlen, the largest shipowner in Norway, was the main owner of the slave ship \"Cornelia\", which made two slave-trading voyages in 1673 and 1674 respectively; he also developed the city's industrial sector, particularly in the neighbourhood of M\u00f8hlenpris, which is named after him. Bergen retained its monopoly of trade with northern Norway until 1789. The Bergen stock exchange, the ', was established in 1813.\nModern history.\nBergen was separated from Hordaland as a county of its own in 1831. It was established as a municipality on 1 January 1838 (see ). The rural municipality of was merged with Bergen on 1 January 1877. The rural municipality of \u00c5rstad was merged with Bergen on 1 July 1915.\nDuring World War II, Bergen was occupied on the first day of the German invasion on 9 April 1940, after a brief fight between German ships and the Norwegian coastal artillery. The Norwegian resistance movement groups in Bergen were Saborg, Milorg, \"\", Sivorg, ' and the Communist Party. On 20 April 1944, during the German occupation, the Dutch cargo ship ' anchored off the Bergenhus Fortress, loaded with over 120 tons of explosives, and blew up, killing at least 150 people and damaging historic buildings. The city was subject to some Allied bombing raids, aimed at German naval installations in the harbour. Some of these caused Norwegian civilian casualties numbering about 100.\nBergen is also well known in Norway for the Isdal Woman (), an unidentified person who was found dead at Isdalen (\"Ice Valley\") on 29 November 1970. The unsolved case encouraged international speculation over the years and it remains one of the most profound mysteries in recent Norwegian history.\nThe rural municipalities of Arna, Fana, Laksev\u00e5g, and \u00c5sane were merged with Bergen on 1 January 1972. The city lost its status as a separate county on the same date, and Bergen is now a municipality, in the county of Vestland.\nFires.\nThe city's history is marked by numerous great fires. In 1198, the faction set fire to the city in connection with a battle against the faction during the civil war. In 1248, and burned, and 11 churches were destroyed. In 1413 another fire struck the city, and 14 churches were destroyed. In 1428 the city was plundered by the Victual Brothers, and in 1455, Hanseatic merchants were responsible for burning down Munkeliv Abbey. In 1476, burned down in a fire started by a drunk trader. In 1582, another fire hit the city centre and . In 1675, 105 buildings burned down in . In 1686 another great fire hit , destroying 231 city blocks and 218 boathouses. The greatest fire in history was in 1702, when 90% of the city was burned to ashes. In 1751, there was a great fire at . In 1756, yet another fire at burned down 1,500 buildings, and further great fires hit in 1771 and 1901. In 1916, 300 buildings burned down in the city centre including the Swan pharmacy, the oldest pharmacy in Norway, and in 1955 parts of burned down.\nToponymy.\nBergen is pronounced in English or and in Norwegian (in the local dialect ). The Old Norse forms of the name were and (and in Icelandic and Faroese the city is still called ). The first element is (n.) or (n.), which translates as 'mountain(s)'. The last element is (f.), which means a new settlement where there used to be a pasture or meadow. Bergen is often called \"the city among the seven mountains\". The playwright Ludvig Holberg, inspired by the seven hills of Rome, decided that his home town must be blessed with a corresponding seven mountains, though locals debate which seven they are.\nIn 1918, there was a campaign to reintroduce the Norse form ' as the name of the city. This was turned down \u2013 but as a compromise, the name of the diocese was changed to '.\nGeography.\nBergen occupies most of the peninsula of Bergenshalv\u00f8yen in the district of Midthordland in mid-western Hordaland. The municipality covers an area of . Most of the urban area is on or close to a fjord or bay, although the urban area has several mountains. The city centre is surrounded by the Seven Mountains, although there is disagreement as to which of the nine mountains constitute these. Ulriken, Fl\u00f8yen, L\u00f8vstakken and Damsg\u00e5rdsfjellet are always included as well as three of Lyderhorn, Sandviksfjellet, Bl\u00e5manen, Rundemanen and Kolbeinsvarden. Gullfjellet is Bergen's highest mountain, at above mean sea level. Bergen is far enough north that during clear nights at the solstice, there is borderline civil daylight in spite of the sun having set.\nBergen is sheltered from the North Sea by the islands Ask\u00f8y, Holsn\u00f8y (the municipality of Meland) and Sotra (the municipalities of Fjell and Sund). Bergen borders the municipalities Alver and Oster\u00f8y to the north, Vaksdal and Samnanger to the east, Os (Bj\u00f8rnafjorden) and Austevoll to the south, and \u00d8ygarden and Ask\u00f8y to the west.\nClimate.\nBergen has a temperate oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\", Trewartha: \"Dolk\"), with mild summers and cool winters. Rainfall is plentiful in all seasons, along with intermittent snowfall during winter, which often melts quickly. The exceptionally plentiful precipitation that defines the city is caused by orographic lift, sometimes causing more than two months of consecutive rainy days. The city is therefore considered the rainiest city in Europe, although it is not the wettest \"place\" on the continent.\nBergen's weather is much warmer than the city's latitude (60.4\u00b0 N) might suggest. Temperatures below \u221210\u00a0\u00b0C (14\u00a0\u00b0F) are rare. Summer temperatures sometimes reach the upper 20s, although temperatures over 30\u00b0C were previously only seen a few days each decade. The growing season in Bergen is exceptionally long for its latitude, more than 200 days. Its mild winters and proximity to the Gulf Stream provide the city with a plant hardiness zone of 8b and 9a depending on location; this zone is much more common below 50\u00b0N even in Europe, with cities as far south as Bordeaux, Thessaloniki and Istanbul falling into this category. The average date for the last overnight freeze (low below ) in spring is April 4 and average date for first freeze in autumn is November 7 giving a frost-free season of 216 days.\nExtreme temperatures are also quite rare in the city. The highest temperature ever recorded was on 26 July 2019, beating the previous record from 2018 at degrees, and the lowest was in January 1987.\nThe city is quite cloudy year round, although old sunshine hours data might have caused an underestimate of sunshine hours, due to the city's mountainside location. A new sun recorder was established at Bergen Airport, Flesland (a location with less terrain obscuring the sun) in December 2015, and this recorded an average of 1,596 hours of sun annually during 2016\u20132022.\nCityscape.\nThe city centre of Bergen lies in the west of the municipality, facing the fjord of Byfjorden. It is among a group of mountains known as the Seven Mountains, although the number is a matter of definition. From here, the urban area of Bergen extends to the north, west and south, and to its east is a large mountain massif. Outside the city centre and the surrounding neighbourhoods (i.e. \u00c5rstad, inner Laksev\u00e5g and Sandviken), the majority of the population lives in relatively sparsely populated residential areas built after 1950. While some are dominated by apartment buildings and modern terraced houses (e.g. Fyllingsdalen), others are dominated by single-family homes.\nThe oldest part of Bergen is the area around the bay of V\u00e5gen in the city centre. Originally centred on the bay's eastern side, Bergen eventually expanded west and southwards. Few buildings from the oldest period remain, the most significant being St Mary's Church from the 12th century. For several hundred years, the extent of the city remained almost constant. The population was stagnant, and the city limits were narrow. In 1702, seven-eighths of the city burned. Most of the old buildings of Bergen, including Bryggen (which was rebuilt in a mediaeval style), were built after the fire. The fire marked a transition from tar covered houses, as well as the remaining log houses, to painted and some brick-covered wooden buildings.\nThe last half of the 19th century saw a period of rapid expansion and modernisation. The fire of 1855 west of Torgallmenningen led to the development of regularly sized city blocks in this area of the city centre. The city limits were expanded in 1876, and Nyg\u00e5rd, M\u00f8hlenpris and Sandviken were urbanized with large-scale construction of city blocks housing both the poor and the wealthy. Their architecture is influenced by a variety of styles; historicism, classicism and Art Nouveau. The wealthy built villas between M\u00f8hlenpris and Nyg\u00e5rd, and on the side of Mount Fl\u00f8yen; these areas were also added to Bergen in 1876. Simultaneously, an urbanization process was taking place in Solheimsviken in \u00c5rstad, at that time outside the Bergen municipality, centred on the large industrial activity in the area. The workers' homes in this area were poorly built, and little remains after large-scale redevelopment in the 1960s\u20131980s.\nAfter \u00c5rstad became a part of Bergen in 1916, a development plan was applied to the new area. Few city blocks akin to those in Nyg\u00e5rd and M\u00f8hlenpris were planned. Many of the worker class built their own homes, and many small, detached apartment buildings were built. After World War II, Bergen had again run short of land to build on, and, contrary to the original plans, many large apartment buildings were built in Land\u00e5s in the 1950s and 1960s. Bergen acquired Fyllingsdalen from Fana municipality in 1955. Like similar areas in Oslo (e.g. Lambertseter), Fyllingsdalen was developed into a modern suburb with large apartment buildings, mid-rises, and some single-family homes, in the 1960s and 1970s. Similar developments took place beyond Bergen's city limits, for example in Loddefjord. \nAt the same time as planned city expansion took place inside Bergen, its extra-municipal suburbs also grew rapidly. Wealthy citizens of Bergen had been living in Fana since the 19th century, but as the city expanded it became more convenient to settle in the municipality. Similar processes took place in \u00c5sane and Laksev\u00e5g. Most of the homes in these areas are detached row houses, single family homes or small apartment buildings. After the surrounding municipalities were merged with Bergen in 1972, expansion has continued in largely the same manner, although the municipality encourages condensing near commercial centres, future Bergen Light Rail stations, and elsewhere.\nAs part of the modernisation wave of the 1950s and 1960s, and due to damage caused by World War II, the city government ambitiously planned redevelopment of many areas in central Bergen. The plans involved demolition of several neighbourhoods of wooden houses, namely Nordnes, Marken, and St\u00f8len. None of the plans was carried out in its original form; the Marken and St\u00f8len redevelopment plans were discarded and that of Nordnes only carried out in the area that had been most damaged by war. The city council of Bergen had in 1964 voted to demolish the entirety of Marken, however, the decision proved to be highly controversial and the decision was reversed in 1974. Bryggen was under threat of being wholly or partly demolished after the fire of 1955, when a large number of the buildings burned to the ground. Instead of being demolished, the remaining buildings were restored and accompanied by reconstructions of some of the burned buildings.\nDemolition of old buildings and occasionally whole city blocks is still taking place, the most recent major example being the 2007 razing of Jonsvollskvartalet at N\u00f8stet.\nBillboards are banned in the city.\nAdministration.\nThe municipality has had a parliamentary government since 2000. Up until then, Bergen had been governed by the city council (). The government now consists of seven government members called commissioners, and is appointed by the city council, the supreme authority of the city.\nThe tables below show the current and historical composition of the council by political party. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBoroughs.\nBergen is divided into eight boroughs, as seen on the map to the right. Clockwise, starting with the northernmost, the boroughs are \u00c5sane, Arna, Fana, Ytrebygda, Fyllingsdalen, Laksev\u00e5g, \u00c5rstad and Bergenhus. The city centre is in Bergenhus. Parts of Fana, Ytrebygda, \u00c5sane and Arna are not part of the Bergen urban area, explaining why the municipality has approximately 20,000 more inhabitants than the urban area.\nLocal borough administrations have varied since Bergen's expansion in 1972. From 1974, each borough had a politically chosen administration. From 1989, Bergen was divided into 12 health and social districts, each locally administered. From 2000 to 2004, the former organizational form with eight politically chosen local administrations was again in use and from 2008 through to 2010, a similar form existed where the local administrations had less power than previously.\nFormer borough: SentrumSentrum (literally, \"Centre\") was a borough (with the same name as a present-day neighbourhood). The borough was numbered \"01\", and its perimeter was from Store Lungeg\u00e5rdsvann and Str\u00f8mmen along Puddefjorden around Nordnes and over to Skuteviken, up Mt. Fl\u00f8yen east of Langelivannet, on to Skansemyren and over Forskj\u00f8nnelsen to Store Lungeg\u00e5rdsvann, south of the railroad tracks.\nThe population of the (now defunct) borough, numbered in 1994 more than 18,000 people.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the start of 2022[ [update]], the municipality had a population of 286,930, making the population density 599 people per km2. Urban areas outside the city limits, as defined by Statistics Norway, consist of Indre Arna (6,536 residents on 1 January 2012), Fanahammeren (3,690), Ytre Arna (2,626), Hylkje (2,277) and Espeland (2,182).\nAs of 2007, people of Norwegian origin (those who have two parents born in Norway) make up 84.5% of Bergen's residents. In addition, 8.1% were first or second generation immigrants of Western background and 7.4% were first or second generation immigrants of non-Western background. The population grew by 4,549 people in 2009, a growth rate of 1.8%. Ninety-six percent of the population lives in urban areas. As of 2002, the average gross income for men above the age of 17 is 426,000 Norwegian krone (NOK), the average gross income for women above the age of 17 is NOK238,000, with the total average gross income being NOK330,000. In 2007, there were 104.6 men for every 100 women in the age group of 20\u201339. 22.8% of the population were under 17years of age, while 4.5% were 80 and above.\nThe immigrant population (those with two foreign-born parents) in Bergen, includes 42,169 individuals with backgrounds from more than 200 countries representing 15.5% of the city's population (2014). Of these, 50.2% have background from Europe, 28.9% from Asia, 13.1% from Africa, 5.5% from Latin America, 1.9% from North America, and 0.4% from Oceania. The immigrant population in Bergen in the period 1993\u20132008 increased by 119.7%, while the ethnic Norwegian population grew by 8.1% during the same period. The national average is 138.0% and 4.2%. The immigrant population has thus accounted for 43.6% of Bergen's population growth and 60.8% of Norway's population growth during the period 1993\u20132008, compared with 84.5% in Oslo.\nThe immigrant population in Bergen has changed a lot since 1970. As of 1 January 1986, there were 2,870 people with a non-Western immigrant background in Bergen. In 2006, this figure had increased to 14,630, so the non-Western immigrant population in Bergen was five times higher than in 1986. This is a slightly slower growth than the national average, which has sextupled during the same period. Also in relation to the total population in Bergen, the proportion of non-Westerns increased significantly. In 1986, the proportion of the total population in the municipality of non-Western background was 3.6%. In January 2006, people with a non-Western immigrant background accounted for 6 percent of the population in Bergen. The share of Western immigrants has remained stable at around 2% in the period. The number of Poles in Bergen rose from 697 in 2006 to 3,128 in 2010.\nAs of 2022, immigrants of non-Western origin and their children enumerated 30,540, and made up an estimated 11% of Bergen's population. Immigrants of Western origin and their children enumerated 22,954, and made up an estimated 9% of Bergen's population.\nThe Church of Norway is the largest denomination in Bergen, with 201,006 (79.74%) registered adherents in 2012. Bergen is the seat of the Diocese of Bj\u00f8rgvin with Bergen Cathedral as its centrepiece, while St John's Church is the city's most prominent. As of 2012, the state church is followed by 52,059 irreligious, 4,947 members of various Protestant free churches, 3,873 actively registered Catholics, 2,707 registered Muslims, 816 registered Hindus, 255 registered Russian Orthodox and 147 registered Oriental Orthodox.\nEducation.\nThere are 64 elementary schools, 18 lower secondary schools and 20 upper secondary schools in Bergen, as well as 11 combined elementary and lower secondary schools. Bergen Cathedral School is the oldest school in Bergen and was founded by Pope Adrian IV in 1153.\nThe \"Bergen School of Meteorology\" was developed at the Geophysical Institute beginning in 1917, the Norwegian School of Economics was founded in 1936, and the University of Bergen in 1946.\nThe University of Bergen has 16,000 students and 3,000 staff, making it the third-largest educational institution in Norway. Research in Bergen dates back to activity at Bergen Museum in 1825, although the university was not founded until 1946. The university has a broad range of courses and research in academic fields and three national centres of excellence, in climate research, petroleum research and medieval studies. The main campus is in the city centre. The university co-operates with Haukeland University Hospital within medical research. The Chr. Michelsen Institute is an independent research foundation established in 1930 focusing on human rights and development issues.\nThe Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, which has its main campus in Kronstad, has 16,000 students and 1800 staff. It focuses on professional education, such as teaching, healthcare and engineering. The college was created through amalgamation in 1994; campuses are spread around town but will be co-located at Kronstad. The Norwegian School of Economics is in outer Sandviken and is the leading business school in Norway, having produced three Economy Nobel Prize laureates. The school has more than 3,000 students and approximately 400 staff. Other tertiary education institutions include the Bergen School of Architecture, the Bergen National Academy of the Arts, in the city centre with 300 students, and the Norwegian Naval Academy in Laksev\u00e5g. The Norwegian Institute of Marine Research has been in Bergen since 1900. It provides research and advice relating to ecosystems and aquaculture. It has a staff of 700 people.\nEconomy.\nIn August 2004, \"Time\" magazine named the city one of Europe's 14 \"secret capitals\" where Bergen's capital reign is acknowledged within maritime businesses and activities such as aquaculture and marine research, with the Institute of Marine Research (IMR) (the second-largest oceanography research centre in Europe) as a leading institution. Some of the world's largest aquaculture companies, such as Mowi and Ler\u00f8y are headquartered in the city. Shipowners based in Bergen control a significant portion of the Norwegian merchant fleet, including shipowners such as Wilson, Odfjell and Gearbulk. The city has a large presence of financial institutions. Banks Sbanken and Sparebanken Vest are headquartered in the city. The Norwegian branches of insurance companies Tryg, DNB Livsforsikring and Nordea Liv are headquartered in Bergen, along with a significant presence of marine insurance companies, including Norwegian Hull Club. A number of banks maintain large corporate banking divisions in connection with shipping and aquaculture in the city.\nBergen is the main base for the Royal Norwegian Navy (at Haakonsvern) and its international airport Flesland is the main heliport for the Norwegian North Sea oil and gas industry, from where thousands of offshore workers commute to their work places onboard oil and gas rigs and platforms.\nTourism is an important income source for the city. The hotels in the city may be full at times, due to the increasing number of tourists and conferences. Bergen is recognized as the unofficial capital of the region known as Western Norway, and recognized and marketed as the gateway city to the world-famous fjords of Norway, and for that reason, it has become Norway's largest \u2013 and one of Europe's largest \u2013 cruise ship ports of call.\nTransport.\nAir.\nBergen Airport, Flesland, is from the city centre, at Flesland. In 2013, the Avinor-operated airport served 6 million passengers. The airport serves as a hub for Scandinavian Airlines, Norwegian Air Shuttle and Wider\u00f8e; there are direct flights to 20 domestic and 53 international destinations.\nSea.\nBergen Port, operated by Bergen Port Authority, is the largest seaport in Norway. In 2011, the port saw 264 cruise calls with 350,248 visitors, In 2009, the port handled 56million tonnes of cargo, making it the ninth-busiest cargo port in Europe. There are plans to move the port out of the city centre, but no location has been chosen. Fjord Line operates a cruiseferry service to Hirtshals, Denmark. Bergen is the southern terminus of Hurtigruten, the Coastal Express, which operates with daily services along the coast to Kirkenes. Passenger catamarans run from Bergen south to Leirvik and Sunnhordland, and north to Sognefjord and Nordfjord.\nThe port includes three large power connections that allow ships to turn off their engines whilst docked (known as \"cold ironing\")\nRoad.\nThe city centre is surrounded by an electronic toll collection ring using the Autopass system. The main motorways consist of E39, which runs north\u2013south through the municipality, E16, which runs eastwards, and National Road 555, which runs westwards. There are four major bridges connecting Bergen to neighbouring municipalities: the Nordhordland Bridge, the Ask\u00f8y Bridge, the Sotra Bridge and the Oster\u00f8y Bridge. Bergen connects to the island of Bjor\u00f8y via the subsea Bjor\u00f8y Tunnel.\nRail.\nBergen Station is the terminus of the Bergen Line, which runs to Oslo. Vy operates express trains to Oslo and the Bergen Commuter Rail to Voss. Between Bergen and Arna Station, the train runs about every 30minutes through the Ulriken Tunnel; there is no corresponding road tunnel, forcing road vehicles to travel via \u00c5sane or Nesttun.\nLightrail.\nBergen is one of the smallest cities in Europe to have both tram and trolleybus electric urban transport systems simultaneously. Public transport in Hordaland is managed by Skyss, which operates an extensive city bus network in Bergen and to many neighbouring municipalities, including one route which operates as a trolleybus. The trolleybus system in Bergen is the only one still in operation in Norway and one of two trolleybus systems in Scandinavia.\nThe modern tram Bergen Light Rail () opened between the city centre and Nesttun in 2010, extended to R\u00e5dal (Lagunen Storsenter) in 2013 and to the Bergen airport Flesland in 2017. Extensions to other boroughs may occur later. \nFl\u00f8ibanen is a funicular which runs from the city centre to Mount Fl\u00f8yen and Ulriksbanen is an aerial tramway which runs to Mount Ulriken.\nCulture and sports.\n (BT) and (BA) are the largest newspapers, with circulations of 87,076 and 30,719 in 2006, \"BT\" is a regional newspaper covering all of Vestland, while \"BA\" focuses on metropolitan Bergen. Other newspapers published in Bergen include the Christian national \"Dagen\", with a circulation of 8.936, and \"TradeWinds\", an international shipping newspaper. Local newspapers are \"Fanaposten\" for Fana, \"Sydvesten\" for Laksev\u00e5g and Fyllingsdalen and \"Bygdanytt\" for Arna and the neighbouring municipality Oster\u00f8y. TV 2, Norway's largest private television company, is based in Bergen.\nThe 1,500-seat Grieg Hall is the city's main cultural venue, and home of the Bergen Philharmonic Orchestra, founded in 1765, and the Bergen Woodwind Quintet. The city also features Carte Blanche, the Norwegian national company of contemporary dance. The annual Bergen International Festival is the main cultural festival, which is supplemented by the Bergen International Film Festival. Two internationally renowned composers from Bergen are Edvard Grieg and Ole Bull. Grieg's home, Troldhaugen, has been converted to a museum. During the 1990s and early 2000s, Bergen produced a series of successful pop, rock and black metal artists, collectively known as the Bergen Wave.\nDen Nationale Scene is Bergen's main theatre. Founded in 1850, it had Henrik Ibsen as one of its first in-house playwrights and art directors. Bergen's contemporary art scene is centred on BIT Teatergarasjen, Bergen Kunsthall, United Sardines Factory (USF) and Bergen Center for Electronic Arts (BEK). Bergen was a European Capital of Culture in 2000. Buekorps is a unique feature of Bergen culture, consisting of boys aged from 7 to 21 parading with imitation weapons and snare drums. The city's Hanseatic heritage is documented in the Hanseatic Museum at Bryggen.\nSK Brann is Bergen's premier football team; founded in 1908, they have played in the top flight for Norwegian men's football, Eliteserien, for 67 out of 80 seasons since its establishment in 1937, the second most of any club. The team were the football champions in 1961\u20131962, 1963, and 2007, and reached the quarter-finals of the Cup Winners' Cup in 1996\u20131997. They have also won the Norwegian Football Cup seven times, most recently in the 2022 season. Brann play their home games at the 16,750-seat Brann Stadion. \u00c5sane is the city's second-best team, playing in the First Division at \u00c5sane Arena. Now-defunct Fyllingen played in the top flight in 1990, 1991 and 1993. Brann and \u00c5sane also play in the women's top flight, Toppserien, along with Arna-Bj\u00f8rnar. Brann have won the league twice (once as IL Sandviken), and the Norwegian Women's Cup once.\nBergen IK is the premier men's ice hockey team, playing at Bergenshallen in the First Division. Tertnes play in the Women's Premier Handball League, and Fyllingen in the Men's Premier Handball League. In athletics, the city is dominated by IL Norna-Salhus, IL Gular and FIK BFG Fana, formerly also Norr\u00f8na IL and TIF Viking. The Bergen Storm are an American football team that plays matches at Varden Kunstgress and plays in the second division of the Norwegian league.\nBergensk is the native dialect of Bergen. It was strongly influenced by Low German-speaking merchants from the mid-14th to mid-18th centuries. During the Dano-Norwegian period from 1536 to 1814, Bergen was more influenced by Danish than other areas of Norway. The Danish influence removed the female grammatical gender in the 16th century, making Bergensk one of very few Norwegian dialects with only two instead of three grammatical genders. The Rs are uvular trills, as in French, which probably spread to Bergen some time in the 18th century, overtaking the alveolar trill in the time span of two to three generations. Owing to an improved literacy rate, Bergensk was influenced by riksm\u00e5l and bokm\u00e5l in the 19th and 20th centuries. This led to large parts of the German-inspired vocabulary disappearing and pronunciations shifting slightly towards East Norwegian.\nThe 1986 edition of the Eurovision Song Contest took place in Bergen. Bergen was the host city for the 2017 UCI Road World Championships. The city is also a member of the UNESCO Creative Cities Network in the category of gastronomy since 2015.\nMusic.\nBergen has been the home of several notable alternative bands, collectively referred to as the Bergen Wave. These bands include R\u00f6yksopp and Kings of Convenience on the small, Bergen-based record label Tell\u00e9 Records, as well as related side-projects, such as The Whitest Boy Alive, Kommode, and Visekongene on independent labels. Other internationally well-received artists also originating from Bergen include Aurora, Sondre Lerche, Kygo, Boy Pablo and Alan Walker.\nBergen is also known as the \"black metal capital of Norway\", due to its role in the early Norwegian black metal scene and the amount of acts to come from the city in the early 1990s. Also the singer Einar Selvik of the band Wardruna was born in Bergen and became famous thanks to the TV series \"Vikings\".\nBergen is also the birthplace of composer Edvard Grieg. The biggest music festival in the city is Bergenfest.\nStreet art.\nBergen is considered to be the street art capital of Norway. Famed artist Banksy visited the city in 2000 and inspired many to start creating street art. Soon after, the city brought up the most famous street artist in Norway: Dolk. His art can still be seen in several places in the city, and in 2009 the city council choose to preserve Dolk's work \"Spray\" with protective glass. In 2011, Bergen council launched a plan of action for street art in Bergen from 2011 to 2015 to ensure that \"Bergen will lead the fashion for street art as an expression both in Norway and Scandinavia\".\nThe Madam Felle (1831\u20131908) monument in Sandviken, is in honour of a Norwegian woman of German origin, who in the mid-19th century managed, against the will of the council, to maintain a counter of beer. A well-known restaurant of the same name is now elsewhere in Bergen. The monument was erected in 1990 by sculptor Kari Rolfsen, supported by an anonymous donor. Madam Felle, civil name Oline Fell, was posthumously remembered in a popular song, possibly originally a folksong, \"Kjenner Dokker Madam Felle?\" by Lothar Lindtner and Rolf Berntzen on an album in 1977.\nParks and bathing places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNeighbourhoods.\nThe traditional neighbourhoods of Bergen include Bryggen, Eidemarken, Engen, Fjellet, Kalfaret, Ladeg\u00e5rden, L\u00f8vstakksiden, Marken, Minde, M\u00f8hlenpris, Nordnes, Nyg\u00e5rd, N\u00f8stet, Sandviken, Sentrum, Skansen, Skuteviken, Strandsiden, St\u00f8len, Sydnes, Verftet, V\u00e5gsbunnen, Wergeland, and Ytre Sandviken.\n\"Grunnkretser\".\nThe various addresses in Bergen, each belong to one of the various \"grunnkrets\".\nInternational relations.\nEach year Bergen sells the Christmas tree seen in Newcastle's Haymarket as a sign of the ongoing friendship between the sister cities, which were connected by a ferry service from 1890 to 2008. The Nordic friendship cities of Bergen, Gothenburg, Turku and Aarhus arrange inter-Nordic camps each year by registering tenth-grade school classes from each of the other cities to school camps, for a profit. Bergen received a totem pole as a gift of friendship from the city of Seattle on the city's 900th anniversary in 1970. It is now placed in the Nordnes Park and gazes out over the sea towards the friendship city far to the west.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nBergen is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56495", "revid": "1314261700", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56495", "title": "Mons, Belgium", "text": "Capital of Hainaut province, Wallonia, Belgium\nMons (; German and , ; Walloon and ) is a city and municipality of Wallonia, and the capital of the province of Hainaut, Belgium.\nMons was made into a fortified city by Count Baldwin IV of Hainaut in the 12th century. The population grew quickly, trade flourished, and several commercial buildings were erected near the Grand-Place. In 1814, King William I of the Netherlands increased the fortifications, following the fall of the First French Empire. The Industrial Revolution and coal mining made Mons a centre of heavy industry. In 1830, Belgium gained its independence and the decision was made to dismantle the fortifications, allowing the creation of large boulevards and other urban projects. In 1914, Mons was the location of the Battle of Mons. The British were forced to retreat by a numerically superior German force and the town remained occupied by the Germans until its liberation by the Canadian Corps during the final days of the war. There are several memorial placards related to the World War I battles.\nToday, the city is an important university town and commercial centre. The main square is the centre of the old city. It is paved in the manner of old cities and is home to many cafes and restaurants, as well as the Town Hall and Belfry. It is forbidden to park in or drive through the centre. Together with the Czech city of Plze\u0148, Mons was the European Capital of Culture in 2015.\nHistory.\nEarly settlements.\nThe first signs of activity in the region of Mons are found at Spiennes, where some of the best flint tools in Europe were found dating from the Neolithic period. When Julius Caesar arrived in the region in the 1st century BC, the region was settled by the Nervii, a Belgian tribe. A castrum was built in Roman (Belgica) times, giving the settlement its Latin name Castrilocus. The name was later changed into Montes for the mountain on which the castrum was built.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the 7th century, Saint Ghislain and two of his disciples built an oratory or chapel dedicated to Saints Peter and Paul near the Mons hill, at a place called Ursidongus, now known as Saint-Ghislain. Soon after, Saint Waltrude (in French \"Sainte Waudru\"), daughter of one of Chlothar II\u2019s intendants, came to the oratory and was proclaimed a saint upon her death in 688. She was canonized in 1039.\nLike Ath, its neighbour to the north-west, Mons was made a fortified city by Count Baldwin IV of Hainaut in the 12th century. The population grew quickly, trade flourished, and several commercial buildings were erected near the Grand-Place. The 12th century also saw the appearance of the first town halls. The city had 4,700 inhabitants by the end of the 13th century. Mons succeeded Valenciennes as the capital of the county of Hainaut in 1295 and grew to 8,900 inhabitants by the end of the 15th century. In the 1450s, Matheus de Layens took over the construction of the Saint Waltrude church from Jan Spijkens and restored the Town Hall.\nFrom 1500 to 1800.\nIn 1515, Charles V took an oath in Mons as Count of Hainaut. In this period of its history, the city became the target of various occupations, starting in May 1572 with the Protestant takeover by Louis of Nassau, who had hoped to clear the way for the French Protestant leader Gaspard de Coligny to oppose Spanish rule. After the murder of de Coligny during the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre, the Duke of Alba took control of Mons in September 1572 in the name of the Catholic King of Spain. This spelled the ruin of the city and the arrest of many of its inhabitants; from 1580 to 1584, Mons became the capital of the Southern Netherlands.\nOn 8 April 1691, after a nine-month siege, Louis XIV\u2019s army stormed the city, which again suffered heavy casualties. From 1697 to 1701, Mons was alternately French or Austrian. After being under French control from 1701 to 1709, the Dutch and British armies gained the upper hand in the Battle of Malplaquet and the Siege of Mons in 1709. In 1715, Mons returned to Austria under the terms of the Treaty of Utrecht (1713). But the French did not give up easily; Louis XV besieged the city again in 1746. After the Battle of Jemappes (1792), the Hainaut area was annexed to France and Mons became the capital of Jemappes.\nFrom 1800 to the present.\nFollowing the fall of the First French Empire in 1814, King William I of the Netherlands fortified the city heavily. In 1830, however, Belgium gained its independence and the decision was made to dismantle fortified cities such as Mons, Charleroi, and Namur. The actual removal of fortifications only happened in the 1860s, allowing the creation of large boulevards and other urban projects. The Industrial Revolution and coal mining made Mons a center of heavy industry, which strongly influenced the culture and image of the Borinage region as a whole. It was to become an integral part of the \"sillon industriel\", the industrial backbone of Wallonia.\nRiots of Mons.\nOn 17 April 1893, between Mons and Jemappes, seven strikers were killed by the civic guard at the end of the Belgian general strike of 1893. This general strike was one of the first general strikes in an industrial country. The proposed law on universal suffrage was approved the day after by the Belgian Parliament.\nBattle of Mons.\nOn 23\u201324 August 1914, Mons was the location of the Battle of Mons\u2014the first battle fought by the British Army in World War I. The British were forced to retreat with just over 1,600 casualties, and the town remained occupied by the Germans until its liberation in the Second Battle of Mons by the Canadian Corps during the final days of the war.\nWithin the front entrance to the City Hall, there are several memorial placards related to the First World War battles and in particular, one has the inscription:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;MONS WAS RECAPTURED BY THE CANADIAN CORPS ON THE 11th NOVEMBER 1918: AFTER FIFTY MONTHS OF GERMAN OCCUPATION, FREEDOM WAS RESTORED TO THE CITY: HERE WAS FIRED THE LAST SHOT OF THE GREAT WAR.\nSecond World War.\nDuring the Second World War, as an important industrial centre, the city was heavily bombed. During the Battle of the Mons Pocket US Army forces encircled and took 25,000 Germans prisoner in early September 1944.\nAfter 1945.\nAfter the war, most industries went into decline.\nNATO's Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe (SHAPE) was relocated in Casteau, a village near Mons, from Rocquencourt on the outskirts of Paris after France's withdrawal from the military structure of the alliance in 1967. The relocation of SHAPE to this particular region of Belgium was largely a political decision, based in large part on the depressed economic conditions of the area at the time with the view to bolstering the economy of the region. A riot in the prison of Mons took place in April 2006 after prisoner complaints concerning living conditions and treatment; no deaths were reported as a result of the riot, but the event focused attention on prisons throughout Belgium. Today, the city is an important university town and commercial centre.\nGeography.\nThe municipality consists of the following sub-municipalities: Ciply, Cuesmes, Fl\u00e9nu, Ghlin, Harmignies, Harveng, Havr\u00e9, Hyon, Jemappes, Maisi\u00e8res, Mesvin, Mons proper, Nimy, Nouvelles, Obourg, Saint-Denis, Saint-Symphorien, Spiennes, and Villers-Saint-Ghislain.\nFestivities.\nTanks in town commemorates the liberation of Belgium during World War II by the American 3rd Armored Division, and is one of the world's largest gatherings of World War II tanks.\nEducation.\nThere are several public educational facilities in Mons:\nTransportation.\nMons is located along the N56 road. It is also accessed via European route E42, which is a continuation of French Autoroute A2, linking the British World War I battlefields of Mons with the Somme Battlefields,\nMons railway station opened on 19 December 1841.\nA small, general aviation airfield Saint-Ghislain Airport is located nearby for private aircraft. The nearest passengers airports are Charleroi Airport, located east and Brussels Airport, located north east of Mons.\nClimate.\nMons has a typical Belgian oceanic climate with relatively narrow temperature differences between seasons for its inland 50\u00b0 latitude, as a result of Gulf Stream influence.\nSports.\nThe town hosts a professional basketball team called Belfius Mons-Hainaut and a tennis tournament called the Ethias Trophy. It previously hosted the football club R.A.E.C. Mons, though the team has since disbanded. There is also a horse racing venue at Hippodrome de Wallonie in Mons.\nPlanning and architectural heritage.\nThe centre consists largely of red brick houses. Although there are few old buildings and rarely new blue stone buildings, its use is generally limited to parts of the decorative walls. Much of the centre is made up of houses which are two or three storeys high. \nIn commercial areas, the ground floor is used as commercial space, while other floors are used for housing. Generally behind the houses there is a small garden.\nThe outskirts of the city are also generally made of brick terraced houses. They nevertheless have the largest green spaces in the front or rear. In more remote areas of the centre, there are four fa\u00e7ades of the villas.\nAfter the Second World War the city experienced rather limited construction of buildings. Some public housing have been built in Ghlin, Hyon Jemappes and in the suburbs of the city. Since the late 1990s and especially since the arson which took place in one of these buildings, the city undertook a policy of deconstruction of these houses which is still in progress at the moment. A whole series of social buildings are evenly dispersed in the downtown and surrounding suburbs.\n16,5% of the city's population lives in apartments (17% in Belgium) and 82.7% in single-family homes (82.3% in Belgium). Of the 82.7% who live in single family homes, only 26% (37.3% in Belgium) are separate houses, while 55.7% (44.4 in Belgium) are detached or terraced houses. That's pretty much a small town in Belgium. Large municipalities have in fact fewer single family homes, but many more apartments whereas the smallest towns have few apartments and a lot of single family homes. The figures show very clearly the strong presence of terraced houses rather than separate houses: it exemplifies the urbanization of downtown, but also urban cores such as Jemappes et Cuesmes.\nGrand-Place.\nThe Grand-Place is the centre of the old city. It is situated near the shopping street (pedestrian) and the Belfry. It is paved in the manner of old cities and is home to many cafes and restaurants, as well as the Town Hall. The outskirts of the square are accessible by car, but it is forbidden to park or drive through the centre. Each year, the square is used as an action theatre called \"Lume\u00e7on\" to stage a battle between Saint George and Dragon. The Grand-Place is also equipped with a fountain, which opened on 21 March 2006. It also hosts a Christmas market and sometimes an ice rink during the winter holiday period.\nThe fa\u00e7ade of the building called \"au Blan Levrie\" shows the care with which the city attempted to unite the old and the modern. It is the first authorised building in the main square which was made of stone to avoid fire incidents. It was originally built in 1530 in the Gothic style, for the Malaperts, a wealthy local family. In 1975, the architects A. Godart and O. Dupire were assigned to design a bank. They proceeded to gut the interior and conduct a precise survey of the whole before beginning the restoration project. The fa\u00e7ade was completely restored, sometimes (as below) by extending the design of mouldings, but the fenestration proved impossible to restore as there were not enough clues from the remains of the original to do so. Therefore, \"The choice was directed towards a contemporary discrete [style], appearing in second test [?]: they are steel frame whose profiles are thinner. \u00bb Impression yet reinforced by the way of which was treated at the entrance gate.[?]\"\nCity Hall.\nHistory.\nOriginally its communal organization, Mons was a City Hall called \"House of Peace.\" Earlier the deputy mayors were on the castle of the Counts of Hainaut, and now it is only the conciergerier, Saint-Calixte chapel and some underground rooms and the chamber. This place is now Castle Park, where we can also see the Belfry. Already in the 13th century, the counts mentioned the House of Peace, located in the Rue Nimy. Other documents of the same time let one suppose that there existed two Houses of Peace, the one in the Rue Nimy and the other in the market area.\nIt was in 1323 that Count William I gave permission to build the House of Peace on the location of the current City Hall. This is called a \"Town House\" built of stones and bricks at the base, while the superstructure is of wood. This building underwent various changes during the 15th century until 1477, when the nearby shop in the arsenal exploded.\nCurrent City Hall.\nThe destroyed buildings were rebuilt and benefitted from new changes and additions over the centuries.\nThe architect of the City Hall, Matthew Layens of Leuven, was called to draw up plans. It was to be a building in Gothic style, but it seems that the plan (which was not found) was not completed, including the abandonment of the second floor, which was still intended for construction. The Renaissance campanile was added in the 18th century. It contains a bell dating from 1390, the Bancloque, and carries a clock dial overlooking the Grand-Place and a light clock. The 19th century saw various modifications of the fa\u00e7ade, the removal of stone mullions to the floor and various stone ornaments.\nIn its current state, the Town Hall consists of a remarkable collection of various buildings housing a large proportion of municipal services. These buildings have undergone many changes over the centuries, restorations and additions of elements from other buildings, such as a Gothic style fireplace from castle Trazegnies, carved doors of the 16th century saved from demolition, a fireplace from the castle of Gouy-lez-Pedestrian, and another fireplace in 1603 from the Ch\u00e2teau d'Havr\u00e9.\nOn 23 April 2006 was inaugurated a bronze statuary group by Garouste Gerard, creator of a fresco for the wedding hall. The work, evoking the combat of St. George and the dragon, is in front of City Hall at the bottom of the stair-ramps providing access to one of the entrances to City Hall.\nMayor's Garden.\nThese buildings surround a small, irregularly shaped square, the Mayor's Garden, from which the Rue d'Enghien descends. The Ropieur Fountain, by sculptor L\u00e9on Gobert (1869\u20131935), can be found in the middle of the square. The symbolizes a young insolent resident of Mons, drenching passersby with water from the fountain.\nSaint Waltrude Collegiate Church.\nAlthough located in the heart of the old County of Hainaut, the Saint Waltrude Collegiate Church is one of the most characteristic churches and most homogeneous of Brabantine Gothic architecture.\nThe collegiate was built in the 15th century on the orders of canons. Along with the nearby Belfry, it is considered as a major symbol of the city of Mons. It contains many works of Jacques du Broeucq.\nIt is made of local materials like sandstone, blue stone and brick. It is designed in a classic form, which is expressed by a Latin cross sign. It measures 115 metres long, 32 metres wide and rises to 24.5 metres at the keystone. The chancel is surrounded by an ambulatory and 15 chapels.\nBelfry.\nAlso called El Catiau by Montois, it was built in the 17th century. The Belfry is the only Baroque style building in Belgium that reaches a height of 87 meters. In its top section it contains a 49 bell carillon. It was classified as a UNESCO World Heritage Site on 1 December 1999, as part of the Belfries of Belgium and France site.\nVictor Hugo described the Belfry in a letter to his wife as \"a coffeepot flanked by four smaller teapots.\"\nPress House (Spanish House).\nThe Press House dates back to the 16th century and is a rare example of a house in traditional Spanish style in Mons. It is made in a simple architectural way using brick. This material was economical and used after the fire in 1548, because when it was rebuilt, the cost of stone had increased. In 1548, the deputy mayor had prohibited the use of flammable materials.\nThe buildings were restored in 1919\u20131920, on the plans of the communal architect E. Bertiaux and are occupied by the Maison de la Presse.\nWater machine.\nThis industrial hall is all that remains of the \"machine\" that supplied Mons with drinkable water from 1871, the year when the river Trouille was diverted. Designed by the architect Hubert and the engineer Celi Moullan, this impressive machinery of pipes and mains was built in metal and glass and forced the water from the valley level up to the town water tanks in the castle place yard. To source the water, Mons purchased two springs known as the \"Mouse Hole\" and \"La Valli\u00e8re,\" and the water was transported via hydraulic motor.\nThe \"water machine\" still bears witness to the sanitary and hygiene concerns which arose in Mons in 1865-1870 and marks the transition from medieval water supply wells, springs and hand pumps, to operation of pumps suction and force.\nThis progress at domestic level transformed the townspeople's way of life and changed the boundaries of Mons and Spiennes. They used to get water from wells or fountains, sometimes over a hundred yards from their homes. Soon followed another urban project: the introduction in 1828 of city gas to illuminate new avenues and streets. These two changes are made possible by the demolition of the fortifications, which releases the land, and the diversion of Trouille including the strategic role of supply ditches was then passed.\nThe \"water machine\" was restored in the early 1990s, and the building now hosts various cultural events. The machinery was dismantled.\nWaux Hall.\nWaux Hall park was built in the 19th century (1862\u20131864) at the initiative of the Society of Waux Hall created for this purpose by members of the bourgeoisie. It is therefore the source of a private park. It is located at the site of Fort said that the Dutch formed an outwork the last fortification (1815\u20131864). Remnants of the fort still exist under the current pavillon. The gardens were designed by Louis Fuchs and the central pavilion was built by architect Joseph Hubert in tavern style.\nA 5 hectare landscaped park was built in the mid 19th century and consists of various species of age-old trees, water features, lakes and lawns. A Turkish hazel is one of the remarkable trees in the park. Various memorials and outdoor sculptures, including works of sculptors Grard, Deville, Hupet, and Guilmot Harvent, are placed.\nThe Technical and Vocational School of Horticulture was established in 1863, it was installed under the authority of the corporation of Waux Hall. It became communal in 1892 at the time of acquisition of Waux Hall by the city of Mons, and then came under the authority of the province of Hainaut in 2006. In 2009 this event was moved to the Grand-Place.\nParfaite Union.\nThe masonic Lodge \"La Parfaite Union\" is the oldest in Belgium and perhaps even on the continent. It was founded in 1721. At that time, Mons became a masonic centre followed by the creation of several new lodges (Vraie et parfaite harmonie (1767), \u00c0 l'Orient de Mons (1783) et la Ligue \u00e9quitable (1786).\nAfter the French Revolution, the meetings were held in different locations, and an event was organised by the \"Parfaite Union\" for the construction of a permanent building. The plans of the architect Hector Puchot were retained in 1890. The neo-Egyptian style then became a reference for Masonic architecture, and we can consider the lodge of Mons as a model of its kind with its numerous motifs\u2014\"Egyptian\" papyrus capitals, frieze lotus bud, etc.\nCarr\u00e9 des Arts.\nThe William Barracks, renamed the Major Sabbe Barracks after the First World War and since the 1990s called the Carr\u00e9 des Arts, dates from 1824 to 1827, at the time of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands. It is the work of the architect R\u00e9mi de Puydt (1789\u20131844). The fa\u00e7ade and roof of the building were listed in 1983 on the advice of the Royal Commission of Monuments, Sites and Excavations.\nMaintaining its military purpose until the late 1940s, the building was then used by the Royal Grammar School John Avesnes from the 1960s to the early 1990s. Since the completion of the conversion carried out between 1993 and 1995, the Carr\u00e9 des Arts hosts the Graduate School of Arts and visual (ESAPV) and regional television TV Borinage Mons (Tele MB).\nRouge-Puits.\nThree wells, fountains that decorated the streets of Mons have survived until today. This is the case of the fountain-pillory, Louis XVI style, built in 1779 by the blue stone Ouvertus architect.\nBuilt in 1831 by Albert Jamot, this well was transferred to the central March\u00e9-aux-Herbes in 1877 and has served as a fountain after the development of the water supply in the city during the years 1869\u20131870. It has regained its original location at the corner of the Coupe and the Chauss\u00e9e in 1981. After the March\u00e9 aux Herbes, the fountain (not connected to the water) was placed for a few years in the park at the far end of the Rue des Quatre Fils Aymon.\nCasemates.\nThe casemates and the bakery are the remains of military fortifications dating from the kingdom of the Netherlands (1814\u20131830). The law dividing the disassembly of the fortifications dates back to 1861. They are located near the Nervienne site. The roof of the old bakery has been transformed into a public park and playground for children, while the casemates accommodate the mus\u00e9e de la Route.\nValenciennoise Tower.\nThis is the last existing trace of the medieval walls surrounding the city. This defensive structure built of sandstone from Bray was built around 1358. Its walls equipped with loopholes have a thickness of up to 4 meters. The tower has lost about a third of its original size. A project to install a terrace on its top open to the public had just been completed in 2009. The tower has housed a sound installation in the festival of contemporary art audio-visual CitySonics when it reopened.\nConcourse of the Courts.\nIn 1966, the Council of Ministers decided to build new buildings to house the Courts of Justice: Assize Court, Labour Court, Court of Appeal, Court of Commerce, etc. The choice is the site of the former \"Hall of exposure\". The Building Authority designated as architects for the project the Office Aura (John Bartholomew). The triangular shape of the land has created interior spaces, decreasing in height and width, forming a sort of \"cathedral space\" underlined by a continuous central luminous line. On this major axis, the \"backbone\" of the project, has created spaces for encounter and relaxation. The latest techniques have been implemented for the economic management of energy, giving maximum comfort to staff and the public while ensuring the development of architectural building.\nOpened in May 2007, by January 2011 all buildings already had developed many problems of water seepage and stability. Thus one of the gateways weighing a hundred kilos came off its hinges and nearly fell on a lawyer who entered, cracks opened between concrete blocks, the joints of windows let in wind and water when it rains in the concourse, etc. The lack of any maintenance contracts might be a significant cause of these problems, since minor problems might otherwise have been prevented from getting worse.\nPatron saint.\nThe patron saint of Mons is Waltrude.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56496", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56496", "title": "Bergen, Belgium", "text": ""}
{"id": "56498", "revid": "1276612407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56498", "title": "Gand", "text": "Gand may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "56499", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56499", "title": "Kingston", "text": "Kingston may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "56500", "revid": "23755636", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56500", "title": "Bharatanatyam", "text": "Major form of Indian classical dance\nBharatanatyam is an Indian classical dance form that comes from Tamil Nadu, India. It is a classical dance form recognized by the Sangeet Natak Akademi, and expresses South Indian religious themes and spiritual ideas, particularly of Shaivism and in general of Hinduism.\nA description of precursors of \"Bharatanatyam\" from the Natya Shastra date from around 500 BCE - 500CE and those in the ancient Tamil epic \"Silappatikaram\" date to around 171 CE. Temple sculptures of the 6th to 9th century CE suggest dance was a refined performance art by the mid-1st millennium CE. Sadiraattam, which was renamed Bharatanatyam in 1932, is the oldest classical dance tradition in India. \n\"Bharatanatyam\" contains different types of \"bani\". \"Bani\", or \"tradition\", is a term used to describe the dance technique and style specific to a guru or school, often named for the village of the guru. \"Bharatanatyam\" style is noted for its fixed upper torso, bent legs, and flexed knees (\"Aramandi\") combined with footwork, and a vocabulary of sign language based on gestures of hands, eyes, and face muscles. The dance is accompanied by music and a singer, and typically the dancer's guru is present as the \"nattuvanar\" or director-conductor of the performance and art. The performance repertoire of Bharatanatyam, like other classical dances, includes \"nrita\" (pure dance), \"nritya\" (Conveys a meaning to the audience through hand gestures) and \"natya\" (Consists of the elements of drama). A program of bharatanatyam usually lasts two hours without interruption and includes a specific list of procedures, all performed by one dancer, who does not leave the stage or change costume. The accompanying orchestra\u2014composed of drums, drone, and singer\u2014occupies the back of the stage, led by the guru, or the teacher, of the dancer.\nSadiraattam remained exclusive to Tamil Hindu temples through the 19th century. It was banned by the colonial British government in 1910, but the Indian community protested against the ban and expanded its performance outside temples in the 20th century as Bharatanatyam. Modern stage productions of Bharatanatyam have become popular throughout India and include performances that are purely dance-based on non-religious ideas and fusion themes. The Thanjavur Quartet developed the basic structure of modern Bharatanatyam by formalizing it.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Bharatam\" is seen as a backronym, with \"bha\" standing for \"bhavam\" (feelings, emotions), \"ra\" for \"ragam\" (melody, framework for musical notes), and \"tam\" for \"talam\" (rhythm). The term \"Natyam\" is a Sanskrit word for \"dance\". The compound word \"Bharatanatyam\" therefore is understood to connote a dance that harmoniously expresses \"bhavam\", \"ragam\" and \"talam\". Other interpretations suggest that the name literally translates as \"the dance of Bharata\", from Bharata, who is reputed to be the author of the \"Natya Shastra\", a Sanskrit text of performance arts.\nIn 1932, E Krishna Iyer and Rukmini Devi Arundale proposed renaming \"Sadiraattam\" (), also known as \"Parathaiyar Aattam or Thevarattam\", as \"Bharatanatyam\" to give the dance form a measure of respect, at a meeting of the Madras Music Academy. They also were instrumental in modifying mainly the Pandanallur style of dance.\nHistory.\nThe theoretical foundations of dance Bharatanatyam are found first in \"Natya Shastra\" and later in a Tamil text called Kootha nool taken from Tholkappiyam (250 BCE).\nThe \"Natya Shastra,\" attributed to the ancient scholar Bharata, and its first complete compilation is dated to between 500 BCE and 200 CE, but estimates vary between 500 BCE and 500 CE. Richmond et al. estimate the \"Natasutras\" to have been composed around 600 BCE. The most studied version of the \"Natya Shastra\" text consists of about 6000 verses structured into 36 chapters. The text, states Natalia Lidova, describes the theory of \"T\u0101\u1e47\u1e0dava\" dance (Shiva), the theory of \"rasa\", of \"bh\u0101va\", expression, gestures, acting techniques, basic steps, standing postures\u2014all of which are part of Indian classical dances. Dance and performance arts, states this text, are a form of expression of spiritual ideas, virtues and the essence of scriptures.\nHistorical references to dance are found in the Tamil epics \"Silappatikaram\" (c. 2nd century CE) and \"Manimegalai\" (c. 6th century). The ancient text \"Silappatikaram\", includes a story of a dancing girl named Madhavi; it describes the dance training regimen called \"Arangatrau Kathai\" of Madhavi in verses 113 through 159. The carvings in Kanchipuram's Shiva temple that have been dated to 6th to 9th century CE suggest dance was a well-developed performance art by about the mid 1st millennium CE.\nA famous example of illustrative sculpture is in the southern gateway of the Chidambaram temple (\u224812th century) dedicated to the Hindu god Shiva, where 108 poses, described as karanas in the \"Natya Shastra\", are carved in stone.\nBharatanatyam shares the dance poses of many ancient Shiva sculptures in Hindu temples. The Cave 1 of the Badami cave temples of Karnataka, dated back to the 7th century portrays the \"Tandava\" dancing Shiva as Nataraja. The image, tall, has 18 arms in a form that expresses the dance positions arranged in a geometric pattern. The arms of Shiva express \"mudras\" (symbolic hand gestures), that are used in Bharatanatyam. The early 12th century ancient Sanskrit text Manasollasa discusses about the dancing movements like Natya, Tandava, Lasya, Laghu, Visama and Vikata, This discussion is similar to the content found in Natya Shastra. \nDevadasis, anti-dance movement, colonial ban, and the decline.\nSome colonial Indologists and modern authors have argued that Bharatanatyam is a descendant of an ancient :o \"Devadasi\" (lit.\u2009'servant girls of Devas') culture, suggesting a historical origin back to between 300 BCE and 300 CE. Modern scholars have questioned this theory for lack of any direct textual or archeological evidence. Historic sculptures and texts do describe and project dancing girls, as well as temple quarters dedicated to women, but they do not state them to be courtesans and prostitutes as alleged by early colonial Indologists. According to Davesh Soneji, a critical examination of evidence suggests that courtesan dancing is a phenomenon of the modern era, beginning in the late 16th or the 17th century of the Nayaka period of Tamil Nadu. According to James Lochtefeld, classical dance remained exclusive to Hindu temples through the 19th century, only in the 20th century appearing on stage outside the temples. Further, the Thanjavur Maratha kingdom patronized classical dance.\nWith the arrival of the East India Company in the 18th century, and British colonial rule in the 19th, classical Indian dance forms were ridiculed and discouraged, and these performance arts declined. Christian missionaries and British officials presented \"nautch girls\" of north India (Kathak) and \"devadasis\" of south India (Bharatanatyam) as evidence of \"harlots, debased erotic culture, slavery to idols and priests\" tradition, and Christian missionaries demanded that this must be stopped, launching the \"anti-dance movement\" in 1892. The anti-dance camp accused the dance form as a front for prostitution, while revivalists questioned the constructed colonial histories.\nIn 1910, the Madras Presidency of the British Empire banned temple dancing, and with it the classical dance tradition in Hindu temples.\nThe banning of temple dancing stemmed from the 1892 anti-dance movement and new, liberal colonial perspectives. What the English imagined nineteenth-century modernity to be did not include what they regarded Bharatanatyam to be, which they regarded as indecent. Coming from a deep orientalist perspective, the morality of people who performed Bharatanatyam was called into question. Accusations of prostitution were thrown around. Some women from traditionally performing communities were used as a way to showcase obscenity. New reforms disregarded local issues like production of the arts for the sake of liberalism and felt able to impose disruptive reforms that reshaped lives at all levels and subjected people to new standards. Colonial reforms were largely unsympathetic to local traditions, and dismissive of the industry surrounding producing art. The adoption of Anglo-Indian laws that imposed certain restrictions and regulations on certain expressions of sexuality, and more so regulations on bodies and sex in general, which in turn affected traditional dance practices. Temple dancing became caught in a web of multiple political agendas, hoping to bend this burgeoning morality issue to suit their cause. Colonial denunciations of the practice of temple dancing were caught up in liberal ideals of bringing modernity to India, where modernity was tied to Anglo-Protestant moral ideas about how bodies are viewed and how sexuality was presented.\nPost-colonial revival.\nThe 1910 ban triggered protests against the stereotyping and dehumanization of temple dancers. Tamil people were concerned that a historic and rich dance tradition was being victimized under the excuse of social reform. Classical art revivalists such as E. Krishna Iyer, a lawyer who had learned from traditional practitioners of Sadir, questioned the cultural discrimination and the assumed connection, asking why prostitution needs years of training for performance arts, and how killing performance arts could end any evils in society. Iyer was arrested and sentenced to prison on charges of nationalism, who while serving out his prison term persuaded his fellow political prisoners to support Bharatanatyam.\nWhile the British colonial government enforced laws to suppress Hindu temple dances, some from the West, such as the American dancer Esther Sherman moved to India in 1930, learned Indian classical dances, changed her name to Ragini Devi, and joined the movement to revive Bharatanatyam and other ancient dance arts.\nThe Indian independence movement in the early 20th century, already in progress, became a period of cultural foment and initiated an effort by its people to reclaim their culture and rediscover history. In this period of cultural and political turmoil, Bharatanatyam was revived as a mainstream dance outside of Hindu temples by artists such as Rukmini Devi Arundale, Balasaraswati and Yamini Krishnamurti They championed and performed the Pandanallur style and Thanjavur styles of Bharatanatyam.\nNationalist movements that brought revitalizing devadasis up as an issue to focus on viewed it as a way to critique the imposition of colonial morality on India. However, the revival movement was not without Western influence. Nationalist movements that also focused on devadasis revival were influenced by Western ideas of democratization of arts. Part of the revival movement was making the opportunity to dance open to more people. Nationalist movements that focused on revival were also influenced by Western ideology through their propagation that part of the revival movement is a reassertion of traditional values, as well as a moment to remind people of the country's cultural heritage and reestablish a sense of identity. Fighting for freedom from the British and fighting for civil liberties included debates about morality, and how gender impacts morality. The revival movement moralized devadasis by democratizing the art, while also decorating it with the female performing class. Figures like Rukmini Devi Arundale, who are credited with revitalizing Bharatanatyam, also shifted the practice to appeal to middle to upper-class women. Rukmini Devi Arundale is credited with helping develop the Kalakshetra style of Bharatanatyam. There was an emphasis on building a modern India through Indian nationalism, which tied in with protecting traditional artistic traditions. The decommercialization and sanitation of Bharatanatyam for the sake of protecting the spirit of the art is part of Bharatanatyam's revival. Bharatanatyam's successful revival meant that it was regarded as a classical dance tradition specific to India, as opposed to a cultural dance that had been changed by colonial censorship. It was becoming a modern nation to have a traditional dance that was practiced recreationally and was nationally recognized. With the standardization of Bharatanatyam, there came books based on historic texts, like Natya Shastra, which described the different movements. Evidence of a successful revival movement of Bharatanatyam through Indian Nationalist movements was the introduction of state-sponsored dance festivals in 1955 in an independent India. These festivals were put on to display art with religious, social, and cultural connotations that have some regional diversity on a common national platform.\nIn the late 20th century, Tamil Hindu migrants reintroduced the traditions of temple dancing in British Tamil temples.\nElements.\nBharatanatyam is traditionally a team performance art that consists of a solo dancer, accompanied by musicians and one or more singers. It is described as classical art because the theory of musical notes, vocal performance, and the dance movement reflect ideas of the Sanskrit treatise \"Natya Shastra\" and other Sanskrit and Tamil texts, such as the \"Abhinaya Darpana\".\nThe solo artist (\"ekaharya\") in Bharatanatyam is dressed in a colorful sari, adorned with jewelry and presents a dance and it is synchronized with Indian classical music. The hand and facial gestures are a coded sign language able to recite legends and spiritual ideas from the \"Mahabharata\", the \"Ramayana\", the Puranas and historic drama texts. The dancer deploys turns or specific body movements to mark punctuations in the story or the entry of a different character in the play or legend being acted out through dance. \"Abhinaya\" is the art of expression in Indian aesthetics; footwork, body language, postures, musical notes, the tones of the vocalist, aesthetics and costumes integrate to express and communicate the underlying text.\nIn modern adaptations, Bharatanatyam dance troupes may involve many dancers who play specific characters in a story, creatively choreographed to ease the interpretation and expand the experience by the audience.\nThe repertoire of Bharatanatyam, like all major classical Indian dance forms, follows the three categories of performance in the \"Natya Shastra\". These are \"Nritta\" (Nirutham), \"Nritya\" (Niruthiyam) and \"Natya\" (Natyam).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n The purpose\nBharata Natyam is an art which consecrates the body (...)the dancer, who dissolves her identity in rhythm and music, makes her body an instrument, at least for the duration of the dance, for the experience and expression of the spirit.The traditional order of Bharata Natyam recital viz. \"alarippu\", \"jatiswaram\", \"varnam\", \"padams\", \"tillana\" and the \"shloka\" is the correct sequence in the practice of this art, which is an artistic Yoga, for revealing the spiritual through the corporeal.\n Balasaraswati, a devadasi\nArangetram.\nA Bharatanatyam arangetram is a solo debut performance that signifies the completion of initial formal training of a young dancer, female or male in Indian classical dance. The term \"Arangetram\" translates to \"ascending the stage\". This performance is typically done ten to twelve years after a dancer begins learning Bharatanatyam. Still, more importantly, it is done when the guru believes the student is ready for a solo performance. This solo debut is synonymous with a \"coming-of-age\" celebration. The arangetram is a culmination of multiple years of hard work by the student and the guru, and it is an opportunity for the dancer to showcase their dedication and skills developed over the years. Throughout this debut, the dancer performs a series of dances. The dancer must build up their concentration and stamina to perform solo dances for approximately three hours. Each dance performed symbolizes various aspects of Hindu religion.\nSequence of dances.\nA traditional Bharatanatyam arangetram dance performance follows a seven to eight-part order of presentation. This set is called \"Margam\".\nPushpanjali\nThe Arangetram performance typically begins with a dance called the \"Pushpanjali\", which translates to \"offering of flowers\". In this dance, the performer offers flowers and salutations to the Hindu deities, the guru, and the audience as a mark of respect. The beginning of the dance symbolizes supplication, from which the dancer then commences the rest of the performance.\nAlarippu\nThe presentation can also begin with a rhythmic invocation (\"vandana\") called the \"Alarippu\". It is a pure dance, which combines a thank you and benediction for blessings from the gods and goddesses, the guru and the gathered performance team. It also serves as a preliminary warm-up dance, without melody, to enable the dancer to loosen their body, and journey away from distractions and towards single-minded focus.\nJatiswaram\nThe next stage of the performance adds melody to the movement of \"Alarippu\", and this is called \"Jatiswaram\". The dance remains a prelim technical performance (\"nritta\"), pure in form and without any expressed words. The drums set the beat, of any Carnatic music \"raga\" (melody). They perform a sequence (\"Korvai\") to the rhythm of the beat, presenting to the audience the unity of music, rhythm and movements.\nShabdam\nThe performance sequence then adds \"Shabdam\" (expressed words). This is the first item of Margam where expressions are introduced. The solo dancer, the vocalist(s), and the musical team, in this stage of the production, present short compositions, with words and meaning, in a spectrum of moods. This performance praises God (such as Krishna, Shiva, Rama, and Murugan) and their qualities.\nVarnam\nThe performance thereafter evolves into the \"Varnam\" stage. This marks the arrival into the sanctum sanctorum core of the performance. It is the longest section and the \"nritya\". A traditional Varnam may be as long as 30\u201345 minutes or sometimes an hour. Varnam offers huge scope for improvisation and an experienced dancer can stretch the Varnam to a desirable length. The artist presents the play or the main composition, reveling in all their movements, silently communicating the text through codified gestures and footwork, harmoniously with the music, rhythmically punctuated. The dancer performs complicated moves, such as expressing a verse at two speeds. Their hands and body tell a story, whether of love and longing or of a battle between the good and the evil, as the musicians envelop them with musical notes and tones that set the appropriate mood.\nPadam\nThe \"Padam\" is next. This is the stage of reverence, of simplicity, of \"abhinaya\" (expression) of the solemn spiritual message or devotional religious prayer (bhakti). The music is lighter, the chant intimate, the dance emotional. The choreography attempts to express \"rasa\" (emotional taste) and a mood, while the recital may include items such as a keertanam (expressing devotion), a \"javali\" (expressing divine love) or something else.\nTillana\nThe performance sequence ends with a \"Tillana\", the climax. It closes out the \"nritya\" portion, the movements exit the temple of expressive dance, returning to the \"nritta\" style, where a series of pure movement and music are rhythmically performed. Therewith the performance ends.\nShlokam or Mangalam\nThe seventh and final item in the sequence can be either a \"Shlokam\" or a \"Mangalam\". The dancer calls for blessings on the people all around.\nThe overall sequence of Bharatanatyam, states Balasaraswati, thus moves from \"mere meter; then melody and meter; continuing with music, meaning and meter; its expansion in the centerpiece of the varnam; thereafter, music and meaning without meter; (...) a non-metrical song at the end. We see a most wonderful completeness and symmetry in this art\".\nCostume and attire.\nThe costume of a female Bharatanatyam dancer resembles a Tamil Hindu bridal dress. It typically consists of a sari in bright colors with golden or silver \"zari\" embroidery on the borders. The costume can be stitched from the \"sari\", with individual pieces for a bottom (either a skirt or \"salwar\"-shaped pants), a pleated piece which falls in front and opens like a hand fan when the dancer flexes her knees or performs footwork, a hip piece that covers the seat of the pant/skirt, and a torso piece that looks like an \"aanchal\" (i.e. the draped part of a regular sari). Some dancers also opt for an unstitched \"sari\" that is draped specially, with the single piece of cloth starting around the legs like a \"dhoti\", then upwards along the front torso, over the left shoulder, and then down the back with its end held at the waist by a jeweled belt. The costume of a male Bharatanatyam dancer is usually either a \"sari\" or a white cotton cloth draped around the legs and bottom half of the body like a \"dhoti\". During performances, the upper body of the male dancer remains bare. Male dancers typically do not wear stitched costumes.\nBoth female and male dancers wear elaborate jewelry on their ears, nose, neck, and wrists. Female dancers wear additional jewelry on their heads that emphasizes their hairline and parting. They also wear a smaller piece of jewelry on each side of their parting. These represent the sun and the moon.\nLong hair on both male and female dancers is either secured by a bun or a braid. Female dancers with short hair often use braid extensions or bun hair pieces to simulate long hair. Female dancers also wear imitation flowers made of either cloth or paper around their braids or buns. These are known as (or \"gajra\").\nBoth male and female dancers wear makeup, including foundation, blush, lipstick, and thick eyeliner or kohl, which helps the audience see and understand their facial expressions.\nAll dancers wear leather anklets on each foot, which are called \"salangai\" or \"ghungroos\". These are made of small bells attached to a broad leather strap with belts that secure them at the back of the ankle. The bells are arranged in uniform rows and can be heard when the dancer moves their feet. The \"salangai\" helps emphasize the rhythm of the music as well as the dancer's footwork.\nLastly, all dancers outline their hands and feet with red \"kumkum\" powder or alta, a tradition that helps the audience easily see their hand and foot gestures.\nFor classes, training, practice, or rehearsals, dancers traditionally wear a special dance sari. These saris are always cotton and have a shorter breadth than normal saris, falling at the knees rather than the ankles. These are paired with cotton pyjamas and blouses. The sari is worn with pleats at the front and tied tightly around the torso and hips. However, in recent times, dancers also opt for salwar kameez or athletic wear (like T-shirts and leggings) when not performing.\nThe accompanying music to Bharatanatyam is in the Carnatic style of South India, as is the recitation and chanting. The vocalist is called \"nattuvanar\", typically also the conductor of the entire performance, who may be the guru of the dancer and may also be playing cymbals or one of the musical instruments. The recited verses and text in Bharatanatyam are in Tamil, Telugu, Kannada and Sanskrit.\nThe instruments used include the mridangam (double-sided drum), nadaswaram (long type of oboe made from black wood), nattuvangam (cymbals), the flute, violin and veena.\nSymbolism.\nBharatanatyam, like all classical dances of India, uses symbolism in its \"abhinaya\" (acting) and its goals. The roots of \"abhinaya\" appear in the \"Natya Shastra\" text, which defines drama in verse 6.10 as something that aesthetically arouses joy in the spectator, through the medium of the actor's art of communication, that helps connect and transport the individual into a sensual inner state of being. A performance art, asserts \"Natya Shastra\", connects the artists and the audience through \"abhinaya\" (literally, \"carrying to the spectators\"), that is applying body-speech-mind and scene, wherein the actors communicate to the audience, through song and music. Drama in this ancient Sanskrit text, thus is an art that engages every aspect of life to glorify and give a state of joyful consciousness.\nThe communication through symbols is in the form of expressive gestures and pantomime set to music. The gestures and facial expressions convey the \"ras\" (sentiment, emotional taste) and \"bhava\" (mood) of the underlying story. In the Hindu texts on dance, the dancer successfully expresses the spiritual ideas by paying attention to four aspects of a performance: \"Angika\" (gestures and body language), \"Vachika\" (song, recitation, music and rhythm), \"Aharya\" (stage setting, costume, makeup, jewelry), and \"Sattvika\" (artist's mental disposition and emotional connection with the story and audience, wherein the artist's inner and outer state resonates). \"Abhinaya\" draws out the \"bhava\" (mood, psychological states).\nThe gestures used in Bharatanatyam are called \"Hasta\" (or \"mudras\"). These symbols are of three types: \"asamyuta hastas\" (single hand gestures), \"samyuta hastas\" (two hand gestures), and \"nrtta hastas\" (dance hand gestures). Like words in a glossary, these gestures are presented in the \"nritta\" as a list or embellishment to a prelim performance. In \"nritya\" stage of Bharatanatyam, these symbols set in a certain sequence become sentences with meaning, with emotions expressed through facial expressions and other aspects of \"abhinaya\". The basic standing position is called as Aramandi.\nBharatanatyam contains at least 20 asanas found in modern yoga, including Dhanurasana (the bow, a back-arch); Chakrasana (the wheel, a standing back-arch); Vrikshasana (the tree, a standing pose); and Natarajasana, the pose of dancing Shiva. 108 karanas of classical temple dance are represented in temple statuary; they depict the devadasi temple dancers who made use of yoga asanas in their dancing. Bharatanatyam is also considered a form of Bhakti Yoga. However, Natarajasana is not found in any medieval hatha yoga text; it was among the many asanas introduced into modern yoga by Krishnamacharya in the early 20th century.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56502", "revid": "50993393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56502", "title": "Rockland County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nRockland County is the southernmost county on the west side of the Hudson River in the U.S. state of New York. It is part of the New York metropolitan area. As of the 2020 U.S. census, the county's population is 338,329, making it the state's third-most densely populated county outside New York City after Nassau and neighboring Westchester counties. The county seat and largest hamlet is New City. Rockland County is accessible via both the New York State Thruway, which crosses the Hudson River to Westchester via the Tappan Zee Bridge over the Tappan Zee, ten exits up from the NYC border; and the Palisades Parkway, four exits up, via the George Washington Bridge. The county's name derives from \"rocky land\", as the area has been aptly described, largely due to the Hudson River Palisades. The county is part of the Hudson Valley region of the state.\nRockland County is the smallest county by area in New York outside New York City. It comprises five towns, eighteen incorporated villages, eighteen census-designated places, eight hamlets and eleven defunct communities. Rockland County is designated as a Preserve America Community, and nearly a third of the county's area is parkland. The county has the largest Jewish population percentage of any U.S. county, at 31.4%, or 90,000 residents. Rockland also ranked 80th on the list of highest-income counties by median household income in the United States, with a median household income of $82,534 according to the 2010 census.\nHistory.\nThe area that became Rockland County was originally inhabited by Algonquian-speaking Native Americans, including Munsees and Lenape. The Tappan tribe had a particularly noteworthy presence in the area, extending from present-day Nyack, south to Sparkill and Tappan, down the Hackensack River valley through present-day Bergen County, New Jersey, and also along the Palisades and Hudson River shore all the way to present-day Edgewater, New Jersey.\nIn 1609, Henry Hudson was the first major English explorer to arrive in the area. Hudson, thinking he had found the legendary \"Northwest Passage\", sailed on the \"Half Moon\" up the river that would one day bear his name, and sailing through present-day Haverstraw before exploring north in present-day Albany.\nIn the years before 1664 when the area was formally a Dutch colony called New Netherland, present-day Rockland did not have formal European settlements. However, individuals did explore the area and made transactions with Tappan tribe for land with the idea that it could have future use. For example, in 1640, Dutch Captain David Pietersz. de Vries purchased from natives the area where the Sparkill Creek flows into the Hudson River.\nIn 1664, the British Crown assumed control of New Netherland from the Dutch. In June 1664, the Berkeley-Carteret land grant established the colony of New Jersey, dividing present-day Rockland and Bergen Counties into separate political areas. The northern border of New Jersey was placed in a straight line from the Delaware River at present-day Port Jervis to the Hudson River at 41 degrees even North latitude, where the Palisades Cliffs pause and give way to Sneden's Landing in Orangetown. The state line remains there to this day, though various disagreements along the exact border were had over the years.\nIn the 1670s, permanent Dutch settlers began to arrive with land grants, starting with the Tappan area. These settlers were eager to escape \"city life\", moving from Manhattan to Rockland. A number of unique, Dutch-style red sandstone houses still stand, and many place names in the county reveal their Dutch origin.\nIn 1683, when the Duke of York (who became King James II of England) established the first 12 counties of New York, present-day Rockland County was part of Orange County, known then as \"Orange County South of the Mountains\". Orangetown was created at the same time under a royal grant, originally encompassing all of modern Rockland County. Around this time, as the English began to colonize Nyack and Tappan, the Native Americans began to leave Rockland in search of undisturbed land further north.\nThe natural barrier of the Ramapo Mountains and the size of the county made carrying out governmental activities difficult. At one point, two governments were active, one on each side of the Ramapo Mountains, so Rockland split off from Orange in 1798 to form its own county. That same year, the county seat was transferred from Tappan to New City, where a new courthouse was built.\nHaverstraw was separated from Orangetown in 1719, and became a town in 1788; it included the present-day Clarkstown, Ramapo, and Stony Point. Clarkstown and Ramapo became towns in 1791, followed by Stony Point in 1865.\nDuring the American Revolution, when control of the Hudson River was viewed by the British as strategic to dominating the American territories, Rockland saw skirmishes at Haverstraw, Nyack, and Piermont, and significant military engagements at the Battle of Stony Point, where General \"Mad\" Anthony Wayne earned his nickname. George Washington had headquarters for a time at John Suffern's tavern, the later site of the village of Suffern. British Major John Andr\u00e9 met with American traitor Benedict Arnold near Stony Point to buy the plans for the fortifications at West Point. Andr\u00e9 was captured with the plans in Tarrytown on his way back to the British lines; he was brought to Tappan for trial in the Tappan church, found guilty, hanged, and buried nearby. Yet another important chapter in the story of the Revolution was written on May 5, 1783, when General Washington received Sir Guy Carleton at the DeWint House, where they discussed terms of a peace treaty. Two days later, Washington visited Sir Guy aboard a British war vessel, H.M.S Perseverance, laying anchor in the Hudson. On this day, the king's navy fired its first salute to the flag of the United States of America.\nIn the decades following the Revolution, Rockland became popular for its stone and brick manufactories. Many buildings in New York City were built with bricks made in Rockland. These products, however, required quarrying in land that many later believed should be set aside as a preserve. Many unsuccessful efforts were made to turn much of the Hudson Highlands on the northern tip of the county into a forest preserve. Union Pacific Railroad president E. H. Harriman, though, donated land and large sums of money for the purchase of properties in the area of Bear Mountain. Bear Mountain/Harriman State Park became a reality in 1910 when Harriman's widow donated his lands to the state, and by 1914, more than an estimated one million people a year were coming to the park. After World War I, Rockland County became the most important sausage-making hub in New York.\nIn 1911, Letchworth Village, an institution for the mentally disabled opened in Rockland County near Thiells. The institution gained national infamy in 1972, when an investigation by Geraldo Rivera revealed the patients there to have been housed in neglectful conditions. Letchworth closed in 1996.\nRockland remained semi-rural until the 1950s, when the Palisades Interstate Parkway, Tappan Zee Bridge, New York State Thruway, and other major transit arteries were built. In the decades that followed, the county became a maturely developed suburb of New York City. As people moved up from the five boroughs (particularly the Bronx in the early years), the population flourished from 89,276 in 1950 to 338,329 in 2020.\nGeography.\nRockland County lies just north of the New Jersey-New York border, west of Westchester County (across the Hudson River), and south of Orange County. Its east border is formed by the Tappan Zee portion of the Hudson River. The county's terrain ranges from ASL on Rockhouse Mountain (northwest of Lake Welch) to approaching sea level along the Hudson River. According to the US Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which are land and 25.79 sqmi (66.80\u00a0km2) (13%) are covered by water. It is the state's smallest county outside the five boroughs of New York City.\nAbout 30% of Rockland County is devoted to parkland, belonging to either the five towns, incorporated villages, the state, or the county. These parks provide walking and hiking trails, ballfields, dog runs, historic sites, ponds, streams, salt marshes, and equestrian trails. Some popular state parks include Bear Mountain State Park on the northernmost tip of the county, Harriman State Park, also along the county's northern boundary, and Nyack Beach State Park along the Hudson River, with trails connecting to Rockland Lake State Park. The county hosts numerous public and private golf courses, with the towns of Orangetown, Ramapo, Stony Point, and Haverstraw all operating public golf courses within their towns. The Palisades Interstate Park Commission operates two golf courses in Rockland Lake State Park. Notable private courses in the county include Paramount Country Club, Manhattan Woods Golf Course (designed by PGA great Gary Player), and Rockland Country Club (Sparkill).\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, 338,329 people and 100,438 households were residing in the county. The population density was . The 107,002 housing units averaged .\n2010 census.\nOf the 107,002 households, 38% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 63% were married couples living together, 10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 23% were not families. Around 19% of households were made up of individuals, and 8% had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 3.0 and the average family size was 3.5.\nThe county's age distribution was 28.4% under 18, 8% from 18 to 24, 28% from 25 to 44, 24.30% from 45 to 64, and 12% who were 65 or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 women, there were 95 men. For every 100 women age 18 and over, there were 91 men.\nThe median income for a household was $93,024 and for a family was $80,000. Males had a median income of $58,000 versus $39,000 for females. The per capita income for the county was $39,286. The mean, or average, income for a family in Rockland County is $73,500 according to the 2004 census. About 6% of families and 12.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14% of those under age 18 and 8% of those age 65 or over.\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 United States census, 286,753 people, 92,675 households, and 70,989 families were residing in the county. The population density was . The 94,973 housing units averaged . Residents live closer together than the census numbers indicate, as 30% of the county is reserved as parkland. About 9% of residents reported speaking Spanish at home, 5% Yiddish, 3% French-based creole, 1.5% Italian, 1.3% Tagalog, 1.3% Hebrew, 1.2% French, and 1% Russian. Other languages spoken at home by at least 1000 people include Malayalam, Korean, Chinese, German, and Polish.\nOrthodox Jewish community.\nAs of 2017, the Orthodox Jewish and Hasidic Jewish communities are 15 percent of the population in Rockland County.\nEducation.\nThe county is home to several Blue Ribbon School of Excellence Award winners, awarded by the U.S. Department of Education:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSchool districts.\nSchool districts include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nColleges and universities.\nThe county is home to several colleges and universities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransportation.\nThe Governor Mario M. Cuomo Bridge, commonly called the Tappan Zee Bridge, connects South Nyack in Rockland County and Tarrytown in Westchester County across the Hudson River in the Lower Hudson Valley of New York. The old bridge was replaced with a new span in 2017.\nMajor highways.\nThe county is served by several major highways, including Interstate 87/287 (the New York Thruway), opening from Suffern to Yonkers in 1955. The old Tappan Zee Bridge opened the same year, connecting Rockland and Westchester, allowing Rockland County's population to grow rapidly. The Palisades Interstate Parkway, a project of master planner Robert Moses, and built between 1947 and 1958, connects the county directly to the George Washington Bridge due south. The Garden State Parkway opened in 1955, connecting New Jersey to I-87/287.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFor further information\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBus.\nThe Transport of Rockland operates several local bus routes throughout the county, and the express bus Hudson Link routes to city centers and train stations in Tarrytown and White Plains in Westchester County. TOR provides connections to other neighborhood bus operations\u00a0\u2013 Minitrans and connections to private commuter lines, Rockland Coaches and Short Line providing service to North Jersey and New York City.\nRailroad.\nNJ Transit/Metro-North Railroad operates the Port Jervis Line, which stops at the Suffern Railroad Station and Sloatsburg Station, and the Pascack Valley Line, whose stops include Pearl River, Nanuet, and Spring Valley, in their respective hamlets and village of the same name. Connections on this line are available at Secaucus for service to Penn Station in Midtown Manhattan and service to the Meadowlands Sports Complex in East Rutherford, New Jersey. The southern terminus of both lines is Hoboken Terminal in New Jersey, where connections can be made to several NJ Transit bus lines, ferries, and PATH trains to New York City.\nUntil 1958, Rockland County's eastern side was served by the New York Central Railroad's passenger service on the West Shore Railroad from Weehawken, New Jersey, opposite midtown Manhattan up through Tappan, West Nyack, Congers, and Haverstraw, on to the West Hudson shore cities of Newburgh, Kingston, and Albany. The service ran to West Haverstraw, in the north of the until 1959. The Erie Railroad ran train service on the Northern Branch through the southeastern corner of the county to Nyack up to 1966.\nFerry.\nNY Waterway operates a ferry service between Haverstraw and Ossining in Westchester County for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority. Commuters take the Transport of Rockland's Ferry Express route to the Haverstraw ferry terminal for service to Metro-North's Hudson Line service to Grand Central Terminal. Ferry service is typically suspended in the colder months when the Hudson River freezes over, and commuters must take shuttle buses across the Tappan Zee Bridge.\nAirports.\nNearby airports include:\nLaw, government, and politics.\nAll of Rockland County falls within the 17th Congressional District, along with central and western Westchester County. The district is represented by Congressman Mike Lawler.\nThe county of Rockland is represented as follows in the New York State Senate as of 2025:\nThe county of Rockland is represented as follows in the New York State Assembly as of 2025:\nOn July 10, 2024, Ken Zebrowski resigned his elected position in the New York State Assembly 96th District six months before he was to leave Albany for good.\nIn 2025, Rockland County, New York, received an issuer and limited tax general obligation (LTGO) bond rating of Aaa from Moody's Investors Service. Moody's Investors Service defines an Aaa rating as representing the highest quality and lowest level of credit risk. Rockland County is the only county in New York State to hold a Moody's Aaa rating.\nRockland County has a county legislature made up of 17 members, elected from single-member districts. This includes 12 Democrats, 5 Republicans. The Chairman of the Legislature is Democrat Jay Hood Jr. As of January 2025, the legislators are:\nRockland Community College appointed County Legislator Dana G. Stilley and Legislative Fiscal Director Moshe Gruber as its unanimous choices of the Rockland County Legislature's bipartisan Multi-Services Committee.\nOn February 14, 2025 \u2013 Valentine's Day, Assemblyman Aron Wieder resigned his Rockland legislature seat in Spring Valley 13th district he kept after starting his position at New York State Assembly at the 97th district.\nTown governments.\nThe five towns of Rockland County are led by town supervisors and town boards. The villages encompassed in the towns are led by mayors and village trustees.\nAs of the November 2023 elections, the town supervisors are:\nCounty courts.\nThere are three types of general trial courts in Rockland County: the New York Supreme Court, the County Court, and the Justice Courts. The Supreme Court is the trial level court of the New York State Unified Court System, which presents some confusion as the Supreme Court is the highest court of appeals in the federal system, as well as in most states (the Court of Appeals is the highest court in New York). The Supreme Court has broad authority over all categories of cases, both civil and criminal. Generally, the Supreme Court in Rockland County hears civil cases involving claims in excess of $25,000. While the Supreme Court has jurisdiction over criminal cases in most counties, this is handled by the County Courts. In Rockland, however, the Supreme Court does exercise jurisdiction over some criminal cases.\nThe County Court is inferior to the Supreme Court and is authorized to hear criminal cases that have occurred in the county as well as limited jurisdiction over civil cases. The County Court handles felony cases exclusively and shares jurisdiction with the town and village justice courts on misdemeanor cases and other minor offenses and violations. The County Court's jurisdiction on civil cases is limited to those involving less than $25,000.\nEach of the towns and 15 of the villages have Justice Courts, which mostly hear routine traffic ticket cases, especially from the New York State Thruway and the Palisades Interstate Parkway. They also handle drunk driving charges, lower-level criminal misdemeanor matters, and occasionally perform arraignment on felonies (most felony proceedings are heard in County Court). These courts generally handle the highest volume of cases.\nLaw enforcement.\nOn March 1, 2024, Deirdre Smith was sworn in as the first female officer to serve as chief of detectives for Rockland County.\nNational politics.\nLike most of the Hudson Valley, Rockland County historically voted Republican but has shifted Democratic in recent years. From 1892 to 1992, Democrats won the county in presidential elections only three times: during Lyndon B. Johnson's 1964 landslide, Franklin D. Roosevelt's 1936 landslide (when it was the only New York City suburb to vote Democratic), and Woodrow Wilson's 1912 campaign in which the Republican vote was split. Rockland County began trending Democratic in 1992 and has voted Republican just twice since then, though races remain more competitive than in neighboring Westchester County, which has consistently delivered Democratic victories since the 1990s. Rockland County supported Republicans George W. Bush in 2004 and Donald Trump in 2024, with Trump winning by the largest margin since 1988. Rockland County now holds a unique distinction: it is the only county in the United States to have voted for the winner of the national popular vote in every presidential election since 1980, after St. Joseph County, Indiana and Caddo Parish, Louisiana broke their similar streaks by voting Democratic in 2024.\nMedia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHealth.\nAccording to Scorecard.org, which integrates data from different sources including the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), in 2002, Rockland County ranked among the worst 10% in the United States in terms of air releases. Recent EPA statistics show that a total of 66 presently active Rockland County facilities are currently regulated. In Scorecard's list of Top 10 polluters from 2002, the Lovett generating station in Tompkins Cove is the top polluter, releasing 1,523,339 pounds of toxic emissions. Studies were released in 2000 and in 2004 by the Clean Air Task Force to study the impacts of power plant emissions in the United States. This data for Rockland County shows that a total of $2,150,800 was paid in compensation for numerous illnesses caused by power plant pollution, including asthma attacks, heart attacks and death. The Lovett generating station was closed and dismantled prior to 2014. From 2015 to 2018, the Haverstraw Quarry owned and managed by CRH Tilcon and Oldcastle Materials was heavily fined for air and water pollution, including over-blasting, over-excavating, non-viable use of its NESCO unhealthy dust suppression systems and lethal dust &amp; water runoffs into protected waterways. In the period from 2017 to 2020, Suez experienced instances of discolored water and odor complaints. During 2020, the Rockland County Health Dept. and New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) Conservationfound/investigated and informed Suez of untreated polluted water at Tilcon operated discharge points at a stream that flows into Lake DeForest. After discovery, Tilcon stopped pumping the waste. Higher cancer rates in Rockland County as compared to Manhattan associate towards drinking water quality, aging drink water infrastructure/storm drain runoff concerns.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic was first confirmed to have reached Rockland County on March 6, 2020. After the areas of Spring Valley and Monsey were identified as having the highest infection rates, County Executive Ed Day requested that state emergency management declare those areas a closed containment zone. As of July 4, 2021, there are a total of 47,027 COVID-19 cases and 966 deaths. At 14,450 cases per 100,000, Rockland had the greatest density of COVID-19 cases of any New York county. 47% of the population and 58% of the eligible population (aged 12 and over) have been vaccinated. The Orthodox Jewish community, the largest in the country, have some of the lowest vaccination rates in the state; Monsey's is the lowest in the state, at 17.8%, as of June 15, 2021.\nNews reports confirmed that the first known case of polio in the United States in a decade was discovered in Rockland County in July 2022.\nSolar field.\nIn 2014, Clarkstown created a first-of-its-kind in New York State 2.3-megawatt solar panel system consisting of about 4,300 panels on top of a closed, highly regulated, flat shadeless 13-acre section of the former garbage landfill in West Nyack. The unit is sized to generate 3 million kilowatt-hours annually \u2013 enough power to supply about 200 homes, that provides one-third of the electric needs of the Town of Clarkstown government. The Clarkstown solar field project is at the maximum size that is currently allowed by New York State. The installation was projected to save taxpayers as much as $4 million over 30 years by reducing the amount of the town's annual electric bill \u2013 which is about $2 million and produce 10 percent of all the electricity that O&amp;R gets through solar power. The project was installed in summer 2014, coming online in October.\nMunicipalities.\nPaul W. Adler, the chairperson of the Rockland County's Jewish Community Relations Council, said in a 1997 \"New York Times\" article that \"There are two reasons villages get formed in Rockland. One is to keep the Hasidim out and the other is to keep the Hasidim in.\"\nAdministrative divisions of New York\nThere are five towns in Rockland County. The most populous is Ramapo at 148,919, while the least populous is Stony Point, at 14,655, according to the 2020 US Census.\nThere are eighteen incorporated villages in Rockland County after the April 2022, dissolution of the Village of South Nyack, twelve of which are located at least partially in the town of Ramapo, and none of which are in Stony Point. There are eighteen Census-designated places and eight Hamlets within the five towns of Rockland County.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClarkstown is divided into 4 wards for the purposes of municipal representation\nVillages (Zip-codes).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places (Zip-codes).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHamlets (Zip-codes).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDefunct communities (Zip-codes).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPoints of interest.\nParks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable people.\nWell-known residents of Rockland County have included:\nPaulette Goddard\nWill Geer \nAlan J. Lerner \nFrederick Loewe \nAndre Watts \nMyron Cohen \nMorty Gunty \nFreddie Roman\nHuntington Hartford \nBill Mauldin\nMilton Cunniff\nKurt Weill\nJohn McGillicuddy \nZoot Sims\nJohn Patrick\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56504", "revid": "49667337", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56504", "title": "Monarchy of Canada", "text": "Canadian sovereign and head of state\nThe monarchy of Canada is Canada's form of government embodied by the Canadian sovereign and head of state. It is one of the key components of Canadian sovereignty and sits at the core of Canada's constitutional federal structure and Westminster-style parliamentary democracy. The monarchy is the foundation of the executive (King-in-Council), legislative (King-in-Parliament), and judicial (King-on-the-Bench) branches of both federal and provincial jurisdictions. The current monarch is King Charles III, who has reigned since 8 September 2022.\nAlthough the sovereign is shared with 14 other independent countries within the Commonwealth of Nations, each country's monarchy is separate and legally distinct. As a result, the current monarch is officially titled \"King of Canada\" and, in this capacity, he and other members of the royal family undertake public and private functions domestically and abroad as representatives of Canada. However, the monarch is the only member of the royal family with any constitutional role. \nThe monarch lives in the United Kingdom, and almost all of the royal governmental and ceremonial duties in Canada are carried out by the monarch's representative, the governor general of Canada (the main exception being the appointment of the governor general themselves, and the extraordinary appointment of extra senators). In each of Canada's provinces, the monarchy is represented by a lieutenant governor. As territories fall under the federal jurisdiction, they each have a commissioner, rather than a lieutenant governor, who represents the federal Crown-in-Council directly.\nAll executive authority is vested in the sovereign, so the monarch's consent is necessary for letters patent and orders-in-council to have legal effect. As well, the monarch is part of the Parliament of Canada, so royal assent is required to allow for bills to become law. While the power for these acts stems from the Canadian people through the constitutional conventions of democracy, executive authority remains vested in the Crown and is only entrusted by the sovereign to the government on behalf of the people. This underlines the Crown's role in safeguarding the rights, freedoms, and democratic system of government of Canadians, reinforcing the fact that \"governments are the servants of the people and not the reverse\". Thus, within Canada's constitutional monarchy the sovereign's direct participation in any of these areas of governance is normally limited, with the sovereign typically exercising executive authority only with the advice and consent of the Cabinet of Canada, and the sovereign's legislative and judicial responsibilities largely carried out through the Parliament of Canada as well as judges and justices of the peace. There are, though, cases where the sovereign or their representative would have a duty to act directly and independently under the doctrine of necessity to prevent genuinely unconstitutional acts. In these respects, the sovereign and his viceroys are custodians of the Crown's reserve powers and represent the \"power of the people above government and political parties\". Put another way, the Crown functions as the guarantor of Canada's continuous and stable governance and as a nonpartisan safeguard against the abuse of power.\nCanada has been described as \"one of the oldest continuing monarchies in the world\" of today. Parts of what is now Canada have been under a monarchy since as early as the 15th century as a result of colonial settlement and often competing claims made on territory in the name of the English (and later British) and French crowns. Monarchical government has developed as the result of colonization by the French colonial empire and British Empire competing for territory in North America and a corresponding succession of French and British sovereigns reigning over New France and British America, respectively. As a result of the conquest of New France, claims by French monarchs were extinguished and what became British North America came under the hegemony of the British monarchy which ultimately evolved into the Canadian monarchy of today. With the exception of Newfoundland from 1649 to 1660, no part of what is now Canada has been a republic or part of a republic; though, there have been isolated calls for the country to become one. The Crown, however, is considered to be \"entrenched\" into the governmental framework. The institution that is Canada's system of constitutional monarchy is sometimes colloquially referred to as the \"Maple Crown\" or \"Crown of Maples\", Canada having developed a \"recognizably Canadian brand of monarchy\".\nInternational and domestic aspects.\nThe monarch is shared in a personal union with 14 other Commonwealth realms within the 56-member Commonwealth of Nations. As he resides in the United Kingdom, viceroys (the governor general of Canada in the federal sphere and a lieutenant governor in each province) represent the sovereign in Canada and are able to carry out most of the royal governmental duties, even when the monarch is in the country Nevertheless, the monarch can carry out Canadian constitutional and ceremonial duties abroad.\nThe evolution of the role of the governor general from being both a representative of the sovereign and an \"agent of the British government\" who \" in matters deemed to be of 'imperial' concern... acted on the instructions of the British Colonial Office\" to being solely a representative of the monarch developed with a rise in Canadian nationalism following the end of the First World War culminating in the passage of the Statute of Westminster in 1931. Since then, the Crown has had both a shared and a separate character: the sovereign's role as monarch of Canada has been distinct from his or her position as monarch of any other realm, including the United Kingdom. Only Canadian federal ministers of the Crown may advise the sovereign on any and all matters of the Canadian state, of which the sovereign, when not in Canada, is kept abreast by weekly communications with the federal viceroy. The monarchy thus ceased to be an exclusively British institution and, in Canada, became a Canadian, or \"domesticated\", establishment, though it is still often denoted as \"British\" in both legal and common language, for reasons historical, political, and of convenience.\nThis division is illustrated in a number of ways: The sovereign, for example, holds a unique Canadian title and, when he and other members of the royal family are acting in public specifically as representatives of Canada, they use, where possible, Canadian symbols, including the country's national flag, unique royal symbols, armed forces uniforms, and the like, as well as Canadian Forces aircraft or other Canadian-owned vehicles for travel. Once in Canadian airspace, or arrived at a Canadian event taking place abroad, the Canadian secretary to the King, officers of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP), and other Canadian officials will take over from whichever of their other realms' counterparts were previously escorting the King or other member of the royal family.\nThe sovereign similarly only draws from Canadian funds for support in the performance of his duties when in Canada or acting as King of Canada abroad; Canadians do not pay any money to the King or any other member of the royal family, either towards personal income or to support royal residences outside of Canada.\nThere are five aspects to the monarchy of Canada: constitutional (such as the use of the royal prerogative in summoning and dissolving parliament, granting royal assent), national (delivering the Speech from the Throne and the Royal Christmas Message, distributing honours, decorations, and medals, and partaking in Remembrance Day ceremonies), international (the monarch being head of state in other Commonwealth realms, and being the head of the Commonwealth), religious (the words \"by the grace of God\" in the monarch's title, the \"Act of Settlement, 1701\", requiring the sovereign to be Anglican, and the monarch encouraging people \"to tolerate, accept, and understand cultures, beliefs, and faiths different from our own\"), and the welfare and service monarchy (seen in members of the royal family founding charities and supporting others, fundraising for charity, and giving royal patronage to civil and military organizations).\nSuccession and regency.\nAs in the other Commonwealth realms, the current heir apparent to the Canadian throne is William, Prince of Wales, who is followed in the line of succession by his eldest child, Prince George.\nDemise of the Crown and accession.\nUpon the death of the monarch, there is an immediate and automatic succession by the late sovereign's heir; hence the phrase, \"the King is dead. Long live the King\". No confirmation or further ceremony is necessary. The federal cabinet and civil service follow the \"Manual of Official Procedure of the Government of Canada\" in carrying out various formalities around the transition.\nBy custom, the accession of a new monarch is publicly proclaimed by the governor general-in-council, who meet at Rideau Hall immediately upon the previous monarch's death. Since the adoption of the Statute of Westminster it has been considered \"constitutionally inappropriate\" for Canada's accession proclamations to be approved by a British order-in-council, as the monarch has, since then, assumed the Canadian throne according to Canadian law. For the accession of Charles III, the first since the creation of the Canadian Heraldic Authority in 1989, the Chief Herald read the royal proclamation aloud. If Parliament is in session, the Prime Minister will announce the demise of the Crown there and move for a joint address of sympathy and loyalty to the new monarch.\nA period of mourning also follows, during which portraits of the recently deceased monarch are draped with black fabric and staff at government houses wear black armbands. The \"Manual of Official Procedure of the Government of Canada\" states the prime minister is responsible for convening Parliament, tabling a resolution of loyalty and condolence from Parliament to the new monarch, and arranging for the motion to be seconded by the leader of the official opposition. The prime minister will then move to adjourn Parliament. The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation keeps a regularly updated plan for a \"broadcast of national importance\", announcing the demise of a sovereign and covering the aftermath, during which all regular programming and advertising is cancelled and on-call commentators contribute to a 24-hour news mode. As funerals for Canada's sovereigns, as well as for their consorts, take place in the United Kingdom, commemoration services are conducted by the federal and provincial governments across Canada. Such ceremonies may also be held for other recently deceased members of the royal family. The day of the sovereign's funeral is likely to be a federal holiday.\nThe new monarch is crowned in the United Kingdom in an ancient ritual but one not necessary for a sovereign to reign. Under the federal \"Interpretation Act\", officials who hold a federal office under the Crown are not affected by the death of the monarch, nor are they required to take the Oath of Allegiance again. In some provinces, though, those holding Crown offices must swear the Oath to the new sovereign. All references in federal legislation to previous monarchs, whether in the masculine (e.g. \"His Majesty\") or feminine (e.g. \"The Queen\"), continue to mean the reigning sovereign of Canada, regardless of his or her gender. This is because, in common law, the Crown never dies. After an individual accedes to the throne, he or she usually continues to reign until death.\nLegal aspects of succession.\nThe relationship between the Commonwealth realms is such that any change to the rules of succession to their respective crowns requires the unanimous consent of all the realms. Succession is governed by statutes, such as the \"Bill of Rights, 1689\", the \"Act of Settlement, 1701\", and the \"Acts of Union, 1707\".\nEdward VIII abdicated in 1936, and any possible future descendants of his were excluded from the line of succession. The British government at the time, wishing for speed so as to avoid embarrassing debate in Dominion parliaments, suggested that the governments of the Dominions of the British Commonwealth\u2014then Australia, New Zealand, the Irish Free State, the Union of South Africa, and Canada\u2014regard whoever was monarch of the UK to automatically be monarch of their respective Dominion. As with the other Dominion governments, the Canadian Cabinet, headed by Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King, refused to accept the idea and stressed that the laws of succession were part of Canadian law and, as the Statute of Westminster 1931 disallowed the UK from legislating for Canada, including in relation to succession, altering them required Canada's request and consent to the British legislation (\"His Majesty's Declaration of Abdication Act, 1936\") becoming part of Canadian law. Sir Maurice Gwyer, first parliamentary counsel in the UK, reflected this position, stating the \"Act of Settlement\" was a part of the law in each Dominion. Thus, Order-in-Council P.C. 3144 was issued, expressing the Cabinet's request and consent for \"His Majesty's Declaration of Abdication Act, 1936\", to become part of the laws of Canada and the \"Succession to the Throne Act, 1937\", gave parliamentary ratification to that action, together bringing the \"Act of Settlement\" and \"Royal Marriages Act, 1772\", into Canadian law. The latter was deemed by the Cabinet in 1947 to be part of Canadian law. The Department of External Affairs included all succession-related laws in its list of acts within Canadian law.\nThe Supreme Court of Canada declared unanimously in the 1981 \"Patriation Reference\" that the \"Bill of Rights, 1689\", is \"undoubtedly in force as part of the law of Canada\". Furthermore, in \"O'Donohue v. Canada\" (2003) the Ontario Superior Court of Justice found that the \"Act of Settlement, 1701\", is \"part of the laws of Canada\" and the rules of succession are \"by necessity incorporated into the Constitution of Canada\". Another ruling of the Ontario Superior Court, in 2014, echoed the 2003 case, stating that the \"Act of Settlement\" \"is an imperial statute which ultimately became part of the law of Canada.\" Upon dismissing appeal of that case, the Court of Appeal of Ontario stated \"[t]he rules of succession are a part of the fabric of the constitution of Canada and incorporated into it\".\nIn a meeting of the Special Joint Committee on the Constitution during the process of patriating the Canadian constitution in 1981, John Munro asked Minister of Justice Jean Chr\u00e9tien about the \"selective omissions\" of the \"Succession to the Throne Act, 1937\", the \"Demise of the Crown Act, 1901\", the \"Seals Act\", the \"Governor General's Act\", and the \"Royal Style and Titles Act, 1953\", from the schedule to the \"Constitution Act, 1982\". In response, Chr\u00e9tien asserted that the schedule to the \"Constitution Act, 1982\", was not exhaustive, outlining that section 52(2) of the \"Constitution Act, 1982\", says \"[t]he Constitution of Canada includes [...] the acts and orders referred to the schedule\" and \"[w]hen you use the word 'includes' [...] it means that if ever there is another thing related to the Canadian constitution as part of it, should have been there, or might have been there, it is covered. So we do not have to renumerate [sic] the ones that you are mentioning.\" In the same meeting, Deputy Attorney General Barry Strayer stated: \"Clause 52(2) is not an exhaustive definition of the Constitution of Canada so that while we have certain things listed in the schedule which are clearly part of the constitution, that does not mean that there are not other things which are part of the constitution [...] [The schedule] is not an exhaustive list.\"\nLeslie Zines claimed in the 1991 publication, \"Constitutional Change in the Commonwealth\", that, though the succession to Canada's throne was outlined by common law and the \"Act of Settlement, 1701\", these were not part of the Canadian constitution, which \"does not contain rules for succession to the throne.\" Richard Toporoski, writing three years later for the Monarchist League of Canada, stated, \"there is no existing provision in our law, other than the \"Act of Settlement, 1701\", that provides that the king or queen of Canada shall be the same person as the king or queen of the United Kingdom. If the British law were to be changed and we did not change our law [...] the person provided for in the new law would become king or queen in at least some realms of the Commonwealth; Canada would continue on with the person who would have become monarch under the previous law.\"\nCanada, with the other Commonwealth realms, committed to the 2011 Perth Agreement, which proposed changes to the rules governing succession to remove male preference and removal of disqualification arising from marriage to a Roman Catholic. As a result, the Canadian Parliament passed the \"Succession to the Throne Act, 2013\", which gave the country's assent to the \"Succession to the Crown Bill\", at that time proceeding in the Parliament of the United Kingdom. In dismissing a challenge to the law on the basis that a change to the succession in Canada would require unanimous consent of all provinces under section 41(a) of the \"Constitution Act, 1982\", Quebec Superior Court Justice Claude Bouchard ruled that Canada \"did not have to change its laws nor its constitution for the British royal succession rules to be amended and effective\" and constitutional convention committed Canada to having a line of succession symmetrical to those of other Commonwealth realms. The ruling was upheld by the Quebec Court of Appeal. The Supreme Court of Canada declined to hear an appeal in April 2020.\nConstitutional scholar Philippe Lagass\u00e9 argues that, in light of the \"Succession to the Throne Act, 2013\", and court rulings upholding that law, section 41(a) of the \"Constitution Act, 1982\", which requires a constitutional amendment passed with the unanimous consent of the provinces, applies only to the \"office of the Queen\", but not who holds that office, and that therefore \"ending the principle of symmetry with the United Kingdom can be done with the general amending procedure, or even by Parliament alone under section 44 of the \"Constitution Act, 1982\".\"\nTed McWhinney, another constitutional scholar, argued that a future government of Canada could begin a process of phasing out the monarchy after the death of Elizabeth II \"quietly and without fanfare by simply failing legally to proclaim any successor to the Queen in relation to Canada\". This would, he claimed, be a way of bypassing the need for a constitutional amendment that would require unanimous consent by the federal Parliament and all the provincial legislatures. However, Ian Holloway, Dean of Law at the University of Western Ontario, criticized McWhinney's proposal for its ignorance of provincial input and opined that its implementation \"would be contrary to the plain purpose of those who framed our system of government.\"\nCertain aspects of the succession rules have been challenged in the courts. For example, under the provisions of the \"Bill of Rights, 1689\", and the \"Act of Settlement, 1701\", Catholics are barred from succeeding to the throne; this prohibition has been upheld twice by Canadian courts, once in 2003 and again in 2014. Legal scholar Christopher Cornell of the SMU Dedman School of Law concluded \"that the prohibition on the Canadian Monarch being Catholic, while discriminatory, is perfectly-if not fundamentally-constitutional\" and that if the prohibition is \"to be changed or removed it will have to be accomplished politically and legislatively through another multilateral agreement similar to the Perth Agreement rather than judicially through the courts.\"\nRegency.\nCanada has no laws allowing for a regency, should the sovereign be a minor or debilitated; none have been passed by the Canadian Parliament and it was made clear by successive cabinets since 1937 that the United Kingdom's Regency Act had no applicability to Canada, as the Canadian Cabinet had not requested otherwise when the act was passed that year and again in 1943 and 1953. As the \"Letters Patent, 1947\", issued by King George VI permit the governor general of Canada to exercise almost all of the monarch's powers in respect of Canada, the viceroy is expected to continue to act as the personal representative of the monarch, and not any regent, even if the monarch is a child or incapacitated.\nThis has led to the question of whether the governor general has the ability to remove themselves and appoint their viceregal successor in the monarch's name. While Lagass\u00e9 argued that appears to be the case, both the \"Canadian Manual of Official Procedures\", published in 1968, and the Privy Council Office took the opposite opinion. Lagass\u00e9 and Patrick Baud claimed changes could be made to regulations to allow a governor general to appoint the next governor general; Christopher McCreery, however, criticized the theory, arguing it is impractical to suggest that a governor general would remove him or herself on ministerial advice, with the consequence that, if a prolonged regency occurred, it would remove one of the checks and balances in the constitution. The intent expressed whenever the matter of regency came up among Commonwealth realm heads of government was that the relevant parliament (other than the United Kingdom's) would pass a bill if the need for a regency arose and the pertinent governor-general would already be empowered to grant royal assent to it. The governor general appointing their successor is not a power that has been utilized to date.\nForeign visits.\nThe following state and official visits to foreign countries have been made by the monarch as the sovereign of Canada (sometimes representing other realms on the same visit):\nFederal and provincial aspects.\nThe origins of Canadian sovereignty lie in the early 17th century, during which time the monarch in England fought with parliament there over who had ultimate authority, culminating in the Glorious Revolution in 1688 and the subsequent \"Bill of Rights, 1689\", which, as mentioned elsewhere in this article, is today part of Canadian constitutional law. This brought to Canada the British notion of the supremacy of parliament\u2014of which the monarch is a part\u2014and it was carried into each of the provinces upon the implementation of responsible government. That, however, was superseded when the \"Charter of Rights and Freedoms\" (within the \"Constitution Act, 1982\") introduced into Canada the American idea of the supremacy of the law. Still, the King remains the sovereign of Canada.\nCanada's monarchy was established at Confederation, when its executive government and authority were declared, in section 9 of the \"Constitution Act, 1867\", to continue and be vested in the monarch. Placing such power, along with legislative power, with the tangible, living Queen, rather than the abstract and inanimate Crown, was a deliberate choice by the framers of the constitution. Still, the Crown is the foundation of the country as \"the very centre of [Canada's] constitution and democracy.\" Although Canada is a federation, the Canadian monarchy is unitary throughout all jurisdictions in the country, the sovereignty of the different administrations being passed on through the overreaching Crown itself as a part of the executive, legislative, and judicial operations in each of the federal and provincial spheres and the headship of state being a part of all equally. The Crown thus links the various governments into a federal state, while it is simultaneously also \"divided\" into 11 legal jurisdictions, or 11 \"crowns\"\u2014one federal and 10 provincial\u2014with the monarch taking on a distinct legal persona in each. As such, the constitution instructs that any change to the position of the monarch or his or her representatives in Canada requires the consent of the Senate, the House of Commons, and the legislative assemblies of all the provinces. The Crown, being shared and balanced, provides the bedrock upon which all of Canada's different regions and peoples can live together peacefully and was said by David E. Smith, in 2017, to be the \"keystone of the constitutional architecture\" of Canada.\nThe Crown is located beyond politics, existing to give authority to and protect the constitution and system of governance. Power, therefore, rests with an institution that \"functions to safeguard it on behalf of all its citizens\", rather than any singular individual. The sovereign and his representatives typically \"act by 'not acting'\"\u2014holding power, but, not exercising it\u2014both because they are unelected figures and to maintain their neutrality, \"deliberately, insistently, and resolutely\", in case they have to be an impartial arbiter in a constitutional crisis and ensure that normal democratic discourse can resume. Consequently, the Crown performs two functions: as a unifying symbol and a protector of democratic rights and freedoms, \"tightly woven into the fabric of the Canadian constitution.\"\nAt the same time, a number of freedoms granted by the constitution to all other Canadians are denied to, or limited for, the monarch and the other senior members of the royal family: freedom of religion, freedom of expression, freedom to travel, freedom to choose a career, freedom to marry, and freedom of privacy and family life.\nWhile the Crown is empowered by statute and the royal prerogative, it also enjoys inherent powers not granted by either. The Court of Appeal of British Columbia ruled in 1997 that \"the Crown has the capacities and powers of a natural person\" and its actions as a natural person are, as with the actions of any natural person, subject to judicial review. Further, it was determined in \"R. v Secretary of State for Health the ex parte C\" that, \"as a matter of capacity, no doubt, [the Crown] has power to do whatever a private person can do. But, as an organ of government, it can only exercise those powers for the public benefit, and for identifiably 'governmental' purposes within limits set by the law.\" Similarly, use of the royal prerogative is justiciable, though, only when the \"subject matter affects the rights or legitimate expectations of an individual\".\nThe governor general is appointed by the monarch on the advice of his federal prime minister and the lieutenant governors are appointed by the governor general on the advice of the federal prime minister. The commissioners of Canada's territories are appointed by the federal governor-in-council, at the recommendation of the minister of Crown\u2013Indigenous relations, but, as the territories are not sovereign entities, the commissioners are not personal representatives of the sovereign. The Advisory Committee on Vice-Regal Appointments, which may seek input from the relevant premier and provincial or territorial community, proposes candidates for appointment as governor general, lieutenant governor, and commissioner.\nSovereign immunity.\nIt has been held since 1918 that the federal Crown is immune from provincial law. Constitutional convention has also held that the Crown in right of each province is outside the jurisdiction of the courts in other provinces. This view, however, has been questioned.\nLieutenant governors do not enjoy the same immunity as the sovereign in matters not relating to the powers of the viceregal office, as decided in the case of former Lieutenant Governor of Quebec Lise Thibault, who had been accused of misappropriating public funds.\nPersonification of the Canadian state.\nAs the living embodiment of the Crown, the sovereign is regarded as the personification of the Canadian state and is meant to represent all Canadians, regardless of political affiliation. As such, he, along with his or her viceregal representatives, must \"remain strictly neutral in political terms\".\nThe person of the reigning sovereign thus holds two distinct personas in constant coexistence, an ancient theory of the \"King's two bodies\"\u2014the body natural (subject to infirmity and death) and the body politic (which never dies). The Crown and the monarch are \"conceptually divisible but legally indivisible [...] The office cannot exist without the office-holder\", so, even in private, the monarch is always \"on duty\". The terms \"the state\", \"the Crown\", \"the Crown in Right of Canada\", \"His Majesty the King in Right of Canada\" (), and similar are all synonymous and the monarch's legal personality is sometimes referred to simply as \"Canada\".\nThe monarch is at the apex of the Canadian order of precedence and, as the embodiment of the state, is also the focus of oaths of allegiance, required of many of the aforementioned employees of the Crown, as well as by new citizens, as by the Oath of Citizenship. Allegiance is given in reciprocation to the sovereign's Coronation Oath, wherein he or she promises to govern the people of Canada \"according to their respective laws and customs\".\nHead of state.\nAlthough it has been argued that the term \"head of state\" is a republican one inapplicable in a constitutional monarchy such as Canada, where the monarch is the embodiment of the state and thus cannot be head of it, the sovereign is regarded by official government sources, judges, constitutional scholars, and pollsters as the head of state, while the governor general and lieutenant governors are all only representatives of, and thus equally subordinate to, that figure. Some governors general, their staff, government publications, and constitutional scholars like Ted McWhinney and C.E.S. Franks have, however, referred to the position of governor general as that of Canada's head of state; though, sometimes qualifying the assertion with or \"effective\"; Franks has hence recommended that the governor general be named officially as the head of state. Still others view the role of head of state as being shared by both the sovereign and his viceroys. Since 1927, governors general have been received on state visits abroad as though they were heads of state.\nOfficials at Rideau Hall have attempted to use the \"Letters Patent, 1947\", as justification for describing the governor general as head of state. However, the document makes no such distinction, nor does it effect an abdication of the sovereign's powers in favour of the viceroy, as it only allows the governor general to \"act on the Queen's behalf\". D. Michael Jackson, former Chief of Protocol of Saskatchewan, argued that Rideau Hall had been attempting to \"recast\" the governor general as head of state since the 1970s and doing so preempted both the Queen and all of the lieutenant governors. This caused not only \"precedence wars\" at provincial events (where the governor general usurped the lieutenant governor's proper spot as most senior official in attendance) and Governor General Adrienne Clarkson to accord herself precedence before the Queen at a national occasion, but also constitutional issues by \"unbalancing\u00a0[...] the federalist symmetry\". This has been regarded as both a natural evolution and as a dishonest effort to alter the constitution without public scrutiny.\nIn a poll conducted by Ipsos-Reid following the first prorogation of the 40th parliament on 4 December 2008, it was found that 42 per cent of the sample group thought the prime minister was head of state, while 33 per cent felt it was the governor general. Only 24 per cent named the Queen as head of state, a number up from 2002, when the results of an EKOS Research Associates survey showed only 5 per cent of those polled knew the Queen was head of state (69 per cent answered that it was the prime minister).\nArms.\nThe Arms of His Majesty the King in Right of Canada is the arms of dominion of the Canadian monarch and, thus, equally the official coat of arms of Canada and a symbol of national sovereignty. It is closely modelled after the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom, with French and distinctive Canadian elements replacing or added to those derived from the British version, which was employed in Canada before the granting of the Canadian arms in 1921.\nThe royal standard is the monarch's official flag, which depicts the royal arms in banner form. It takes precedence above all other flags in Canada\u2014including the national flag and those of the other members of the royal family\u2014and is typically flown from buildings, vessels, and vehicles in which the sovereign is present (although exceptions have been made for its use when the monarch is not in attendance). The royal standard is never flown at half-mast because there is always a sovereign: when one dies, his or her successor becomes the sovereign instantly. Elements of the royal arms have also been incorporated into the governor general's flag; similarly, the flags of the lieutenant governors employ the shields of the relevant provincial coat of arms.\nFederal constitutional role.\nCanada's constitution is based on the Westminster parliamentary model, wherein the role of the King is both legal and practical, but not political. The sovereign is vested with all the powers of state, collectively known as the royal prerogative, leading the populace to be considered subjects of the Crown. However, as the sovereign's power stems from the people and the monarch is a constitutional one, he or she does not rule alone, as in an absolute monarchy. Instead, the Crown is regarded as a corporation sole, with the monarch being the centre of a construct in which the power of the whole is shared by multiple institutions of government\u2014the executive, legislative, and judicial\u2014acting under the sovereign's authority, which is entrusted for exercise by the politicians (the elected and appointed parliamentarians and the ministers of the Crown generally drawn from among them) and the judges and justices of the peace. The monarchy has thus been described as the underlying principle of Canada's institutional unity and the monarch as a \"guardian of constitutional freedoms\" whose \"job is to ensure that the political process remains intact and is allowed to function.\"\nThe Great Seal of Canada \"signifies the power and authority of the Crown flowing from the sovereign to [the] parliamentary government\" and is applied to state documents such as royal proclamations and letters patent commissioning Cabinet ministers, senators, judges, and other senior government officials. The \"lending\" of royal authority to Cabinet is illustrated by the great seal being entrusted by the governor general, the official keeper of the seal, to the minister of innovation, science, and economic development, who is \"ex officio\" the registrar general of Canada. Upon a change of government, the seal is temporarily returned to the governor general and then \"lent\" to the next incoming registrar general.\nThe Crown is the pinnacle of the Canadian Armed Forces, with the constitution placing the monarch in the position of commander-in-chief of the entire force, though the governor general carries out the duties attached to the position and also bears the title of \"Commander-in-Chief in and over Canada\".\nExecutive (King-in-Council).\nThe government of Canada\u2014formally termed \"His Majesty's Government\"\u2014is defined by the constitution as the King acting on the advice of his Privy Council; what is technically known as the \"King-in-Council\", or sometimes the \"Governor-in-Council\", referring to the governor general as the King's stand-in, though, a few tasks must be specifically performed by, or bills that require assent from, the King. One of the main duties of the Crown is to \"ensure that a democratically elected government is always in place,\" which means appointing a prime minister to thereafter head the Cabinet\u2014a committee of the Privy Council charged with advising the Crown on the exercise of the royal prerogative. The monarch is informed by his viceroy of the swearing-in and resignation of prime ministers and other members of the ministry, remains fully briefed through regular communications from his Canadian ministers, and holds audience with them whenever possible. By convention, the content of these communications and meetings remains confidential so as to protect the impartiality of the monarch and his representative. The appropriateness and viability of this tradition in an age of social media has been questioned.\nIn the construct of constitutional monarchy and responsible government, the ministerial advice tendered is typically binding, meaning the monarch \"reigns\" but does not \"rule\", the Cabinet ruling \"in trust\" for the monarch. This has been the case in Canada since the Treaty of Paris ended the reign of the territory's last absolute monarch, King Louis XV of France. However, the royal prerogative belongs to the Crown and not to any of the ministers and the royal and viceroyal figures may unilaterally use these powers in exceptional constitutional crisis situations (an exercise of the reserve powers), thereby allowing the monarch to make sure \"the government conducts itself in compliance with the constitution\"; he and the viceroys being guarantors of the government's constitutional, as opposed to democratic, legitimacy and must ensure the continuity of such. Use of the royal prerogative in this manner was seen when the Governor General refused his prime minister's advice to dissolve Parliament in 1926 and when, in 2008, the Governor General took some hours to decide whether or not to accept her Prime Minister's advice to prorogue Parliament to avoid a vote of non-confidence. The prerogative powers have also been used numerous times in the provinces.\nThe royal prerogative further extends to foreign affairs, including the ratification of treaties, alliances, international agreements, and declarations of war, the accreditation of Canadian high commissioners and ambassadors and receipt of similar diplomats from foreign states, and the issuance of Canadian passports, which remain the sovereign's property. It also includes the creation of dynastic and national honours, though only the latter are established on official ministerial advice.\nParliament (King-in-Parliament).\nAll laws in Canada are the monarch's and the sovereign is one of the three components of the Parliament of Canada\u2014formally called the \"King-in-Parliament\"\u2014but, the monarch and viceroy do not participate in the legislative process, save for royal consent, typically expressed by a minister of the Crown, and royal assent, which is necessary for a bill to be enacted as law. Either figure or a delegate may perform this task and the constitution allows the viceroy the option of deferring assent to the sovereign.\nThe governor general is further responsible for summoning the House of Commons, while either the viceroy or monarch can prorogue and dissolve the legislature, after which the governor general usually calls for a general election. This element of the royal prerogative is unaffected by legislation \"fixing\" election dates, as \"An Act to Amend the Canada Elections Act\" specifies that it does not curtail the Crown's powers. The new parliamentary session is marked by either the monarch, governor general, or some other representative reading the Speech from the Throne. Members of Parliament must recite the Oath of Allegiance before they may take their seat. Further, the official opposition is traditionally dubbed as \"His Majesty's Loyal Opposition\", illustrating that, while its members are opposed to the incumbent government, they remain loyal to the sovereign (as personification of the state and its authority).\nThe monarch does not have the prerogative to impose and collect new taxes without the authorization of an act of Parliament. The consent of the Crown must, however, be obtained before either of the houses of Parliament may even debate a bill affecting the sovereign's prerogatives or interests and no act of Parliament binds the King or his rights unless the act states that it does.\nCourts (King-on-the-Bench).\nThe sovereign is traditionally viewed as the fount of justice, although practically speaking, this role is administered by justices in the monarch's name. The sovereign's position in the Canadian courts formally dubbed the \"King on the Bench\". The Arms of His Majesty in Right of Canada, provincial coats of arms or the UK royal arms (for older court rooms) are displayed in Canadian courtrooms, as is a portrait of the sovereign.\nSolicitor-barristers exercise certain privileges held on trust as officers of His Majesty's courts, sourced from the monarch's royal prerogative. Common law holds the notion that the sovereign \"can do no wrong\": the monarch cannot be prosecuted in his own courts\u2014judged by himself\u2014for criminal offences under his own laws. Canada inherited the common law version of Crown immunity from British law. However, over time, the scope of said immunity has been steadily reduced by statute law. With the passage of relevant legislation through the provincial and federal parliaments, the Crown in its public capacity (that is, lawsuits against the King-in-Council), in all areas of Canada, is now liable in tort, as any normal person would be. In international cases, as a sovereign and under established principles of international law, the King of Canada is not subject to suit in foreign courts without his express consent.\nWithin the royal prerogative is also the granting of immunity from prosecution, mercy, and pardoning offences against the Crown. Since 1878, the prerogative of pardon has always been exercised upon the recommendation of ministers.\nThe Crown and Indigenous peoples.\nIncluded in Canada's constitution are the various treaties between the Crown and Canada's First Nations, Inuit, and M\u00e9tis peoples, who, like the M\u0101ori and the Treaty of Waitangi in New Zealand, generally view the affiliation as being not between them and the ever-changing Cabinet, but instead with the continuous Crown of Canada, as embodied in the reigning sovereign, meaning the link between monarch and Indigenous peoples in Canada will theoretically last for \"as long as the sun shines, grass grows, and rivers flow.\"\nThe association stretches back to the first decisions between North American Indigenous peoples and European colonialists and, over centuries of interface, treaties were established concerning the monarch and indigenous nations. The only treaties that survived the American Revolution are those in Canada, which date to the beginning of the 18th century. Today, the main guide for relations between the monarchy and Canadian First Nations is King George III's \"Royal Proclamation of 1763\"; while not a treaty, it is regarded by First Nations as their Magna Carta or \"Indian bill of rights\", as it affirmed native title to their lands and made clear that, though under the sovereignty of the Crown, the aboriginal bands were autonomous political units in a \"nation-to-nation\" association with non-native governments, with the monarch as the intermediary. The agreements with the Crown are administered by aboriginal law and overseen by the minister of Crown-Indigenous relations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI have greatly appreciated the opportunity to discuss [...] the vital process of reconciliation in this country\u2014not a one-off act, of course, but an ongoing commitment to healing, respect and understanding [...] with indigenous and non-indigenous peoples across Canada committing to reflect honestly and openly on the past and to forge a new relationship for the future.\n Prince Charles, Prince of Wales, 2022\nThe link between the Crown and Indigenous peoples will sometimes be symbolically expressed through ceremony. Gifts have been frequently exchanged and aboriginal titles have been bestowed upon royal and viceregal figures since the early days of indigenous contact with the Crown. As far back as 1710, Indigenous leaders have met to discuss treaty business with royal family members or viceroys in private audience and many continue to use their connection to the Crown to further their political aims; public ceremonies attended by the monarch or another member of the royal family have been employed as a platform on which to present complaints, witnessed by both national and international cameras. Following country-wide protests, beginning in 2012, and the close of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in 2015, focus turned toward rapprochement between the nations in the nation-to-nation relationship.\nHereditary chiefs.\nThe hereditary chiefs are leaders within First Nations who represent different houses or clans and whose chieftaincies are passed down intergenerationally; most First Nations have a hereditary system. The positions are rooted in traditional models of Indigenous governance that predate the colonization of Canada and are organized in a fashion similar to the occidental idea of monarchy. Indeed, early European explorers often considered territories belonging to different aboriginal groups to be kingdoms\u2014such as along the north shore of the St. Lawrence River, between the Trinity River and the Isle-aux-Coudres, and the neighbouring \"kingdom of Canada\", which stretched west to the Island of Montreal\u2014and the leaders of these communities were referred to as kings, particularly those chosen through heredity.\nToday, the hereditary chiefs are not sovereign; according to the Supreme Court of Canada, the Crown holds sovereignty over the whole of Canada, including reservation and traditional lands. However, by some interpretations of case law from the same court, the chiefs have jurisdiction over traditional territories that fall outside of band-controlled reservation land, beyond the elected band councils established by the \"Indian Act\". Although recognized by, and accountable to, the federal Crown-in-Council (the Government of Canada), band chiefs do not hold the cultural authority of hereditary chiefs, who often serve as knowledge-keepers, responsible for the upholding of a First Nation's traditional customs, legal systems, and cultural practices. When serving as Lieutenant Governor of British Columbia, Judith Guichon postulated that the role of hereditary chiefs mirrored that of Canada's constitutional monarch, being the representative of \"sober second thought and wisdom, not the next political cycle; but, rather, enduring truths and the evolution of our nation through generations.\" For these reasons, the Crown maintains formal relations with Canada's hereditary chiefs, including on matters relating to treaty rights and obligations.\nCultural role.\nRoyal presence and duties.\nMembers of the royal family have been present in Canada since the late 18th century, their reasons including participating in military manoeuvres, serving as the federal viceroy, or undertaking official royal tours, which \"reinforce [the] country's collective heritage\". At least one royal tour has been conducted every year between 1957 and 2018.\nThe \"welfare and service\" function of the monarchy is regarded as an important part of the modern monarchy's role and demonstrates a significant change to the institution in recent generations, from a heavily ceremonialized, imperial crown to a \"more demotic and visible\" head of state \"interacting with the general population far beyond confined court circles.\" As such, a prominent feature of tours are royal walkabouts; a tradition initiated in 1939 by Queen Elizabeth when she was in Ottawa and broke from the royal party to speak directly to gathered veterans. Usually important milestones, anniversaries, or celebrations of Canadian culture will warrant the presence of the monarch, while other members of the royal family will be asked to participate in lesser occasions. A household to assist and tend to the monarch forms part of the royal party.\nOfficial duties involve the sovereign representing the Canadian state at home or abroad, or her relations as members of the royal family participating in government organized ceremonies either in Canada or elsewhere; sometimes these individuals are employed in asserting Canada's sovereignty over its territories. The advice of the Canadian Cabinet is the impetus for royal participation in any Canadian event, though, at present, the Chief of Protocol and his staff in the Department of Canadian Heritage are, as part of the State Ceremonial and Canadian Symbols Program, responsible for orchestrating any official events in or for Canada that involve the royal family.\nConversely, unofficial duties are performed by royal family members for Canadian organizations of which they may be patrons, through their attendance at charity events, visiting with members of the Canadian Forces as colonel-in-chief, or marking certain key anniversaries. The invitation and expenses associated with these undertakings are usually borne by the associated organization. In 2005, members of the royal family were present at a total of 76 Canadian engagements, as well as several more through 2006 and 2007. In the period between 2019 and 2022, they carried out 53 engagements, the number reduced, and all through the latter year and a half being virtual, because of restrictions in place during the COVID-19 pandemic. The various viceroys took part in 4,023 engagements through 2019 and 2020, both in-person and virtually.\nApart from Canada, the King and other members of the royal family regularly perform public duties in the other 14 Commonwealth realms in which the King is head of state. This situation, however, can mean the monarch and members of the royal family will be promoting one nation and not another; a situation that has been met with criticism.\nSymbols, associations, and awards.\nThe main symbol of the monarchy is the sovereign himself, described as \"the personal expression of the Crown in Canada,\" and his image is thus used to signify Canadian sovereignty and government authority\u2014his image, for instance, appearing on currency, and his portrait in government buildings. The sovereign is further both mentioned in and the subject of songs, loyal toasts, and salutes. A royal cypher, appearing on buildings and official seals, or a crown, seen on provincial and national coats of arms, as well as police force and Canadian Forces regimental and maritime badges and rank insignia, is also used to illustrate the monarchy as the locus of authority, the latter without referring to any specific monarch.\nSince the days of King Louis XIV, the monarch is the fount of all honours in Canada and the orders, decorations, and medals form \"an integral element of the Crown.\" Hence, the insignia and medallions for these awards bear a crown, cypher or portrait of the monarch. Similarly, the country's heraldic authority was created by Queen Elizabeth II and, operating under the authority of the governor general, grants new coats of arms, flags, and badges in Canada. Use of the royal crown in such symbols is a gift from the monarch showing royal support or association and requires his approval before being added.\nMembers of the royal family also act as ceremonial colonels-in-chief, commodores-in-chief, captains-general, air commodores-in-chief, generals, and admirals of various elements of the Canadian Forces, reflecting the Crown's relationship with the country's military through participation in events both at home and abroad. The monarch also serves as the Commissioner-in-Chief, and Prince Edward and Princess Anne as Honorary Deputy Commissioners, of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.\nA number of Canadian civilian organizations have association with the monarchy, either through their being founded via a royal charter, having been granted the right to use the prefix \"royal\" before their name, or because at least one member of the royal family serves as a patron. In addition to The Prince's Trust Canada, established by Charles III when Prince of Wales, some other charities and volunteer organizations have also been founded as gifts to, or in honour of, some of Canada's monarchs or members of the royal family, such as the Victorian Order of Nurses, a gift to Queen Victoria for her Diamond Jubilee in 1897; the Canadian Cancer Fund, set up in honour of King George V's Silver Jubilee in 1935; and the Queen Elizabeth II Fund to Aid in Research on the Diseases of Children. A number of awards in Canada are likewise issued in the name of previous or present members of the royal family. Further, organizations will give commemorative gifts to members of the royal family to mark a visit or other important occasion. All Canadian coins bear the image of the monarch reigning at the time of the coin's production, with an inscription, (often abbreviated to ), a Latin phrase translated to English as, \"by the grace of God, king\". During the reign of a female monarch, is replaced with , which is Latin for 'queen'.\nThroughout the 1970s, symbols of the monarch and monarchy were slowly removed from the public eye. For instance, the Queen's portrait was seen less in public schools and the Royal Mail became Canada Post. Smith attributed this to the attitude the government of the day held toward Canada's past; though, it never raised the policy in public or during any of the constitutional conferences held that decade. Andrew Heard argued, however, that dispensing with such symbols was necessary to facilitate the simultaneous increasing embrace of the monarch as Queen of Canada. Emblems such as the Royal Coat of Arms remained, however, and others, such as the monarch's royal standard, were created. With the later developments of the governor general's flag, foundation of the Canadian Heraldic Authority, royal standards for other members of the royal family, and the like, Canada, along with New Zealand, is one of the two realms that have \"paid the greatest attention to the nationalization of the visual symbols of the monarchy.\"\nSignificance to Canadian identity.\nIn his 2018 book, \"The Canadian Kingdom: 150 Years of Constitutional Monarchy\", Jackson wrote that \"the Canadian manifestation of the monarchy is not only historical and constitutional, it is political, cultural, and social, reflecting, and contributing to, change and evolution in Canada's governance, autonomy, and identity.\" Since at least the 1930s, supporters of the Crown have held the opinion that the monarch is a unifying focal point for the nation's \"historic consciousness\"\u2014the country's heritage being \"unquestionably linked with the history of monarchy\"\u2014and Canadian patriotism, traditions, and shared values, \"around which coheres the nation's sense of a continuing personality\". This infusion of monarchy into Canadian governance and society helps strengthen Canadian identity and distinguish it from American identity, a difference that has existed since at least 1864, when it was a factor in the Fathers of Confederation choosing to keep constitutional monarchy for the new country in 1866. Former Governor General Vincent Massey articulated in 1967 that the monarchy \"stands for qualities and institutions which mean Canada to every one of us and which, for all our differences and all our variety, have kept Canada Canadian.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI want the Crown in Canada to represent everything that is best and most admired in the Canadian ideal. I will continue to do my best to make it so during my lifetime.\nElizabeth II, 1973\nBut, Canadians were, through the late 1960s to the 2000s, encouraged by federal and provincial governments to \"neglect, ignore, forget, reject, debase, suppress, even hate, and certainly treat as foreign what their parents and grandparents, whether spiritual or blood, regarded as the basis of Canadian nationhood, autonomy, and history\", including the monarchy resulting in a disconnect between the Canadian populace and their monarch. Former Governor General Roland Michener said in 1970 that anti-monarchists claimed the Canadian Crown is foreign and incompatible with Canada's multicultural society, which the government promoted as a Canadian identifier, and Lawrence Martin called in 2007 for Canada to become a republic in order to \"re-brand the nation\". However, Michener also stated, \"[the monarchy] is our own by inheritance and choice, and contributes much to our distinctive Canadian identity and our chances of independent survival amongst the republics of North and South America.\" Journalist Christina Blizzard emphasized in 2009 that the monarchy \"made [Canada] a haven of peace and justice for immigrants from around the world\", while Michael Valpy contended in 2009 that the Crown's nature permitted non-conformity amongst its subjects, thereby opening the door to multiculturalism and pluralism. Johnston described the Crown as providing \"space for our values and beliefs as Canadians.\"\nIn media and popular culture.\nPainting and sculpture.\nAside from official artworks, such as monuments and portraits commissioned by government bodies, Canadian painters have, by their own volition or for private organizations, created more expressive, informal depictions of Canada's monarchs and other members of the royal family, ranging from fine art to irreverent graffiti. For example, the English-Canadian artist Frederic Marlett Bell-Smith produced \"The Artist Painting Queen Victoria\" in 1895, which now resides at the National Gallery of Canada. At Library and Archives Canada is the painting \"The Unveiling of the National War Memorial\", capturing the dedication of the monument, in Ottawa, by King George VI and Queen Elizabeth in 1939; though, the artist is unknown.\nHilton Hassell depicted Princess Elizabeth (later Queen Elizabeth II) square dancing at Rideau Hall in 1951 and a portrait of Elizabeth II by Lorena Ziraldo, of Ottawa, was featured in the \"Hill Times\" and \"Ottawa Citizen\".\nCharles Pachter, from Toronto, fashioned the painting \"Noblesse Oblige\" in 1972, which shows Queen Elizabeth II, in her Guards Regiment uniform and saluting, as she did during Trooping the Colour ceremonies, except atop a moose instead of her horse, Burmese. Despite great controversy when it was first exhibited, it \"has become a Canadian cultural image; the people's image\". Pachter, subsequently made numerous variations on the theme, including \"Queen &amp; Moose\" (1973) and \"The Queen on a Moose\" (1988). The artist said, \"there was an amazing symmetry of putting the sovereign of her northern realm (Canada) on an animal who is the 'monarch of the north, awkward but majestic'\". Pachter made similar pieces showing Elizabeth's son, Prince Charles (now King Charles III) and his wife, Camilla, standing alongside a moose and Charles's son, Prince William, and his wife, Catherine, with Canadian wildlife, such as a moose and a squirrel. For Elizabeth II's Diamond Jubilee, Pachter created a series of fake postage stamps using all his paintings that include members of the royal family, which he called \"my branded images\nfor Canada.\" Some were featured on accessory items sold at the Hudson's Bay Company.\nPortraits of Elizabeth II hung in several hockey arenas across Canada after her accession in 1952. One was in place in Maple Leaf Gardens until the early 1970s, when owner Harold Ballard had it removed to construct more seating, stating, \"if people want to see pictures of the Queen, they can go to an art gallery.\" Three large portraits of Elizabeth II were created for Winnipeg Arena, on display there from the building's opening in 1955 to 1999.\nAt the time of the sesquicentennial of Confederation in 2017, Vancouver Island-based artist Timothy Hoey created a \"Canada 150\" version of his decade-long \"O Canada\" project, painting 150 Canadian icons in acrylic paint on 20.3 by 25.4 centimetre (eight by 10 inch) boards. Among them are numerous depictions of Queen Elizabeth II with other Canadian icons, such as beavers, Cheezies, the Grey Cup, the Stanley Cup, a bottle of beer (\"O Canada Liz Enjoying Some Wobbly-Pops\"), Rush (\"O Canada Closer to the Heart\"), the Hudson's Bay point blanket, the Trans-Canada Highway, a birch canoe, a buckskin jacket, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police uniform, a Montreal Canadiens hockey sweater, and so on. Hoey had previously painted Elizabeth, in formal attire and tiara, holding a hockey stick in front of a Hudson's Bay point blanket; the work titled \"O-Canada Liz\". In 2021, he depicted the Queen in a decorative hat, uniform of the Vancouver Canucks from the 1978\u20131979 season, and full goaltender equipment.\nThe also exist wax sculptures of Queen Elizabeth II in private museums, such as the Royal London Wax Museum in Victoria, British Columbia, and the Wax Museum of History in Niagara Falls, Ontario.\nTelevision.\nThe television series \"Rideau Hall\", starring Bette MacDonald, was produced by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation and aired for one season in 2002. Its premise was a brash, one-hit wonder disco artist being appointed governor general on the advice of a republican prime minister.\nCanadian comedian Scott Thompson regularly played a parody of Queen Elizabeth II in a Canadian context on the sketch comedy television show \"The Kids in the Hall\", as well as in other productions, such as \"The Queen's Toast: A Royal Wedding Special\" and \"Conan\". Thompson also voiced a portrayal of Queen Elizabeth II in Canada in the animated television show \"Fugget About It\", in the episode \"Royally Screwed\".\nThe Canadian monarchy was parodied in \"Royal Pudding\", the third episode of the 15th season of the animated television show \"South Park\", which first aired on 11 May 2011. The opening focuses on a spoof of the wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton, featuring caricatures of Queen Elizabeth II; Prince William, Prince of Wales; and Catherine, Princess of Wales. Specific mention is made of \"the Queen of Canada\" and \"the Canadian royal family\". The show subsequently, in the second episode of the 26th season, \"The Worldwide Privacy Tour\", parodied the Duke and Duchess of Sussex as a prince of Canada and \"the wife\", who, after hostile treatment at the funeral of the late Queen of Canada, go on national television and a world tour demanding people and the media not pay attention to them and branding themselves as victims.\nRoyal family and house.\nThe Canadian royal family is the group of people who are comparatively closely related to the country's monarch and, as such, belong to the House of Windsor and owe their allegiance specifically to the reigning king or queen of Canada. There is no legal definition of who is or is not a member of the royal family; though, the Government of Canada's website lists \"working members of the royal family\".\nUnlike in the United Kingdom, the monarch is the only member of the royal family with a title established through Canadian law and is styled by convention as \"His/Her Majesty\", as would be a queen consort. Otherwise, the remaining family members are, as a courtesy, styled and titled as they are in the UK, according to letters patent issued there, with additional French translations.\nThose in the royal family are distant relations of the Belgian, Danish, Greek, Norwegian, Spanish, and Swedish royal families and, given the shared nature of the Canadian monarch, are also members of the British royal family. While Canadian and foreign media often refer to them as the \"British royal family\", the Canadian government considers it inappropriate, as they are family members of the Canadian monarch. Further, in addition to the few Canadian citizens in the royal family, the sovereign is considered Canadian, and those among his relations who do not meet the requirements of Canadian citizenship law are considered Canadian, which entitles them to Canadian consular assistance and the protection of the King's armed forces of Canada when they are in need of protection or aid outside of the Commonwealth realms, as well as, since 2013, substantive appointment to the Order of Canada and Order of Military Merit. Beyond formalities, members of the royal family have, on occasion, been said by the media and non-governmental organizations to be Canadian, have declared themselves to be Canadian, and some past members have lived in Canada for extended periods as viceroy or for other reasons.\nAccording to the Canadian Royal Heritage Trust, Prince Edward Augustus, Duke of Kent and Strathearn\u2014due to his having lived in Canada between 1791 and 1800 and fathering Queen Victoria\u2014is the \"ancestor of the modern Canadian royal family\". Nonetheless, the concept of the Canadian royal family did not emerge until after the passage of the Statute of Westminster in 1931, when Canadian officials only began to overtly consider putting the principles of Canada's new status as an independent kingdom into effect. Initially, the monarch was the only member of the royal family to carry out public ceremonial duties solely on the advice of Canadian ministers; King Edward VIII became the first to do so when in July 1936 he dedicated the Canadian National Vimy Memorial in France. Over the decades, however, the monarch's children, grandchildren, cousins, and their respective spouses began to also perform functions at the direction of the Canadian Crown-in-Council, representing the monarch within Canada or abroad, in a role specifically as members of the Canadian royal family.\nHowever, it was not until October 2002 when the term \"Canadian royal family\" was first used publicly and officially by one of its members: in a speech to the Nunavut legislature at its opening, Queen Elizabeth II stated: \"I am proud to be the first member of the Canadian royal family to be greeted in Canada's newest territory.\" Princess Anne used it again when speaking at Rideau Hall in 2014, as did the now King Charles in Halifax the same year. Also in 2014, Premier of Saskatchewan Brad Wall called Prince Edward a member of the Canadian royal family. By 2011, both Canadian and British media were referring to \"Canada's royal family\" or the \"Canadian royal family\".\nWhile Heard observed in 2018 that no direct legal action has, so far, created a Canadian royal family, he also asserted that the Canadian Heraldic Authority creating uniquely Canadian standards for members of the royal family other than the monarch was a symbolic \"localization of the royal family\"; Sean Palmer agreed, stating the banners are a sign the country has taken \"'ownership' not only of the Queen of Canada, but of the other members of her family as well\" and that doing so was another formal affirmation of the concept of a Canadian royal family \"as distinct as the Queen of Canada is from the Queen of the United Kingdom\". Jai Patel and Sally Raudon also noted, in 2019, that the purpose of these heraldic banners was to recognize the owners' roles as members of the Canadian royal family.\nFederal residences and royal household.\nBuildings across Canada reserved by the Crown for the use of the monarch and his viceroys are called \"Government House\", but may be customarily known by some specific name. The sovereign's and governor general's official residences are Rideau Hall in Ottawa and the Citadelle in Quebec City. Each holds pieces from the Crown Collection. Though neither was used for their intended purpose, Hatley Castle in British Columbia was purchased in 1940 by the federal government for the use of George VI and his family during the Second World War and the Emergency Government Headquarters, built between 1959 and 1961 at CFS Carp and decommissioned in 1994, included a residential apartment for the sovereign or governor general in the case of a nuclear attack.\nBritish royalty have also owned homes and land in Canada in a private capacity: Edward VIII owned Bedingfield Ranch, near Pekisko, Alberta; and Princess Margaret owned Portland Island, which was given to her by British Columbia in 1958. She offered it back to the province on permanent loan in 1961, which was accepted in 1966, and the island and surrounding waters eventually became Princess Margaret Marine Park.\nIn addition to a ma\u00eetre d'h\u00f4tel, chefs, footmen, valets, dressers, pages, aides-de-camp (drawn from the junior officers of the armed forces), equerries, and others at Rideau Hall, the King appoints various people to his Canadian household to assist him in carrying out his official duties on behalf of Canada. Along with the Canadian secretary to the King, the monarch's entourage includes the equerry-in-waiting to the King, the King's police officer, two ladies-in-waiting for the Queen, the King's honorary physician, the King's honorary dental surgeon, and the King's honorary nursing officer\u2014the latter three being drawn from the Canadian Forces. Prince Edward, Duke of Edinburgh, also has a Canadian private secretary and his wife, Sophie, Duchess of Edinburgh, a lady-in-waiting. Royal Canadian Air Force VIP aircraft are provided by 412 Transport Squadron.\nThere are three household regiments specifically attached to the royal household\u2014the Governor General's Foot Guards, the Governor General's Horse Guards, and the Canadian Grenadier Guards. There are also three chapels royal, all in Ontario: Mohawk Chapel in Brantford; Christ Church Royal Chapel, near Deseronto; and St Catherine's Chapel in Massey College, in Toronto. Though not a chapel royal, St Bartholomew's Anglican Church, located across MacKay Street from Rideau Hall, is regularly used by governors general and their families and sometimes by the sovereign and other visiting royalty, as well as by staff, their families, and members of the Governor General's Foot Guards, for whom the church serves as a regimental chapel.\nSecurity.\nThe Royal Canadian Mounted Police is tasked with providing security to the sovereign, the governor general (starting from when he or she is made governor general-designate), and other members of the royal family; as outlined in the \"RCMP Regulations\", the force \"has a duty to protect individuals designated by the minister of public safety, including certain members of the royal family when visiting.\" The RCMP's provision of service is determined based on threat and risk assessment, the seniority of the individual in terms of precedence and. for members of the royal family, the nature of the royal tour\u2014i.e. an official tour by the King or on behalf of the King or a working or private visit. The governor general receives round-the-clock security from the Governor General Protection Detail, part of the Personal Protection Group, based at Rideau Hall.\nHistory.\nFrom colonies to independence.\nThe Canadian monarchy can trace its ancestral lineage back to the kings of the Angles and the early Scottish kings and through the centuries since the claims of King Henry VII in 1497 and King Francis I in 1534; both being blood relatives of the current Canadian monarch. Former Prime Minister Stephen Harper said of the Crown that it \"links us all together with the majestic past that takes us back to the Tudors, the Plantagenets, Magna Carta, \"habeas corpus\", petition of rights, and English common law.\" Though the first French and British colonizers of Canada interpreted the hereditary nature of some indigenous North American chieftainships as a form of monarchy, it is generally accepted that Canada has been a territory of a monarch or a monarchy in its own right only since the establishment of the French colony of Canada in the early 16th century; according to historian Jacques Monet, the Canadian Crown is one of the few that have survived through uninterrupted succession since before its inception.\nAfter the Canadian colonies of France were, via war and treaties, ceded to the British Crown, and the population was greatly expanded by those loyal to George III fleeing north from persecution during and following the American Revolution, British North America was in 1867 confederated by Queen Victoria to form Canada as a kingdom in its own right. By the end of the First World War, the increased fortitude of Canadian nationalism inspired the country's leaders to push for greater independence from the King in his British Council, resulting in the creation of the uniquely Canadian monarchy through the Statute of Westminster, which was granted royal assent in 1931. Only five years later, Canada had three successive kings in the space of one year, with the death of George V, the accession and abdication of Edward VIII, and his replacement by George VI.\nFrom 1786 through to the 1930s, members of the royal family toured Canada, including Prince William (later King William IV); Prince Edward, Duke of Kent; Prince Albert Edward, Prince of Wales (later King Edward VII); Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn; John Campbell, Marquess of Lorne, and Princess Louise; Prince Leopold; Princess Marie-Louise; Prince George, Duke of Cornwall and York (later King George V), and Princess Victoria (later Queen Mary); Prince Arthur (son of the Duke of Connaught); Princess Patricia; Prince Albert (later King George VI); Prince Edward, Prince of Wales (later King Edward VIII); Prince George, Duke of Kent; and Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester.\nThe Canadian Crown.\nKing George VI became in 1939 the first reigning monarch of Canada to tour the country, doing so with his wife, Queen Elizabeth. Only weeks later, the King, on the advice of his Canadian Prime Minister, declared war on Nazi Germany. Throughout the conflict, George boosted the morale of his Canadian troops while Governor General the Earl of Athlone (the King's uncle) supported the war effort in Canada. The men were occasionally assisted in their efforts by other members of the royal family.\nElizabeth II undertook her first tour of Canada in 1951, when Princess Elizabeth, Duchess of Edinburgh. She would go on to officiate at various moments of importance in the nation's history: She opened Parliament in 1957\u2014on the same tour, delivering, from Rideau Hall, her first-ever live television broadcast\u2014and in 1977; opened the St. Lawrence Seaway in 1959; celebrated the Canadian Centennial; and proclaimed the country to be fully independent, via constitutional patriation, in 1982. That act is said to have entrenched the monarchy in Canada, due to the stringent amending formula that must be followed in order to alter the monarchy in any way.\nThrough the 1960s and 1970s, the rise of Quebec nationalism and changes in Canadian identity created an atmosphere where the purpose and role of the monarchy came into question. Some references to the monarch and the monarchy were removed from the public eye and moves were made by the federal government to constitutionally alter the Crown's place and role in Canada, first by explicit legal amendments and later by subtle attrition. But, provincial and federal ministers, along with loyal national citizen's organizations, ensured that the system remained the same in essence.\nThe Queen publicly expressed her personal support for the Meech Lake Accord, which attempted to bring Quebec governmental support to the patriated constitution. The accord failed, prompting Elizabeth to deliver a nationally-broadcast speech in Ottawa supporting Canadian unity. In the lead-up to the referendum on Quebec independence in 1995, the Queen was tricked by a Montreal radio DJ into revealing her desire to see the \"no\" side win, offering to help however she could. Elizabeth followed the results closely on the day of the vote.\nMembers of the royal family continued to be present at important national events through the decades: the Queen in 1970, 1971, and 1973, respectively, marked the anniversaries of Manitoba, British Columbia, and Prince Edward Island becoming Canadian provinces; celebrated Ontario's and New Brunswick's bicentennials in 1984 and the 125th anniversary of Confederation in 1992; and she opened the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal and Nunavut's parliament in 1999. Prince Charles, Prince of Wales, attended the 100th anniversary of Treaty 7 in 1977; commemorated in 1983 the bicentennial of United Empire Loyalists settling in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia; and, with Diana, Princess of Wales, opened Expo 86 in Vancouver. Between them, the Queen and her family opened numerous Commonwealth Games, Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings, conferences, hospitals, community centres, and the like; handed out The Duke of Edinburgh Awards at ceremonies across the country, and visited many regiments and branches of the Canadian Armed Forces.\nThe 21st century.\nBy 2002, the royal tour and associated f\u00eates for the Queen's Golden Jubilee proved popular with Canadians across the country, though Canada's first republican organization since the 1830s was also founded that year. Celebrations took place across the country to mark the Queen's Diamond Jubilee in 2012, the first such event in Canada since that for Victoria in 1897. On 9 September 2015, she became the second-longest reigning monarch in Canadian history (preceded only by King Louis XIV); events were organized to celebrate her as the \"longest-reigning sovereign in Canada's modern era.\" Prince Charles represented his mother, the Queen, two years later, at the main events in Ottawa recognizing the 150th anniversary of Confederation.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic, the Queen expressed her support for all Canadians and thanks to those who were caring for the vulnerable and providing essential services. As the pandemic waned into 2022, celebrations were mounted around the country and throughout the year to mark the Queen's Platinum Jubilee; the first-ever such event in Canadian history. It was also, though, the first time since at least Queen Victoria's Golden Jubilee in 1887 that the federal Cabinet did not advise the Crown to create an associated medal. In response, six provinces produced their own Platinum Jubilee medals; another first.\nThe subject of reconciliation with Canada's Indigenous peoples came to the forefront of the public consciousness in 2021, particularly in regard to residential schools. Statues of Queen Victoria and Queen Elizabeth II in Winnipeg were vandalized. On the first National Day for Truth and Reconciliation, Elizabeth made a public statement, saying she \"joins with all Canadians [...] to reflect on the painful history that Indigenous peoples endured in residential schools in Canada and on the work that remains to heal and to continue to build an inclusive society.\" In the same year, the Queen appointed Mary Simon as the first Indigenous governor general in Canadian history. During Charles's tour for his mother's Platinum Jubilee, the BBC's royal correspondent observed that \"there [was] no shying away from acknowledging and highlighting the scandalous way many indigenous peoples have been treated in Canada.\"\nQueen Elizabeth II died on 8 September 2022 and was succeeded by her eldest son, Charles III. The Queen's final public statement was issued on 7 September, in the aftermath of the 2022 Saskatchewan stabbings, stating she \"mourn[s] with all Canadians at this tragic time.\" Elizabeth reigned for almost half of Canada's history since Confederation, being only the sixth Canadian monarch since 1867.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Crown has for so long been a symbol of unity for Canada. It also represents stability and continuity from the past to the present. As it should, it stands proudly as a symbol of Canada today, in all her richness and dynamism.\n Charles III, Speech from the Throne, 2025\nImmediately following a formal meeting of the King's Privy Council for Canada, the new king was proclaimed on 10 September in a ceremony at Rideau Hall. On 4 May 2023, the King held audiences with Simon and Indigenous leaders, who also attended his coronation two days later.\nIn May 2025, King Charles III, accompanied by Queen Camilla, visited Canada for the first time as monarch and delivered the speech from the throne, the first time a Canadian monarch has done so in person since 1977.\nPublic perception and understanding.\nPrior to the 1970s, Canadians' view of the monarchy was more focused on the person of the monarch than the institution's place in the country's framework. Smith, in 2017, and Jackson, in 2018, observed the shift continuing, especially as \"the process of 'Canadianization' of the Crown picked up momentum in the early 21st century.\"\nStill, beginning in the later decades of the 20th century, commentators stated that contemporary Canadians had and have a poor understanding of the Canadian monarchy; something the Monarchist League of Canada (MLC) claims opponents of the monarchy exacerbate by spreading disinformation and then take advantage of. Jackson wrote in his book, \"The Crown and Canadian Federalism\", that this is part of a wider ignorance about Canadian civics and Hugo Cyr agreed, while Smith researched for his 1995 book, \"The Invisible Crown\", he found it difficult to \"find anyone who could talk knowledgeably about the subject\". Former Governors General Clarkson and Johnston made similar observations and Senator Lowell Murray wrote in 2003, \"the Crown has become irrelevant to most Canadians' understanding of our system of government\", which he attributed to the \"fault of successive generations of politicians, of an educational system that has never given the institution due study, and of past viceregal incumbents themselves\".\nOn education, teacher and author Nathan Tidridge asserted that, beginning in the 1960s, the role of the Crown disappeared from provincial education curricula, as the general subject of civics came to receive less attention. He said Canadians are being \"educated to be illiterate, ambivalent, or even hostile toward our constitutional monarchy\". The MLC agreed, stating Canada has \"an educational system which unfortunately often fails to provide comprehensive knowledge of Canada's constitution.\"\nMichael Valpy also pointed to the fact that \"the Crown's role in the machinery of Canada's constitutional monarchy rarely sees daylight. Only a handful of times in our history has it been subjected to glaring sunshine, unfortunately resulting in a black hole of public understanding as to how it works.\" He later iterated, \"the public's attention span on the constitutional intricacies of the monarchy is clinically short\". At the same time, it has been theorized the monarchy is so prevalent in Canada\u2014by way of all manner of symbols, place names, royal tours, etcetera\u2014that Canadians fail to take note of it; the monarchy \"functions like a tasteful wallpaper pattern in Canada: enjoyable in an absent-minded way, but so ubiquitous as to be almost invisible\".\nJohn Pepall argued in 1990 that, among all this, a \"Liberal-inspired republican misconception of the role\" of governor general had taken root, though the Conservative government headed by Brian Mulroney exacerbated the matter. The position of prime minister has simultaneously undergone, with encouragement from its occupants, what has been described as a \"presidentialization\", to the point that its incumbents publicly outshine the actual head of state. David S. Donovan felt Canadians mostly consider the monarch and her representatives as purely ceremonial and symbolic figures, while also still viewing the sovereign as British, even if they understand he is King of Canada. It was argued by Alfred Neitsch that this undermined the Crown's legitimacy as a check and balance in the governmental system, a situation Helen Forsey (daughter of Canadian constitutional expert Eugene Forsey) said prime ministers take advantage of, portraying themselves as the embodiment of popular democracy and the reserve powers of the Crown as illegitimate. The issue is particularly acute in Quebec, where sovereigntist politicians consider the Canadian monarchy as British, foreign, and, consequently, as symbol of oppression.\nBeginning slightly earlier, a \"growing interest in the Crown and its prerogatives\" was observed, as evidenced by \"a burst of articles, books and conferences\"; the monarchy attracted increased attention from academics, as well as those involved with the law, government, and public policy. This was attributed to the coincidental occurrence of publicly prominent events over a number of years, including the 2008 prorogation dispute; an increased use of royal symbols as directed by the Cabinet while headed by Stephen Harper, including three consecutive royal tours; court cases focusing on the Oath of Citizenship; and increasingly active governors. Smith and Lagass\u00e9 noted in early 2016 that post-secondary students were giving more focus to the subject of the Crown.\nSome Canadians have taken the opposite extreme view of the Crown's powers, such as when, in 2013, the leader of the Green Party of Canada, Elizabeth May, wrote to Queen Elizabeth II asking her to call a \"royal inquiry\" to \"investigate what may potentially be criminal activities which [sic] influenced Canada's last election\" and \"restore Canada to a free and fair democracy.\" The monarch's secretary instructed May, \"as a constitutional sovereign, Her Majesty acts through her personal representative, the Governor-General, on the advice of her Canadian ministers and it is to them that your appeal should be directed.\" So many protesters involved in the 2022 Freedom Convoy called and emailed the office of Governor General Mary Simon to pressure her into dismissing her Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau, or dissolving Parliament that Simon made a rare public statement on the role of the governor general. Lagass\u00e9 pointed to that as \"evidence of a recent trend in protest movements\", saying, \"it has become routine in Canadian politics to write a letter to the Queen, Governor General, or a lieutenant governor asking them to exercise their powers in some way, contrary to constitutional conventions. This is political theatre, no more.\"\nThe relationship between Canada's Indigenous peoples and the monarch remains unchanged, aside from the issue of reconciliation arising in it through the late 2010s into the 2020s, when there were some assertions by activists and in the media that the monarchy and the Queen herself represented colonialism and racism and she did not do enough to either prevent or rectify supposed offences. Those who made such claims also, though, mistook the independent Canadian Crown as the British Crown in Canada and demonstrated a misunderstanding of the Crown-Indigenous peoples relationship and the workings of constitutional monarchy and responsible government, in which the sovereign must, outside of constitutional crises, follow the directions of his or her ministers and parliamentarians. The leader of the Parti Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois, Paul St-Pierre Plamondon, claimed in 2022, \"we cannot overlook that she [Queen Elizabeth II] represented an institution, the British Crown, that has caused significant harm to Quebecers and Indigenous nations.\"\nWithin Quebec, too, the Canadian Crown is often depicted as being synonymous with the British Crown, with Quebec sovereigntists arguing that it is fundamentally foreign to Quebec and should be abolished within the province as a part of Quebec independence. For instance, in the televised Radio-Canada leaders' debate on 22 September 2022, during that year's general election in the province, the moderator, Patrice Roy, asked the panel, with \"incredulous chuckles\", \"should we still, in Quebec, swear allegiance to the British Crown, thus Charles III [to take one's seat in the National Assembly]?\" Bloc Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois leader Yves-Fran\u00e7ois Blanchet on 26 October 2022 tabled a motion in the House of Commons proposing that the \"House express its desire to sever ties between the Canadian state and the British monarchy.\" This motion was defeated 266 to 44.\nDebate.\nOutside of academic circles, there has been little national debate on the monarchy. The position of monarch in Canada is highly protected by the \"Constitution Act, 1982\"\u2014which mandates that any major constitutional amendment, such as any change to the monarchy, must receive the consent of the Senate, the House of Commons, and all ten provincial legislative assemblies. Abolishing the monarchy may also be complicated by the fact that First Nations treaties are officially between the Crown and Indigenous peoples.\nCanada has two special-interest groups representing the debate, who occasionally argue the issue in the media: the Monarchist League of Canada (MLC) and Citizens for a Canadian Republic. There are also other organizations that support and advocate the monarchy, such as the Institute for the Study of the Crown in Canada, the Canadian Royal Heritage Trust, the Friends of the Canadian Crown, Canadian Friends of the Royal Family, the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 de la Couronne du Canada, the Orange Order in Canada, and the United Empire Loyalists' Association of Canada.\nOut of Canada's four most prominent political parties, neither the Liberal Party nor the Conservative Party are officially in favour of abolishing the monarchy (the Conservative Party cite support for constitutional monarchy as a founding principle in its policy declaration) and the New Democratic Party has no official position on the role of the Crown. Only some individual members of Parliament belonging to these parties and the leaders of the Bloc Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois party have made any statements suggesting abolition of the monarchy.\nOpinion polls on the Canadian monarchy have been regularly conducted since the 1990s. An analysis of these polls in 2008 highlighted an increased disaffection with the monarchy, albeit with internal contradictions in specific polling results, with some criticizing the polling questions for using \"inconsistent and sometimes ambiguous wording.\" Questions often describe the monarch or monarchy as \"British\", terminology at odds with the contemporary situation in Canada, wherein the monarchy is a Canadian institution, separate from that of the United Kingdom, and it, the Crown, and royal family are referred to as Canadian. Both monarchists and republicans agree the populace's general lack of understanding about the monarchy affects opinions.\nThe idea of a uniquely Canadian monarch, either one descended from the House of Windsor or coming from a First Nations royal house, has been proffered as an alternative. However, there has been no popular or official support for such a change.\nSee also.\nBC\nAB\nSK\nMB\nON\nQC\nNB\nPE\nNS\nNL\nMonarchy by provinces\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nReading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56505", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56505", "title": "Schoharie County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nSchoharie County ( ) is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 29,714, making it the state's fifth-least populous county. The county seat is Schoharie. \"Schoharie\" comes from a Mohawk word meaning \"floating driftwood.\" Schoharie County is part of the Albany-Schenectady-Troy, NY Metropolitan Statistical Area and thus the Capital District of New York. The county is part of the Mohawk Valley region of the state.\nHistory.\nThe large territory of the county was long occupied by the Mohawk Nation and, to the west, the other four tribes of the Iroquois (Haudenosaunee) Confederacy (increased to six with the migration of the Tuscarora). After European colonization of the Northeast started, the Mohawk had a lucrative fur trade with the French coming down from Canada, as well as the early Dutch colonists, and later British and German colonists.\nSome Palatine Germans, who worked in camps on the Hudson to pay off their passage in 1710, later settled in this county in the 1720s and 30s. In addition, Scots-Irish immigrants settled in the present Schoharie County area before the American Revolutionary War, especially near Cherry Creek.\nPolitical organization.\nAfter Great Britain defeated the Dutch in the Second Anglo-Dutch War and received New Netherland via the Treaty of Breda, they began to establish counties in the New York territory in 1683. The present Schoharie County was first part of Albany County. In theory, it extended westward to the Pacific Ocean, as the colonists wanted to keep their options open. This county was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now part of Vermont.\nOn March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one retaining the name Albany County. Tryon County was formed from the western portion of the territory (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). The eastern boundary of Tryon County was approximately five miles west of the present city of Schenectady, and the county included the western part of the Adirondack Mountains and the area west of the West Branch of the Delaware River. The area then designated Tryon County was eventually organized into what are now 37 counties of New York State. The county was named for William Tryon, colonial governor of New York.\nIn the years preceding 1776, as social and political tensions rose in the colony, most of the Loyalists in Tryon County, then on the frontier, fled to Canada. In 1784, after the peace treaty that ended the Revolutionary War and the establishment of states, the new government changed Tryon County's name to Montgomery County to honor United States General Richard Montgomery, who had captured several places in Canada and died trying to take the city of Quebec.\nThe state continued to organize new counties. In 1789, Montgomery County was reduced in size by the splitting off of Ontario County. It was originally much larger than the present county, including present-day Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, Livingston, Monroe, Niagara, Orleans, Steuben, Wyoming, Yates, and part of Schuyler and Wayne counties.\nIn 1791, Otsego, Herkimer and Tioga Counties were split off from Montgomery. \nIn 1795, Schoharie County was created by joining portions of Otsego and Albany counties.\nRevolutionary War.\nThis was an area of fighting during the American Revolutionary War. On the frontier, colonists were subject to raids by British and their Iroquois allies. Four of the six tribes allied with the British, hoping to repel the colonists from their territory.\nGeography.\nSchoharie County is in central New York State, west of Albany and southeast of Utica.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.7%) is water.\nMuch of the southern portion of the county lies within the Catskill Mountains. Land rises in both directions quite rapidly east and east of Schoharie Creek in the middle of the county. In contrast, the northern part of the county is predominately small hills and valleys. More than 75% of the county's population lives in the north, closer to the Mohawk River, the historic transportation route east and west through the state. Schoharie Creek is a northward-flowing tributary of the Mohawk River. The Schoharie Creek watershed spans an area of approximately . The course of Schoharie Creek includes two reservoir-dam systems.\nThe Gilboa Dam and the Schoharie Reservoir are part of the New York City Water Supply System. The New York Power Authority operates the Blenheim-Gilboa Dam and its reservoir to produce hydroelectric power. The headwaters of the Delaware River are located in the town of Jefferson. Tributaries of the Susquehanna River are located in the towns of Jefferson and Summit.\nThe highest point is at the summit of Huntersfield Mountain on the southern boundary with Greene County, at above sea level. The lowest point is where the Montgomery County line meets Schoharie Creek, above sea level. The most prominent geological feature is Vroman's Nose, near the village of Middleburgh in the town of Fulton.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 31,582 people, 11,991 households and 8,177 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 15,915 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 95.06% White, 2.14% Black or African American, 0.30% Native American, 0.49% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.36% from other races, and 0.93% from two or more races. 1.86% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 20.9% were of German, 15.6% Irish, 11.5% American, 10.8% Italian and 9.7% English ancestry according to Census 2000. 95.5% spoke English, 1.7% Spanish and 1.0% German as their first language.\nThere were 11,991 households, out of which 31.20% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.20% were married couples living together, 9.30% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.80% were non-families. 25.80% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.70% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.49 and the average family size was 2.98.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 24.00% under the age of 18, 10.60% from 18 to 24, 26.20% from 25 to 44, 24.40% from 45 to 64, and 14.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 99.00 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.80 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $36,585, and the median income for a family was $43,118. Males had a median income of $31,725 versus $24,475 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,778. About 7.90% of families and 11.40% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.70% of those under age 18 and 8.60% of those age 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nSchoharie County's primary industry is agriculture. Farms are situated all over the county and farm stands and other agriculture-related businesses are operated throughout it. Many residents work in the Capital District, New York. Walmart has a distribution center in the Village of Sharon Springs. The I-88 corridor is growing due to the short commute to Schenectady and Albany.\nThe Catskills-area villages have a number of historic hotels, as it was a vacation destination in the early 20th century. Vacation homes are common in the county.\nA growing tourist industry attracts visitors for recreation, the landscape and historic destinations. These include Howe Caverns, Vroman's Nose, the Old Stone Fort, and the Iroquois Indian Museum, among others. The Old Blenheim Bridge, a covered bridge, was among the attractions until it was destroyed by Hurricane Irene in August 2011. Work to rebuild it began in 2017.\nGovernment.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], Schoharie County is part of New York's 21st congressional district, represented by Republican Elise Stefanik; part of New York's 51st State Senate district, represented by Republican Peter Oberacker; and part of New York's 102nd Assembly district, represented by Republican Christopher Tague.\nThe sheriff of Schoharie County, Tony Desmond, received national attention for publicly stating during the 2013 election that he would not enforce the NY SAFE Act. The current sheriff, Ronald R. Stevens, succeeded Desmond in 2018.\nFrom 1828 to 1916 with the exception of 1848, Schoharie County consistently backed Democratic Party candidates in presidential elections; it was the only county in the state to support William Jennings Bryan over William McKinley in 1896. After 1916, the county has backed the Democratic candidate only twice, in 1964 and 1996.\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther hamlets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransportation.\nInterstate and other major highways.\nSchoharie County is served by Interstate 88, which is paralleled by Route 7 as well as U.S. Route 20 in the north of the county running in the east\u2013west direction. Route 10, Route 30 (which splits into Route 30A north of Schoharie) and Route 145 run in the north\u2013south direction in the county.\nBus.\nBus service is provided by Schoharie County Public Transportation, with commuter routes to Albany as well as local and demand-responsive services.\nRail (Former).\nPassenger rail service in Schoharie County was formerly provided by the Delaware and Hudson Railway on their Susquehanna Division until passenger service was discontinued in the 1960s. Today, freight service continues along the Susquehanna Division provided by Norfolk Southern.\nAirports.\nThe nearest commercial airport to Schoharie County is Albany International Airport.\nNotable sites.\nA prominent site in the county is the Old Stone Fort, used for defense against British and allied Indian attacks during the Revolution. It was later used as an armory during the Civil War.\nDuring the 19th century, the Middleburgh-Schoharie Railroad was constructed through the county.\nIn 1981 the Iroquois Indian Museum opened in a new building near Howe Caverns in Cobleskill. It has the largest collection of Iroquois art in the United States and includes a performance center where Iroquois present traditional and contemporary music and dance.\nThe Gilboa Fossil Forest is home to one of the earth's oldest forests, with petrified tree trunks dating back over 380 million years to the Devonian period. Numerous fossils are on display at the Gilboa Museum near the Schoharie Reservoir.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
