{"id": "44319", "revid": "3048957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44319", "title": "Elizabeth of Russia", "text": "Empress of Russia from 1741 to 1762\nElizabeth or Elizaveta Petrovna (; 29 December\u00a0[O.S. 18 December]\u00a01709\u00a0\u2013 5 January\u00a0[O.S. 25 December]\u00a01762) was Empress of Russia from 1741 until her death in 1762. She remains one of the most popular Russian monarchs because of her decision not to execute a single person during her reign, her numerous construction projects, and her strong opposition to Prussian policies. She was the last person on the agnatic line of the Romanovs as her nephew ascended, thus creating the house of Holstein-Gottorp-Romanov.\nThe second-eldest daughter of Tsar Peter the Great (r.\u20091682\u00a0\u2013\u00a01725), Elizabeth lived through the confused successions of her father's descendants following her half-brother Alexei's death in 1718. The throne first passed to her mother Catherine I of Russia (r.\u20091725\u00a0\u2013\u00a01727), then to her nephew Peter II, who died in 1730 and was succeeded by Elizabeth's first cousin Anna (r.\u20091730\u00a0\u2013\u00a01740). After the brief rule of Anna's infant great-nephew, Ivan VI, Elizabeth seized the throne with the military's support and declared her own nephew, the future Peter III, her heir.\nDuring her reign Elizabeth continued the policies of her father and brought about a remarkable Age of Enlightenment in Russia. Her domestic policies allowed the nobles to gain dominance in local government while shortening their terms of service to the state. She encouraged Mikhail Lomonosov's foundation of the University of Moscow, the highest-ranking Russian educational institution. Her court became one of the most splendid in all Europe, especially regarding architecture: she modernised Russia's roads, encouraged Ivan Shuvalov's foundation of the Imperial Academy of Arts, and financed grandiose Baroque projects of her favourite architect, Bartolomeo Rastrelli, particularly in Peterhof Palace. The Winter Palace and the Smolny Cathedral in Saint Petersburg are among the chief monuments of her reign.\nElizabeth led the Russian Empire during the two major European conflicts of her time: the War of Austrian Succession (1740\u20131748) and the Seven Years' War (1756\u20131763). She and diplomat Aleksey Bestuzhev-Ryumin solved the first event by forming an alliance with Austria and France, but indirectly caused the second. Russian troops enjoyed several victories against Prussia and briefly occupied Berlin, but when Frederick the Great was finally considering surrender in January 1762, the Russian Empress died. She was the last agnatic member of the House of Romanov to reign over the Russian Empire.\nEarly life.\nChildhood and teenage years.\nElizabeth was born at Kolomenskoye, near Moscow, Russia, on 18 December 1709 (O.S.). Her parents were Peter the Great, Tsar of Russia and Catherine. Catherine was the daughter of Samuel Skowro\u0144ski, a subject of Grand Duchy of Lithuania. Although no documentary record exists, her parents were said to have married secretly at the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in Saint Petersburg at some point between 23 October and 1 December 1707. Their official marriage was at Saint Isaac's Cathedral in Saint Petersburg on 9 February 1712. On this day, the two children previously born to the couple (Anna and Elizabeth) were legitimised by their father and given the title of Tsarevna (\"princess\") on 6 March 1711. Of the twelve children born to Peter and Catherine (five sons and seven daughters), only the sisters survived to adulthood. They had one older surviving sibling, crown prince Alexei Petrovich, who was Peter's son by his first wife, noblewoman Eudoxia Lopukhina.\nAs a child, Elizabeth was the favourite of her father, whom she resembled both physically and temperamentally. Even though he adored his daughter, Peter did not devote time or attention to her education; having both a son and grandson from his first marriage to a noblewoman, he did not anticipate that a daughter born to his former maid might one day inherit the Russian throne, which had until that point never been occupied by a woman; as such, it was left to Catherine to raise the girls, a task met with considerable difficulty due to her own lack of education. Despite this, Elizabeth was still considered to be a bright girl, if not brilliant, and had a French governess who gave lessons of mathematics, arts, languages, and sports. She grew interested in architecture, became fluent in Italian, German, and French, and became an excellent dancer and rider. Like her father, she was physically active and loved horseriding, hunting, sledging, skating, and gardening.\nFrom her earliest years, Elizabeth was recognised as a vivacious young woman, and was regarded as the leading beauty of the Russian Empire. The wife of the British ambassador described Grand Duchess Elizabeth as \"fair, with light brown hair, large sprightly blue eyes, fine teeth and a pretty mouth. She is inclinable to be fat, but is very genteel and dances better than anyone I ever saw. She speaks German, French and Italian, is extremely gay, and talks to everyone...\"\nMarriage plans.\nWith much of his fame resting on his effective efforts to modernise Russia, Tsar Peter desired to see his children married into the royal houses of Europe, something which his immediate predecessors had consciously tended to avoid. Peter's son Aleksei Petrovich, born of his first marriage to a Russian noblewoman, had no problem securing a bride from the ancient house of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg. However, the Tsar experienced difficulties in arranging similar marriages for the daughters born of his second wife. When Peter offered either of his daughters in marriage to the future Louis XV, the Bourbons of France snubbed him due to the girls' post-facto legitimisation, and her mother, a Polish commoner.\nIn 1724, Peter betrothed his daughters to two young princes, first cousins to each other, who hailed from the tiny north German principality of Holstein-Gottorp and whose family was undergoing a period of political and economic turmoil. Anna Petrovna (aged 16) was to marry Charles Frederick, Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, who was then living in exile in Russia as Peter's guest after having failed in his attempt to succeed his maternal uncle as King of Sweden and whose patrimony was at that time under Danish occupation. Despite all this, the prince was of impeccable birth and well-connected to many royal houses; it was a respectable and politically useful alliance. In the same year, Elizabeth was betrothed to marry Charles Frederick's first cousin, Charles Augustus of Holstein-Gottorp, the eldest son of Christian Augustus, Prince of Eutin. Anna Petrovna's wedding took place in 1725 as planned, even though her father had died (8 February\u00a0[O.S. 28 January]\u00a01725) a few weeks before the nuptials. In Elizabeth's case, however, her fianc\u00e9 died on 31 May 1727, before her wedding could be celebrated. This came as a double blow to Elizabeth, because her mother (who had ascended to the throne as Catherine I) had died just two weeks previously, on 17 May 1727.\nBy the end of May 1727, 17-year-old Elizabeth had lost her fianc\u00e9 and both of her parents. Furthermore, her half-nephew Peter II had ascended the throne. Her marriage prospects continued to fail to improve three years later, when her nephew died and was succeeded on the throne by Elizabeth's first cousin Anna, daughter of Ivan V. There was little love lost between the cousins and no prospect of either any Russian nobleman or any foreign prince seeking Elizabeth's hand in marriage. Nor could she marry a commoner because it would cost her royal status, property rights and claim to the throne. The fact that Elizabeth was something of a beauty did not improve marriage prospects, but instead earned her resentment. When the Empress Anna asked the Chinese minister in Saint Petersburg to identify the most beautiful woman at her court, he pointed to Elizabeth, much to Anna's displeasure.\nElizabeth's response to the lack of marriage prospects was to take Alexander Shubin, a sergeant in the Semyonovsky Life Guards Regiment, as her lover. When Empress Anna found out about this, she banished him to Siberia. After consoling herself, Elizabeth turned to coachmen and footmen for her sexual pleasure. She eventually found a long-term companion in Alexei Razumovsky, a kind-hearted Ukrainian Cossack with a good bass voice. Razumovsky had been brought from his village to Saint Petersburg by a nobleman to sing for a church choir, but the Grand Duchess purchased the talented serf from the nobleman for her own choir. A simple-minded man, Razumovsky never showed interest in affairs of state during all the years of his relationship with Elizabeth, which spanned from the days of her obscurity to the height of her power. As the couple was devoted to each other, there is reason to believe that they might even have married in a secret ceremony. In 1742, the Holy Roman Emperor made Razumovsky a count of the Holy Roman Empire. In 1756, Elizabeth made him a prince and field marshal.\nImperial coup.\nWhile Aleksandr Danilovich Menshikov remained in power (until September 1727), the government of Elizabeth's adolescent nephew Peter II (reigned 1727\u20131730) treated her with liberality and distinction. However, the Dolgorukovs, an ancient boyar family, deeply resented Menshikov. With Peter II's attachment to Prince Ivan Dolgorukov and two of their family members on the Supreme State Council, they had the leverage for a successful . Menshikov was arrested, stripped of all his honours and properties, and exiled to northern Siberia, where he died in November 1729. The Dolgorukovs hated the memory of Peter the Great and practically banished his daughter from Court.\nDuring the reign of her cousin Anna (1730\u20131740), Elizabeth was gathering support in the background. Being the daughter of Peter the Great, she enjoyed much support from the Russian Guards regiments. She often visited the elite Guards regiments, marking special events with the officers and acting as godmother to their children. After the death of Empress Anna, the regency of Anna Leopoldovna for the infant Ivan VI was marked by high taxes and economic problems. The French ambassador in Saint Petersburg, the Marquis de La Ch\u00e9tardie was deeply involved in planning a coup to depose the regent, whose foreign policy was opposed to the interests of France, and bribed numerous officers in the Imperial Guard to support Elizabeth's coup. The French adventurer Jean Armand de Lestocq helped her actions according to the advice of the marquis de La Ch\u00e9tardie and the Swedish ambassador, who were particularly interested in toppling the regime of Anna Leopoldovna.\nOn the night of 25 November 1741 (O.S.), Elizabeth seized power with the help of the Preobrazhensky Life Guards Regiment. Arriving at the regimental headquarters wearing a warrior's metal breastplate over her dress and grasping a silver cross, she challenged them: \"Whom do you want to serve: me, your natural sovereign, or those who have stolen my inheritance?\" Won over, the regiment marched to the Winter Palace and arrested the infant Emperor, his parents, and their own lieutenant-colonel, Count Burkhard Christoph von Munnich. It was a daring coup and, amazingly, succeeded without bloodshed. Elizabeth had vowed that if she became Empress, she would not sign a single death sentence, an extraordinary promise at the time but one that she kept throughout her life.\nDespite Elizabeth's promise, there was still cruelty in her regime. Although she initially thought of allowing the young tsar and his mother to leave Russia, she imprisoned them later in a Shlisselburg Fortress, worried that they would stir up trouble for her in other parts of Europe. Fearing a coup on Ivan's favour, Elizabeth set about destroying all papers, coins or anything else depicting or mentioning Ivan. She had issued an order that if any attempt were made for the adult Ivan to escape, he was to be eliminated. Catherine the Great upheld the order, and when an attempt was made, he was killed and secretly buried within the fortress.\nAnother case was Countess Natalia Lopukhina. The circumstances of Elizabeth's birth would later be used by her political opponents to challenge her right to the throne on grounds of illegitimacy. When Countess Lopukhina's son, Ivan Lopukhin, complained of Elizabeth in a tavern, he implicated his mother, himself and others in a plot to reinstate Ivan VI as tsar. Ivan Lopukhin was overheard and tortured for information. All the conspirators were sentenced to death. The female conspirators had their sentences commuted to having their tongues removed and being publicly flogged. The men were broken on the wheel.\nReign.\nElizabeth crowned herself Empress in the Dormition Cathedral on 25 April 1742 (O.S.), which would become standard for all emperors of Russia until 1896. At the age of thirty-three, with relatively little political experience, she found herself at the head of a great empire at one of the most critical periods of its existence. Her proclamation explained that the preceding reigns had led Russia to ruin: \"The Russian people have been groaning under the enemies of the Christian faith, but she has delivered them from the degrading foreign oppression.\"\nRussia had been under the domination of German advisers, so Elizabeth exiled the most unpopular of them, including Andrey Osterman and Burkhard Christoph von M\u00fcnnich. She passed down several pieces of legislation that undid much of the work her father had done to limit the power of the church.\nWith all her shortcomings (documents often waited months for her signature), Elizabeth had inherited her father's genius for government. Her usually keen judgement and her diplomatic tact again and again recalled Peter the Great. What sometimes appeared as irresolution and procrastination was most often a wise suspension of judgement under exceptionally difficult circumstances. From the Russian point of view, her greatness as a stateswoman consisted of her steady appreciation of national interests and her determination to promote them against all obstacles.\n&lt;gallery&gt;\nFile:Carle Vanloo, Portrait de l\u2019imp\u00e9ratrice \u00c9lisabeth Petrovna (1760).jpg\nEducational reforms.\nDespite the substantial changes made by Peter the Great, he had not exercised a really formative influence on the intellectual attitudes of the ruling classes as a whole. Although Elizabeth lacked the early education necessary to flourish as an intellectual (once finding the reading of secular literature to be \"injurious to health\"), she was clever enough to know its benefits and made considerable groundwork for her eventual successor, Catherine the Great. She made education freely available to all social classes (except for serfs), encouraged establishment of the first university in Russia founded in Moscow by Mikhail Lomonosov, and helped to finance the establishment of the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts.\nSocial welfare.\nIt was during Elizabeth\u2019s reign that parishes became common. These were places that provided (as noted by one study) \u201cshelter, food, clothes and care for orphans, elderly people and people with disabilities belonging to peasant families.\u201d These were financed through a special tax.\nInternal peace.\nA gifted diplomat, Elizabeth hated bloodshed and conflict and went to great lengths to alter the Russian system of punishment, even outlawing capital punishment. According to historian Robert Nisbet Bain, it was one of her \"chief glories that, so far as she was able, she put a stop to that mischievous contention of rival ambitions at Court, which had disgraced the reigns of Peter II, Anna and Ivan VI and enabled foreign powers to freely interfere in the domestic affairs of Russia.\"\nConstruction projects.\nElizabeth enjoyed and excelled in architecture, overseeing and financing many construction projects during her reign. One of the many projects from the Italian architect Bartolomeo Rastrelli was the reconstruction of Peterhof Palace, adding several wings between 1745 and 1755. Her most famous creations were the Smolny Convent and the Winter Palace, though she died before its completion. The Palace is said to contain 1,500 rooms, 1,786 doors, and 1,945 windows, including bureaucratic offices and the Imperial Family's living quarters arranged in two enfilades, from the top of the Jordan Staircase. Regarding the Smolny Convent, historian Robert Nisbet Bain stated that \"No other Russian sovereign ever erected so many churches.\"\nThe expedited completion of buildings became a matter of importance to the Empress and work continued throughout the year, even in winter's severest months. 859,555 rubles had been allocated to the project, a sum raised by a tax on state-owned taverns, but work temporarily ceased due to lack of resources. Ultimately, taxes were increased on salt and alcohol to completely fund the extra costs. However, Elizabeth's incredible extravagance ended up greatly benefiting the country's infrastructure. Needing goods shipped from all over the world, numerous roads in all Russia were modernised at her orders.\nSelection of an heir.\nAs an unmarried and childless empress, it was imperative for Elizabeth to find a legitimate heir to secure the Romanov dynasty. She chose her nephew, Peter of Holstein-Gottorp. The young Peter had lost his mother, Elizabeth\u2019s older sister, shortly after he was born, and his father, Charles Frederick, Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, at the age of eleven. Elizabeth invited her young nephew to Saint Petersburg, where he was received into the Russian Orthodox Church and proclaimed the heir to the throne on 7 November 1742. Keen to see the dynasty secured, Elizabeth immediately gave Peter the best Russian tutors and settled on Princess Sophia Augusta Frederica of Anhalt-Zerbst as a bride for her heir. Incidentally, Sophie's mother, Joanna Elisabeth of Holstein-Gottorp, was a sister of Elizabeth's own fianc\u00e9, who had died before the wedding. On her conversion to the Russian Orthodox Church, Sophie was given the name Catherine in memory of Elizabeth's mother. The marriage took place on 21 August 1745. Nine years later a son, the future Paul I, was born on 20 September 1754.\nThere is considerable speculation as to the actual paternity of Paul. It is suggested that he was not Peter's son at all but that his mother had engaged in an affair, to which Elizabeth had consented, with a young officer, Sergei Vasilievich Saltykov, who would have been Paul's biological father. Peter never gave any indication that he believed Paul to have been fathered by anyone but himself but took no interest in parenthood. Elizabeth most certainly took an active interest and acted as if she were his mother, instead of Catherine. Shortly after Paul's birth the Empress ordered the midwife to take the baby and to follow her, and Catherine did not see her child for another month, for a short churching ceremony. Six months later, Elizabeth let Catherine see the child again. The child had, in effect, become a ward of the state and, in a larger sense, the property of the state.\nForeign policy.\nElizabeth abolished the cabinet council system that had been used under Anna, and reconstituted the Senate as it had been under Peter the Great, with the chiefs of the departments of state (none of them German) attending. Her first task after this was to address the war with Sweden. On 23 January 1743, direct negotiations between the two powers were opened at \u00c5bo. In the Treaty of \u00c5bo, on 7 August 1743 (O.S.), Sweden ceded to Russia all of southern Finland east of the Kymmene River, which became the boundary between the two states. The treaty also gave Russia the fortresses of Villmanstrand and Fredrikshamn.\nBestuzhev.\nThe concessions to Russia can be credited to the diplomatic ability of the new vice chancellor, Aleksey Bestuzhev-Ryumin, who had Elizabeth's support. She placed Bestuzhev at the head of foreign affairs immediately after her accession. He represented the anti-Franco-Prussian side of her council, and his objective was an alliance with England and Austria. At that time, it was probably advantageous to Russia. Both the Lopukhina affair and other attempts of Frederick the Great and Louis XV to get rid of Bestuzhev failed. Instead, they put the Russian court into the centre of a tangle of intrigue during the earlier years of Elizabeth's reign. Ultimately, the minister's strong support from the Empress prevailed.\nBestuzhev had many achievements. His effective diplomacy and 30,000 troops sent to the Rhine accelerated the peace negotiations, leading to the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (18 October 1748). He extricated his country from the Swedish imbroglio and reconciled his imperial mistress with the courts of Vienna and London. He enabled Russia to assert herself effectually in Poland, the Ottoman Empire, Sweden and isolated the King of Prussia by forcing him into hostile alliances. All this would have been impossible without the steady support of Elizabeth who trusted him completely in spite of the Chancellor's many enemies, most of whom were her personal friends.\nHowever, on 14 February 1758, Bestuzhev was removed from office. The future Catherine II recorded, \"He was relieved of all his decorations and rank, without a soul being able to reveal for what crimes or transgressions the first gentleman of the Empire was so despoiled, and sent back to his house as a prisoner.\" No specific crime was ever pinned on Bestuzhev. Instead, it was inferred that he had attempted to sow discord between the Empress and her heir and his consort. Enemies of the pro-Austrian Bestuzhev were his rivals; the Shuvalov family, Vice-Chancellor Mikhail Vorontsov, and the French ambassador.\nSeven Years' War.\nThe great event of Elizabeth's later years was the Seven Years' War. Elizabeth regarded the Convention of Westminster (16 January 1756) in which Great Britain and Prussia agreed to unite their forces to oppose the entry of or the passage through Germany of troops of every foreign power, as utterly subversive of the previous conventions between Great Britain and Russia. Elizabeth sided against Prussia over a personal dislike of Frederick the Great. She wanted him reduced within proper limits so that he might no longer be an alleged danger to the empire. Elizabeth acceded to the Second Treaty of Versailles, thus entering into an alliance with France and Austria against Prussia. On 17 May 1757, the Imperial Russian Army, 85,000 strong, advanced against K\u00f6nigsberg.\nThe serious illness of the Empress, which began with a fainting-fit at Tsarskoe Selo (19 September 1757), the fall of Bestuzhev (21 February 1758) and the cabals and intrigues of the various foreign powers at Saint Petersburg, did not interfere with the progress of the war. The crushing defeat of Kunersdorf (12 August 1759) at last brought Frederick to the verge of ruin. From that day, he despaired of success, but he was saved for the moment by the jealousies of the Russian and Austrian commanders, which ruined the military plans of the allies.\nFrom the end of 1759 to the end of 1761, the eagerness of the Russian Empress was the one constraining political force that held together the heterogeneous, incessantly jarring elements of the anti-Prussian combination. From the Russian point of view, her greatness as a stateswoman consisted of her steady appreciation of Russian interests and her determination to promote them against all obstacles. She insisted throughout that the King of Prussia must be reduced to the rank of a Prince-Elector.\nFrederick himself was quite aware of his danger. \"I'm at the end of my resources,\" he wrote at the beginning of 1760. \"The continuance of this war means for me utter ruin. Things may drag on perhaps till July, but then a catastrophe must come.\" On 21 May 1760, a fresh convention was signed between Russia and Austria, a secret clause of which, never communicated to the court of Versailles, guaranteed East Prussia to Russia as an indemnity for war expenses. The failure of the campaign of 1760, wielded by the inept Count Buturlin, induced the court of Versailles on the evening of 22 January 1761 to present to the court of Saint Petersburg a dispatch to the effect that the king of France, by reason of the condition of his dominions, absolutely desired peace. The Russian empress's reply was delivered to the two ambassadors on 12 February. It was inspired by the most uncompromising hostility towards the king of Prussia. Elizabeth would not consent to any pacific overtures until the original object of the league had been accomplished.\nSimultaneously, Elizabeth had conveyed to Louis XV a confidential letter in which she proposed the signature of a new treaty of alliance of a more comprehensive and explicit nature than the preceding treaties between the two powers without the knowledge of Austria. Elizabeth's object in the mysterious negotiation seems to have been to reconcile France and Great Britain, in return for which signal service France was to throw all her forces into the attack on Prussia. This project, which lacked neither ability nor audacity, foundered upon Louis XV's invincible jealousy of the growth of Russian influence in Eastern Europe and his fear of offending the Porte. It was finally arranged by the allies that their envoys at Paris should fix the date for the assembling of a peace congress and that in the meantime, the war against Prussia should be vigorously prosecuted. In 1760 a Russian flying column briefly occupied Berlin. Russian victories placed Prussia in serious danger.\nThe campaign of 1761 was almost as abortive as the campaign of 1760. Frederick acted on the defensive with consummate skill, and the capture of the Prussian fortress of Kolberg on Christmas Day 1761, by Rumyantsev, was the sole Russian success. Frederick, however, was now at the last gasp. On 6 January 1762, he wrote to Count Karl-Wilhelm Finck von Finckenstein, \"We ought now to think of preserving for my nephew, by way of negotiation, whatever fragments of my territory we can save from the avidity of my enemies.\" A fortnight later, he wrote to Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick, \"The sky begins to clear. Courage, my dear fellow. I have received the news of a great event.\" The Miracle of the House of Brandenburg that snatched him from destruction was the death of the Russian empress, on 5 January 1762 (N.S.).\nSiberia.\nIn 1742, the imperial government at Saint Petersburg ordered a Russian military expedition to conquer the Chukchi and Koryaks, but the expedition failed and its commander, Major Dmitry Pavlutsky, was killed in 1747. On 12 March 1747, a party of 500 Chukchi warriors raided the Russian stockade of Anadyrsk. By 1750, it had become clear the Chukchi would be difficult to conquer. The Empress then changed her tactical approach and established a formal peace with them.\nCourt.\nElizabeth's court was one of the most splendid in all Europe. As historian Mikhail Shcherbatov stated, the court was \"arrayed in cloth of gold, her nobles satisfied with only the most luxurious garments, the most expensive foods, the rarest drinks, that largest number of servants and they applied this standard of lavishness to their dress as well\". A great number of silver and gold objects were produced, the most the country had seen thus far in its history. It was common to order over a thousand bottles of French champagnes and wines to be served at one event and to serve pineapples at all receptions, despite the difficulty of procuring the fruit in such quantities.\nFrench plays quickly became the most popular and often were performed twice a week. In tandem, music became very important. Many attribute its popularity to Elizabeth's supposed husband, the \"Emperor of the Night\", Alexei Razumovsky, who reportedly relished music. Elizabeth spared no expense in importing leading musical talents from Germany, France, and Italy. She reportedly owned 15,000 dresses, several thousand pairs of shoes and a seemingly unlimited number of stockings.\nAttractive in her youth and vain as an adult, Elizabeth passed various decrees intended to make herself stand out: she issued an edict against anyone wearing the same hairstyle, dress, or accessory as the Empress. One woman accidentally wore the same item as the Empress and was lashed across the face for it. Another law required French fabric salesmen to sell to the Empress first, and those who disregarded that law were arrested. One famous story exemplifying her vanity is that once Elizabeth got a bit of powder in her hair and was unable to remove it except by cutting a patch of her hair. She made all of the court ladies cut patches out of their hair too, which they did \"with tears in their eyes\". This aggressive vanity became a tenet of the court throughout her reign, particularly as she grew older. According to historian Tamara Talbot Rice, \"Later in life her outbursts of anger were directed either against people who were thought to have endangered Russia's security or against women whose beauty rivalled her own\".\nDespite her volatile and often violent reactions to others regarding her appearance, Elizabeth was ebullient in most other matters, particularly when it came to court entertainment. It was reported that she threw two balls a week; one would be a large event with an average of 800 guests in attendance, most of whom were the nation's leading merchants, members of the lower nobility and guards stationed in and around the city of the event. The other ball was a much smaller affair reserved for her closest friends and members of the highest echelons of nobility. The smaller gatherings began as masked balls, but evolved into the famous metamorphoses balls by 1744. At these metamorphoses balls, guests were expected to dress as the opposite sex, with Elizabeth often dressing up as Cossack or carpenter in honour of her father. Costumes not permitted at the event were those of pilgrims and harlequins, which she considered profane and indecent respectively. Most courtiers thoroughly disliked the balls, as most guests by decree looked ridiculous, but Elizabeth adored them; as Catherine the Great's advisor Potemkin posited, this was because she was \"the only woman who looked truly fine and completely a man... As she was tall and possessed a powerful body, male attire suited her\". Kazimierz Waliszewski noted that Elizabeth had beautiful legs, and loved to wear male attire because of the tight trousers. Though the balls were by far her most personally beloved and lavish events, Elizabeth often threw children's birthday parties and wedding receptions for those affiliated with her Court, going so far as to provide dowries for each of her ladies-in-waiting.\nDeath.\nIn the late 1750s, Elizabeth's health started to decline. She suffered a series of dizzy spells and refused to take the medication she had been prescribed. The Empress forbade the word \"death\" in her presence until she suffered a stroke on 24 December 1761 (O.S.). Knowing that she was dying, Elizabeth used her last remaining strength to make her confession, to recite with her confessor the prayer for the dying, and to say farewell to the few people who wished to be with her, including Peter and Catherine and Counts Alexei and Kirill Razumovsky.\nThe Empress died the next day, Orthodox Christmas, 1761. For her lying in state, she was dressed in a shimmering silver dress. It was said that she was beautiful in death as she had been in life. She was buried in the Peter and Paul Cathedral in Saint Petersburg on 3 February 1762 (O.S.) six weeks after her lying in state.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44320", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44320", "title": "Anaesthesia", "text": ""}
{"id": "44321", "revid": "41132577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44321", "title": "Capi", "text": "Capi or CAPI may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44324", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44324", "title": "Commodus", "text": "Roman emperor from 177 to 192\nCommodus (; ; 31 August 161 \u2013 31 December 192) was Roman emperor from 177 to 192, first serving as nominal co-emperor under his father Marcus Aurelius and then ruling alone from 180. Commodus's sole reign is commonly thought to mark the end of the Pax Romana, a golden age of peace and prosperity in the history of the Roman Empire.\nCommodus accompanied his father during the Marcomannic Wars in 172 and on a tour of the Eastern provinces in 176. The following year, he became the youngest emperor and consul up to that point, at the age of 16. His solo reign saw less military conflict than that of Marcus Aurelius, but internal intrigues and conspiracies abounded, goading Commodus to an increasingly dictatorial style of leadership. This culminated in his creating a deific personality cult, including his performances as a gladiator in the Colosseum. Throughout his reign, Commodus entrusted the management of affairs to his palace chamberlain and praetorian prefects, namely Saoterus, Perennis, and Cleander.\nCommodus was assassinated by the wrestler Narcissus in 192, ending the Nerva\u2013Antonine dynasty. He was succeeded by Pertinax, the first claimant in the tumultuous Year of the Five Emperors.\nEarly life and rise to power (161\u2013180).\nEarly life.\nLucius Aelius Aurelius Commodus was born on 31 August AD161 in Lanuvium, near Rome. He was the son of the reigning emperor, Marcus Aurelius, and Aurelius' first cousin, Faustina the Younger, the youngest daughter of Emperor Antoninus Pius, who had died only a few months before. Commodus had a twin brother, Titus Aurelius Fulvus Antoninus, who died in 165. On 12 October 166, Commodus was made \"caesar\" together with his younger brother, Marcus Annius Verus. The latter died in 169 having failed to recover from an operation, which left Commodus as Marcus Aurelius's sole surviving son.\nHe was looked after by his father's physician, Galen, who treated many of Commodus's common illnesses. Commodus received extensive tutoring from a multitude of teachers with a focus on intellectual education. Among his teachers, Onesicrates, Antistius Capella, Titus Aius Sanctus, and Pitholaus are mentioned.\nCommodus is known to have been at Carnuntum, the headquarters of Marcus Aurelius during the Marcomannic Wars, in 172. It is presumed that there, on 15 October 172, he was given the victory title \"Germanicus\", in the presence of the army. The title suggests Commodus was present at his father's victory over the Marcomanni. On 20 January 175, Commodus entered the College of Pontiffs, the starting point of a career in public life.\nIn 175, Avidius Cassius, Governor of Syria, declared himself emperor following rumours that Marcus Aurelius had died. Having been accepted as emperor by Syria, Palestina and Egypt, Cassius carried on his rebellion even after it had become obvious Marcus was still alive. During the preparations for the campaign against Cassius, Commodus assumed his \"toga virilis\" on the Danubian front on 7 July 175, thus formally entering adulthood. Cassius, however, was killed by one of his centurions before the campaign against him could begin. Commodus subsequently accompanied his father on a lengthy trip to the Eastern provinces, during which he visited Antioch. The Emperor and his son then travelled to Athens, where they were initiated into the Eleusinian Mysteries. They then returned to Rome in the autumn of 176.\nMarcus Aurelius was the first emperor since Vespasian to have a legitimate biological son, though he himself was the fifth in the line of the so-called Five Good Emperors, also known as the Adoptive Emperors, each of whom had adopted his successor. Commodus was the first (and until 337, the only) emperor \"born in the purple,\" meaning during his father's reign.\nOn 27 November 176, Marcus Aurelius bestowed the title of \"Imperator\" on Commodus. Modern authors often use this date as the beginning of his reign, but the exact chronology of events is uncertain. Commodus is first mentioned as \"Augustus\" (emperor) on 17 June 177, but he reckoned his reign back to his salutation in 176. For instance, he assumed the \"tribunicia potestas\" (tribunician power) around February 177, but in April 177 he started to backdate this event to November 176.\nOn 23 December 176, the two \"imperatores\" celebrated a joint triumph. On 1 January 177, Commodus became consul for the first time, which made him, aged 15, the youngest consul up to that time (the minimum age for the consulship was around 30). He subsequently married Bruttia Crispina before accompanying his father to the Danubian front once more in 178. Marcus Aurelius died there on 17 March 180, leaving the 18-year-old Commodus as sole emperor.\nSole reign (180\u2013192).\nUpon his ascension, Commodus devalued the Roman currency. He reduced the weight of the denarius from 96 per Roman pound to 105 per Roman pound (3.85\u00a0grams to 3.35\u00a0grams). He also reduced the silver purity from 79\u00a0percent to 76\u00a0percent\u00a0\u2013 the silver weight dropping from 2.57\u00a0grams to 2.34\u00a0grams. In 186, he further reduced the purity and silver weight to 74\u00a0percent and 2.22\u00a0grams respectively, being 108 to the Roman pound. His reduction of the denarius during his rule was the largest since the empire's first devaluation during Nero's reign.\nWhereas the reign of Marcus Aurelius had been marked by almost continuous warfare, Commodus's rule was comparatively peaceful in the military sense, but was also characterised by political strife and the increasingly arbitrary and capricious behaviour of the emperor himself. In the view of Cassius Dio, his accession marked the descent \"from a kingdom of gold to one of iron and rust\".\nDespite his notoriety, and considering the importance of his reign, Commodus's years in power are not well chronicled. The principal surviving literary sources are Herodian, Cassius Dio (a contemporary and sometimes first-hand observer and Senator during Commodus's reign, whose reports for this period survive only as fragments and abbreviations), and the \"Historia Augusta\" (untrustworthy because of its character as a work of literature rather than of history, with elements of fiction embedded within its biographies; in the case of Commodus, it probably embroiders what the author found in reasonably good contemporary sources).\nCommodus remained with the Danube armies for only a short time before negotiating a peace treaty with the Danubian tribes. He then returned to Rome and celebrated a triumph for the conclusion of the wars on 22 October 180. Unlike the preceding emperors Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius, he seems to have had little interest in the business of administration. He tended throughout his reign to leave the practical running of the state to a succession of favourites, beginning with Saoterus, a freedman from Nicomedia who had become his chamberlain.\nDissatisfaction with this state of affairs led to a series of conspiracies and attempted coups, which in turn eventually provoked Commodus to take charge of affairs, which he did in an increasingly dictatorial manner. Nevertheless, though the senatorial order came to hate and fear him, the evidence suggests he remained popular with the army and the common people for much of his reign, not least because of his lavish shows of largesse (recorded on his coinage) and because he staged and took part in spectacular gladiatorial combats. He was not an inspired combatant. He killed animals by bow, standing above the arena. When he fought fellow gladiators, they would purposely submit. During this period Rome's economy declined.\nOne of the ways he paid for his donatives (imperial handouts) and mass entertainments was to tax the senatorial order. On many inscriptions, the traditional order of the two nominal powers of the state, the Senate and People (\"Senatus Populusque Romanus\") was provocatively reversed (\"Populus Senatusque...\").\nConspiracies of 182.\nAt the outset of his reign, Commodus, aged 18, inherited many of his father's senior advisers, notably Tiberius Claudius Pompeianus (the second husband of Commodus's eldest sister Lucilla), his father-in-law Gaius Bruttius Praesens, Titus Fundanius Vitrasius Pollio, and Aufidius Victorinus the Prefect of the City of Rome. He also had four surviving sisters, all of them with husbands who were potential rivals. Lucilla was over ten years his senior and held the rank of Augusta as the widow of her first husband, Lucius Verus.\nThe first crisis of the reign came in 182, when Lucilla engineered a conspiracy against her brother. Her motive is alleged to have been the envy of the Empress Crispina. Lucilla's husband, Pompeianus, was not involved, but two men alleged to have been her lovers, Marcus Ummidius Quadratus Annianus (the consul of 167, also her first cousin) and Appius Claudius Quintianus, attempted to murder Commodus as he entered a theater. They bungled the job and were seized by the emperor's bodyguard.\nQuadratus and Quintianus were executed. Lucilla was exiled to Capri and later killed. Pompeianus retired from public life. One of the two praetorian prefects, Publius Tarrutenius Paternus, had actually been involved in the conspiracy but his involvement was not discovered until later. In the meantime, he and his colleague, Sextus Tigidius Perennis, were able to arrange for the murder of Saoterus, the hated chamberlain.\nCommodus took the loss of Saoterus badly, and Perennis now seized the chance to advance himself by implicating Paternus in a second conspiracy, one apparently led by Publius Salvius Julianus, the son of the jurist Salvius Julianus and betrothed to Paternus' daughter. Salvius and Paternus were executed along with a number of other prominent consulars and senators. Didius Julianus, the future emperor and a relative of Salvius Julianus, was dismissed from the governorship of Germania Inferior.\nCleander.\nAfter the murder of the powerful Saoterus, Perennis took over the reins of government and Commodus found a new chamberlain and favourite in Cleander, a Phrygian freedman who had married one of the emperor's mistresses, Demostratia. Cleander was in fact the person who had murdered Saoterus. After these attempts on his life, Commodus spent much of his time outside Rome, mostly on the family estates at Lanuvium. As he was physically strong, his chief interest was sport: he took part in horse racing, chariot racing, and combat with beasts and men, mostly in private but occasionally in public.\nDacia and Britain.\nCommodus was inaugurated in 183 as consul with Aufidius Victorinus as colleague and assumed the title \"Pius\". War broke out in Dacia: few details are available, but it appears two future contenders for the throne, Clodius Albinus and Pescennius Niger, both distinguished themselves in the campaign. Also, in Britain in 184, the governor Ulpius Marcellus re-advanced the Roman frontier northward to the Antonine Wall, but the legionaries revolted against his harsh discipline and acclaimed another legate, Priscus, as emperor.\nPriscus refused to accept their acclamation, and Perennis had all the legionary legates in Britain cashiered. On 15 October 184, at the Capitoline Games, a Cynic philosopher publicly denounced Perennis before Commodus. His tale was considered false and he was immediately put to death. According to Cassius Dio, Perennis, though ruthless and ambitious, was not personally corrupt and was a generally good administrator.\nHowever, the following year a detachment of soldiers from Britain (they had been drafted to Italy to suppress brigands) also denounced Perennis to the emperor as plotting to make his own son emperor (they had been enabled to do so by Cleander, who was seeking to dispose of his rival), and Commodus gave them permission to execute him as well as his wife and sons. The fall of Perennis brought a new spate of executions: Aufidius Victorinus committed suicide. Ulpius Marcellus was replaced as governor of Britain by Pertinax. Brought to Rome and tried for treason, Marcellus narrowly escaped death.\nCleander's zenith and fall (185\u2013190).\nCleander proceeded to concentrate power in his own hands and to enrich himself by taking responsibility for all public offices. He sold (and bestowed entry to) Senate seats, army commands, governorships, and increasingly, suffect consulships, to the highest bidder. Unrest rose throughout the empire, with large numbers of army deserters causing trouble in Gaul and Germany. Pescennius Niger dealt with the deserters in Gaul in a military campaign. The revolt in Brittany was put down by two legions brought over from Britain.\nIn 187, one of the leaders of the deserters, Maternus, came from Gaul intending to assassinate Commodus at the Festival of the Great Goddess in March but was betrayed and executed. In the same year Pertinax unmasked a conspiracy by two enemies of Cleander, Antistius Burrus (one of Commodus's brothers-in-law) and Arrius Antoninus. As a result, Commodus appeared more rarely in public, preferring to live on his estates.\nEarly in 188, Cleander disposed of the current praetorian prefect, Atilius Aebutianus, and took over supreme command of the Praetorian Guard at the new rank of \"a pugione\" (\"dagger-bearer\"), with two praetorian prefects subordinate to him. Now at the zenith of his power, Cleander continued to sell public offices as his private business. The climax came in the year 190, which had 25 suffect consuls\u2014a record in the 1,000-year history of the Roman consulship\u2014all appointed by Cleander (they included the future Emperor Septimius Severus).\nIn the spring of 190, Rome was afflicted by a food shortage, for which the \"praefectus annonae\" Papirius Dionysius, the official actually in charge of the grain supply, contrived to lay the blame on Cleander. At the end of June, a mob demonstrated against Cleander during a horse race in the Circus Maximus: he sent the Praetorian Guard to put down the disturbances, but Pertinax, who was now City Prefect of Rome, dispatched the \"Vigiles Urbani\" to oppose them. Cleander fled to Commodus, who was at Laurentum in the house of the Quinctilii, for protection, but the mob followed him calling for his head.\nAt the urging of his mistress Marcia, Commodus had Cleander beheaded and his son killed. Other victims at this time were the praetorian prefect Julius Julianus, Commodus's cousin Annia Fundania Faustina, and his brother-in-law Mamertinus. Papirius Dionysius was executed, too. In AD 191, Commodus took more of the reins of power, though he continued to rule through a cabal consisting of Marcia, his new chamberlain Eclectus, and the new praetorian prefect Quintus Aemilius Laetus.\nMegalomania (190\u2013192).\nIn opposition to the Senate, in his pronouncements and iconography, Commodus had always stressed his unique status as a source of god-like power, liberality, and physical prowess. Innumerable statues around the empire were set up portraying him in the guise of Hercules, reinforcing the image of him as a demigod, a physical giant, a protector, and a warrior who fought against men and beasts (see and below). Moreover, as Hercules, he could claim to be the son of Jupiter, the supreme god of the Roman pantheon. These tendencies now increased to megalomaniacal proportions. Far from celebrating his descent from Marcus Aurelius, the actual source of his power, he stressed his own personal uniqueness as the bringer of a new order, seeking to re-cast the empire in his own image.\nDuring 191, the city of Rome was extensively damaged by a fire that raged for several days, during which many public buildings including the Temple of Pax, the Temple of Vesta, and parts of the imperial palace were destroyed.\nPerhaps seeing this as an opportunity, early in 192 Commodus, declaring himself the new Romulus, ritually re-founded Rome, renaming the city \"Colonia Lucia Annia Commodiana\". All the months of the year were renamed to correspond exactly with his (now twelve) names: \"Lucius\", \"Aelius\", \"Aurelius\", \"Commodus\", \"Augustus\", \"Herculeus\", \"Romanus\", \"Exsuperatorius\", \"Amazonius\", \"Invictus\", \"Felix\", and \"Pius\". The legions were renamed \"Commodianae\", the fleet which imported grain from Africa was termed \"Alexandria Commodiana Togata\", the Senate was entitled the Commodian Fortunate Senate, his palace and the Roman people themselves were all given the name \"Commodianus\", and the day on which these reforms were decreed was to be called \"Dies Commodianus\".\nThus, he presented himself as the fountainhead of the Empire, Roman life, and religion. He also had the head of the Colossus of Nero adjacent to the Colosseum replaced with his own portrait, gave it a club, placed a bronze lion at its feet to make it look like \"Hercules Romanus\", and added an inscription boasting of being \"the only left-handed fighter to conquer twelve times one thousand men\".\nAssassination (192).\nIn November 192, Commodus held Plebeian Games, in which he shot hundreds of animals with arrows and javelins every morning, and fought as a gladiator every afternoon, winning all the fights. In December, he announced his intention to inaugurate the year 193 as both consul and gladiator on 1 January.\nWhen Marcia found a list of people Commodus intended to have executed, she discovered that she, the prefect Laetus, and Eclectus were on it. The three of them plotted to assassinate the emperor. On 31 December, Marcia poisoned Commodus's food, but he vomited up the poison, so the conspirators sent his wrestling partner Narcissus to strangle him in his bath.\nUpon his death, the Senate declared him a public enemy (a \"de facto\" \"damnatio memoriae\") and restored the original name of the city of Rome and its institutions. Statues of Commodus were demolished. His body was buried in the Mausoleum of Hadrian.\nCommodus's death marked the end of the Nerva\u2013Antonine dynasty. Commodus was succeeded by Pertinax, whose reign was short; he became the first claimant to be usurped during the Year of the Five Emperors.\nIn 195, the emperor Septimius Severus, trying to gain favour with the family of Marcus Aurelius, rehabilitated Commodus's memory and had the Senate deify him.\nCharacter and physical prowess.\nCharacter and motivations.\nCassius Dio, a first-hand witness, describes him as \"not naturally wicked but, on the contrary, as guileless as any man that ever lived. His great simplicity, however, together with his cowardice, made him the slave of his companions, and it was through them that he at first, out of ignorance, missed the better life and then was led on into lustful and cruel habits, which soon became second nature.\"\nHis recorded actions do tend to show a rejection of his father's policies, his father's advisers, and especially his father's austere lifestyle, and an alienation from the surviving members of his family. It seems likely that he was raised in an atmosphere of Stoic asceticism, which he rejected entirely upon his accession to sole rule.\nAfter repeated attempts on Commodus's life, Roman citizens were often killed for making him angry. One such notable event was the attempted extermination of the house of the Quinctilii. Condianus and Maximus were executed on the pretext that while they were not implicated in any plots, their wealth and talent would make them unhappy with the current state of affairs. Another event, as recorded by the historian Aelius Lampridius, took place at the Roman baths at Terme Taurine, where the emperor had an attendant thrown into an oven after he had found his bathwater to be lukewarm.\nChanges of name.\nHis original name was Lucius Aelius Aurelius Commodus. On his father's death in 180, Commodus changed this to Marcus Aurelius Commodus Antoninus, before changing back to his birth name in 191. Later that year he adopted as his full style \"Lucius Aelius Aurelius Commodus Augustus Herculeus Romanus Exsuperatorius Amazonius Invictus Felix Pius\" (the order of some of these titles varies in the sources). \"Exsuperatorius\" (the supreme) was a title given to Jupiter, and \"Amazonius\" identified him again with Hercules.\nAn inscribed altar from Dura-Europos on the Euphrates shows that Commodus's titles and the renaming of the months were disseminated to the farthest reaches of the Empire; moreover, that even auxiliary military units received the title Commodiana, and that he claimed two additional titles: \"Pacator Orbis\" (pacifier of the world) and \"Dominus Noster\" (Our Lord). The latter eventually would be used as a conventional title by Roman emperors, starting about a century later, but Commodus seems to have been the first to assume it.\nCommodus and Hercules.\nDisdaining the more philosophic inclinations of his father, Commodus was extremely proud of his physical prowess. The historian Herodian, a contemporary, described Commodus as an extremely handsome man. As mentioned above, he ordered many statues to be made showing him dressed as Hercules with a lion's hide and a club. He thought of himself as the reincarnation of Hercules, frequently emulating the legendary hero's feats by appearing in the arena to fight a variety of wild animals. He was left-handed and very proud of the fact. Cassius Dio and the writers of the \"Augustan History\" say that Commodus was a skilled archer, who could shoot the heads off ostriches in full gallop, and kill a panther as it attacked a victim in the arena.\nCommodus the gladiator.\nCommodus also had a passion for gladiatorial combat, which he took so far as to take to the arena himself, dressed as a secutor. The Romans found Commodus's gladiatorial combat to be scandalous and disgraceful. According to Herodian, spectators of Commodus thought it unbecoming of an emperor to take up arms in the amphitheater for sport when he could be campaigning against barbarians among other opponents of Rome. The consensus was that it was below his office to participate as a gladiator. Popular rumors spread alleging he was not actually the son of Marcus Aurelius, but of a gladiator his mother Faustina had taken as a lover at the coastal resort of Caieta.\nCassius Dio claimed that citizens of Rome who lacked feet (either through accident or illness) were taken to the arena, where they were tethered together for Commodus to club to death while pretending they were giants. Dio also wrote that it was Commodus's custom to privately use deadly weapons to fight, murdering and maiming his opponents.\nCommodus was also known for fighting exotic animals in the arena, often to the horror and disgust of the Roman populace. According to Cassius Dio, Commodus once killed 100 lions in a single day. Later, he decapitated a running ostrich with a specially designed dart and afterward carried his sword and the bleeding head of the dead bird over to the Senators' seating area, and motioned to suggest that they were to be next. Dio notes that the targeted senators actually found this more ridiculous than frightening, and chewed on laurel leaves to conceal their laughter. On other occasions, Commodus killed three elephants on the floor of the arena by himself, and a giraffe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44325", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44325", "title": "Kranzberg's laws of technology", "text": ""}
{"id": "44326", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44326", "title": "Kranzberg's Laws", "text": ""}
{"id": "44328", "revid": "50566480", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44328", "title": "Ulugh Beg", "text": "Timurid sultan, astronomer and mathematician (1394\u20131449)\nM\u012brz\u0101 Muhammad Tar\u0101gh\u0101y bin Sh\u0101hrukh (; ), better known as Ulugh Beg (; 22 March 1394 \u2013 27 October 1449), was a Timurid sultan, as well as an astronomer and mathematician. \nUlugh Beg was notable for his work in astronomy-related mathematics, such as\u00a0trigonometry and spherical geometry, as well as his general interests in the arts and intellectual activities.\u00a0It is thought that he spoke five languages: Arabic,\u00a0Persian,\u00a0Chaghatai Turkic, Mongolian, and a small amount of\u00a0Chinese. During his rule (first as a governor, then outright) the\u00a0Timurid Empire\u00a0achieved the cultural peak of the Timurid Renaissance through his attention and patronage.\u00a0Samarkand was captured and given to Ulugh Beg by his father\u00a0Shah Rukh.\nHe built the great\u00a0Ulugh Beg Observatory\u00a0in Samarkand between 1424 and 1429. It was considered by scholars to have been one of the finest observatories in the Islamic world at the time and the largest in\u00a0Central Asia. Ulugh Beg was subsequently recognized as the most important observational astronomer from the 15th century by many scholars.\u00a0He also built the\u00a0Ulugh Beg Madrasah\u00a0(1417\u20131420) in Samarkand and\u00a0Bukhara, transforming the cities into cultural centers of learning in Central Asia.\nHowever, Ulugh Beg's scientific expertise was not matched by his skills in governance. During his short reign, he failed to establish his power and authority. As a result, other rulers, including his family, took advantage of his lack of control, and he was subsequently overthrown and assassinated.\nEarly life.\nHe was a grandson of the great conqueror and king, Timur (Tamerlane) (1336\u20131405), and the oldest son of Shah Rukh, both of whom came from the Turkicized Mongol Barlas tribe of Transoxiana (now Uzbekistan). His mother was a noblewoman named Gawhar Shad, daughter of a member of the representative Turkic tribal aristocracy, Ghiyasuddin Tarkhan. \nUlugh Beg was born in Sultaniyeh during his grandfather's invasion of Persia. He was given the name \"M\u012brz\u0101 Muhammad T\u0101raghay\". Ulugh Beg, the name he was most commonly known by, was not truly a personal name, but rather a moniker, which can be loosely translated as \"Great Ruler\" (compare modern Turkish \"ulu\", \"great\", and \"bey\", \"chief\") and is the Turkic equivalent of Timur's Perso-Arabic title \"Am\u012br-e Kab\u012br\". \nAs a child he wandered through a substantial part of the Middle East and India as his grandfather expanded his conquests in those areas. After Timur's death, Shah Rukh moved the empire's capital to Herat (in modern Afghanistan). Sixteen-year-old Ulugh Beg subsequently became the governor of the former capital of Samarkand in 1409. In 1411, he was named the sovereign ruler of the whole of Mavarannahr.\nScience.\nThe young ruler set out to turn the city into an intellectual center for the empire. Between 1417 and 1420, he built a \"madrasa\" (\"university\" or \"institute\") on Registan Square in Samarkand (currently in Uzbekistan), and he invited numerous Islamic astronomers and mathematicians to study there. The \"madrasa\" building still survives. Ulugh Beg's most famous pupil in astronomy was Ali Qushchi (died in 1474). Qadi Zada al-Rumi was the most notable teacher at Ulugh Beg's madrasa and Jamshid al-Kashi, an astronomer, later came to join the staff. \nAstronomy.\nAstronomy piqued Ulugh Beg's interest when he visited the Maragheh Observatory at a young age. This observatory, located in Maragheh, Iran, is where the well-known astronomer Nasir al-Din al-Tusi practised.\nIn 1428, Ulugh Beg built an enormous observatory, similar to Tycho Brahe's later Uraniborg as well as Taqi al-Din's observatory in Constantinople. Lacking telescopes to work with, he increased his accuracy by increasing the length of his sextant; the so-called \"Fakhri\" sextant had a radius of about and the optical separability of 180\" (seconds of arc). The Fakhri sextant was the largest instrument at the observatory in Samarkand (an image of the sextant is on the side of this article). There were many other astronomical instruments located at the observatory, but the Fakhri sextant is the most well-known instrument there. The purpose of the Fakhri sextant was to measure the transit altitudes of the stars. This was a measurement of the maximum altitude above the horizon of the stars. It was only possible to use this device to measure the declination of celestial objects. The image, which can be found in this article, shows the remaining portion of the instrument, which consists of the underground, lower portion of the instrument that was not destroyed. The observatory built by Ulugh Beg was the most pervasive and well-known observatory throughout the Islamic world.\nWith the instruments located in the observatory in Samarkand, Ulugh Beg composed a star catalogue consisting of 1018 stars, which is eleven fewer stars than are present in the star catalogue of Ptolemy. Ulugh Beg utilized dimensions from al-Sufi and based his star catalogue on a new analysis that was autonomous from the data used by Ptolemy. Throughout his life as an astronomer, Ulugh Beg came to realize that there were multiple mistakes in the work and subsequent data of Ptolemy that had been in use for many years.\nUsing it, he compiled the 1437 \"Zij-i-Sultani\" of 994 stars, generally considered the greatest star catalogue between those of Ptolemy and Tycho Brahe, a work that stands alongside Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi's \"Book of Fixed Stars\". The serious errors which he found in previous Arabian star catalogues (many of which had simply updated Ptolemy's work, adding the effect of precession to the longitudes) induced him to redetermine the positions of 992 fixed stars, to which he added 27 stars from Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi's catalogue \"Book of Fixed Stars\" from the year 964, which were too far south for observation from Samarkand. This catalogue, one of the most original of the Middle Ages, was first edited by Thomas Hyde at Oxford in 1665 under the title \"Jad\u0101vil-i Mav\u0101zi' S\u0331av\u0101bit\", and reprinted in 1767 by G. Sharpe. More recent editions are those by Francis Baily in 1843 in Vol. XIII of the \"Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society\", and by Edward Ball Knobel in \"Ulugh Beg's Catalogue of Stars, Revised from all Persian Manuscripts Existing in Great Britain, with a Vocabulary of Persian and Arabic Words\" (1917).\nIn 1437, Ulugh Beg determined the length of the sidereal year as 365.2570370...d = 365d 6h 10m 8s (an error of +58\u00a0seconds). In his measurements over the course of many years he used a 50\u00a0m high gnomon. This value was improved by 28\u00a0seconds in 1525 by Nicolaus Copernicus, who appealed to the estimation of Thabit ibn Qurra (826\u2013901), which had an error of +2\u00a0seconds. However, Ulugh Beg later measured another more precise value of the tropical year as 365d 5h 49m 15s, which has an error of +25\u00a0seconds, making it more accurate than Copernicus's estimate which had an error of +30\u00a0seconds. Ulugh Beg also determined the Earth's axial tilt as 23\u00b030'17\" in the sexagesimal system of degrees, minutes and seconds of arc, which in decimal notation converts to 23.5047\u00b0.\nMathematics.\nIn mathematics, Ulugh Beg wrote accurate trigonometric tables of sine and tangent values correct to at least eight decimal places.\nForeign relations.\nOnce Ulugh Beg became governor of Samarqand, he fostered diplomatic relations with the Yongle emperor of the Ming dynasty. In 1416, Ming envoys Chen Cheng and Lu An presented silk and silver stuffs to Ulugh Beg on behalf of the Yongle emperor. In 1419, The Timurid sent his own emissaries, Sultan-Shah and Muhammad Bakhshi, to the Ming court. Ulugh Beg's emissaries came across Ghiy\u0101th al-d\u012bn Naqq\u0101sh and other envoys representing Shah Rukh, Prince Baysunghur, and other Timurid authorities in Beijing; however, they stayed at separate hostelries. Ghiy\u0101th al-d\u012bn Naqq\u0101sh even saw the Yongle emperor riding a black horse with white feet which had been gifted by Ulugh Beg. \nUlugh Beg led two major campaigns against his neighbours. This first one took place in 1425 and was directed against Moghulistan and its ruler Shir Muhammad. He was victorious but the impact of the campaign was limited and Shir Muhammad remained in power. A year later, Baraq, Khan of the Golden Horde and former prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Ulugh Beg, laid claim to Timurid possessions around the Syr Darya, including the town of Sighnaq. In response to that, in 1427 Ulugh Beg, accompanied by his brother Muhummad Juki, marched against Baraq. In a hill close to Sighnaq the Timurid army was surprised by a smaller enemy force but was soundly defeated. The humiliation suffered at the hands of Baraq was to have a lasting effect on Ulugh Beg. His campaign against the Golden Horde would be the last he would undertake against a neighbouring power. The armies he later sent against them would not win any resounding victories and by the end of his reign his territories would be raided by his northern and easterly foes.\nIn 1439, the Zhengtong emperor ordered an artist to produce a painting of a black horse with white feet and a white forehead that had been sent by Ulugh Beg. Six years later, the Ming emperor sent a letter to Ulugh Beg in order to express his gratitude for all the \"tribute\" from Samarqand. The emperor sent \"vessels made of gold and jade, a spear with a dragon's head, a fine horse with saddle, and variegated gold-embroidered silk stuffs\" to Ulugh Beg, as well as silk stuffs and garments for the Timurid prince's family.\nWar of succession and death.\nIn 1447, upon learning of the death of his father Shah Rukh, Ulugh Beg went to Balkh. Here, he heard that Ala al-Dawla, the son of his late brother Baysunghur, had claimed the rulership of the Timurid Empire in Herat. Consequently, Ulugh Beg marched against Ala al-Dawla and met him in battle at Murghab. He defeated his nephew and advanced toward Herat, massacring its people in 1448. However, Abul-Qasim Babur Mirza, Ala al-Dawla's brother, came to the latter's aid and defeated Ulugh Beg.\nUlugh Beg retreated to Balkh where he found that its governor, his oldest son Abdal-Latif Mirza, had rebelled against him. Another civil war ensued. Abdal-Latif recruited troops to meet his father's army on the banks of the Amu Darya river. However, Ulugh Beg was forced to retreat to Samarkand before any fighting took place, having heard news of turmoil in the city. Abdal-Latif soon reached Samarkand and Ulugh Beg involuntarily surrendered to his son. Abd-al-Latif released his father from custody, allowing him to make pilgrimage to Mecca. However, he ensured Ulugh Beg never reached his destination, having him, as well as his brother Abdal-Aziz assassinated in 1449. \nEventually, Ulugh Beg's reputation was rehabilitated by his nephew, Abdallah Mirza (1450\u20131451), who placed his remains at Timur's feet in the Gur-e-Amir in Samarkand, where they were found by Soviet archaeologists in 1941.\nMarriages.\nUlugh Beg had sixteen consorts:\nExhumation.\nSoviet anthropologist Mikhail M. Gerasimov reconstructed the face of Ulugh Beg. Like his grandfather Timurlane, Ulugh Beg is close to the Mongoloid type with slightly Europoid features. His father Shah Rukh had predominantly Caucasoid features, with no obvious Mongoloid feature.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44329", "revid": "26665467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44329", "title": "Severus", "text": "Severus is the name of various historical and fictional figures, including:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44330", "revid": "35107032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44330", "title": "Bow", "text": "Bow most often refers to:\nBow may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44331", "revid": "44721228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44331", "title": "Severus Snape", "text": "Severus Snape is a fictional character in the \"Harry Potter\" series of novels by J. K. Rowling. In the first five novels, he is the professor of Potions at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. In the sixth book, he teaches Defence Against the Dark Arts, and in the seventh book he ascends to the position of headmaster before his death. Snape is hostile, yet heroic towards Harry Potter throughout the series; Harry eventually learns that Snape was bullied by Harry's father, James Potter, and was in love with Harry's mother, Lily Evans. This causes Snape to have mixed feelings towards Harry, who resembles his father greatly, but has his mother's eyes.Fictional character in the Harry Potter series\nAs the series progresses, Snape's character becomes more layered and enigmatic. A central mystery is unravelled concerning his loyalties. Snape dies at the hands of Lord Voldemort in the seventh book, at which time his back story is revealed. Despite his attraction to the Dark Arts and Voldemort's ideology of wizard supremacy, Snape's love for Muggle-born Lily Evans, Harry's mother, eventually compelled him to defect from the Death Eaters. He then became a double agent for Albus Dumbledore and the Order of the Phoenix. The fact that Lily chose James Potter, Harry's father, only fuels Snape's hostility towards Harry.\nSnape's character has been widely acclaimed by readers and critics. Rowling described him as \"a gift of a character\", whose story she had known since the first book. Elizabeth Hand of \"The Washington Post\" explained that Snape's life \"is the most heartbreaking, surprising and satisfying of all of Rowling's achievements\".\nAlan Rickman portrayed Snape in all eight \"Harry Potter\" films, released between 2001 and 2011. Paapa Essiedu will portray the character in the upcoming HBO TV adaptation.\nCharacter development.\nIn an interview, Rowling described Snape's character as an \"antihero\". She has said that she drew inspiration for Snape's character from a disliked teacher from her own childhood, and described Snape as a horrible teacher, saying the \"worst, shabbiest thing you can do\" as a teacher is to bully students. However, she does suggest in the books that he is generally an effective teacher. Although Rowling has said that Gilderoy Lockhart is her only character that she \"deliberately based on a real person\", Snape was reportedly based, at least in part, on John Nettleship, who taught Rowling chemistry and employed her mother as an assistant at Wyedean School near Chepstow. Rowling based Snape's given name on \"Severus Road\" in Clapham, and his surname is borrowed from the name of a village in England. In a 1999 interview and again in 2004, Rowling singled out Snape as one of her favourite characters to write.\nRowling was less forthcoming about Snape than she was for other characters, because his true loyalties and motivations were not revealed until the final book. However, she hinted numerous times at Snape's important role, suggesting that people should \"keep their eye on Snape\". In 1999, answering a question regarding Snape's love life and the redemptive pattern to his character, Rowling expressed her surprise at the foresight. Rowling also disclosed that after the publication of \"Prisoner of Azkaban\", there was one female fan who guessed Snape loved Lily Potter, making Rowling wonder how she had given herself away.\nAfter the completion of the series, Rowling began to speak openly about Snape, discussing the contrast between his character arc and that of Albus Dumbledore. Rowling said \"the series is built around [the Dumbledore and Snape storylines]\", and maintained that she always knew what Snape would turn out to be at the end and that she carefully plotted his storyline throughout the series. \"I had to drop clues all the way through because as you know in the seventh book when you have the revelation scene where everything shifts and you realise...what Snape's motivation was. I had to plot that through the books because at the point where you see what was really going on, it would have been an absolute cheat on the reader at that point just to show a bunch of stuff you've never seen before.\" Rowling further said in an interview that she wanted Snape to find redemption and forgiveness: \"Snape is a complicated man...he was a flawed human being, like all of us. Harry forgives him...Harry really sees the good in Snape ultimately... I wanted there to be redemption.\"\nAppearances.\nNovels.\n\"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\".\nSnape first appears in \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\", shortly after Harry arrives at Hogwarts. He is the school's Potions Master, though he is widely rumoured to covet the Defence Against the Dark Arts post. Snape himself confirms the rumour in \"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\". Snape is a sinister and malicious teacher who makes frequent snide and disparaging remarks at Harry's expense. He quickly becomes the primary antagonist of the book, as Harry suspects him of plotting to steal the Philosopher's Stone, and of attempting to kill him. Only the climax of the book reveals that Professor Quirrell, in league with Lord Voldemort, is the real enemy; Snape, suspicious of Quirrell, had been looking out for Harry throughout the book.\nIn the final chapter, Dumbledore suggests that because Harry's father James had saved Snape's life when they were both students, even though the two detested each other, Snape felt responsible for Harry in return. As the final book reveals, this is not the full story. In any case, even after Quirrell's true role is revealed, Harry retains feelings of suspicion and resentment towards Snape, and their relationship remains tense. Snape's behaviour and attitude towards Harry also remain unchanged.\n\"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\".\nSnape has a minor role in \"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\", where he helps Gilderoy Lockhart oversee Hogwarts' short-lived Duelling Club, but he has little interaction with the main plot. It is while attending the Duelling Club that Harry learns the \"Expelliarmus\" spell, which plays a significant role in later books, by seeing Snape use it.\n\"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\".\nIn \"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\", Snape demonstrates his expertise with potions by brewing the complex Wolfsbane potion for the new Defence Against the Dark Arts professor, Remus Lupin. Throughout the third book, Snape suspects that Lupin may be helping Harry's godfather Sirius Black enter Hogwarts castle; Sirius had been convicted (wrongly, as it is later revealed) of murdering Peter Pettigrew and innocent bystanders, and betraying the Potter family's hiding place to Voldemort. This suspicion stems from Lupin's friendship with Sirius and Harry's father, James, while they were all at Hogwarts as students. Near the climax of the book, Snape attempts to apprehend Sirius, but Sirius escapes with Harry's aid. Snape informs Dumbledore of this circumstance, and when Harry and Lupin are not punished, Snape retaliates by revealing to the entire school that Lupin is a werewolf, forcing the latter to resign his post.\n\"Prisoner of Azkaban\" reveals more details about the connection between Snape and James. While in school together, Sirius once tricked Snape into almost entering the Shrieking Shack while Lupin was there, transformed into a werewolf. James realised the danger and stopped Snape, saving his life; this is the incident Dumbledore referred to at the end of the first book. Snape, however, believes James' actions were self-serving, to avoid being expelled.\n\"Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire\".\nSnape's role in the fourth novel, \"Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire\", is not substantially different from that of the previous three books. He is apoplectic when Harry is unexpectedly entered into the Triwizard Tournament. Later Harry accidentally falls into Dumbledore's Pensieve and views memories of several Death Eater trials from years before. At one point, Snape is named as a Death Eater by Igor Karkaroff, but Dumbledore comes to Snape's defence, claiming that although Snape had indeed been a Death Eater, he changed sides before Voldemort's downfall and turned spy against him. Later, Dumbledore assures Harry that Snape's reformation is genuine, though he refuses to tell Harry how he knows this, saying the information \"is a matter between Professor Snape and myself\".\nAt the end of the book, Dumbledore attempts to convince a disbelieving Minister for Magic, Cornelius Fudge, that Voldemort has returned. As proof, Snape willingly shows Fudge the restored Dark Mark on his arm. He is subsequently sent on a secret mission by Dumbledore. This mission, as had been implied in \"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\" and revealed in \"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\", was to rejoin the Death Eaters and spy on Voldemort as a re-doubled agent, while pretending to spy on Dumbledore on behalf of Voldemort.\n\"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\".\nIn the fifth novel, \"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\", Snape returns to a more prominent role. With Voldemort having returned to a fully corporeal body, Snape continues working as a re-doubled agent for Dumbledore. He is seen prior to the start of school at Number 12, Grimmauld Place giving reports to the Order of the Phoenix. He has a very strained relationship with Sirius, who owns Grimmauld Place and must remain there in hiding. The two trade frequent snide remarks and at one point almost begin a duel. Snape taunts Sirius about the latter's not being able to take an active role in the Order's missions because of his fugitive status. Harry feels later that this taunting contributed to Sirius' willingness to take unsafe risks. Back at school, Snape's allegiance to the Order has no effect on his dislike for Harry.\nLater in the book, Dumbledore has Snape teach Harry Occlumency, the protection of the mind from outside intrusion or influence. The sessions mainly consist in Snape forcibly reading Harry's mind to teach him to defend himself, but are made difficult by their mutual hostility. They end prematurely when Harry looks into Snape's pensieve after Snape leaves the room, and views Snape's worst childhood memory without his permission. He sees the memory of Snape being bullied by James and Sirius, and of calling Harry's mother Lily a Mudblood (a highly offensive term). Only in the final book is it revealed that, prior to this confrontation, Snape and Lily had been close friends.\nTowards the end of the novel, Dolores Umbridge \u2013 the school's politically-appointed headmistress \u2013 captures Harry and interrogates him about Dumbledore's whereabouts. She sends for Snape, demanding that he provide the magical truth serum Veritaserum in order to force Harry to reveal any information he may be hiding. Snape claims that his supplies of the serum have been exhausted after Umbridge tries to use the drug previously on Harry. It is later revealed that Snape had in fact supplied Umbridge with fake Veritaserum on the prior attempt. Snape then carries Harry's cryptic warning about Sirius' capture to the other Order members, allowing them to come to the rescue in the Department of Mysteries. Harry still holds Snape partly responsible for Sirius' death, believing Snape's goading spurred Sirius into joining the battle.\n\"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\".\nIn the second chapter of \"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\", Bellatrix Lestrange and Narcissa Malfoy visit Snape at his home in Spinner's End. Narcissa's son Draco has been given a difficult task by Voldemort, and Narcissa swears Snape to an Unbreakable Vow that he will protect Draco, help him complete Voldemort's task, and finish the task himself if Draco fails. When questioned by Bellatrix about his loyalties, Snape says he has been working for Voldemort ever since Voldemort's return, and explains his actions in the previous books in that light. He points out that gaining Dumbledore's trust and protection has kept him out of Azkaban and free to operate on Voldemort's behalf.\nAt the start-of-term feast at Hogwarts, Dumbledore announces Snape as the new Defence Against the Dark Arts professor. Horace Slughorn, Snape's own former teacher, comes out of retirement and replaces him as Potions Master. With Snape no longer teaching Potions, Harry enrolls in Slughorn's class and is lent an old textbook until his new one arrives. Harry finds marginalia, including a variety of hexes and jinxes seemingly invented by an unknown student, and substantial improvements to the book's standard potion-making instructions. The text is inscribed as being \"the Property of the Half-Blood Prince\". The notes greatly bolster Harry's performance in Potions, so much so that he impresses Slughorn. Snape, who maintains that he \"never had the impression that [he] had been able to teach Potter anything at all\", is suspicious of Harry's newfound Potions success.\nLater, during a fight with Draco, Harry casts one of the Prince's spells marked \"For Enemies,\" and is horrified by the devastating wounds it inflicts on Draco's face and chest. Snape rushes to the scene and heals Draco, then interrogates Harry regarding the spell, using Legilimency to extract the source of Harry's knowledge (the Potions textbook) from Harry's mind. When Snape insists that Harry show him his Potions textbook, Harry hides the Prince's book and gives him Ron Weasley's book instead. As punishment for the attack and knowing Harry is lying about the textbook, Snape assigns Harry detention during the final Quidditch match of the year.\nBefore leaving Hogwarts to accompany Dumbledore in locating another horcrux \u2013 part of Voldemort's soul \u2013 Harry discovers from Professor Trelawney that it was Snape who overheard the prophecy and told it to Voldemort, resulting in Voldemort hunting down Harry and his parents. Despite this and Harry's angry questions, Dumbledore avers his trust in Snape. Returning to Hogwarts after retrieving Voldemort's Horcrux, Harry and Dumbledore alight atop the school's astronomy tower. Gravely weakened by the horcrux's protective potion, Dumbledore tells Harry he must fetch Snape, but before Harry can leave, Draco suddenly arrives, intending to carry out Voldemort's order to assassinate Dumbledore, closely followed by other Death Eaters (followers of Voldemort), and Snape. Snape interrupts the planned murder, killing the headmaster himself. Harry, who is paralysed under his invisibility cloak by Dumbledore for his own protection, witnesses the kill, and is released upon Dumbledore's death. Enraged, he pursues Snape, Draco, and the Death Eaters as they flee the castle. Snape easily blocks Harry's spells and jeeringly points out Harry's mistakes, but never strikes back. During the confrontation, Snape reveals himself as the eponymous \"Half-Blood Prince\" (being the half-blood son of Muggle Tobias Snape and pure-blood Eileen Prince). Snape passes through the school gates and Disapparates with Draco in tow at the book's end. The full relationship between Dumbledore and Snape and the reason for Snape's actions remain unknown until the final book. In an interview, Rowling mentioned that at this point in the series, the Harry\u2013Snape relationship has become \"as personal, if not more so, than Harry\u2013Voldemort.\"\n\"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\".\nIn \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\", Voldemort and his Death Eaters have tightened their grip on the wizarding world. Snape is named Headmaster of Hogwarts, while Death Eaters Alecto and Amycus Carrow are appointed as Hogwarts staff. The novel focuses largely on Harry and his friends and events outside the school; therefore Snape plays a limited role at the start. In the course of the book, Harry and his friends find out that a few students attempted to steal the Sword of Godric Gryffindor, and that Snape subsequently sent it to be stored at Gringotts Wizarding Bank; however, that sword was only a copy. Later on, Harry and Ron are led to find the real sword by a Patronus taking the form of a doe. (Towards the end of the book, Harry learns that this was Snape's Patronus, taking the same shape as Harry's mother Lily's Patronus, a visible sign of his lifelong love for Harry's mother, and that Dumbledore had asked Snape to ensure that Harry gained possession of the sword. The novel also reveals that Snape had covertly used his position as Headmaster to protect the students and to contain the Carrows.)\nTowards the end of the school year, Professors McGonagall, Flitwick, and Sprout force Snape to flee the school. Voldemort summons Snape to the Shrieking Shack. Erroneously believing Snape is the master of the Elder Wand and that Snape's death will make him the master of the Wand, Voldemort kills Snape by having his pet snake Nagini bite him through the neck. The dying Snape releases a cloud of memories and tells Harry, who has watched the entire scene from a hidden spot, to take and view them. The dying Snape asks Harry to look at him, since Harry has the eyes of his mother Lily which Snape loved, and Snape wants to have these eyes as the last thing he would see.\nFrom these memories, Harry sees Snape's childhood and learns his true loyalties. In this vision, Harry learns that Snape befriended Lily as a child when they lived near each other. Upon their arrival at Hogwarts, the Sorting Hat placed Snape and Lily into Slytherin and Gryffindor Houses, respectively. They remained friends for the next few years until they were driven apart by Snape's interest in the Dark Arts; the friendship finally ended following the bullying episode that Harry had briefly seen in the fifth book, in which Snape calls Lily \"Mudblood\". Despite this separation and Snape's enduring animosity toward Lily's eventual husband James Potter, Snape continued to love Lily for the rest of his life.\nThe memories also show that as a Death Eater, Snape had revealed to Voldemort a prophecy made by Sybill Trelawney, causing Voldemort to attempt to prevent it by killing Harry and his parents. Snape, who had not realised until too late that Voldemort had interpreted the prophecy to be referring to Lily and her family (as it could've also referred to Frank and Alice Longbottom and their son Neville Longbottom), asked Voldemort to spare Lily. Still in terror for her life, he also approached Dumbledore, admitted his actions, and begged him to protect the Potters. Dumbledore chided him for thinking only of himself and not of Lily's husband and child, but agreed and ensured that they were placed under the Fidelius Charm. In return, Snape secretly allied himself with Dumbledore and the Order of the Phoenix as a double agent against Voldemort, using his powers of Occlumency to hide his betrayal from Voldemort. However, Snape demanded of Dumbledore that his love for Lily (his reason for switching sides) be kept a secret, especially from Harry, because of the deep animosity he felt towards Harry's father and his mixed feelings towards Harry (who reminded him of both his love for Lily Potter and her death, and his animosity towards James Potter). Dumbledore agreed and kept the secret throughout his life, although questioning Snape's request to \"never reveal the best of you\". Even with his efforts to protect her, Snape felt guilty and responsible for Lily's death at Voldemort's hands.\nSnape's memories then reveal that Dumbledore had impetuously tried to use the Gaunt ring, which had been cursed by Voldemort, and had been suffering from a powerful curse. Snape's knowledge of the Dark Arts enabled him to slow the spread of the curse from Dumbledore's hand through his body, but he would have died within a year. Dumbledore, aware that Voldemort had ordered Draco to kill him, had asked Snape to kill him instead as a way of sparing the boy's soul and of preventing his own otherwise slow, painful death. Although Snape was reluctant, even asking about the impact of such an action on his own soul, Dumbledore implied that this kind of \"coup de gr\u00e2ce\" would not damage a human's soul in the same way murder would. Nevertheless, they both knew that Snape could not avoid what he had sworn to Narcissa at the beginning of the previous book. Snape agreed to do as the Headmaster requested. Snape's memories also provide Harry with the information he needs to ensure Voldemort's final defeat, in the form of conversations Snape had with Dumbledore.\nRowling noted in an interview that because Snape abandoned his post before dying or officially retiring, a portrait of him does not immediately appear in the Headmaster's office following his death. She adds, however, that she would like to think Harry made Snape's true loyalty and heroism known in the Wizarding world, and that he lobbied to ensure that a portrait be installed in the office. In a separate interview, Rowling discussed Snape's back story, saying she had planned it ever since she wrote the first book because the whole series is built around it and she considers him one of the most important characters of the seventh book.\nEpilogue.\nIn the epilogue to \"Deathly Hallows\", set nineteen years after Harry defeats Voldemort, Harry has named his second-born son Albus Severus, after Albus Dumbledore and Severus Snape. As Albus is about to enter his first year at Hogwarts, he expresses concern that he will be sorted into Slytherin. Harry tells his son, \"you were named for two headmasters of Hogwarts. One of them [Snape] was a Slytherin and he was probably the bravest man I ever knew.\"\nPortrayal in media.\nFilm.\nSeverus Snape is portrayed by Alan Rickman in all eight \"Harry Potter\" films. Rickman was Rowling's personal choice to portray the character. He had conversations with Rowling about his character and is one of the few \"Harry Potter\" actors that she spoke to prior to the completion of the book series about the future direction of the character. \"He knew very early on that he'd been in love with Lily,\" said Rowling. \"He needed to understand [...] where this bitterness towards this boy who's the living example of her preference for another man came from.\"Rickman used this knowledge of Snape's ultimate loyalties throughout the films to decide how to play certain scenes, deliver specific lines, or use body language to convey specific emotions. When the directors of the films would ask him why he was doing a scene a certain way or delivering a line in a specific manner, Rickman would simply reply that he knew something they didn't.\nRickman himself refrained from talking about Snape, asking readers to wait and \"see what unfolds\" in the course of the novels; however, he did say Snape is a complicated person, very rigid and full of himself; in an interview he went further, saying: \"Snape isn't one who enjoys jokes and I strongly fear that his sense of humour is extremely limited... But in his defence, I will add that he didn't have an easy adolescence, particularly during his studies at Hogwarts.\" He also said Snape is a fascinating character, and that he takes immense pleasure in playing such an ambiguous person.\nRickman's performance as Snape was widely acclaimed by critics, fans and Rowling herself. \"Entertainment Weekly\" listed Rickman as one of the most popular movie stars in 2007 for his performance as Snape, saying: \"As the icy, humourless magic instructor Severus Snape, Rickman may not be on screen long\u2014but he owns every minute.\" Rickman also noted fans' reactions; in an interview, he said he found \"that people in general adore Snape. He is sarcastic, stubborn, etc, etc. But he is also fascinating. I have a lot of fun impersonating him.\" Rickman was nominated for several awards for his portrayal of Snape, and in 2011, was elected the best character portrayal in all the \"Harry Potter\" films series.\nIn 2011, \"Empire\" magazine published an open letter from Rickman to J.K. Rowling, ruminating on the ten years of working on the Potter films and thanking her for telling the story.\nIn \"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\", the fifteen-year-old Snape (portrayed by Alec Hopkins) makes a brief appearance in a flashback to Snape's youth. In the final film, \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows \u2013 Part 2\", the younger Snape, perhaps ten or eleven, is played by Benedict Clarke. In 2016, a fan film prequel, \"Severus Snape and the Marauders\", was released online and Snape was played by Morgana Ignis.\nBefore Alan Rickman was offered the role of Severus Snape, the role was offered to Tim Roth, who turned it down in favour of portraying General Thade in \"Planet of the Apes\".\nTelevision.\nSnape is set to be portrayed by Paapa Essiedu in the HBO television adaption of the Harry Potter series.\nStage.\n\"Harry Potter and the Cursed Child\" is a play written by Jack Thorne from a story by Thorne, J. K. Rowling and John Tiffany. In the play, Draco Malfoy's son Scorpius finds himself in an alternate timeline in which Voldemort won the Battle of Hogwarts, killed Harry, and instituted a reign of terror. Scorpius desperately searches for help in restoring history to its original course. He finds that in this reality Snape is still alive and still teaches at Hogwarts, and asks for his help. At first Snape is suspicious of him, since this timeline's version of Scorpius is a bully and a Voldemort stalwart. But when Scorpius shows that he knows of Snape having been in love with Lily, Harry's mother \u2013 Snape's most closely guarded secret \u2013 Snape becomes convinced that he does indeed come from a different timeline where Harry and his friends won. Snape then reveals that he, together with the fugitive Ron and Hermione Granger, maintain the last remnants of Dumbledore's Army \u2013 still waging hopeless resistance against the all-powerful Voldemort. In talking with Scorpius, Snape had learned that Harry would name his son \"Albus Severus\" and would regard Snape as \"probably the bravest man I ever knew\" \u2013 and is deeply moved. Though having guessed that in the other timeline he would die, Snape nevertheless willingly helps Scorpius recreate this timeline \u2013 and being discovered by Dementors, Snape sacrifices himself in order to cover Scorpius' escape.\nCharacterisation.\nOutward appearance.\nSnape is described as a thin man with sallow skin, a large, hooked nose, and yellow, uneven teeth. He has shoulder-length, greasy black hair which frames his face, and cold, black eyes. He wears black, flowing robes which give him the appearance of \"an overgrown bat\". The youthful Snape had a \"stringy, pallid look\", being \"round-shouldered yet angular\", having a \"twitchy\" walk \"that recalled a spider\" and \"long oily hair that jumped about his face\".\nIn the chapter illustrations by Mary GrandPr\u00e9 in the American editions of \"The Prisoner of Azkaban\", \"The Order of the Phoenix\", and \"The Half-Blood Prince\", Snape is depicted with a moustache and goatee, long black hair, and a receding hairline.\nPersonality.\nSnape is generally depicted as being cold, calculating, precise, sarcastic, and bitter. He strongly dislikes Harry and often insults him by insulting his father James. As the series progresses, it is revealed that his treatment of Harry stems from Snape's bitter rivalry with James when they were in school together. In particular, James and Sirius bullied Snape, which according to Alan Rickman caused the already lonely boy to further \"shut himself in\". Rowling further described the young Snape as insecure and vulnerable: \"Given his time over again [Snape] would not have become a Death Eater, but like many insecure, vulnerable people he craved membership of something big and powerful, something impressive.[...] [He] was so blinded by his attraction to the dark side he thought [Lily] would find him impressive if he became a real Death Eater.\"\nThe adult Snape, on the other hand, is portrayed as very self-assured and confident of his abilities, to a degree that Rickman described as \"full of himself.\" Director David Yates said Snape is a character with gravitas, authority and power. Snape typically displays a very calm and collected demeanour, rarely at a loss for words or taken off guard. His temper, however, is sometimes short where Harry is concerned and positively flares when dealing with his erstwhile tormentor Sirius, or when accused of cowardice. His otherwise impassive and aloof attitude seems to stem from his belief that people who cannot control their emotions are weak.\nLike some other prominent members of Slytherin house, Snape is shown to be a clever and cunning wizard. He is intelligent and has a keen, analytical mind. In an interview, Rowling adds that Snape is immensely brave, and when asked if she considers Snape a hero, replied: \"Yes, I do; though a very flawed hero. An anti-hero, perhaps. He is not a particularly likeable man in many ways. He remains rather cruel, a bully, riddled with bitterness and insecurity\u2014and yet he loved, and showed loyalty to that love and, ultimately, laid down his life because of it. That's pretty heroic!\"\nMagical abilities and skills.\nAll seven novels show Snape to be a very powerful wizard and to have been outstanding while a student. He specialises in potion making and has talent and passion for the Dark Arts. Sirius claimed that Snape knew more hexes and curses as a first-year student at Hogwarts than most seventh-years knew. Particularly gifted in potion making, Snape added major improvements to his Potions textbook while still a student.\nAlso as a student, Snape shows a rare gift for discovering new spells. Lupin describes Sectumsempra as Snape's \"speciality\" in \"Deathly Hallows.\" Snape is shown using this spell as a teenager against Harry's father James and in the aerial battle in the last novel when he accidentally hits George Weasley (acting as a Potter decoy) with it while actually aiming for a Death Eater who was trying to attack Lupin, permanently severing George's right ear. Despite Sectumsempra's deadly power, Snape can also heal the wounds it causes. Snape is adept at reversing or containing potentially fatal damage from other dark curses as well, due to his vast knowledge of Dark Arts, as he does when Dumbledore and then Katie Bell are cursed.\nSkilful in the arts of Legilimency and especially Occlumency, Snape is able to both access the minds of others and protect his own thoughts\u2014indeed, though Snape does not care for the term himself, Harry forms the uncomfortable impression early in the series that the Potions Master is able to \"read minds.\" Being an Occlumens, Snape is able to keep his betrayal from Voldemort, who is himself described as being \"the greatest Legilimens\" in history. According to Rowling, Snape is the only Death Eater capable of producing a full Patronus, which, like Lily's, is a doe.\nSnape is a talented duellist, able to hold off by himself (if only briefly) a group of three Hogwarts professors that included former duelling champion Filius Flitwick. Professor McGonagall later implies that Snape learned to fly without the use of a broom, a rare skill previously displayed only by Voldemort.\nFamily.\nSnape's family background is mostly shown in flashbacks during the course of the last three novels. Snape was born to Eileen Prince, a witch, and Tobias Snape, a Muggle, making him a half-blood (hence the name, \"Half-Blood Prince\"). This is rare for a Death Eater, as remarked in the last book, though Voldemort himself also had a Muggle father. Snape spent his early childhood living with his parents in a small house in Spinner's End. Snape's family was a poor one and he is described as wearing ill-fitting clothes \"that were so mis-matched that it looked deliberate\". As a child, Snape was apparently neglected and his parents often fought with one another. Snape was very eager to leave his home to go to Hogwarts. Towards the end of the last novel, Harry draws parallels between his childhood, Snape's, and Voldemort's.\nLoyalties.\nSnape's true loyalty was one of the most significant questions in the series up until the end of the final installment, \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\". Although the first five novels depict him as unfair and vindictive towards Harry and his friends, he invariably ends up protecting or otherwise helping them when they or their allies are in danger. Several characters express doubts about his loyalty, but Dumbledore's trust in him is generally taken to be the final word. Curiously, the same thing appears to happen in the opposite side, when we see how Bellatrix Lestrange mistrust Snape and only the word of Voldemort seems to protect him from the suspicions of the other death-eaters. The sixth novel, \"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\", departs from that model. In the second chapter, Snape claims to have been working for Voldemort ever since the latter's return, and only pretending to help Dumbledore. By killing Dumbledore toward the end of the novel, Snape seems to place himself firmly in Voldemort's camp. Rowling maintains this impression through the early chapters of the seventh novel. However, near the climax of the book, Snape leaves Harry his dying thoughts (to be viewed in the Pensieve) and ultimately reveals to Harry that he had been loyal to Albus Dumbledore throughout the series. Snape's fierce devotion to and love of his childhood friend Lily, Harry's mother, is the foundation of that loyalty.\nAfter \"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\", Snape's loyalty was a matter of intense debate among the fans. The issue was given special attention in the marketing campaigns on behalf of the last book, \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\". \"Is Snape Good or Evil?\" was one of the questions in Scholastic Inc.'s seven-question series, part of its marketing campaign for the book. As part of the Waldenbooks marketing campaign, two free stickers, one that said \"Trust Snape\" and another that stated \"Snape Is A Very Bad Man\" were available with the book. Borders published a separate book on the topic, \"The Great Snape Debate,\" containing essays and arguments from both sides of the debate.\nReception.\nThe secretive attitude and gradual unfolding of Snape's character was broadly admired, with Stephen Fry, narrator of the UK audiobooks, saying in 2003: \"Most characters like Snape are hard to love but there is a sort of ambiguity\u2014you can't quite decide\u2014something sad about him\u2014lonely and it's fascinating when you think he's going to be the evil one..., then slowly you get this idea he's not so bad after all.\" David Yates, who directed the final four films of the series, also expressed his views on the character, saying: \"A character like Snape, where you're not really sure if he's a good guy or a bad guy, that gives you a latent tension... I think the coolest thing you can do with an audience is deny them a little bit of information.\" Rowling herself described Snape as \"a gift of a character\". Despite being less than kind, Snape quickly gained popularity within fandom to a level that surprised Rowling herself. Joyce Millman suggests in her essay \"To Sir with Love\" in the book \"Mapping the World of Harry Potter\", that Snape is derived from a tradition of Byronic heroes such as \"Wuthering Heights\"' Heathcliff.\nJenny Sawyer from \"The Christian Science Monitor\" commented on the character's development in the series. She claimed that Snape is the only protagonist who genuinely has a choice to make and who struggles to do the right thing, hence the only one to face a \"compelling inner crisis\". She believed the popularity of the character is due to the moral journey and inner conflict that Snape undergoes within the series, as it is the hero's struggle and costly redemption that really matter: \"[Snape's] character ached for resolution. And it is precisely this need for resolution\u2014our desire to know the real Snape and to understand his choices\u2014that makes him the most compelling character in the Potter epic.\"\nThe final revelation of Snape's loyalty in \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\" was viewed positively by fans and critics alike. Daniel Radcliffe, who portrays Harry Potter in the movie series, expressed his delight, saying he was pleased to see that his theory that Snape would end up being a sort of tragic hero came through. Elizabeth Hand from \"The Washington Post\" wrote, \"The much-maligned loner Snape does not come onstage until the latter part of \"Deathly Hallows,\" but when he does the book becomes his: Snape's fate, more than Voldemort's, perhaps more even than Harry's, is the most heartbreaking, surprising and satisfying of all of Rowling's achievements.\"\nIGN listed Snape as their 4th top \"Harry Potter\" character, saying that he makes \"quite an impact in the \"Harry Potter\" series\", and IGN's Joe Utichi called Snape his favourite \"Harry Potter\" character and praised his character development. Shortly after the release of the final film, MTV held a public poll for fans to vote for the best character in the series, and Snape was voted #1. Around the same time, \"Empire\" magazine held a public poll for fans to vote for the 25 greatest characters in the series, and Snape once again came in at #1. In May 2011, Snape was again voted as the No. 1 favourite Harry Potter character in a public poll held by the Bloomsbury publishing house.\nIn popular culture.\nThe character of Severus Snape has appeared in various animated parodies of Harry Potter. He is a starring character in Neil Cicierega's online \"Potter Puppet Pals\" parodies, and has a centric episode titled \"Bothering Snape\". Also, the video \"The Mysterious Ticking Noise\" with the chorus \"Snape, Snape, Severus Snape\" was the winner for \"Best Comedy\" of the year 2007 at YouTube; it currently has over 170 million views. Snape is also parodied as Professor Santory Snapekin in Sluggy Freelance's recurring series \"Torg Potter\". In the first parody, Torg mistakenly thinks Professor Snapekin is plotting to achieve ultimate power.\nIn a 2004 sketch on \"Saturday Night Live\" in which Lindsay Lohan appears as Hermione Granger, Snape is portrayed by Will Forte. Snape has also been parodied in UK television. Comic Relief released a story called \"Harry Potter and the Secret Chamberpot of Azerbaijan\", in which Snape is played by Jeremy Irons. Snape appeared in a \"Harry Potter\" parody named \"Louis Potter and the Philosopher's Scone\" in Alistair McGowan's \"Big Impression\" show, played by Alistair McGowan himself. In the \"Harry Bladder\" sketches in \"All That\", Snape appears as Professor Chafe (portrayed by Jeremy Rowley), whose legs were badly chafed, causing him to be unnecessarily mean. Many sketches feature students brewing potions that did silly things, like enlarge students' behinds, give males large breasts, or change people into bras. In a sketch comedy named \"Cooking With...\" on Australian TV series \"The Wedge\", Snape is played by Anthony Ahern, and catches Harry and Hermione making love. In Team Starkid's \"A Very Potter Musical\", and its subsequent sequels \"A Very Potter Sequel\" and \"A Very Potter Senior Year\", Snape is played by actor Joe Moses.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44332", "revid": "49497497", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44332", "title": "Club (organization)", "text": "Association of people united by a common interest or goal\nA club is an association of people united by a common interest or goal. A service club, for example, exists for voluntary or charitable activities. There are clubs devoted to hobbies and sports, social activities clubs, political and religious clubs, and so forth.\nHistory.\nHistorically, clubs occurred in all ancient states of which exists detailed knowledge. Once people started living together in larger groups, there was need for people with a common interest to be able to associate despite having no ties of kinship. Organizations of the sort have existed for many years, as evidenced by Ancient Greek clubs and associations (\"collegia\") in Ancient Rome.\nOrigins of the word and concept.\nIt is uncertain whether the use of the word \"club\" originated in its meaning of a knot of people, or from the fact that the members \"clubbed\" together to pay the expenses of their gatherings. The oldest English clubs were merely informal periodic gatherings of friends for the purpose of dining or drinking with one another. Thomas Occleve (in the time of Henry IV) mentions such a club called \"La Court de Bonne Compagnie\" (the Court of Good Company), of which he was a member. In 1659 John Aubrey wrote, \"We now use the word clubbe for a sodality [a society, association, or fraternity of any kind] in a tavern.\"\nIn Shakespeare's day.\nOf early clubs the most famous, latterly, was the Bread Street or Friday Street Club that met at the Mermaid Tavern on the first Friday of each month. John Selden, John Donne, John Fletcher\nand Francis Beaumont were among the members (although it is often asserted that William Shakespeare and Sir Walter Raleigh were members of this club, there is no documented evidence to support this claim). Another such club, founded by Ben Jonson, met at the Devil Tavern near Temple Bar, also in London.\nCoffee houses.\nThe word \u201cclub,\u201d in the sense of an association to promote good-fellowship and social intercourse, became common in England at the time of \"Tatler\" and \"The Spectator\" (1709\u20131712). With the introduction of coffee-drinking in the middle of the 17th century, clubs entered on a more permanent phase. The coffee houses of the later Stuart period are the real originals of the modern clubhouse. The clubs of the late 17th and early 18th century type resembled their Tudor forerunners in being oftenest associations solely for conviviality or literary coteries. But many were confessedly political, e.g. The Rota, or Coffee Club (1659), a debating society for the spread of republican ideas, broken up at the Restoration in 1660, the Calves Head Club (c.1693) and the Green Ribbon Club (1675). The characteristics of all these clubs were:\nThese coffee-house clubs soon became hotbeds of political scandal-mongering and intriguing, and in 1675 King Charles II issued a proclamation which ran: \u201cHis Majesty hath thought fit and necessary that coffee houses be (for the future) put down and suppressed,\u201d because \u201cin such houses divers false, malicious and scandalous reports are devised and spread abroad to the Defamation of his Majesty\u2019s Government and to the Disturbance of Peace and Quiet of the Realm.\u201d So unpopular was this proclamation that it was almost instantly found necessary to withdraw it, and by Anne\u2019s reign the coffee-house club was a feature of England\u2019s social life. See English coffeehouses in the 17th and 18th centuries.\n18th and 19th century.\nThe idea of the club developed in two directions. One was of a permanent institution with a fixed clubhouse. The London coffeehouse clubs in increasing their members absorbed the whole accommodation of the coffeehouse or tavern where they held their meetings, and this became the clubhouse, often retaining the name of the original innkeeper, e.g. White's, Brooks's, Arthur's, and Boodle's. These still exist today as the famous gentlemen's clubs.\nThe peripatetic lifestyle of the 18th and 19th century middle classes also drove the development of more residential clubs, which had bedrooms and other facilities. Military and naval officers, lawyers, judges, members of Parliament and government officials tended to have an irregular presence in the major cities of the Empire, particularly London, spending perhaps a few months there before moving on for a prolonged period and then returning. Especially when this presence did not coincide with the Season, a permanent establishment in the city (i.e., a house owned or rented, with the requisite staff), or the opening of a townhouse (generally shuttered outside the Season) was inconvenient or uneconomic, while hotels were rare and socially \"d\u00e9class\u00e9\". Clubbing with a number of like-minded friends to secure a large shared house with a manager was therefore a convenient solution.\nThe other sort of club meets occasionally or periodically and often has no clubhouse, but exists primarily for some specific object. Such are the many purely athletic, sports and pastimes clubs, the Alpine, chess, yacht and motor clubs. Also there are literary clubs (see writing circle and book club), musical and art clubs, publishing clubs. The name of \u201cclub\u201d has been annexed by a large group of associations which fall between the club proper and friendly societies, of a purely periodic and temporary nature, such as slate, goose and Christmas clubs, which do not need to be registered under the Friendly Societies Act.\nWorldwide.\nThe institution of the gentleman's club has spread all over the English-speaking world. Many of those who energised the Scottish Enlightenment were members of the Poker Club in Edinburgh. In the United States clubs were first established after the War of Independence. One of the first was the Hoboken Turtle Club (1797), which still survived as of 1911. In former British Empire colonies like India and Pakistan they are known as Gymkhana.\nThe earliest clubs on the European continent were of a political nature. These in 1848 were repressed in Austria and Germany, and later clubs of Berlin and Vienna were mere replicas of their English prototypes. In France, where the term \"cercle\" is most usual, the Club de l'Entresol (1724-1731) was followed by the Club Politique (1782), and during the French Revolution such associations proved important political forces (see Jacobins, Feuillants, Cordeliers). Of the purely social clubs in Paris the most notable were the Jockey-Club de Paris (1833), the Cercle de l'Union, the Traveller's and the Cercle Interalli\u00e9.\nTypes of clubs.\nBuying club.\nBuyer's clubs or buying clubs are clubs organized to pool members' collective buying power, enabling them to make purchases at lower prices per individual item than are generally available, or purchase goods that might otherwise be difficult to obtain. There are many legitimate buying clubs \u2013 for example, food buying clubs \u2013 but many are unauthorized credit card billing scams, in which a customer is induced to enroll in a free trial of a buyer's club membership, and then unexpectedly billed when the trial ends.\nCountry or sports club.\nThere are two types of athletic and sports clubs: those organized for sporting participants (which include athletic clubs and country clubs), and those primarily for spectator fans of a team.\nAthletic and country clubs offer one or more recreational sports facilities to their members. Such clubs may also offer social activities and facilities, and some members may join primarily to take advantage of the social opportunities. Country clubs offer a variety of recreational sports facilities to their members and are usually located in suburban or rural areas. Most country clubs have golf facilities. Swimming pools, tennis courts, polo grounds and exercise facilities are also common. Country clubs usually provide dining facilities to their members and guests, and frequently host special events like weddings. Similar clubs in urban areas are often called \"athletic clubs\". These clubs often feature indoor sports, such as indoor tennis, squash, futsal, basketball, volleyball, boxing, and exercise facilities.\nMembers of sports clubs that support a team can be sports amateurs\u2014groups who meet to practice a sport, as for example in most cycling clubs\u2014or professionals; football clubs consist of well-paid team members and thousands of supporters. A sports club can thus comprise participants (not necessarily competitors) or spectator fans, or both.\nSome organizations exist with a mismatch between name and function. The Jockey Club is not a club for jockeys, but rather exists to regulate the sport of horseracing; the Marylebone Cricket Club was until recently the regulatory body of cricket; and so on. Sports club should not be confused with gyms and health clubs, which also can be for members only.\nFraternities and sororities.\nFraternities and sororities are social clubs of secondary or higher education students. Membership in these organizations is generally by invitation only.\nHobby club.\nHobbies are practiced for interest and enjoyment, rather than financial reward. Examples include science fiction clubs, ham radio, model railroading, collecting, creative and artistic pursuits, making, tinkering, sports, and adult education. Participants may form an organization to coordinate gatherings of hobbyists, provide services related to the activity (for example, a club of board game enthusiasts might have a library of games for members), or act as a buyers' club.\nProfessional societies.\nThese organizations are partly social, partly professional in nature and provide professionals with opportunities for advanced education, presentations on current research, business contacts, public advocacy for the profession and other advantages. Examples of these groups include medical associations, scientific societies, autograph club and bar associations. Professional societies frequently have layers of organization, with regional, national and international levels. The local chapters generally meet more often and often include advanced students unable to attend national meetings.\nSchool club.\nThese are activities performed by students that fall outside the realm of classes. Such clubs may fall outside the normal curriculum of school or university education or, as in the case of subject matter clubs (e.g. student chapters of professional societies), may supplement the curriculum through informal meetings and professional mentoring.\nSecret club.\nA secret society is a club or an organization whose activities, events, inner functioning, or membership are concealed. The society may or may not attempt to conceal its existence. The term usually excludes covert groups, such as intelligence agencies or guerrilla warfare insurgencies, that hide their activities and memberships but maintain a public presence.\nService club.\nA service club is a type of voluntary organization where members meet regularly for social outings and to perform charitable works either by direct hands-on efforts or by raising money for other organizations.\nSocial activities club.\nSocial activities clubs are a modern combination of several other types of clubs and reflect today's more eclectic and varied society. These clubs are centered around the activities available to the club members in the city or area in which the club is located. Because the purpose of these clubs is split between general social interaction and taking part in the events themselves, clubs tend to have more single members than married ones; some clubs restrict their membership to one of the other, and some are for gay and lesbian patrons.\nMembership can be limited or open to the general public, as can the events. Most clubs have a limited membership based upon specific criteria, and limit the events to members to increase the security of the members, thus creating an increased sense of camaraderie and belonging. Social activities clubs can be for profit or not for profit, and some are a mix of the two (a for-profit club with a non-profit charitable arm, for instance).\nSocial club.\nSome social clubs are organized around competitive games, such as chess or bridge. Other clubs are designed to encourage membership of certain social classes. In the 1940s, 1950s and 1960s social clubs were the precursor name of gangs like the infamous Hamburgs of Chicago. Latino immigrant adult and youth groups organized themselves as social clubs like: Black Eagles, Flaming Arrows, Paragons and Young Lords. Those made up of the elite are best known as gentlemen's clubs (not to be confused with strip clubs) and country clubs (though these also have an athletic function, see above). Membership to gentlemen's clubs require the ability to pay large fees as well as an invitation by existing members who seek new recruits who meet personal criteria such as lifestyle, moral base, etc. Less elitist, but still in some cases exclusive, are working men's clubs. Clubs restricted to either officers or enlisted men exist on military bases.\nThe modern Gentlemen's club is occasionally proprietary, i.e. owned by an individual or private syndicate and run on a for-profit basis, but more frequently owned by the members who delegate to a committee the management of its affairs, first reached its highest development in London, where the district of St. James's has long been known as \"Clubland\".\nCurrent London proprietary clubs include Soho House, which commenced business in 1995, and Soho's Groucho Club, which opened in 1985 as \"the antidote to the traditional club.\" In this spirit, the club was named for Groucho Marx because of his famous remark that he would not wish to join any club that would have him as a member.\nPolitical club.\nA political club is a group of people who share a political ideology, or supporters of a particular political party, of which it may function as a local element. For example, a Constituency Labour Party is an association of British Labour Party members who live in a given electoral district; the rival Conservatives instead have groups called Conservative Associations. Most Canadian political parties are likewise organized into riding associations.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "44333", "revid": "47195756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44333", "title": "Slytherin", "text": ""}
{"id": "44334", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44334", "title": "Draco Malfoy", "text": "Fictional character of the Harry Potter series\nDraco Lucius Malfoy is a fictional character and a major antagonist in J. K. Rowling's \"Harry Potter\" series. He is a student in Harry Potter's year belonging in the Slytherin house. He is frequently accompanied by his two cronies, Vincent Crabbe and Gregory Goyle, who act as henchmen. Draco is characterised as a cowardly bully who tricks and hurts people to get what he wants; he is also a cunning user of magic. He was played by Tom Felton in the \"Harry Potter\" film series, while Lox Pratt is set to portray him in the TV series adaptation.\nCharacter development.\nDraco serves as a foil to the hero, Harry Potter, and is loosely based on bullies Rowling encountered during her school days. Harry first encounters Draco's snobbish bigotry after their initial encounter at Madam Malkin's. Rowling uses the Malfoys to introduce themes of intolerance and bigotry into a setting where people are often judged solely by their blood lineage rather than their good character or accomplishments. Draco, adhering to his family's beliefs, thinks that Muggle-born witches and wizards, which he and other characters derogatorily describe by the epithet \"Mudbloods\", should be denied a magical education. Harry's first impression that the Wizarding community is a \"magical wonderland\" is instantly shattered. Says Rowling, \"[Harry] found out that many people in power in the wizarding world are just as corrupt and nasty as they are in our world.\"\nMalfoy was originally named \"Draco Spungen\" in the earliest drafts of \"Philosopher's Stone.\" \"Spungen\" also appeared on her pre-canon class list, but it was crossed out and replaced with the surname \"Spinks\", while \"Malfoy\" was later added after the completion of the list. Philip Nel believes that \"Malfoy\" is derived from the French phrase \"mal foi\", meaning \"bad faith\".\nIn an article published in 2002, Nilsen and Nilsen argue that \"Draco\" has connotations with \"draconian\", and that his name starts with \"mal\", a French prefix for \"bad\" or \"evil\".\nMany of Draco's relatives on his mother's side of the family (the Blacks) are named for stars or constellations (e.g., Sirius Black, Regulus Black, Andromeda Black Tonks, Bellatrix Black Lestrange, Cygnus Black, Orion Black). Another constellation is Draco (the Dragon). Draco Malfoy eventually named his son for yet another constellation, Scorpius.\nAppearances.\n\"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\".\nDraco Malfoy makes his first appearance in the series when he and Harry meet while being fitted for school robes at Madam Malkin's, a clothing shop in Diagon Alley. Not realising that the boy in the store is Harry Potter\u2014a child whose parents were murdered when he was one year old by the powerful dark wizard Lord Voldemort\u2014Draco engages him in polite (relative to his later attitude towards Harry) conversation. Harry, however, is alienated by the arrogance of Draco, who asks whether the orphan's parents are \"our kind\" (pure-blood wizards). Draco then proclaims that \"the other sort\" (Muggle-borns) should not be allowed at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, because \"they've never been brought up to know our ways\". The two boys part without introductions, but meet again on the Hogwarts Express. After Draco ridicules Ron Weasley's family, Harry rejects his offer of friendship, demonstrated by a handshake, and their mutual antagonism is born.\nAccording to Rowling, Malfoy originally makes an effort to be Harry's friend because \"it will be cool to turn up at the school being Harry Potter's friend, because Harry is so famous.\" However, Harry did not want Malfoy as a friend because he \"has been so rude about Rubeus Hagrid and about Ron, who Harry likes so much\".\nAt the first years' Sorting Ceremony, the Sorting Hat places him instantly into Slytherin, the house that has developed all of the bad wizards, where he becomes an instant favourite of Potions teacher and Slytherin Head of House, Severus Snape, an apparent follower of Lord Voldemort. Draco attempts to get Harry expelled by falsely challenging him to a midnight duel and informing Argus Filch in advance of Harry's plans to be out of bed; Draco's attempt fails when Harry evades Filch and safely makes it back to his dormitory.\n\"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\".\nIn \"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\", Draco becomes the new Seeker for the Slytherin Quidditch team after his father, Lucius Malfoy, donates new, high-quality Nimbus 2001 broomsticks. When Hermione Granger comments that the Gryffindor players made the team through talent and not bribery, Draco responds by calling her a \"Mudblood\", a derogatory term for people of mixed magical and human ancestry. This provokes an immediate, violent response from Ron. Because of Draco's contempt for Muggle-borns, Harry, Ron, and Hermione suspect that Draco is the Heir of Slytherin, who has recently reopened the Chamber of Secrets. Harry and Ron disguise themselves as Crabbe and Goyle with Polyjuice Potion and infiltrate the Slytherin common room in an attempt to collect additional information, whereupon they realise that their initial suspicion about Draco is incorrect.\n\"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\".\nDuring Hagrid's debut as Care of Magical Creatures instructor in \"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\", Buckbeak the hippogriff attacks Draco after he fails to observe proper protocol while approaching it and insults it. He exaggerates the extent of his injury, giving Slytherin a chance to postpone their Quidditch match against Gryffindor until later in the year and as an attempt to have Hagrid fired. Hermione punches Draco when he mocks Hagrid for crying over Buckbeak's death sentence. Draco, who implies that he is aware of how Sirius Black was supposedly involved in the deaths of Harry's parents, also taunts Harry about the impending threat of Black: \"If it was me, I'd want revenge. I'd hunt him down myself.\"\n\"Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire\".\nAfter Harry is unexpectedly chosen as a Triwizard Tournament champion in \"Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire\", Draco shows off a \"Support Cedric Diggory\" badge to Harry, then presses it to replace the phrase with \"Potter Stinks.\" Draco also gives malicious and often false information about Harry and Hagrid to muckraking \"Daily Prophet\" journalist Rita Skeeter. When Draco attempts to curse Harry behind his back, the Defence Against the Dark Arts professor Alastor Moody (actually Barty Crouch, Jr in disguise via Polyjuice Potion) humiliates Draco by transforming him into a ferret and repeatedly slamming him against the ground as well as dropping him down Goyle's pants.\n\"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\".\nIn \"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\", Draco is named a Slytherin prefect along with Pansy Parkinson. He gets Harry and the Weasley twins banned from the Gryffindor Quidditch team when they attack him during a postmatch brawl after Draco insults their families following Gryffindor's win over Slytherin. He later joins Dolores Umbridge's Inquisitorial Squad, with whom he plays an important part in the exposure of Dumbledore's Army. As the D.A. flees the Room of Requirement, Draco earns Slytherin fifty points after catching Harry, and helps hold several members captive in Umbridge's office, letting them free only after Ginny Weasley performs her famous Bat Bogey Hex. After his father and other Death Eaters are captured and sentenced to Azkaban following the events at the Department of Mysteries, Draco twice attempts to get revenge on Harry, but Snape and Minerva McGonagall thwart his first effort, and while returning home on the Hogwarts Express, Draco, Crabbe, and Goyle are transformed into giant slugs by a barrage of hexes cast by several D.A. members coming to Harry's defence.\n\"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\".\nDraco is drawn into Death-Eaters' activities more directly in \"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\". Because of Lucius' arrest and fall from Voldemort's favour, Narcissa Malfoy and Bellatrix Lestrange visit Snape at his home to discuss a dangerous task that Voldemort has assigned Draco. Narcissa, deeply worried that her son will be killed in his attempt to complete it, begs Snape to make an Unbreakable Vow to aid Draco with this task and protect him at all costs, and if Draco fails to complete the mission, he will complete it himself; he agrees.\nUnder the Invisibility Cloak, Harry, Ron, and Hermione follow Draco to Borgin and Burkes, a dark magic shop in Knockturn Alley. Draco threatens Mr. Borgin about repairing one item and keeping another safe for him. Draco shows Mr. Borgin something on his arm that Harry believes to be the Dark Mark, Voldemort's sign, though whether or not Harry is correct is never confirmed. (In the film version Draco Malfoy shows Dumbledore the Dark Mark on his arm.) On the Hogwarts Express, Harry invisibly spies on Draco and overhears him discussing Voldemort's task with several other Slytherins. Draco knows Harry is present and, once alone in the compartment, immobilises him and breaks his nose causing Harry to hate Draco even more. Harry is left stranded on the train until Nymphadora Tonks (Luna Lovegood in the film adaptation) rescues him. Harry spends much of the year trailing Draco's whereabouts on his Marauder's Map, but loses track of him once Draco enters the Room of Requirement. When Katie Bell is almost killed in Hogsmeade after handling a cursed necklace and Ron nearly dies by drinking poisoned mead, Harry suspects Draco is behind both attacks.\nIn this book, Draco is, for the first time since being introduced in the series, portrayed as having considerable initiative, ingenuity, and perseverance. However, unlike Harry, who always relies on his friends' support and help, Draco mostly works alone in the Room of Requirement, refusing to confide in or involve his own circle of friends, whom he treats more as underlings. This, and the realisation of what he is ultimately expected to do, nearly drives him to a nervous breakdown. When Harry walks in on Malfoy crying in Moaning Myrtle's bathroom, Draco attempts to cast the Cruciatus Curse. Harry is faster to the draw with an obscure \"Sectumsempra\" spell that he learned from the mysterious Half-Blood Prince's book. The spell cuts deep gashes into Malfoy's face and chest, resulting in severe blood loss. Snape, alerted by Myrtle's screams, swiftly arrives and heals Draco's cuts, then takes him to the hospital wing.\nNear the conclusion, Draco ambushes and disarms a gravely weakened Dumbledore at the Astronomy Tower. After Draco disarms him, Dumbledore calmly reasons with the frightened teenager and persuades him to reveal how he was, according to Voldemort's orders, to kill the headmaster through the cursed necklace and the poisoned mead. Malfoy reveals that he mended the broken Vanishing Cabinet in the Room of Requirement to act as a portal enabling Death Eaters to enter Hogwarts. Draco is hesitant to kill Dumbledore and he eventually lowers his wand. Snape arrives, dispatches Dumbledore himself and then flees Hogwarts with Draco in tow. As revealed during his confrontation with Dumbledore, Draco was an insecure boy incapable of committing cold-blooded murder and was forced to do Voldemort's bidding under the threat of his and his parents' deaths. Harry, who was horrified by the result of his duel with Draco in the bathroom incident, feels \"the tiniest drop of pity mingled with his dislike\" for his old rival.\nDuring an interview in 2005, Rowling revealed that she enjoyed writing Draco in this book, and that the character \"did a lot of growing up\" as well.\n\"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\".\nThe Malfoys remain reluctant followers of Voldemort, who now uses their home as his headquarters; Draco passes out after witnessing Voldemort murder Muggle Studies professor Charity Burbage. Harry experiences occasional and disturbing visions of Draco being forced into performing Voldemort's bidding and feels \"sickened... by the use to which Draco was now being put by Voldemort.\" When Harry, Ron, and Hermione are captured and taken to Malfoy Manor, Draco is asked to identify them, and though they are clearly recognisable, he only ambiguously replies \"It might be.\" During the successful escape from Malfoy Manor headed by Dobby, Harry overpowers Draco and captures his wand.\nWhen Harry, Ron, and Hermione seek Ravenclaw's diadem in the Room of Requirement, Draco, along with Crabbe and Goyle (Blaise Zabini in film version rather than Crabbe), attempts to capture Harry alive. However, Crabbe (Goyle in film version) defies Draco's orders and attempts to kill the trio by casting the deadly Fiendfyre; unable to control the spell, he dies in the blaze while the trio rescue Draco and Goyle (Zabini in film version). Draco, despite his often condescending and belittling attitude toward Crabbe and Goyle (as well as his other underlings), grieves for his lost friend. During the Battle of Hogwarts, Draco is seen pleading with a Death Eater who seems intent on killing him. He is once again saved by Harry and Ron, the latter of whom punches Draco in the face under the invisibility cloak for attempting to appease the Death Eater.\nAt about this time, it is revealed through the Pensieve that Dumbledore had known he was dying after being cursed by Voldemort's ring. However, to spare Draco's soul from being forever tainted by committing murder, Dumbledore pre-arranged his own death with Snape. Voldemort intended Draco to die in the attempt to kill Dumbledore so that Lucius would be punished for his failure to retrieve the prophecy from the Ministry of Magic.\nAfter Harry is struck by the \"Avada Kedavra\" curse, Voldemort orders Narcissa to verify that Harry is actually dead. She detects his heartbeat, but she lies to Voldemort, knowing that she will be allowed to search for her son if the Death Eaters return to Hogwarts \"as part of the conquering army.\" Although Draco does not directly take part in Harry's final confrontation with Voldemort, as he and his parents flee the battle for their personal safety, he influences its outcome; a plot twist reveals that Draco had unwittingly become the Elder Wand's master when he disarmed Dumbledore, even though Draco never actually possessed the wand. The wand's allegiance passes to whoever defeats its owner, so Harry, having taken Draco's wand at Malfoy Manor, became its new master; this prevents Voldemort from using its full power. In the end, it is Narcissa's lie to Voldemort concerning Harry's death that enables the Malfoys to narrowly avoid imprisonment in Azkaban.\nEpilogue.\nIn the epilogue, Draco marries Astoria Greengrass and has a son, Scorpius Malfoy. Draco's hairline has receded, making his face look even more pointed. Though they are not friends, Malfoy has somewhat decreased his animosity toward Harry, and, upon seeing them at King's Cross station, gives a brief and curt nod to Harry, Ron, Hermione and Ginny.\nAppearance in other material.\nIn the play \"Harry Potter and the Cursed Child\", Draco appears with his son Scorpius Hyperion Malfoy, who became best friends with Harry's second son Albus Severus Potter. It was revealed that during the fourth year of Scorpius's time in Hogwarts that Draco became widowed, as his wife Astoria Malfoy (n\u00e9e Greengrass) died due to an inherited blood curse, which could shorten her lifespan and disallow her from growing into old age.\nThe play also explores some of Draco's later life after the second wizarding war and prior to the events of the play. Due to his harrowing experiences during his time with the Death Eaters and his remorse over his crimes as a Death Eater, Draco had realised the error in his ways and thus abandoned the old pure-blood beliefs he was raised to believe in. This notably caused friction between him and his parents (who maintained these beliefs despite having defected from Voldemort). As he grew into adulthood, Draco fell in love with fellow Slytherin Astoria Greengrass, who also witnessed the carnage and horrors which the war and the old beliefs brought about (though lesser than Draco). This romance and eventual marriage would disappoint Draco's parents further given that they expected a more suitable candidate from one of the wizarding world's oldest pure-blood families and also an individual who had the embodiment of the old pure-blood beliefs. Despite having lost the favour of his parents, he still inherits the massive fortune of the Malfoy family, which made him independently wealthy and having no need to work. The inheritance also included his father's collection of Dark Arts artefacts.\nAfter he married, Draco initially contemplated letting the Malfoy bloodline end with him to allow Astoria to live longer (much to Lucius's disappointment), as he was aware of Astoria's family blood curse and that childbirth would weaken her further. Astoria, however, dissuaded him from doing so as she wanted a child not for the pure-blood beliefs, but for him so that he will not be alone should she die some day, which culminated in the birth of Draco's first and only child Scorpius. Draco had once considered the birth of his son as the greatest day of his life, even though Scorpius's birth had further weakened Astoria's health and eventually caused her to die fourteen years later.\nDraco was strict in Scorpius's upbringing and taught him to not believe in the old pure-blood beliefs and instead raised him to become a better child than Draco was in his own childhood, and was willing to allow his son to be punished for breaking school rules. He was also supportive of Scorpius's decision to befriend Harry's son Albus Severus, even though he and Harry had a history of animosity during their schooling years. Draco even trusted Albus to help Scorpius to heal him of his pain over losing his mother, and he valued his son's friendship to the point that he personally went to the Potter house to confront Harry, who tried to separate the two best friends. Despite having become more civil with his old enemies from the past, Draco remained apathetic and full of mockery towards them, including how he continued to mock Harry and his friends and sending a cold reply letter to Ginny's request to invite Scorpius to stay in the Potter house. These feelings only began to dissipate gradually as they became united by their common interest to save their sons. He was also revealed to be constantly envious of how Harry had true friends like Ron and Hermione (the latter whom became Minister of Magic) during his schooling years while he had only Crabbe and Goyle, who did not amount to being true friends for Draco.\nDuring the events of the play, Draco slowly made amends with Harry and his friends as they all embarked on a journey to save their sons from Voldemort's daughter Delphini, demonstrating his slow, but gradual acknowledgement of Harry as a friend and his outright denouncement of his Death Eater past.\nPortrayal.\nFilm portrayal.\nTom Felton played Draco Malfoy in all of the \"Harry Potter\" films. Prior to landing the part of Malfoy, Felton auditioned to play Harry and Ron.\nFelton contributed to premieres, articles and interviews, and received the Disney Channel's Kids Awards for Best DVD \"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\" on 22 September 2003 with Hermione Granger actress, Emma Watson. He also won the MTV Movie Award for Best Villain for his portrayal as Malfoy in the 2010 MTV Movie Awards and the 2011 MTV Movie Awards.\nMalfoy grew into one of the series' most popular characters due to Felton's performances and Felton quickly became synonymous with the character to many female fans, much to Rowling's dismay. \"I'm trying to clearly distinguish between Tom Felton, who is a good-looking young boy, and Draco, who, whatever he looks like, is not a nice man. It's a romantic, but unhealthy, and unfortunately all too common delusion of girls ... it actually worried me a little bit, to see young girls swearing undying devotion to this really imperfect character ... I mean, I understand the psychology of it, but it is pretty unhealthy.\" Rowling has also noted that Malfoy \"is certainly stylish in the film.\"\nTheatre portrayal.\nIn the theatre play \"Harry Potter and the Cursed Child\" Draco was portrayed by Alex Price and later by James Howard. Beginning in 2025, Tom Felton began playing the role, reprising it from the film series. In the theatre play Draco has a style like his father's, such as his long hair. Draco was married to Astoria Greengrass, who had died, and has a son named Scorpius.\nCharacterisation.\nOutward appearance.\nDraco is described as a tall, slender boy with a pale, pointed face, sleek blond hair, and ice grey eyes.\nPersonality.\nDraco is the prototypical spoiled, rich brat; he believes that his family's wealth and social position gives him the right to bully those poorer than himself, such as Ron Weasley. He also insults Hermione Granger's Muggle-born status by referring to her as a \"Mudblood\", a term that, as stated by Hagrid, is one not used in civilised conversations. As Rowling explained in 1999, \"He's a bigot and he's a bully, and as I say, in the most refined sense, he knows exactly what will hurt people\".\nIn a July 2005 interview, Rowling added that Draco, unlike Harry, never feels remorse for his actions: \"I thought of Draco as someone who is very capable of compartmentalising his life and his emotions, and always has done. So he's shut down his pity, enabling him to bully effectively. He's shut down compassion\u2014 how else would you become a Death Eater?\"\nDraco, as well as Dudley Dursley, was indoctrinated with his parents' beliefs. Rowling commented that \"The moment Draco got what he thought he wanted, to become a Death Eater, and given a mission by Lord Voldemort, as he did in \"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\", reality finally hit him\" because his dream was \"so very different\". Rowling also stated that there was a real moral cowardice in Draco, but that he was not wholly bad.\nHaving gone through the horrors of the second wizarding war as a Death Eater, Draco abandoned the pure-blood beliefs he was originally devoted to, and grew to become a better person than he was in his youth, growing more tolerant and accepting of the non-pure-bloods of the wizarding world. He also made sure to discipline his son Scorpius to be a better child than he himself was in his youth, which made Scorpius to show kindness and become friends with Harry's son Albus Severus, as evidence of his reformation.\nMagical abilities and skills.\nDuring the series, Draco is portrayed as a cunning, competent young wizard. In his second year, he successfully performed the \"Tarantallegra\" curse against Harry, a curse used by Death Eater Antonin Dolohov in book 5, and also successfully cast the Serpensortia spell in the same scene, conjuring a serpent from his wand just as Voldemort would later do against Dumbledore in book 5, and Snape against McGonagall in the final book. His character further develops in the sixth book, in which he is among very few students able to reach the required level to take Advanced Potions. Draco also proved capable at Occlumency, which he learned from his Aunt Bellatrix. Rowling recalled a discussion with her editor about Draco having mastered Occlumency while Harry could not. The author said that this is due to Draco being someone \"very capable of compartmentalising his life and his emotions\". Draco's wand is 10\u00a0inches precisely, made of hawthorn with a unicorn hair core, and which Ollivander states is \"reasonably springy\".\nWhen asked what shape Draco's Patronus Charm is, Rowling replied that, at least by the end of the sixth book, Draco was not capable of producing a Patronus, as it is not magic routinely taught at Hogwarts.\nFamily.\nThe Malfoy family is one of the few remaining pure-blood wizarding clans in the \"Harry Potter\" series, and among the wealthiest. The anti-Muggle editor Brutus Malfoy is their ancestor. Lucius Malfoy was a Death Eater during both wizard wars. He marries Narcissa Black and together they have one son, Draco, who is the first Malfoy family member introduced in the series. The Malfoys are related to the Black family through Narcissa (a first cousin of Sirius Black, Harry's godfather), which makes Draco a nephew of both Bellatrix Lestrange and Andromeda Tonks. Draco is also Nymphadora Tonks' first cousin through their mothers. Three of Draco's grandparents are identified: Abraxas Malfoy, Cygnus Black, and Druella Rosier. Abraxas died before the series begins and was a friend of Professor Slughorn. Draco is, therefore, the scion of two old magical families. The Malfoy home, Malfoy Manor, is an elegant mansion located in the western English county of Wiltshire. They were served by Dobby the house elf until the end of \"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\".\nThe Malfoys are a wealthy landed gentry family respected in the Wizarding world mainly from Lucius' influence with Hogwarts and the Ministry of Magic, gained mostly from his monetary donations to the Ministry and St Mungo's Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries, as well as from his post on the Hogwarts board of governors as chairman. However, he was removed from his position at the conclusion of the second book and imprisoned in Azkaban following the battle at the Department of Mysteries in \"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\". Despite maintaining a respectable, but false, image before these events, some in the Wizarding world were previously aware that the Malfoys were devoted to Voldemort and the Dark Arts. Draco constantly uses his elite status and his father's name and influence to gain advantages and to threaten others. Lucius is also known to have used bribery and threats.\nReception.\nIn an interview at the Royal Albert Hall, Rowling noted that boys liked to dress up as Malfoy a lot more than Harry, and that people are \"getting far too fond of Draco\", which she finds \"a little bit worrying\". In the same interview, Stephen Fry noted that just as Harry met Malfoy, he found out that there is also racism in the wizarding world and that many characters in power can be \"as nasty and corrupt as in our world\". Fry also noted that while \"Malfoy, Goyle and Crabbe are almost irredeemably bad\", Malfoy, unlike his companions, \"is reasonably stylish\". IGN listed Malfoy as their ninth top \"Harry Potter\" character.\nIn popular culture.\nWizard-rock band Draco and the Malfoys' lyrics are inspired by the \"Harry Potter\" books but from Draco Malfoy's point of view. As well as Harry and the Potters, the members of Draco and the Malfoys dress themselves as Hogwarts students, in this case in Slytherin-themed costumes. The band is one of about 750 bands of young musicians playing music inspired by the \"Harry Potter\" series.\nDraco is parodied as Jerko Phoenix in the series \"Wizards of Waverly Place\", during the episodes \"Wizard School Part 1\" and \"Wizard School Part 2\", in which Alex and Justin Russo go to a wizarding school named Wiz-tech, where everyone wears yellow and black robes, and glasses reminiscent of Harry Potter. Draco also appears as Sacco (played by Shane Lyons) in the \"Harry Bladder\" sketches in \"All That\", in which Harry Bladder and other students often encounter Sacco's mischief-making. In the stage production \"Harry Potter and the Obnoxious Voice\", Malfoy is seen interacting with Hagrid and a dementor. Draco was also parodied in a Big Bite sketch, where he was known as Mailboy (with his father Lucius being parodied as Mailman). In Neil Cicierega's \"Potter Puppet Pals\", Draco stars in the episode \"Draco Puppet\". He is different from all the other characters, simplistically made out of paper and is a smaller puppet, held and voiced by the Harry puppet. Harry created him in order to torture him, and after the puppet \"annoys\" Harry, he does a series of strange things to the paper Draco and eventually burns it on a stove. In \"A Very Potter Musical\" Draco is played by actress Lauren Lopez. He has a very obvious crush on Hermione and spends a great deal of time posing and rolling around on the floor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44335", "revid": "4977632", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44335", "title": "Kali Devi", "text": ""}
{"id": "44336", "revid": "4995598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44336", "title": "PH value", "text": ""}
{"id": "44337", "revid": "1053126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44337", "title": "Beggar-my-neighbour", "text": "Card game\nBeggar-my-neighbour, also known as strip jack naked, beat your neighbour out of doors, or beat jack out of doors, or beat your neighbour, is a simple choice-free card game. It is somewhat similar in nature to the children's card game War, and has spawned a more complicated variant, Egyptian Ratscrew.\nOrigins.\nThe game was likely invented in Great Britain and has been known there since at least the 1840s.\nIt may be the same as beat the knave out of doors or knave out o' doors, in which case it is much older as this game is mentioned as early as 1755.\nBeggar-my-neighbor appears as a children's game in 19th-century British novels such as Charles Dickens's \"Great Expectations\" (1861).\nPlay.\nA standard 52-card deck is shuffled and then divided equally between two players, and the two stacks of cards are placed on the table face down. The first player lays down their top card face up to start a central pile, and the opponent plays their top card, also face up, on it, and this goes on alternately as long as no Ace or court card (King, Queen, or Jack) appears. These cards are called \"penalty cards\".\nIf either player turns up such a card, their opponent has to pay a penalty: four cards for an Ace, three for a King, two for a Queen, or one for a Jack. They do this playing the required number of cards to the central pile. When they have done so, if all the cards are numerals, the player of the penalty card wins the hand, takes all the cards in the pile and places them under their pack. The game continues in the same fashion, the winner having the advantage of placing the first card. However, if the second player turns up another Ace or court card in the course of paying to the original penalty card, their payment ceases and the first player must pay to this new card. This changing of penalisation can continue for some time. When a single player has all of the cards in the deck in their stack, they have won.\nFor more than two players, play proceeds clockwise. If a player reveals a new penalty card while paying their penalty, the next player around pays the tax.\nGame theory.\nThere are 653,534,134,886,878,245,000 (approximately 654 quintillion) possible initial states for a game of beggar-my-neighbour. , the longest game known that does terminate is 1164 tricks long, where the cards of the deck are played a total of 8344 times. It was found by Reed Nessler.\nWhether there is a game of beggar-my-neighbour that goes on forever was a longstanding question in combinatorial game theory. Some smaller decks of cards have infinite games, such as Camicia, while others do not. John Conway once listed this among his anti-Hilbert problems, open questions whose pursuit should emphatically \"not\" drive the future of mathematical research.\nFor a two-player game, a starting distribution of cards that leads to an infinite game was first found by Brayden Casella and reported on 10 February 2024. The cyclic game begins and . This happens because the game is eventually periodic\u2014that is, it eventually reaches some state it has been in before.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the 1854 novel \"Hide and Seek\" by Wilkie Collins, Zach Thorpe and Matthew Grice kill time by playing beggar-my-neighbor \"for sixpence a time.\"\nIn Charles Dickens' 1861 novel \"Great Expectations\", the game is the only one known by the boy protagonist (Pip) as a child.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44338", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44338", "title": "Begonia", "text": "Genus of perennial flowering plants\nBegonia is a genus of perennial flowering plants in the family Begoniaceae. The genus contains more than 2,000 different plant species. The Begonias are native to moist subtropical and tropical climates. Some species are commonly grown indoors as ornamental houseplants in cooler climates. In cooler climates some species are cultivated outside in summertime for their bright colorful flowers, which have petals but no sepals.\nDescription.\nWith 2,002 species, \"Begonia\" is one of the largest genera of flowering plants. The species are terrestrial (sometimes epiphytic) herbs or undershrubs, and occur in subtropical and tropical moist climates, in South and Central America, Africa, and southern Asia. Terrestrial species in the wild are commonly upright-stemmed, rhizomatous, or tuberous. The plants are monoecious, with unisexual male and female flowers occurring separately on the same plant; the male contains numerous stamens, and the female has a large inferior ovary and two to four branched or twisted stigmas. In most species, the fruit is a winged capsule containing numerous minute seeds, although baccate fruits are also known. The leaves, which are often large and variously marked or variegated, are usually asymmetric such that their left side and right side are different sizes. The plants vary in size from less than a foot to the recently discovered \"Begonia giganticaulis\" which can exceed twelve feet (3.6 meters) in height.\nTaxonomy.\nThe genus name \"Begonia\" was coined by Charles Plumier, a French patron of botany, and adopted by Linnaeus in 1753, to honor Michel B\u00e9gon, a former governor of the French colony of Saint-Domingue (now Haiti).\nPhylogeny.\nThe following phylogenetic tree shows the relationships among sections of the genus \"Begonia\".\nSpecies.\nSelected species:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCultivation.\nThe different groups of begonias have different care requirements, but most species come from tropical regions, so they and their hybrids require warm temperatures. Most are forest understory plants and require bright shade; few will tolerate full sun, especially in warmer climates. In general, begonias require a well-drained growing medium that is neither constantly wet nor allowed to dry out completely. Many begonias will grow and flower year-round except for tuberous begonias, which usually have a dormant period. During this dormant period, the tubers can be stored in a cool, dry place. Begonias of the semperflorens group (or wax begonias) are frequently grown as bedding plants outdoors. Wax begonias are very attractive, they adapt well when brought inside the house for overwintering and can live up to 4-5 years.\nA recent group of hybrids derived from this group is marketed as \"Dragonwing\" begonias; they are much larger both in leaf and in flower. Tuberous begonias are frequently used as container plants. Although most \"Begonia\" species are tropical or subtropical in origin, the Chinese species \"B. grandis\" is hardy to USDA hardiness zone 6 and is commonly known as the \"hardy begonia\". Most begonias can be grown outdoors year-round in subtropical or tropical climates, but in temperate climates, begonias are grown outdoors as annuals, or as house or greenhouse plants.\nMost begonias are easily propagated by division or from stem cuttings. In addition, some can be propagated from leaf cuttings or even sections of leaves, particularly the members of the rhizomatous and rex groups.\nHorticultural nomenclature.\nThe nomenclature of begonias can be very complex and confusing. The term 'picotee' refers to edging on the petals that is in contrast to the color of the main petal if the colors blend. If they do not, then the term 'marginata' is used, but sometimes these terms are used simultaneously. 'Non-Stop' refers to a camellia tuberous hybrid that under certain conditions will bloom 'non-stop' all year round.\nCultivar groups.\nBecause of their sometimes showy flowers of white, pink, scarlet, or yellow color and often attractively marked leaves, many species and innumerable hybrids and cultivars are cultivated. The genus is unusual in that species throughout the genus, even those coming from different continents, can frequently be hybridized with each other, and this has led to an enormous number of cultivars. The American Begonia Society is the International Cultivar Registration Authority for \"Begonia\", and classifies them into several major groups:\nFor the most part, these groups do not correspond to any formal taxonomic groupings or phylogeny, and many species and hybrids have characteristics of more than one group or do not fit well in any of them.\nAGM plants.\nThe following is a selection from about 70 species, varieties and cultivars which currently hold the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \nCulture.\nThe cultivar 'Kimjongilia' is a floral emblem of North Korea.\nMost begonias are sour to the taste, and some people in some areas eat them. This is safe in small amounts but potentially toxic in large quantities due to the prevalence of oxalic acid in the tissues.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44339", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44339", "title": "Beggar", "text": ""}
{"id": "44340", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44340", "title": "Steven Pinker", "text": "Canadian-American psycholinguist (born 1954)\nSteven Arthur Pinker (born September 18, 1954) is a Canadian cognitive psychologist, psycholinguist, popular science author, and public intellectual. He is an advocate of evolutionary psychology and the computational theory of mind. Pinker is the Johnstone Family Professor of Psychology at Harvard University.\nSteven Pinker specializes in visual cognition and developmental linguistics, as well as a number of experimental topics. Pinker has written two technical books that proposed a general theory of language acquisition. In particular, his work with Alan Prince posited that children use default rules sometimes in error but are obliged to learn irregular forms one by one. Pinker is the author of nine books for general audiences. \"The Language Instinct\" (1994), \"How the Mind Works\" (1997), \"Words and Rules\" (2000), \"The Blank Slate\" (2002), and \"The Stuff of Thought\" (2007) posit that language is an innate behavior shaped by natural selection and adapted to our communication needs. Pinker's \"The Sense of Style\" (2014) is a general language-oriented style guide. Pinker's book \"The Better Angels of Our Nature\" (2010) posits that violence in human societies has generally declined over time, and identifies six major trends and five historical forces of this decline. \"Enlightenment Now\" (2018) further argues that the human condition has generally improved over recent history because of reason, science, and humanism. The nature and importance of reason is also discussed in his book \"Rationality: What It Is, Why It Seems Scarce, Why It Matters\" (2021).\nIn 2004, Pinker was named in \"Time\"'s \"The 100 Most Influential People in the World Today\", and in 2005, 2008, 2010, and 2011 in \"Foreign Policy\"'s list of \"Top 100 Global Thinkers\". He was also included in \"Prospect Magazine's\" top 10 \"World Thinkers\" in 2013. He has won awards from the American Psychological Association, the National Academy of Sciences, the Royal Institution, the Cognitive Neuroscience Society, and the American Humanist Association. He has served on the editorial boards of a variety of journals and on the advisory boards of several institutions. Pinker was also the chair of the Usage Panel of the \"American Heritage Dictionary\" from 2008 to 2018.\nBiography.\nPinker was born on September 18, 1954, Montreal, Quebec, to an upper-middle class secular Jewish family in an English-speaking community. He adopted atheism at 13 and at various times has identified as a \"cultural Jew\".\nHis grandparents had immigrated to Canada from Poland and Romania in 1926, and owned a small necktie factory in Montreal. His father, Harry, worked in real estate and was a lawyer. His mother, Roslyn, was originally a homemaker but later became a guidance counsellor and a high-school vice-principal. In an interview, Pinker described his mother as \"very intellectual\" and \"an intense reader [who] knows everything\".\nHis brother, Robert, worked for the Canadian government for several decades as an administrator and a policy analyst, while his sister, Susan Pinker, is a psychologist and writer who authored \"The Sexual Paradox\" and \"The Village Effect\". Susan is also a columnist for \"The Wall Street Journal\".\nPinker graduated from Dawson College in 1971 with a Diploma of College Studies. He graduated from McGill University in 1976 with a Bachelor of Arts in psychology, then did doctoral studies in experimental psychology at Harvard University under Stephen Kosslyn, receiving a PhD in 1979. He did research at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) for a year, then became a professor at Harvard and later, Stanford University.\nFrom 1982 until 2003, Pinker taught at the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences at MIT, was the co-director of the Center for Cognitive Science (1985\u20131994), and eventually became the director of the Center for Cognitive Neuroscience (1994\u20131999), taking a one-year sabbatical at the University of California, Santa Barbara, in 1995\u201396.\nSince 2003, he has served as the Johnstone Family Professor of Psychology at Harvard, and between 2008 and 2013 he also held the title of Harvard College Professor in recognition of his dedication to teaching. In the early 2010s, he gave lectures as a visiting professor at the New College of the Humanities, a private college in London.\nPinker married Nancy Etcoff in 1980 and they divorced in 1992; he married again in 1995 and they divorced. His third wife, whom he married in 2007, is the novelist and philosopher Rebecca Goldstein. He has two stepdaughters, the novelist Yael Goldstein Love and the poet Danielle Blau.\nPinker is an avid cyclist.\nLinguistic career.\nPinker's research on visual cognition, begun in collaboration with his thesis adviser, Stephen Kosslyn, showed that mental images represent scenes and objects as they appear from a specific vantage point (rather than capturing their intrinsic three-dimensional structure), and thus correspond to the neuroscientist David Marr's theory of a \"two-and-a-half-dimensional sketch.\" He also showed that this level of representation is used in visual attention, and in object recognition (at least for asymmetrical shapes), contrary to Marr's theory that recognition uses viewpoint-independent representations.\nIn psycholinguistics, Pinker became known early in his career for promoting computational learning theory as a way to understand language acquisition in children. He wrote a tutorial review of the field followed by two books that advanced his own theory of language acquisition, and a series of experiments on how children acquire the passive, dative, and locative constructions. These books were \"Language Learnability and Language Development\" (1984), in Pinker's words \"outlin[ing] a theory of how children acquire the words and grammatical structures of their mother tongue\", and \"Learnability and Cognition: The Acquisition of Argument Structure\" (1989), in Pinker's words \"focus[ing] on one aspect of this process, the ability to use different kinds of verbs in appropriate sentences, such as intransitive verbs, transitive verbs, and verbs taking different combinations of complements and indirect objects\". He then focused on verbs of two kinds that illustrate what he considers to be the processes required for human language: retrieving whole words from memory, like the past form of the irregular verb \"bring\", namely \"brought\"; and using rules to combine (parts of) words, like the past form of the regular verb \"walk\", namely \"walked\".\nIn 1988 Pinker and Alan Prince published a critique of a connectionist model of the acquisition of the past tense (a textbook problem in language acquisition), followed by a series of studies of how people use and acquire the past tense. This included a monograph on children's regularization of irregular forms and his popular 1999 book, \"Words and Rules: The Ingredients of Language\". Pinker argued that language depends on two things: the associative remembering of sounds and their meanings in words, and the use of rules to manipulate symbols for grammar. He presented evidence against connectionism, where a child would have to learn all forms of all words and would simply retrieve each needed form from memory, in favour of the older alternative theory, the use of words and rules combined by generative phonology. He showed that mistakes made by children indicate the use of default rules to add suffixes such as \"-ed\": for instance 'breaked' and 'comed' for 'broke' and 'came'. He argued that this shows that irregular verb-forms in English have to be learnt and retrieved from memory individually, and that the children making these errors were predicting the regular \"-ed\" ending in an open-ended way by applying a mental rule. This rule for combining verb stems and the usual suffix can be expressed as Vpast \u2192 Vstem + d, where V is a verb and d is the regular ending. Pinker further argued that since the ten most frequently occurring English verbs (be, have, do, say, make ... ) are all irregular, while 98.2% of the thousand least common verbs are regular, there is a \"massive correlation\" of frequency and irregularity. He explains this by arguing that every irregular form, such as 'took', 'came' and 'got', has to be committed to memory by the children in each generation, or else lost, and that the common forms are the most easily memorized. Any irregular verb that falls in popularity past a certain point is lost, and all future generations will treat it as a regular verb instead.\nIn 1990 Pinker, with Paul Bloom, published a paper arguing that the human language faculty must have evolved through natural selection. The article provided arguments for a continuity-based view of language evolution, contrary to then-current discontinuity-based theories that see language as suddenly appearing with the advent of \"Homo sapiens\" as a kind of evolutionary accident. This discontinuity-based view was prominently argued by two main authorities, linguist Noam Chomsky and Stephen Jay Gould. The paper became widely cited and created renewed interest in the evolutionary prehistory of language, and has been credited with shifting the central question of the debate from \"did language evolve?\" to \"\"how\" did language evolve?\" The article also presaged Pinker's argument in \"The Language Instinct\".\nIn 2006 Pinker provided to Alan Dershowitz, a personal friend of Pinker's who was Jeffrey Epstein's defense attorney, Pinker's own interpretation of the wording of a federal law pertaining to the enticement of minors into illegal sex acts via the internet. Dershowitz included Pinker's opinion in a letter to the court during proceedings that resulted in a plea deal in which all federal sex trafficking charges against Epstein were dropped. In 2019, Pinker stated that he was unaware of the nature of the charges against Epstein, and that he engaged in an unpaid favor for his Harvard colleague Dershowitz, as he had regularly done. He stated in an interview with BuzzFeed News that he regrets writing the letter. Pinker says he never received money from Epstein and met with him three times over more than a dozen years, and said he could never stand Epstein and tried to keep his distance.\nPopularization of science.\nHuman cognition and natural language.\nPinker's 1994 \"The Language Instinct\" was the first of several books to combine cognitive science with behavioral genetics and evolutionary psychology. It introduces the science of language and popularizes Noam Chomsky's theory that language is an innate faculty of mind, with the controversial twist that the faculty for language evolved by natural selection as an adaptation for communication. Pinker criticizes several widely held ideas about language \u2013 that it needs to be taught, that people's grammar is poor and getting worse with new ways of speaking, the Sapir\u2013Whorf hypothesis that language limits the kinds of thoughts a person can have, and that other great apes can learn languages. Pinker sees language as unique to humans, evolved to solve the specific problem of communication among social hunter-gatherers. He argues that it is as much an instinct as specialized adaptative behavior in other species, such as a spider's web-weaving or a beaver's dam-building.\nPinker states in his introduction that his ideas are \"deeply influenced\" by Chomsky; he also lists scientists whom Chomsky influenced to \"open up whole new areas of language study, from child development and speech perception to neurology and genetics\" \u2013 Eric Lenneberg, George Miller, Roger Brown, Morris Halle and Alvin Liberman. Brown mentored Pinker through his thesis; Pinker stated that Brown's \"funny and instructive\" book \"Words and Things\" (1958) was one of the inspirations for \"The Language Instinct\".\nThere has been debate about the explanatory adequacy of the theory. By 2015, the linguistic nativist views of Pinker and Chomsky had a number of challenges on the grounds that they had incorrect core assumptions and were inconsistent with research evidence from psycholinguistics and child language acquisition. The reality of Pinker's proposed language instinct, and the related claim that grammar is innate and genetically based, has been contested by linguists such as Geoffrey Sampson in his 1997 book, \"Educating Eve: The 'Language Instinct' Debate\". Sampson argues that \"while it may seem attractive to argue the nature side of the 'nature versus nurture' debate, the nurture side may better support the creativity and nobility of the human mind.\" Sampson denies there is a language instinct, and argues that children can learn language because people can learn anything. Others have sought a middle ground between Pinker's nativism and Sampson's culturalism.\nThe assumptions underlying the nativist view have also been questioned in Jeffrey Elman's \"Rethinking Innateness: A Connectionist Perspective on Development\", which defends the connectionist approach that Pinker attacked. In his 1996 book \"Impossible Minds\", the machine intelligence researcher Igor Aleksander calls \"The Language Instinct\" excellent, and argues that Pinker presents a relatively soft claim for innatism, accompanied by a strong dislike of the 'Standard Social Sciences Model' or SSSM (Pinker's term), which supposes that development is purely dependent on culture. Further, Aleksander writes that while Pinker criticises some attempts to explain language processing with neural nets, Pinker later makes use of a neural net to create past tense verb forms correctly. Aleksander concludes that while he doesn't support the SSSM, \"a cultural repository of language just seems the easy trick for an efficient evolutionary system armed with an iconic state machine to play.\"\nTwo other books, \"How the Mind Works\" (1997) and \"The Blank Slate\" (2002), broadly surveyed the mind and defended the idea of a complex human nature with many mental faculties that are genetically adaptive (Pinker is an ally of Daniel Dennett and Richard Dawkins in many disputes surrounding adaptationism). Another major theme in Pinker's theories is that human cognition works, in part, by combinatorial symbol-manipulation, not just associations among sensory features, as in many connectionist models. On the debate around \"The Blank Slate\", Pinker called Thomas Sowell's book \"A Conflict of Visions\" \"wonderful\", and explained that \"The Tragic Vision\" and the \"Utopian Vision\" are the views of human nature behind right- and left-wing ideologies.\nIn \"Words and Rules: the Ingredients of Language\" (1999), Pinker argues from his own research that regular and irregular phenomena are products of computation and memory lookup, respectively, and that language can be understood as an interaction between the two. \"Words and Rules\" is also the title of an essay by Pinker outlining many of the topics discussed in the book. Critiqueing the book from the perspective of generative linguistics Charles Yang, in the \"London Review of Books\", writes that \"this book never runs low on hubris or hyperbole\". The book's topic, the English past tense, is in Yang's view unglamorous, and Pinker's attempts at compromise risk being in no man's land between rival theories. Giving the example of German, Yang argues that irregular nouns in that language at least all belong to classes, governed by rules, and that things get even worse in languages that attach prefixes and suffixes to make up long 'words': they can't be learnt individually, as there are untold numbers of combinations. \"All Pinker (and the connectionists) are doing is turning over the rocks at the base of the intellectual landslide caused by the Chomskian revolution.\"\nIn \"The Stuff of Thought\" (2007), Pinker looks at a wide range of issues around the way words related to thoughts on the one hand, and to the world outside ourselves on the other. Given his evolutionary perspective, a central question is how an intelligent mind capable of abstract thought evolved: how a mind adapted to Stone Age life could work in the modern world. Many quirks of language are the result.\nPinker is critical of theories about the evolutionary origins of language that argue that linguistic cognition might have evolved from earlier musical cognition. He sees language as being tied primarily to the capacity for logical reasoning, and speculates that human proclivity for music may be a spandrel \u2013 a feature not adaptive in its own right, but that has persisted through other traits that are more broadly practical, and thus selected for. In \"How the Mind Works\", Pinker reiterates Immanuel Kant's view that music is not in itself an important cognitive phenomenon, but that it happens to stimulate important auditory and spatio-motor cognitive functions. Pinker compares music to \"auditory cheesecake\", stating that \"As far as biological cause and effect is concerned, music is useless\". This argument has been rejected by Daniel Levitin and Joseph Carroll, experts in music cognition, who argue that music has had an important role in the evolution of human cognition. In his book \"This Is Your Brain On Music\", Levitin argues that music could provide adaptive advantage through sexual selection, social bonding, and cognitive development; he questions the assumption that music is the antecedent to language, as opposed to its progenitor, noting that many species display music-like habits that could be seen as precursors to human music.\nPinker has also been critical of \"whole language\" reading instruction techniques, stating in \"How the Mind Works\", \"...the dominant technique, called 'whole language,' the insight that [spoken] language is a naturally developing human instinct has been garbled into the evolutionarily improbable claim that \"reading\" is a naturally developing human instinct.\" In the appendix to the 2007 reprinted edition of \"The Language Instinct\", Pinker cited \"Why Our Children Can't Read\" by cognitive psychologist Diane McGuinness as his favorite book on the subject and noted:\nOne raging public debate involving language went unmentioned in \"The Language Instinct\": the \"reading wars,\" or dispute over whether children should be explicitly taught to read by decoding the sounds of words from their spelling (loosely known as \"phonics\") or whether they can develop it instinctively by being immersed in a text-rich environment (often called \"whole language\"). I tipped my hand in the paragraph in [the sixth chapter of the book] which said that language is an instinct but reading is not. Like most psycholinguists (but apparently unlike many school boards), I think it's essential for children to be taught to become aware of speech sounds and how they are coded in strings of letters.\n\"The Better Angels of Our Nature\".\nIn \"The Better Angels of Our Nature\", published in 2011, Pinker argues that violence, including tribal warfare, homicide, cruel punishments, child abuse, animal cruelty, domestic violence, lynching, pogroms, and international and civil wars, has decreased over multiple scales of time and magnitude. Pinker considers it unlikely that human nature has changed. In his view, it is more likely that human nature comprises inclinations toward violence and those that counteract them, the \"better angels of our nature\". He outlines several \"major historical declines of violence\" that all have their own social/cultural/economic causes.&lt;ref name=\"http://iai.tv/video/the-decline-of-violence\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nResponse to the book was divided. Many critics found its arguments convincing and its synthesis of a large volume of historical evidence compelling. This and other aspects drew criticism, including the use of deaths per capita as a metric, Pinker's liberal humanism, the focus on Europe, the interpretation of historical data, and its image of indigenous people. Archaeologist David Wengrow summarized Pinker's approach to archaeological science as \"a modern psychologist making it up as he goes along\".\nEnglish style guide.\nIn his seventh popular book, \"The Sense of Style: The Thinking Person's Guide to Writing in the 21st Century\" (2014), Pinker attempts to provide a writing style guide that is informed by modern linguistics, science and psychology, regarding the existing style guides such as Strunk and White's \"Elements of Style\" as outdated and dogmatic.\nViews.\nPinker identifies as a liberal who is critical of some aspects of the political left. He supports same-sex marriage, a universal basic income, the legalization of drugs, the taxation of carbon, and the abolition of capital punishment. Pinker is a strong supporter of the Democratic Party. However, Pinker has argued that the far-left has created an atmosphere of intellectual intolerance on college campuses and elsewhere, and helped form the Council on Academic Freedom at Harvard to combat what he described as an epidemic of censorship at universities. He was a signatory of the Letter on Justice and Open Debate which argued that discussion of political issues was being silenced by a widespread \"intolerance of opposing views, a vogue for public shaming and ostracism, and a tendency to dissolve complex issues into a binding moral certainty.\"\nPinker has sharply criticized social conservatives, such as former chairman of the President's Council on Bioethics Leon Kass, for opposing stem cell research, arguing that their moral views were mere expressions of disgust that were obstructing treatments that could save millions of lives.\nPinker is a frequent participant in public debates surrounding the contributions of science to contemporary society. Social commentators such as Ed West, author of \"The Diversity Illusion\", consider Pinker important and daring in his willingness to confront taboos, as in \"The Blank Slate\". According to West, the doctrine of \"tabula rasa\" remained accepted \"as fact, rather than fantasy\" a decade after the book's publication. West describes Pinker as \"no polemicist, and he leaves readers to draw their own conclusions\".\nIn January 2005 Pinker defended comments by then-President of Harvard University Lawrence Summers. Summers had speculated that in addition to differing societal demands and discrimination, \"different availability of aptitude at the high end\" may contribute to gender gaps in mathematics and science. In a debate between Pinker and Elizabeth Spelke on gender and science, Pinker argued in favor of the proposition that the gender difference in representation in elite universities was \"explainable by some combination of biological differences in average temperaments and talents interacting with socialization and bias\". \nIn January 2009 Pinker wrote an article about the Personal Genome Project and its possible impact on the understanding of human nature in \"The New York Times\". He discussed the new developments in epigenetics and gene-environment interactions in the afterword to the 2016 edition of his book \"The Blank Slate\". Pinker has been criticised for being associated with, as well as using the data of scientific racists (on subjects unrelated to race), such as the blogger Steven Sailer, with journalist Angela Saini stating that \"for many people, Pinker's willingness to entertain the work of individuals who are on the far right and white supremacists has gone beyond the pale\". Pinker has stated that he condemns racism. In June 2025, Pinker was criticised after he appeared on the podcast of the far-right scientific racism-associated Aporia Magazine\".\"\nIn a November 2009 article for \"The New York Times\", Pinker wrote a mixed review of Malcolm Gladwell's essays, criticizing his analytical methods. Gladwell replied, disputing Pinker's comments about the importance of IQ on teaching performance and by analogy the effect, if any, of draft order on quarterback performance in the National Football League. Advanced NFL Stats addressed the issue statistically, siding with Pinker and showing that differences in methodology could explain the two men's differing opinions. However, while Pinker has acknowledged the within psychometrics and differential psychology about the \"g\" factor in \"The Blank Slate\" and \"The Better Angels of Our Nature\", Pinker argued against the construct validity of general intelligence in \"How the Mind Works\" in favor of modularity of mind as proposed by evolutionary psychologists John Tooby and Leda Cosmides and has reiterated his skepticism of the theoretical coherence of \"g\" when discussing artificial general intelligence.\nIn an appearance for BBC World Service's \"Exchanges At The Frontier\" programme, an audience member questioned whether the virtuous developments in culture and human nature (documented in \"The Better Angels of Our Nature\") could have expressed in our biology either through genetic or epigenetic expression. Pinker responded that it was unlikely since \"some of the declines have occurred far too rapidly for them to be explicable by biological evolution, which has a speed limit measured in generations, but crime can plummet in a span of 15 years and some of these humanitarian reforms like eliminating slavery and torture occurred in, say, 50 years\". Helga Vierich and Cathryn Townsend wrote a critical review of Pinker's sweeping \"civilizational\" explanations for patterns of human violence and warfare in response to a lecture he gave at Cambridge University in September 2015.\nIn his 2018 book \"Enlightenment Now\", Pinker posited that Enlightenment rationality should be defended against attacks from both the political left and political right. In a debate with Pinker, post-colonial theorist Homi Bhabha said that Enlightenment philosophy had immoral consequences such as inequality, slavery, imperialism, world wars, and genocide, and that Pinker downplayed them. Pinker argued that Bhabha had perceived the causal relationship between Enlightenment thinking and these sources of suffering \"backwards\", responding in part that \"The natural state of humanity, at least since the dawn of civilization, is poverty, disease, ignorance, exploitation, and violence (including slavery and imperial conquest). It is knowledge, mobilised to improve human welfare, that allows anyone to rise above this state.\"\nIn 2020, an open letter to the Linguistic Society of America requesting the removal of Pinker from its list of LSA Fellows and its list of media experts was signed by hundreds of academics. The letter accused Pinker of a \"pattern of drowning out the voices of people suffering from racist and sexist violence, in particular in the immediate aftermath of violent acts and/or protests against the systems that created them\", citing as examples six of Pinker's tweets. Pinker said in reply that through this letter, he, and more importantly, younger academics with less protection, were being threatened by \"a regime of intimidation that constricts the theatre of ideas.\" Several academics criticized the letter and expressed support for Pinker. The executive committee of the Linguistic Society of America declined to strike Pinker from its lists and issued a response letter stating that \"It is not the mission of the Society to control the opinions of its members, nor their expression.\"\nIn December 2024, Pinker resigned from the board of honorary members of the Freedom from Religion Foundation over what he and several colleagues viewed as the Foundation's \"quasi-religious\" approach to defining gender. His resignation was followed by those of Jerry Coyne and Richard Dawkins.\nOn May 23, 2025, in the wake of the Trump administration's announcement that it would halt Harvard University's ability to enroll international students, Pinker hit back with a guest essay for \"The New York Times\" entitled \"Harvard Derangement Syndrome\", and his article elicited many responses from readers that were published under the title, \"Harvard as Symbol and Target\".\nAwards and distinctions.\nPinker was named one of \"Time\"'s 100 most influential people in the world in 2004 and one of \"Prospect\" and \"Foreign Policy\"'s 100 top public intellectuals in both years the poll was carried out, 2005 and 2008; in 2010 and 2011 he was named by \"Foreign Policy\" to its list of top global thinkers. In 2016, he was elected to the National Academy of Sciences.\nHis research in cognitive psychology has won the Early Career Award (1984) and Boyd McCandless Award (1986) from the American Psychological Association, the Troland Research Award (1993) from the National Academy of Sciences, the Henry Dale Prize (2004) from the Royal Institution of Great Britain, and the George Miller Prize (2010) from the Cognitive Neuroscience Society. He has also received honorary doctorates from the universities of Newcastle, Surrey, Tel Aviv, McGill, Simon Fraser University and the University of Troms\u00f8. He was twice a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize, in 1998 and in 2003. Pinker received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 1999. On May 13, 2006, he received the American Humanist Association's Humanist of the Year award for his contributions to public understanding of human evolution. For 2022 he was awarded the BBVA Foundation Frontiers of Knowledge Award in the category of \"Humanities and Social Sciences\".\nFrom 2008 to 2018, Pinker chaired the Usage Panel of the American Heritage Dictionary. He wrote the essay on usage for the fifth edition of the Dictionary, published in 2011. In February 2001, Pinker, \"whose hair has long been the object of admiration, and envy, and intense study\", was nominated by acclamation as the first member of the Luxuriant Flowing Hair Club for Scientists (LFHCfS) organized by the \"Annals of Improbable Research\".\nBibliography.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44342", "revid": "4052843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44342", "title": "Henry Bessemer", "text": "English inventor (1813\u20131898)\nSir Henry Bessemer (19 January 1813 \u2013 15 March 1898) was an English inventor, whose steel-making process would become the most important technique for making steel in the nineteenth century for almost one hundred years. He also played a significant role in establishing the town of Sheffield, nicknamed \u2018Steel City\u2019, as a major industrial centre.\nBessemer had been trying to reduce the cost of steel-making for military ordnance, and developed his system for blowing air through molten pig iron to remove the impurities. This made steel easier, quicker and cheaper to manufacture, and revolutionised structural engineering. One of the most significant inventors of the Second Industrial Revolution, Bessemer also made at least 128 other inventions in the fields of iron, steel and glass. Unlike many inventors, he managed to bring his own projects to fruition and profited financially from their success. He was knighted for his contribution to science in 1879, and in the same year was made a fellow of the Royal Society.\nFather: Anthony Bessemer.\nBessemer's father, Anthony, was born in London into a Huguenot family, but moved to Paris when he was about 21 years old. He was an inventor who, while engaged by the Paris Mint, made a machine for making medallions that could produce steel dies from a larger model. He became a member of the French Academy of Sciences, for his improvements to the optical microscope when he was 26. He was forced to leave Paris by the French Revolution, and returned to Britain. There he invented a process for making gold chains, which was successful, and enabled him to buy a small estate in the village of Charlton, near Hitchin in Hertfordshire, where Henry was born. According to Bessemer he was given his name by his godfather Henry Caslon, who employed his father as a punchcutter.\nEarly inventions.\nThe invention from which Bessemer made his first fortune was a series of six steam-powered machines for making bronze powder, used in the manufacture of gold paint. As he relates in his autobiography, he examined the bronze powder made in Nuremberg which was the only place where it was made at the time. He then copied and improved the product and made it capable of being made on a simple production line. It was an early example of reverse engineering where a product is analysed, and then reproduced.\nThe process was kept secret, with only members of his immediate family having access to the factory. The Nuremberg powder, which was made by hand, retailed in London for \u00a35\u00a012s per pound and he eventually reduced the price to half a crown \u00a3 \u2013 2 / 6, or about 1/40th.\nThe profits from sale of the paint allowed him to pursue his other inventions.\nBessemer patented a method for making a continuous ribbon of plate glass in 1848, but it was not commercially successful (, chapter 8). He gained experience in designing furnaces, which was to be of great use for his new steel-making process.\nBessemer process.\nHenry Bessemer's attention was drawn to the problem of steel manufacture in the course of an attempt to improve the construction of guns.\nBessemer worked on the problem of manufacturing cheap steel for ordnance production from 1850 to 1855 when he patented his method. However, William Kelly, an American inventor in Kentucky, received a priority patent in 1857, effectively nullifying Bessemer's 1855 US patent.\nOn 24 August 1856 Bessemer first described the process to a meeting of the British Association in Cheltenham which he titled \"The Manufacture of Malleable Iron and Steel without Fuel.\" It was published in full in \"The Times\". The Bessemer process involved using oxygen in air blown through molten pig iron to burn off the impurities and thus create steel. James Nasmyth had been working on a similar idea for some time prior to this. A reluctant patentor, and in this instance still working through some problems in his method, Nasmyth abandoned the project after hearing Bessemer at the meeting. Bessemer acknowledged the efforts of Nasmyth by offering him a one-third share of the value of his patent. Nasmyth turned it down as he was about to retire.\nMany industries were constrained by the lack of steel, being reliant on cast iron and wrought iron alone. Examples include railway structures such as bridges and tracks, where the treacherous nature of cast iron was keenly felt by many engineers and designers. There had been many accidents when cast iron beams collapsed suddenly, such as the Dee Bridge disaster of May 1847, the Wootton bridge collapse and the Bull bridge accident of 1860. The problem recurred at the Tay Bridge disaster of 1879, and failures continued until all cast iron under-bridges were replaced by steel structures. Wrought iron structures were much more reliable with very few failures.\nThough this process is no longer commercially used, at the time of its invention it was of enormous industrial importance because it lowered the cost of production steel, leading to steel being widely substituted for cast iron and wrought iron.\nImplementation.\nBessemer licensed the patent for his process to five ironmasters, but from the outset, the companies had great difficulty producing good-quality steel. Mr G\u00f6ran Fredrik G\u00f6ransson, a Swedish ironmaster, using the purer charcoal pig iron of that country, was the first to make good steel by the process, but only after many attempts. His results prompted Bessemer to try a purer iron obtained from Cumberland hematite, but even with this he had only limited success because the quantity of carbon was difficult to control. Robert Forester Mushet had carried out thousands of experiments at Darkhill Ironworks, in the Forest of Dean, and had shown that the quantity of carbon could be controlled by removing almost all of it from the iron and then adding an exact amount of carbon and manganese, in the form of spiegeleisen. This improved the quality of the finished product and increased its malleability.\nWhen Bessemer tried to induce makers to take up his improved system, he met with general rebuffs and was eventually driven to undertake the exploitation of the process himself. He erected steelworks in Sheffield in a business partnership with others, such as W &amp; J Galloway &amp; Sons, and began to manufacture steel. At first the output was insignificant, but gradually the magnitude of the operations was enlarged until the competition became effective, and steel traders generally became aware that the firm of Henry Bessemer &amp; Co. was underselling them to the extent of UK\u00a310\u2013\u00a315 a ton. This argument to the pocket quickly had its effect, and licences were applied for in such numbers that, in royalties for the use of his process, Bessemer received a sum in all considerably exceeding a million pounds sterling.\nHowever Mushet received nothing and by 1866 was destitute and in ill health. In that year his 16-year-old daughter, Mary, travelled to London alone, to confront Bessemer at his offices, arguing that his success was based on the results of her father's work. Bessemer decided to pay Mushet an annual pension of \u00a3300, a very considerable sum, which he paid for over 20 years, possibly with a view to keeping the Mushets from legal action.\nBessemer also had works in Greenwich, London, adjacent to the River Thames, from about 1865.\nW.\u00a0M. Lord has said with regard to this success that \"Sir Henry Bessemer was somewhat exceptional. He had developed his process from an idea to a practical reality in his own lifetime and he was sufficient a businessman to have profited by it. In so many cases, inventions were not developed quickly and the plums went to other persons than the inventors.\"\nOther inventions.\nBessemer was a prolific inventor and held at least 129 patents, spanning from 1838 to 1883. These included military ordnance, movable dies for embossed postage stamps, a screw extruder to extract sugar from sugar cane, and others in the fields of iron, steel and glass. These are described in some detail in his autobiography.\nAfter suffering from seasickness in 1868, he designed the SS \"Bessemer\" (also called the \"Bessemer Saloon\"), a passenger steamship with a cabin on gimbals designed to stay level, however rough the sea, to save her passengers from seasickness. The mechanism \u2013 hydraulics controlled by a steersman watching a spirit level \u2013 worked in model form and in a trial version built in his garden in Denmark Hill, London. However, it never received a proper seagoing test as, when the ship demolished part of the Calais pier on her maiden voyage, investor confidence was lost and the ship was scrapped.\nContinuous casting.\nBessemer also obtained a patent in 1857 for the casting of metal between contrarotating rollers \u2013 a forerunner of today's continuous casting processes and remarkably, Bessemer's original idea has been implemented in the direct continuous casting of steel strip.\nDeath.\nBessemer died in March 1898 at Denmark Hill, London. He is buried in West Norwood cemetery,\nLondon SE27. Other influential Victorians such as Sir Henry Tate, Sir Henry Doulton and Baron de Reuters are buried in the same cemetery.\nHonours and legacy.\nBessemer was knighted by Queen Victoria for his contribution to science on 26 June 1879, and in the same year was made a fellow of the Royal Society. An honorary membership was conferred on Bessemer by the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland in 1891. He was elected an International Member of the American Philosophical Society in 1894. In 1895, he was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Sheffield's Kelham Island Industrial Heritage Museum maintains an early example of a Bessemer converter for public viewing.\nA school was named after him in the town of Hitchin, and when the school was demolished in the 1980s the new road built in its place was named Bessemer Close in 1995. Bessemer Way in Rotherham is also named in his honour. In 2009, the public house \"The Fountain\" in Sheffield city centre was renamed \"The Bessemer\" in homage to Henry Bessemer, who had a huge impact on the Steel City's development. In Workington, Cumbria, the local Wetherspoons pub is now named after him.\nIn 2002 the Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining (IOM3) was established from mergers encompassing historical organisations including the Iron and Steel Institute, of which Bessemer was president from 1871 to 1873; the latter organisation instituted the Bessemer Gold Medal under his tenure. IOM3 still recognises Bessemer's legacy with an annual award of the medal for outstanding services to the steel industry; recent recipients include Indira Samarasekera.\nThat a man who did so much for industrial development did not receive higher recognition from his own government was a source of deep regret for English engineers, who alluded to the fact that in the United States, where the Bessemer process found much use, eight cities or towns bore his name.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44344", "revid": "1316293741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44344", "title": "Clover", "text": "Genus of legumes\nClovers, also called trefoils, are plants of the genus Trifolium (from la\u00a0'three'\u00a0'leaf'), consisting of about 300 species of flowering plants in the legume family Fabaceae originating in Europe. The genus has a cosmopolitan distribution with the highest diversity in the temperate Northern Hemisphere, but many species also occur in South America and Africa, including at high altitudes on mountains in the tropics. \nThey are small annual, biennial, or short-lived perennial herbaceous plants, typically growing up to tall. The leaves are trifoliate (rarely, they have more or fewer than three leaflets; the more (or fewer) leaflets the leaf has, the rarer it is; see four-leaf clover), with stipules adnate to the leaf-stalk, and heads or dense spikes of small red, purple, white, or yellow flowers; the small, few-seeded pods are enclosed in the calyx. Other closely related genera often called clovers include \"Melilotus\" (sweet clover) and \"Medicago\" (alfalfa or Calvary clover).\nAs legumes, clovers fix nitrogen using symbiotic bacteria in their root nodules, and are used as an alternative or supplement to synthetic nitrogen fertilizers. They are also valuable food source for grazing livestock and bees. The domestication of clover caused substantial increases in agricultural productivity.\nCultivation history.\nClover was first domesticated in Spain in around the year 1000. During European urbanization, crop rotations involving clover became essential for replacing the fixed nitrogen exported to cities as food. Increased soil nitrogen levels from the spreading use of clover were one of the main reasons why European agricultural production in 1880 was about 275% of the production in 1750. Fields of clover, used as forage and newly-invented silage, became an important part of the rural landscape; adding clover made livestock feed more nutritious. Honey production also rose drastically, and clover remained the main nectar source for bees until the mid-twentieth century. Clover was carried around the world as a crop by European colonists, and some clover species became invasive in some areas.\nImports of guano and the development of the Haber-Bosch process in the 20th century substantially displaced clover as a crop, with negative effects on pollinators, but in the 1990s and 2010s, the cost of industrially-fixed nitrogen rose substantially, approximately doubling, and reviving interest in forage mixes that include clover. As the fixation process is energy-intensive, prices are closely tied to energy prices. The 21st century has also seen interest in clover as a countermeasure to fight the global pollinator decline.\nCultivation.\nSeveral species of clover are extensively cultivated as fodder plants. The most widely cultivated clovers are white clover, \"Trifolium repens\", and red clover, \"Trifolium pratense\". Clover, either sown alone or in mixture with ryegrass, has for a long time formed a staple crop for silaging, for several reasons: it grows freely, shooting up again after repeated mowings; it produces an abundant crop; it is palatable to and nutritious for livestock; it fixes nitrogen using symbiotic bacteria in its root nodules, reducing the need for synthetic fertilizers; it grows in a great range of soils and climates; and it is appropriate for either pasturage or green composting.\nIn many areas, particularly on acidic soil, clover is short-lived because of a combination of insect pests, diseases and nutrient balance; this is known as \"clover sickness\". When crop rotations are managed so that clover does not recur at intervals shorter than eight years, it grows with much of its pristine vigor.\nClovers are most efficiently pollinated by bumblebees, which have declined as a result of agricultural intensification. Honeybees can also pollinate clover, and beekeepers are often in heavy demand from farmers with clover pastures. Farmers reap the benefits of increased reseeding that occurs with increased bee activity, which means that future clover yields remain abundant. Beekeepers benefit from the clover bloom, as clover is one of the main nectar sources for honeybees.\n\"Trifolium repens\", white or Dutch clover, is a perennial abundant in meadows and good pastures. The flowers are white or pinkish, becoming brown and deflexed as the corolla fades. \"Trifolium hybridum\", alsike or Swedish clover, is a perennial which was introduced early in the 19th century and has now become naturalized in Britain. The flowers are white or rosy, and resemble those of \"Trifolium repens\". \"Trifolium medium\", meadow or zigzag clover, a perennial with straggling flexuous stems and rose-purple flowers, has potential for interbreeding with \"T. pratense\" to produce perennial crop plants.\nOther species are: \"Trifolium arvense\", hare's-foot trefoil; found in fields and dry pastures, a soft hairy plant with minute white or pale pink flowers and feathery sepals; \"Trifolium fragiferum\", strawberry clover, with globose, rose-purple heads and swollen calyxes; \"Trifolium campestre\", hop trefoil, on dry pastures and roadsides, the heads of pale yellow flowers suggesting miniature hops; and the somewhat similar \"Trifolium dubium\", common in pastures and roadsides, with smaller heads and small yellow flowers turning dark brown.\nUses.\nBears, game animals, ruminants and birds forage for and eat clover, and it is edible by humans, although red clover in particular contains phytoestrogens that may carry risks during pregnancy. The plant is a traditional Native American food, which is eaten both raw and after drying and smoking the roots. The seeds from the blossoms are used to make bread. It is also possible to make tea from the blossoms.\nSymbolism.\nShamrock, the traditional Irish symbol, which was coined by Saint Patrick for the Holy Trinity, is commonly associated with clover, although alternatively sometimes with the various species within the genus \"Oxalis\", which are also trifoliate.\nClovers occasionally have four leaflets, instead of the usual three. These four-leaf clovers, like other rarities, are considered lucky. Clovers can also have five, six, or more leaflets, but these are rarer still. The clover's outer leaf structure varies in physical orientation.\nThe record for most leaflets is 63, set on August 2, 2023, by Yoshiharu Watanabe in Japan. The previous record holder, Shigeo Obara, had discovered an 18-leaf clover in 2002, a 21-leaf clover in 2008 and a 56-leaf clover in 2009, also in Japan.\nPhylogeny.\nThe first extensive classification of \"Trifolium\" had been done by Michael Zohary and David Heller, and it was subsequently released in 1984. They divided the genus into eight sections: \"Lotoidea, Paramesus, Mistyllus, Vesicamridula, Chronosemium, Trifolium, Trichoecephalum,\" and \"Involucrarium,\" with \"Lotoidea\" placed most basally. Within this classification system, \"Trifolium repens\" falls within section \"Lotoidea\", the largest and least heterogeneous section. \"Lotoidea\" contains species from America, Africa, and Eurasia, considered a clade because of their inflorescence shape, floral structure, and legume that protrudes from the calyx. However, these traits are not unique to the section, and are shared with many other species in other sections. Zohary and Heller argued that the presence of these traits in other sections proved the basal position of \"Lotoidea\", because they were ancestral. Aside from considering this section basal, they did not propose relationships between other sections.\nSince then, molecular data has both questioned and confirmed the proposed phylogeny from Zohary and Heller. A genus-wide molecular study has since proposed a new classification system, made up of two subgenera, \"Chronosemium\" and \"Trifolium.\" This recent reclassification further divides subgenus \"Trifolium\" into eight sections. The molecular data supports the monophyletic nature of three sections proposed by Zohary and Heller (\"Tripholium, Paramesus,\" and \"Trichoecepalum\"), but not of \"Lotoidea\" (members of this section have since been reclassified into five other sections). Other molecular studies, although smaller, support the need to reorganize \"Lotoidea.\"\nSpecies.\n291 species of \"Trifolium\" are accepted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44345", "revid": "337066", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44345", "title": "Damnatio memoriae", "text": "Exclusion of a person from official records and accounts\n () is a modern Latin phrase meaning \"condemnation of memory\" or \"damnation of memory\", indicating that a person is to be excluded from official accounts. There are and have been many routes to including the destruction of depictions, the removal of names from inscriptions and documents, and even large-scale rewritings of history.\nEtymology.\nAlthough the term is Latin, the phrase was not used by the ancient Romans, and first appeared in a thesis written in Germany in 1689 by Christoph Schreiter and Johann Heinrich Gerlach. The thesis was titled \"Dissertationem juridicam de damnatione memoriae, praescitu superiorum, in florentissima Philurea\" (lit. \"A Legal Dissertation on the Damnation of Memory, Foreknown by Superiors, in the Most Flourishing Philurea\").\"\nAncient world.\nToday's best known examples of \"damnatio memoriae\" from antiquity concern chiselling stone inscriptions or deliberately omitting certain information from them.\nAncient Mesopotamia.\nAccording to Stefan Zawadzki, the oldest known examples of such practices come from around 3000\u20132000 BC. He cites the example of Lagash (an ancient city-state founded by the Sumerians in southern Mesopotamia), where preserved inscriptions concerning a conflict with another city-state, Umma, do not mention the ruler of Umma, but describe him as \"the man of Umma\". Zawadzki sees this as an example of deliberate degradation of the ruler of Umma to the role of an unworthy person whose name and position in history the rulers of Lagash did not want to record for posterity.\nAncient Egypt.\nEgyptians also practiced this, as seen in relics from pharaoh Akhenaten's tomb and elsewhere. Akhenaten's sole worship of the god Aten, instead of the traditional pantheon, was considered heretical. During his reign, Akhenaten endeavoured to have all references to the god Amun chipped away and removed. After his reign, temples to Aten were dismantled and the stones reused to create other temples. Images of Akhenaten had their faces chipped away, and images and references to Amun reappeared. The people blamed their misfortunes on Akhenaten's shift of worship to Atenism, away from the gods they served before him. Other Egyptian victims of this practice include the pharaohs that immediately succeeded Akhenaten, including Smenkhkare, Neferneferuaten, and Ay. The campaign of \"damnatio memoriae\" against Akhenaten and his successors was initiated by Ay's successor, Horemheb, who decided to erase from history all pharaohs associated with the unpopular Amarna Period; this process was continued by Horemheb's successors. Tutankhamun was also erased from history in this way, even though he had restored Egypt to the Amun god, because he was one the kings who succeeded Akhenaten; he may also have been Akhenaten's son.\nAncient Greece.\nThe practice was known in Ancient Greece. The Athenians frequently destroyed inscriptions which referred to individuals or events that they no longer wished to commemorate. After Timotheus was convicted of treason and removed from his post as general in 373BC, all references to him as a general were deleted from the previous year's naval catalogue. The most complete example is their systematic removal of all references to the Antigonids from inscriptions in their city, in 200BC when they were besieged by the Antigonid king Philip V of Macedon during the Second Macedonian War. One decree praising Demetrius Poliorcetes (Philip V's great-grandfather) was smashed and thrown down a well.\nAfter Herostratus set fire to the Temple of Artemis, one of the Seven Wonders of antiquity, the people of Ephesus banned the mention of his name.\nAt Delphi, an honorific inscription erected between 337 and 327 BC for Aristotle and his nephew Callisthenes, two philosophers who were closely associated with the Macedonians, were smashed and thrown in a well after the death of Alexander of Macedon in 323BC.\nAncient Rome.\nIn ancient Rome, the practice of was the condemnation of emperors after their deaths. If the Senate or a later emperor did not like the acts of an emperor, they could have his property seized, his name erased and his statues reworked (normally defaced).\nCompounding this difficulty is the fact that a completely successful results\u2014by definition\u2014in the full and total erasure of the subject from the historical record. In the case of figures such as emperors or consuls it is unlikely that complete success was possible, as even comprehensive obliteration of the person's existence and actions in records and the like would continue to be historically visible without extensive reworking. The impracticality of such a cover-up could be vast\u2014in the case of Emperor Geta, for example, coins bearing his effigy proved difficult to entirely remove from circulation for several years, even though the mere mention of his name was punishable by death.\nDifficulties in implementation also arose if there was not full and enduring agreement with the punishment, such as when the Senate's condemnation of Nero was implemented\u2014leading to attacks on many of his statues\u2014but subsequently evaded with the enormous funeral he was given by Vitellius. Similarly, it was often difficult to prevent later historians from \"resurrecting\" the memory of the sanctioned person.\nThe impossibility of actually erasing memory of an emperor has led scholars to conclude that this was not actually the goal of \"damnatio\". Instead, they understand \"damnatio\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;not so much as an attempt to obliterate memory entirely as to transform honorific commemoration into a form of visible denigration. That is: the power of an act of damnatio relies, at least in part, on the viewer of a monument being able to supplement the gaps in an inscription with their own knowledge of what\nthose gaps had once contained, and the reasons why the text had been removed\u2014\u200aThese emperors are known to have been erased from monuments:\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the Middle Ages, heresiarchs could have their memory condemned. The Council of Constance decreed the of John Wycliffe.\nThe practice of replacing pagan beliefs and motifs with Christian, and purposefully not recording the pagan history, has been compared to as well.\nIn her book \"Medici Women - Portraits of Power, Love and Betrayal\", Gabrielle Langdon also presents compelling evidence concerning a probable \"damnatio memoriae\" issued against Isabella de' Medici, a prominent female figure of the 16th century Renaissance Medici court.\nAmericas.\nAncient Maya.\nSeveral apparent \"damnatio memoriae\" incidents occurred within the Maya civilization during the Classic period (AD 250\u2013900) as a result of political conflicts between leaders of the local kingdoms.\nOne notable incident occurred in the kingdom of Pa\u02bc Chan (modern-day Yaxchilan, Mexico) in the middle of the 8th century. In June 742, the \"k'uhul ajaw\" (Holy Lord, i.e. king) of Pa' Chan, Itzamnaaj Bahlam III, died after a 60-year-long rule, during which he turned his kingdom into one of great riches after a large number of military campaigns which were recorded and illustrated on multiple high-quality stelae, lintels and hieroglyphic steps of temples which he dedicated to his military success (e.g. Temple 44) and his family (e.g. Temple 23). Though he had a son who eventually ascended to the throne after his death, there was a mysterious decade-long \"interregnum\" period in which Pa' Chan did not record the existence of any king. Itzamnaaj Bahlam's son, Yaxun B\u02bcalam IV, also known as Bird Jaguar IV, ascended to the throne in April 752, nearly ten years after his father's death.\nThis \"interregnum\" period may be explained by a text from the nearby northern kingdom of Yokib (modern-day Piedras Negras, Guatemala). Panel 3 of this city, largely regarded as one of the most beautiful pieces of Mayan art, was carved approximately in 782 and illustrates an episode of the reign of Itzam K\u02bcan Ahk II (also known as Pawaaj K\u02bcan Ahk II), in which he celebrated his first \"k\u02bcatun\" (period of 7200 days) as king, on 27 July 749. Panel 3 claims that the celebration \"was witnessed by Sak Jukub Yopaat Bahlam, Holy Lord of Pa\u02bc Chan.\" Also known as Yopaat Bahlam II, this mysterious ruler does not appear anywhere else in the historical record, not even in his supposed homeland. Moreoever, his respectful presence at a celebration in Yokib, Pa\u02bc Chan's centuries-old and bitter rival (which had, in fact, scored a victory in battle against Itzamnaaj Bahlam III in 726), as well as the depiction of Itzam K\u02bcan Ahk apparently addressing a speech (now hardly readable, but probably involving an event of Pa\u02bc Chan's past) toward a party from Pa\u02bc Chan\u2014which included his son and \"heir to the throne\" of Pa\u02bc Chan (\"ch\u02bcok pa\u02bcchan ajaw\"), Sihyaj Ahkte\u02bc\u2014, possibly indicate that he ruled as a vassal of Itzam K\u02bcan Ahk, or that he used the celebration as an opportunity to ask for Itzam K\u02bcan Ahk's support against Yaxun B\u02bcalam IV, his political rival. This has led to the conclusion that if this man truly ruled Pa\u02bc Chan, any records of his existence were destroyed during the reign of Yaxun B\u02bcalam IV, who notoriously led a massive propaganda campaign throughout his rule to claim legitimacy over the throne, which involved the rewriting of his kingdom's dynastic history and restoration of several historical records of previous kings. The immense texts writing Yaxun B\u02bcalam's own version of his kingdom's dynastic history may have been carved over existing records which would have been intentionally erased with plaster, possibly destroying the records of the king (or kings) of the \"interregnum\".\nIt is possible Yopaat Bahlam and his son lived the rest of their lives in exile at Yokib, and that the \"heir to the throne\" never rose to power. Yopaat Bahlam may have been buried in Burial 13 of the city, judging from a text carved on four \"Spondylus limbatus\" shells found within it which bears his name and mentions that he had previously visited the city in January 747, also within the \"interregnum\".\nNew Spain.\nNotorious incidents of \"damnatio memoriae\" occurred during the existence of the Viceroyalty of New Spain, the Spanish colony that emerged after the Spanish conquest of Mexico in 1521. Various viceroys ordered the destruction of monuments and documents depicting certain episodes of pre-Columbian Mesoamerican history and rebels to Spanish rule over the Americas.\nFor instance, Moctezuma I (not to be confused with his more famous great-grandson Moctezuma II), 15th-century \"huei tlahtoani\" (Great Speaker, i.e. emperor) of the \"Excan Tlahtoloyan\" (lit. Triple Capital), known by historians as the Mexica or Aztec Empire (also known as the Aztec Triple Alliance, whose inhabitants referred to themselves as Culhua-Mexica), ordered the creation of a portrait of himself and of his military and political advisor Tlacaelel at Chapultepec, a historically and naturally important site which nowadays is within Mexico City. This became a tradition among subsequent Mexica rulers, and portraits of Axayacatl and Ahuizotl, two of Moctezuma's successors, were also made throughout the rest of the century (Tizoc's absence may be explained by his sudden death from poisoning). Moctezuma II would create the last portrait of this kind in 1519 (which believes might be \"the last Aztec monument\"), at the eve of the Spanish conquest.\nAntonio de Le\u00f3n y Gama, a distinguished Mexican intellectual, wrote in the late 18th century that these portraits were well preserved up until that century. Le\u00f3n y Gama claimed that the only portrait he got to see himself was Moctezuma II's, before its destruction was ordered by the authorities in 1753 or 1754. He mentioned that Axayacatl's portrait still existed earlier in that century before it was \"broken up and removed.\" Indeed, the remains of Moctezuma's portrait, approximately 2 meters (over 6 feet) high, reveal that its damage was not accidental or natural. It was carved on pink-to-gray andesite, which is \"slightly harder than marble,\" according to Hajovsky. The markings in the damaged parts show that apparently its destruction was executed with the dropping of a boulder, and that deep holes were drilled \"perhaps in order to pry the stone apart or blow it up.\"\nIn another notorious instance, Spanish bishop Juan de Zum\u00e1rraga ordered the destruction of a portrait depicting Nezahualcoyotl, king of Texcoco, on 7 July 1539, along with various other sculptures at the Hill of Texcotzingo \"in a manner such that they would no longer be remembered\".\nDuring the Mexican War of Independence, which started in 1810, one of the earliest revolutionary leaders, Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, nowadays remembered as a national Hero, was executed by the Spanish authorities in 1811. After his execution, according to contemporary accounts, the authorities declared a \"damnatio memoriae\". According to one of Hidalgo's soldiers, Pedro Garc\u00eda (1790\u20131873), \"the fierce war against Hidalgo's memory and his ideas\" was done through strict censorship.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It became illegal to speak about Hidalgo anywhere, it became a great crime that was severely punished. This is the reason why no portrait which resembles him at all is found anywhere in the country, since the prohibition lasted nearly ten years. Nobody felt safe speaking inside their homes.\nThe Spanish efforts to erase his memory, however, were in vain. The War of Independence continued, and the leaders who continued to revolution after Hidalgo's death made great efforts to commemorate his legacy. Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Morelos, for example, declared in 1813 that 16 September, the anniversary of the beginning of the war, would be celebrated every year \"remembering always the merit of the great Hero Don Miguel Hidalgo and his partner Don Ignacio Allende.\"\nSimilar practices in modern times.\nWhile complete has not been attempted in modern times\u2014naming or writing about a person fallen from favour has never been made subject to formal punishment\u2014there are several examples of less total in modern times.\nSoviet Union.\nDuring the Soviet period.\nIn the Soviet Union, photos were retouched to remove individuals such as Leon Trotsky, Nikolay Yezhov, and even Stalin. After Stalin ordered the murder of Grigory Kulik's wife Kira Kulik-Simonich, all photographic records of her were destroyed; although she was described as very pretty, no photographs or other images of her survive. Following their fall from favour, Lavrentiy Beria and others were removed from articles in the \"Great Soviet Encyclopedia\". \nThe graphic designer David King had a strong interest in Soviet art and design, and amassed a collection of over 250,000 images. His most striking examples of before-and-after alterations were published as \"The Commissar Vanishes\".\n\"Damnatio memoriae\" of the Soviet Union in post-Communist countries.\nFollowing the fall of communism in Eastern Europe, many communist statues, particularly of Lenin and Stalin, were removed from former Soviet satellite states. Following a 2015 decision, a process of decommunization in Ukraine successfully dismantled all 1,320 statues of Lenin after its independence, as well as renaming roads and structures named under Soviet authority.\nPoland.\n19th century Polish writers often omitted mentioning two kings from the list of Polish monarchs, Bezprym and Wenceslaus III of Bohemia, which has resulted in their being omitted from many later works as well.\nChina.\nThe treatment of Chinese politician Zhao Ziyang following his fall from grace inside the Chinese Communist Party is regarded as another modern case of .\nThe major painting \"The Founding Ceremony of the Nation\" has been modified several times as individuals depicted have fallen from political favour or been rehabilitated.\nGermany.\nThe destruction of all copies of \"The Victory of Faith\" in order to erase Ernst R\u00f6hm is considered an act of Nazi \"damnatio memoriae\". In the end, two copies survived: one preserved in London and one preserved by the Communist government of East Germany.\nNorth Korea.\nIn December 2013, Jang Song-thaek was abruptly accused of being a counter-revolutionary and was stripped of all his posts, expelled from the Workers' Party of Korea (WPK), arrested and executed. His photos were removed from official media and his image digitally removed from photos with other North Korean leaders.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAn instance of \"damnatio memoriae\"-esque policy instituted without governmental decree occurred in the aftermath of the Jimmy Savile sexual abuse scandal. Following extensive accusations of sexually abusing underage, disabled, and dead individuals, various public institutions in the United Kingdom took extensive measures to remove posthumous relics of Savile's public presence. This included taking down monuments and memorials to Savile (including his headstone), rechristening locations and awards previously named after him, dissolving charity organizations named after him, and suppressing episodes of television and radio shows which featured or explicitly referenced him. In the immediate aftermath of the scandal, BBC News reporter Finlo Rohrer commented that \"As bloggers have already noted, the Romans would have understood the Savile erasures as \"damnatio memoriae\" [...] people will be able to see the spot where a plaque to him once rested. They may know that a path was once named after him.\"\nFiction.\nThe practice is a key function of the Big Brother government in \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" by George Orwell, associated with the Newspeak word \"unperson\" which has resultantly become another general synonym for it. TV Tropes uses this term in listing numerous other fictional cases.\nAnalysis.\nThe term is used in modern scholarship to cover a wide array of official and unofficial sanctions through which the physical remnants and memories of a deceased individual are destroyed.\nLooking at cases of in modern Irish history, Guy Beiner has argued that iconoclastic vandalism only makes martyrs of the \"dishonored\", thus ensuring that they will be remembered for all time. Nonetheless, Beiner goes on to argue that the purpose of \u2014rather than being to erase people from history\u2014was to guarantee only negative memories of those who were so dishonored. Pointing out that did not erase people from history but in effect kept their memory alive, Beiner concluded that those who partake in the destruction of a monument should be considered agents of memory.\nAuthor Charles Hedrick proposes that a distinction be made between (the condemnation of a deceased person) and (the actual erasure of another from historical texts).\nIn case of removal of Soviet monuments in Eastern Europe, the primary reason was that they were established as a symbol of occupation, domination or cult of personality, rather than simple historic mark. It has been pointed out that all Nazi-established monuments and street names have been removed after World War II which has been perceived as natural reaction after liberation at that time.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44346", "revid": "38496586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44346", "title": "Shallot", "text": "Variety of small onion\nThe shallot is a cultivar group of the onion. Until 2010, the (French red) shallot was classified as a separate species, \"Allium ascalonicum\". The taxon was synonymized with \"Allium cepa\" (the common onion) in 2010, as the difference was too small to justify a separate species.\nAs part of the onion genus \"Allium\", its close relatives include garlic, scallions, leeks, chives, and the Chinese onion.\nEtymology and names.\nThe names \"scallion\" and \"shallot\" are derived from the Old French \"eschalotte\", by way of \"eschaloigne\", from the Latin \"Ascal\u014dnia caepa\" or Ascalonian onion, a namesake of the ancient city of Ascalon.\nThe term \"shallot\" is usually applied to the French red shallot (\"Allium cepa\" var. \"aggregatum\", or the \"A. cepa\" Aggregatum Group). It is also used for the Persian shallot or \"musir\" (\"A. stipitatum\") from the Zagros Mountains in Iran and Iraq, and the French gray shallot (\"Allium oschaninii\") which is also known as \"griselle\" or \"true shallot\"; it grows wild from Central to Southwest Asia. The name \"shallot\" is also used for a scallion in New South Wales, Australia and among English-speaking people in Quebec while the term \"French shallot\" refers to the plant referred to on this page. In most English-speaking nations, the name is pronounced with the emphasis on the last syllable in common with the French pronunciation, \"sha-lot\", while the emphasis is commonly made on the first syllable, \"shall-\u0259t\", in the United States.\nThe term \"eschalot\", derived from the French word \"\u00e9chalote\", can also be used to refer to the shallot.\nDescription and cultivation.\nLike garlic, shallots are formed in clusters of offsets with a head composed of multiple cloves. The skin colour of shallots can vary from golden brown to gray to rose red, and their off-white flesh is usually tinged with green or magenta.\nShallots are extensively cultivated for culinary uses, propagated by offsets. In some regions (\"long-season areas\"), the offsets are usually planted in autumn (September or October in the Northern Hemisphere). In some other regions, the suggested planting time for the principal crop is early spring (typically in February or the beginning of March in the Northern Hemisphere).\nIn planting, the tops of the bulbs should be kept a little above ground, and the soil surrounding the bulbs is often drawn away when the roots have taken hold. They come to maturity in summer, although fresh shallots can now be found year-round in supermarkets. Shallots should not be planted on ground recently manured. Shallots suffer damage from leek moth larvae, which mine into the leaves or bulbs of the plant.\nNutrition.\nA raw shallot is 80% water, 17% carbohydrates, 2.5% protein and contains negligible fat (table). In a reference amount of , raw shallot supplies 72 calories and is a rich source of vitamin B6 (27% of the Daily Value, DV), while providing moderate amounts of manganese (14% DV) and vitamin C (10% DV) (table). No other micronutrients are in significant content.\nUses.\nCulinary.\nShallots are used in cooking. They may be pickled. Finely-sliced deep-fried shallots are used as a condiment in Asian cuisine, often served with porridge. Shallots taste similar to other cultivars of the common onion, but have a milder flavor. Like onions, when sliced, raw shallots release substances that irritate the human eye, resulting in production of tears.\nFresh shallots can be stored in a cool, dry area (0 to 4\u00a0\u00b0C, 32 to 40\u00a0\u00b0F, 60 to 70% RH) for six months or longer. Chopped, dried shallots are available.\nEurope.\nIn Europe, the Pikant, Atlas, and Ed's Red types of shallots are the most common.\nAsia.\nShallots are the traditional choice for many dishes in Sri Lankan cuisine, including pol sambola, lunu miris and many meat, fish and vegetable dishes.\nIn most Indian cuisines, the distinction between onions and shallots is weak; larger varieties of shallot are sometimes confused with small red onions and used interchangeably. Indeed, most parts of India use the regional name for onion interchangeably with shallot (Maharashtra, for instance, where both are called \"kanda\"). The southern regions of India distinguish shallots from onions in recipes more often, especially the much loved tiny varieties (about the width of a finger); these are widely used in curries and different types of \"sambar\", a lentil-based dish. Shallots pickled in red vinegar are common in many Indian restaurants, served along with sauces and papad on the condiments tray. They are also used as a home remedy for sore throats, mixed with jaggery or sugar. In Nepal, shallots are used as one of the ingredients for making \"momo\".\nIn Kashmir shallots are widely used in preparation of Wazwan Kashmiri cuisine, as they add distinct flavor and prevent curry from becoming black, which is common with onions.\nIn Iran shallots are used in various ways, the most common being grated shallot mixed into dense yogurt, a combination served in almost every restaurant when one orders grills or kebabs. Shallots are also used to make different types of \"torshi\" (\u062a\u0631\u0634\u06cc), a sour Iranian side dish consisting of a variety of vegetables under vinegar, eaten with main dishes in small quantities. Shallot is also pickled\u2014called \"shour\" (\u0634\u0648\u0631) in Persian\u2014along with other vegetables to be served as \"torshi\".\nIn Southeast Asian cuisines, such as those of Indonesia, Vietnam, Thailand, Cambodia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and Brunei, both shallots and garlic are often used as elementary spices. Raw shallots can also accompany cucumbers when pickled in mild vinegar solution. They are also often chopped finely, then fried until golden brown, resulting in tiny crispy shallot chips called \"bawang goreng\" (fried shallots) in Indonesian, which can be bought ready-made from groceries and supermarkets. Shallots enhance the flavor of many Southeast Asian dishes, such as fried rice variants. They are also often present in noodle and slaw dishes. Crispy shallot chips are also used in southern Chinese cuisine. In Indonesia, shallots are sometimes pickled and added to several traditional foods; the pickles' sourness is thought to increase the appetite. In the southern Philippines, shallot bulbs and leaves are used to make the popular spicy Maranao condiment called palapa, which is used in the dish piaparan.\nThe tubular green leaves of the plant can also be eaten and are very similar to the leaves of spring onions and chives.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44348", "revid": "1290956733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44348", "title": "The Phantom Edit", "text": "2000 film\nStar Wars Episode I.I: The Phantom Edit is a fan edit of the film \"\", removing many elements of the original film. The purpose of the edit, according to creator Mike J. Nichols, was to make a much stronger version of \"The Phantom Menace\" based on the previous execution and philosophies of film storytelling and editing of George Lucas. \"The Phantom Edit\" was the first unauthorized re-edit of \"The Phantom Menace\" to receive major publicity and acclaim and is also considered the first fan-edit of a feature film ever to be shared by an online audience.\nHistory.\n\"The Phantom Edit\" was originally circulated in Hollywood studios in 2000 and 2001, and was followed by media attention. Salon.com, NPR, PBS, and the BBC all covered the edit to various degrees.\nRumor initially attributed \"The Phantom Edit\" to Kevin Smith, who admitted to having seen the re-edit but denied that he was the editor. The editor was revealed to be Mike J. Nichols of Santa Clarita, California, in the September 7, 2001, edition of \"The Washington Post\".\nLucasfilm, the production company of series creator George Lucas, condoned the edit and did not pursue legal action against its distributors.\nReviews.\nCritics and filmmakers have commented on the original \"Phantom Edit\", in most cases providing the approval and recognition which furthered the fan edit movement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44351", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44351", "title": "Rudolf Hell", "text": "German electrical engineer and inventor (1901\u20132002)\nRudolf Hell (19 December 1901 \u2013 11 March 2002) was a German inventor and engineer.\nCareer.\nHell was born in Eggm\u00fchl. From 1919 to 1923, he studied electrical engineering in Munich. He worked there from 1923 to 1929 as assistant of Prof. Max Dieckmann, with whom he operated a television station at the \"Verkehrsausstellung\" (lit.: \"traffic exhibition\") in Munich in 1925. In the same year Hell invented an apparatus called the \"Hellschreiber\", an early forerunner to impact dot matrix printers and faxes. Hell received a patent for the Hellschreiber in 1929.\nIn the year 1929 he founded his own company in Babelsberg. After World War II he re-founded his company in Kiel. He kept on working as an engineer and invented machines for electronically controlled engraving of printing plates and an electronic photo typesetting system called \"digiset\" marketed in the US as \"VideoComp\" by RCA and later by III.\nHe has received numerous awards such as the Knight Commander's Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany, the Gutenberg Prize of the International Gutenberg Society and the City of Mainz, the Werner von Siemens Ring and the Eduard Rhein Ring of Honor from the German Eduard Rhein Foundation (1992).\nHis company was taken over by Siemens in 1981 and merged with Linotype in 1990, becoming \"Linotype-Hell AG\".\nHellschreiber is still in use today by amateur radio (ham) operators around the world. Hellverein Kiel collects Hell devices and keeps them functional. In addition, the website contains numerous documents and patents relating to the Hell devices: https://www.hell-kiel.de/en/\nDeath.\nRudolf Hell died in Kiel on 11 March 2002.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44353", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44353", "title": "Selfish genetic element", "text": "Genetic segments that can enhance their own transmission at the expense of other genes\nSelfish genetic elements (historically also referred to as selfish genes, ultra-selfish genes, selfish DNA, parasitic DNA and genomic outlaws) are genetic segments that can enhance their own transmission at the expense of other genes in the genome, even if this has no positive or a net negative effect on organismal fitness. Genomes have traditionally been viewed as cohesive units, with genes acting together to improve the fitness of the organism.\nEarly observations of selfish genetic elements were made almost a century ago, but the topic did not get widespread attention until several decades later. Inspired by the gene-centred views of evolution popularized by George Williams and Richard Dawkins, two papers were published back-to-back in \"Nature\" in 1980 \u2013 by Leslie Orgel and Francis Crick and by Ford Doolittle and Carmen Sapienza \u2013 introducing the concept of selfish genetic elements (at the time called \"selfish DNA\") to the wider scientific community. Both papers emphasized that genes can spread in a population regardless of their effect on organismal fitness as long as they have a transmission advantage.\nSelfish genetic elements have now been described in most groups of organisms, and they demonstrate a remarkable diversity in the ways by which they promote their own transmission. Though long dismissed as genetic curiosities, with little relevance for evolution, they are now recognized to affect a wide swath of biological processes, ranging from genome size and architecture to speciation.\nHistory.\nEarly observations.\nObservations of what is now referred to as selfish genetic elements go back to the early days in the history of genetics. Already in 1928, Russian geneticist Sergey Gershenson reported the discovery of a driving X chromosome in \"Drosophila obscura\". Crucially, he noted that the resulting female-biased sex ratio may drive a population extinct (see Species extinction). The earliest clear statement of how chromosomes may spread in a population not because of their positive fitness effects on the individual organism, but because of their own \"parasitic\" nature came from the Swedish botanist and cytogeneticist Gunnar \u00d6stergren in 1945. Discussing B chromosomes in plants he wrote:\nIn many cases these chromosomes have no useful function at all to the species carrying them, but that they often lead an exclusively parasitic existence ... [B chromosomes] need not be useful for the plants. They need only be useful to themselves.\nAround the same time, several other examples of selfish genetic elements were reported. For example, the American maize geneticist Marcus Rhoades described how chromosomal knobs led to female meiotic drive in maize. Similarly, this was also when it was first suggested that an intragenomic conflict between uniparentally inherited mitochondrial genes and biparentally inherited nuclear genes could lead to cytoplasmic male sterility in plants. Then, in the early 1950s, Barbara McClintock published a series of papers describing the existence of transposable elements, which are now recognized to be among the most successful selfish genetic elements. The discovery of transposable elements led to her being awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine or Physiology in 1983.\nConceptual developments.\nThe empirical study of selfish genetic elements benefited greatly from the emergence of the so-called gene-centred view of evolution in the nineteen sixties and seventies. In contrast with Darwin's original formulation of the theory of evolution by natural selection that focused on individual organisms, the gene's-eye view takes the gene to be the central unit of selection in evolution. It conceives evolution by natural selection as a process involving two separate entities: replicators (entities that produce faithful copies of themselves, usually genes) and vehicles (or interactors; entities that interact with the ecological environment, usually organisms).\nSince organisms are temporary occurrences, present in one generation and gone in the next, genes (replicators) are the only entity faithfully transmitted from parent to offspring. Viewing evolution as a struggle between competing replicators made it easier to recognize that not all genes in an organism would share the same evolutionary fate.\nThe gene's-eye view was a synthesis of the population genetic models of the modern synthesis, in particular the work of RA Fisher, and the social evolution models of W. D. Hamilton. The view was popularized by George Williams's \"Adaptation and Natural Selection\" and Richard Dawkins's best seller \"The Selfish Gene\". Dawkins summarized a key benefit from the gene's-eye view as follows:\n\"If we allow ourselves the license of talking about genes as if they had conscious aims, always reassuring ourselves that we could translate our sloppy language back into respectable terms if we wanted to, we can ask the question, what is a single selfish gene trying to do?\" \u2014 Richard Dawkins, \"The Selfish Gene\"\nIn 1980, two high-profile papers published back-to-back in \"Nature\" by Leslie Orgel and Francis Crick, and by Ford Doolittle and Carmen Sapienza, brought the study of selfish genetic elements to the centre of biological debate. The papers took their starting point in the contemporary debate of the so-called C-value paradox, the lack of correlation between genome size and perceived complexity of a species. Both papers attempted to counter the prevailing view of the time that the presence of differential amounts of non-coding DNA and transposable elements is best explained from the perspective of individual fitness, described as the \"phenotypic paradigm\" by Doolittle and Sapienza. Instead, the authors argued that much of the genetic material in eukaryotic genomes persists, not because of its phenotypic effects, but can be understood from a gene's-eye view, without invoking individual-level explanations. The two papers led to a series of exchanges in \"Nature\".\nCurrent views.\nIf the selfish DNA papers marked the beginning of the serious study of selfish genetic elements, the subsequent decades have seen an explosion in theoretical advances and empirical discoveries. Leda Cosmides and John Tooby wrote a landmark review about the conflict between maternally inherited cytoplasmic genes and biparentally inherited nuclear genes. The paper also provided a comprehensive introduction to the logic of genomic conflicts, foreshadowing many themes that would later be subject of much research. Then in 1988 John H. Werren and colleagues wrote the first major empirical review of the topic. This paper achieved three things. First, it coined the term selfish genetic element, putting an end to a sometimes confusingly diverse terminology (selfish genes, ultra-selfish genes, selfish DNA, parasitic DNA, genomic outlaws). Second, it formally defined the concept of selfish genetic elements. Finally, it was the first paper to bring together all different kinds of selfish genetic elements known at the time (genomic imprinting, for example, was not covered).\nIn the late 1980s, most molecular biologists considered selfish genetic elements to be the exception, and that genomes were best thought of as highly integrated networks with a coherent effect on organismal fitness. In 2006, when Austin Burt and Robert Trivers published the first book-length treatment of the topic, the tide was changing. While their role in evolution long remained controversial, in a review published a century after their first discovery, William R. Rice concluded that \"nothing in genetics makes sense except in the light of genomic conflicts\".\nLogic.\nThough selfish genetic elements show a remarkable diversity in the way they promote their own transmission, some generalizations about their biology can be made. In a classic 2001 review, Gregory D.D. Hurst and John H. Werren proposed two 'rules' of selfish genetic elements.\nRule 1: Spread requires sex and outbreeding.\nSexual reproduction involves the mixing of genes from two individuals. According to Mendel's Law of Segregation, alleles in a sexually reproducing organism have a 50% chance of being passed from parent to offspring. Meiosis is therefore sometimes referred to as \"fair\".\nHighly self-fertilizing or asexual genomes are expected to experience less conflict between selfish genetic elements and the rest of the host genome than outcrossing sexual genomes. There are several reasons for this. First, sex and outcrossing put selfish genetic elements into new genetic lineages. In contrast, in a highly selfing or asexual lineage, any selfish genetic element is essentially stuck in that lineage, which should increase variation in fitness among individuals. The increased variation should result in stronger purifying selection in selfers/asexuals, as a lineage without the selfish genetic elements should out-compete a lineage with the selfish genetic element. Second, the increased homozygosity in selfers removes the opportunity for competition among homologous alleles. Third, theoretical work has shown that the greater linkage disequilibrium in selfing compared to outcrossing genomes may in some, albeit rather limited, cases cause selection for reduced transposition rates. Overall, this reasoning leads to the prediction that asexuals/selfers should experience a lower load of selfish genetic elements. One caveat to this is that the evolution of selfing is associated with a reduction in the effective population size. A reduction in the effective population size should reduce the efficacy of selection and therefore leads to the opposite prediction: higher accumulation of selfish genetic elements in selfers relative to outcrossers.\nEmpirical evidence for the importance of sex and outcrossing comes from a variety of selfish genetic elements, including transposable elements, self-promoting plasmids, and B chromosomes.\nRule 2: Presence is often revealed in hybrids.\nThe presence of selfish genetic elements can be difficult to detect in natural populations. Instead, their phenotypic consequences often become apparent in hybrids. The first reason for this is that some selfish genetic elements rapidly sweep to fixation, and the phenotypic effects will therefore not be segregating in the population. Hybridization events, however, will produce offspring with and without the selfish genetic elements and so reveal their presence. The second reason is that host genomes have evolved mechanisms to suppress the activity of the selfish genetic elements, for example the small RNA administered silencing of transposable elements. The co-evolution between selfish genetic elements and their suppressors can be rapid, and follow a Red Queen dynamics, which may mask the presence of selfish genetic elements in a population. Hybrid offspring, on the other hand, may \u00a0inherit a given selfish genetic element, but not the corresponding suppressor and so reveal the phenotypic effect of the selfish genetic element.\nExamples.\nSegregation distorters.\nSome selfish genetic elements manipulate the to their own advantage, and so end up being overrepresented in the gametes. Such distortion can occur in various ways, and the umbrella term that encompasses all of them is segregation distortion. Some elements can preferentially be transmitted in egg cells as opposed to polar bodies during meiosis, where only the former will be fertilized and transmitted to the next generation. Any gene that can manipulate the odds of ending up in the egg rather than the polar body will have a transmission advantage, and will increase in frequency in a population.\nSegregation distortion can happen in several ways. When this process occurs during meiosis it is referred to as . Many forms of segregation distortion occur in male gamete formation, where there is differential mortality of spermatids during the process of sperm maturation or . The segregation distorter (SD) in \"Drosophila melanogaster\" is the best studied example, and it involves a nuclear envelope protein Ran-GAP and the X-linked repeat array called Responder (Rsp), where the SD allele of Ran-GAP favors its own transmission only in the presence of a Rspsensitive allele on the homologous chromosome. SD acts to kill RSPsensitive sperm, in a post-meiotic process (hence it is not strictly speaking meiotic drive). Systems like this can have interesting rock-paper-scissors dynamics, oscillating between the SD-RSPinsensitive, SD+-RSPinsensitive and SD+-RSPsensitive haplotypes. The SD-RSPsensitive haplotype is not seen because it essentially commits suicide.\nWhen segregation distortion acts on sex chromosomes, they can skew the sex ratio. The SR system in \"Drosophila pseudoobscura\", for example, is on the X chromosome, and XSR/Y males produce only daughters, whereas females undergo normal meiosis with Mendelian proportions of gametes. Segregation distortion systems would drive the favored allele to fixation, except that most of the cases where these systems have been identified have the driven allele opposed by some other selective force. One example is the lethality of the t-haplotype in mice, another is the effect on male fertility of the Sex Ratio system in \"D. pseudoobscura\".\nHoming endonucleases.\nA phenomenon closely related to segregation distortion is homing endonucleases. These are enzymes that cut DNA in a sequence-specific way, and those cuts, generally double-strand breaks, are then \"healed\" by the regular DNA repair machinery. Homing endonucleases insert themselves into the genome at the site homologous to the first insertion site, resulting in a conversion of a heterozygote into a homozygote bearing a copy of the homing endonuclease on both homologous chromosomes. This gives homing endonucleases an allele frequency dynamics rather similar to a segregation distortion system, and generally unless opposed by strong countervailing selection, they are expected to go to fixation in a population. CRISPR-Cas9 technology allows the artificial construction of homing endonuclease systems. These so-called \"gene drive\" systems pose a combination of great promise for biocontrol but also potential risk.\nTransposable elements.\nTransposable elements (TEs) include a wide variety of DNA sequences that all have the ability to move to new locations in the genome of their host. Transposons do this by a direct cut-and-paste mechanism, whereas retrotransposons need to produce an RNA intermediate to move. TEs were first discovered in maize by Barbara McClintock in the 1940s and their ability to occur in both active and quiescent states in the genome was also first elucidated by McClintock. TEs have been referred to as selfish genetic elements because they have some control over their own propagation in the genome. Most random insertions into the genome appear to be relatively innocuous, but they can disrupt critical gene functions with devastating results. For example, TEs have been linked to a variety of human diseases, ranging from cancer to haemophilia. TEs that tend to avoid disrupting vital functions in the genome tend to remain in the genome longer, and hence they are more likely to be found in innocuous locations.\nBoth plant and animal hosts have evolved means for reducing the fitness impact of TEs, both by directly silencing them and by reducing their ability to transpose in the genome. It would appear that hosts in general are fairly tolerant of TEs in their genomes, since a sizable portion (30-80%) of the genome of many animals and plants is TEs. When the host is able to stop their movement, TEs can simply be frozen in place, and it then can take millions of years for them to mutate away. The fitness of a TE is a combination of its ability to expand in numbers within a genome, to evade host defenses, but also to avoid eroding host fitness too drastically. The effect of TEs in the genome is not entirely selfish. Because their insertion into the genome can disrupt gene function, sometimes those disruptions can have positive fitness value for the host. Many adaptive changes in \"Drosophila\" and dogs for example, are associated with TE insertions.\nB chromosomes.\nB chromosomes refer to chromosomes that are not required for the viability or fertility of the organism, but exist in addition to the normal (A) set. They persist in the population and accumulate because they have the ability to propagate their own transmission independently of the A chromosomes. They often vary in copy number between individuals of the same species.\nB chromosomes were first detected over a century ago. Though typically smaller than normal chromosomes, their gene poor, heterochromatin-rich structure made them visible to early cytogenetic techniques. B chromosomes have been thoroughly studied and are estimated to occur in 15% of all eukaryotic species. In general, they appear to be particularly common among eudicot plants, rare in mammals, and absent in birds. In 1945, they were the subject of Gunnar \u00d6stergren's classic paper \"Parasitic nature of extra fragment chromosomes\", where he argues that the variation in abundance of B chromosomes between and within species is because of the parasitic properties of the Bs. This was the first time genetic material was referred to as \"parasitic\" or \"selfish\". B chromosome number correlates positively with genome size and has also been linked to a decrease in egg production in the grasshopper \"Eyprepocnemis plorans\".\nSelfish mitochondria.\nGenomic conflicts often arise because not all genes are inherited in the same way. Probably the best example of this is the conflict between uniparentally (usually but not always, maternally) inherited mitochondrial and biparentally inherited nuclear genes. Indeed, one of the earliest clear statements about the possibility of genomic conflict was made by the English botanist Dan Lewis in reference to the conflict between maternally inherited mitochondrial and biparentally inherited nuclear genes over sex allocation in hermaphroditic plants.\nA single cell typically contains multiple mitochondria, creating a situation for competition over transmission. Uniparental inheritance has been suggested to be a way to reduce the opportunity for selfish mitochondria to spread, as it ensures all mitochondria share the same genome, thus removing the opportunity for competition. This view remains widely held, but has been challenged. Why inheritance ended up being maternal, rather than paternal, is also much debated, but one key hypothesis is that the mutation rate is lower in female compared to male gametes.\nThe conflict between mitochondrial and nuclear genes is especially easy to study in flowering plants. Flowering plants are typically hermaphrodites, and the conflict thus occurs within a single individual. Mitochondrial genes are typically only transmitted through female gametes, and therefore from their point of view the production of pollen leads to an evolutionary dead end. Any mitochondrial mutation that can affect the amount of resources the plant invests in the female reproductive functions at the expense of the male reproductive functions improves its own chance of transmission. Cytoplasmic male sterility is the loss of male fertility, typically through loss of functional pollen production, resulting from a mitochondrial mutation. In many species where cytoplasmic male sterility occurs, the nuclear genome has evolved so-called restorer genes, which repress the effects of the cytoplasmic male sterility genes and restore the male function, making the plant a hermaphrodite again.\nThe co-evolutionary arms race between selfish mitochondrial genes and nuclear compensatory alleles can often be detected by crossing individuals from different species that have different combinations of male sterility genes and nuclear restorers, resulting in hybrids with a mismatch.\nAnother consequence of the maternal inheritance of the mitochondrial genome is the so-called Mother's Curse. Because genes in the mitochondrial genome are strictly maternally inherited, mutations that are beneficial in females can spread in a population even if they are deleterious in males. Explicit screens in fruit flies have successfully identified such female-neutral but male-harming mtDNA mutations. Furthermore, a 2017 paper showed how a mitochondrial mutation causing Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy, a male-biased eye disease, was brought over by one of the \"Filles du roi\" that arrived in Quebec, Canada, in the 17th century and subsequently spread among many descendants.\nGenomic imprinting.\nAnother sort of conflict that genomes face is that between the mother and father competing for control of gene expression in the offspring, including the complete silencing of one parental allele. Due to differences in methylation status of gametes, there is an inherent asymmetry to the maternal and paternal genomes that can be used to drive a differential parent-of-origin expression. This results in a violation of Mendel's rules at the level of expression, not transmission, but if the gene expression affects fitness, it can amount to a similar result.\nImprinting seems like a maladaptive phenomenon, since it essentially means giving up diploidy, and heterozygotes for one defective allele are in trouble if the active allele is the one that is silenced. Several human diseases, such as Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes, are associated with defects in imprinted genes. The asymmetry of maternal and paternal expression suggests that some kind of conflict between these two genomes might be driving the evolution of imprinting. In particular, several genes in placental mammals display expression of paternal genes that maximize offspring growth, and maternal genes that tend to keep that growth in check. Many other conflict-based theories about the evolution of genomic imprinting have been put forward.\nAt the same time, genomic or sexual conflict are not the only possible mechanisms whereby imprinting can evolve. Several molecular mechanisms for genomic imprinting have been described, and all have the aspect that maternally and paternally derived alleles are made to have distinct epigenetic marks, in particular the degree of methylation of cytosines. An important point to note regarding genomic imprinting is that it is quite heterogeneous, with different mechanisms and different consequences of having single parent-of-origin expression. For example, examining the imprinting status of closely related species allows one to see that a gene that is moved by an inversion into close proximity of imprinted genes may itself acquire an imprinted status, even if there is no particular fitness consequence of the imprinting.\nGreenbeards.\nA greenbeard gene is a gene that has the ability to recognize copies of itself in other individuals and then make its carrier act preferentially toward such individuals. The name itself comes from thought-experiment first presented by William Hamilton and then it was developed and given its current name by Richard Dawkins in \"The Selfish Gene.\" The point of the thought experiment was to highlight that from a gene's-eye view, it is not the genome-wide relatedness that matters (which is usually how kin selection operates, i.e. cooperative behavior is directed towards relatives), but the relatedness at the particular locus that underlies the social behavior.\nFollowing Dawkins, a greenbeard is usually defined as a gene, or set of closely linked genes, that has three effects:\nGreenbeards were long thought to be a fun theoretical idea, with limited possibility of them actually existing in nature. However, since its conception, several examples have been identified, including in yeast, slime moulds, and fire ants. \u00a0\nThere has been some debate whether greenbeard genes should be considered selfish genetic elements. Conflict between a greenbeard locus and the rest of the genome can arise because during a given social interaction between two individuals, the relatedness at the greenbeard locus can be higher than at other loci in the genome. As a consequence, it may in the interest of the greenbeard locus to perform a costly social act, but not in the interest of the rest of the genome.\nIn conjunction with selfish genetic elements, greenbeard selection has also been used as a theoretical explanation for suicide.\nConsequences to the host.\nSpecies extinction.\nPerhaps one of the clearest ways to see that the process of natural selection does not always have organismal fitness as the sole driver is when selfish genetic elements have their way without restriction. In such cases, selfish elements can, in principle, result in species extinction. This possibility was pointed out already in 1928 by Sergey Gershenson and then in 1967, Bill Hamilton developed a formal population genetic model for a case of segregation distortion of sex chromosomes driving a population to extinction. In particular, if a selfish element should be able to direct the production of sperm, such that males bearing the element on the Y chromosome would produce an excess of Y-bearing sperm, then in the absence of any countervailing force, this would ultimately result in the Y chromosome going to fixation in the population, producing an extremely male-biased sex ratio. In ecologically challenged species, such biased sex ratios imply that the conversion of resources to offspring becomes very inefficient, to the point of risking extinction.\nSpeciation.\nSelfish genetic elements have been shown to play a role in speciation. This could happen because the presence of selfish genetic elements can result in changes in morphology and/or life history, but ways by which the co-evolution between selfish genetic elements and their suppressors can cause reproductive isolation through so-called Bateson\u2013Dobzhansky\u2013Muller incompatibilities has received particular attention.\nAn early striking example of hybrid dysgenesis induced by a selfish genetic element was the \"P\" element in \"Drosophila\". If males carrying the \"P\" element were crossed to females lacking it, the resulting offspring suffered from reduced fitness. However, offspring of the reciprocal cross were normal, as would be expected since piRNAs are maternally inherited. The \"P\" element is typically present only in wild strains, and not in lab strains of \"D. melanogaster\", as the latter were collected before the \"P\" elements were introduced into the species, probably from a closely related \"Drosophila\" species. The \"P\" element story is also a good example of how the rapid co-evolution between selfish genetic elements and their silencers can lead to incompatibilities on short evolutionary time scales, as little as within a few decades.\nSeveral other examples of selfish genetic elements causing reproductive isolation have since been demonstrated. Crossing different species of \"Arabidopsis\" results in both higher activity of transposable elements and disruption in imprinting, both of which have been linked to fitness reduction in the resulting hybrids. Hybrid dysgenesis has also been shown to be caused by centromeric drive in barley and in several species of angiosperms by mito-nuclear conflict.\nGenome-size variation.\nAttempts to understand the extraordinary variation in genome size (C-value)\u2014animals vary 7,000 fold and land plants some 2,400-fold\u2014has a long history in biology. However, this variation is poorly correlated with gene number or any measure of organismal complexity, which led CA Thomas to coin the term C-value paradox in 1971. The discovery of non-coding DNA resolved some of the paradox, and most current researchers now use the term \"C-value enigma\".\nTwo kinds of selfish genetic elements in particular have been shown to contribute to genome-size variation: B chromosomes and transposable elements. The contribution of transposable elements to the genome is especially well studied in plants. A striking example is how the genome of the model organism \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" contains the same number of genes as that of the Norwegian spruce (\"Picea abies\"), around 30,000, but accumulation of transposons means that the genome of the latter is some 100 times larger. Transposable element abundance has also been shown to cause the unusually large genomes found in salamanders.\nThe presence of an abundance of transposable elements in many eukaryotic genomes was a central theme of the original selfish DNA papers mentioned above (See Conceptual developments). Most people quickly accepted the central message of those papers, that the existence of transposable elements can be explained by selfish selection at the gene level and there is no need to invoke individual level selection. However, the idea that organisms keep transposable elements around as genetic reservoir to \"speed up evolution\" or for other regulatory functions persists in some quarters. In 2012, when the ENCODE Project published a paper claiming that 80% of the human genome can be assigned a function, a claim interpreted by many as the death of the idea of junk DNA, this debate was reignited.\nApplications in agriculture and biotechnology.\nCytoplasmic male sterility in plant breeding.\nA common problem for plant breeders is unwanted self-fertilization. This is particularly a problem when breeders try to cross two different strains to create a new hybrid strain. One way to avoid this is manual emasculation, i.e. physically removing anthers to render the individual male sterile. Cytoplasmic male sterility offers an alternative to this laborious exercise. Breeders cross a strain that carries a cytoplasmic male sterility mutation with a strain that does not, the latter acting as the pollen donor. If the hybrid offspring are to be harvested for their seed (like maize), and therefore needs to be male fertile, the parental strains need to be homozygous for the restorer allele. In contrast, in species that harvested for their vegetable parts, like onions, this is not an issue. This technique has been used in a wide variety of crops, including rice, maize, sunflower, wheat, and cotton.\nPiggyBac vectors.\nWhile many transposable elements seem to do no good for the host, some transposable elements have been \"tamed\" by molecular biologists so that the elements can be made to insert and excise at the will of the scientist. Such elements are especially useful for doing genetic manipulations, like inserting foreign DNA into the genomes of a variety of organisms.\nOne excellent example of this is PiggyBac, a transposable element that can efficiently move between cloning vectors and chromosomes using a \"cut and paste\" mechanism. The investigator constructs a PiggyBac element with the desired payload spliced in, and a second element (the PiggyBac transposase), located on another plasmid vector, can be co-transfected into the target cell. The PiggyBac transposase cuts at the inverted terminal repeat sequences located on both ends of the PiggyBac vector and efficiently moves the contents from the original sites and integrates them into chromosomal positions where the sequence TTAA is found. The three things that make PiggyBac so useful are the remarkably high efficiency of this cut-and-paste operation, its ability to take payloads up to 200 kb in size, and its ability to leave a perfectly seamless cut from a genomic site, leaving no sequences or mutations behind.\nCRISPR gene drive and homing endonuclease systems.\nCRISPR allows the construction of artificial homing endonucleases, where the construct produces guide RNAs that cut the target gene, and homologous flanking sequences then allow insertion of the same construct harboring the Cas9 gene and the guide RNAs. Such gene drives ought to have the ability to rapidly spread in a population (see Gene-drive systems), and one practical application of such a system that has been proposed is to apply it to a pest population, greatly reducing its numbers or even driving it extinct. This has not yet been attempted in the field, but gene drive constructs have been tested in the lab, and the ability to insert into the wild-type homologous allele in heterozygotes for the gene drive has been demonstrated. Unfortunately, the double-strand break that is introduced by Cas9 can be corrected by homology directed repair, which would make a perfect copy of the drive, or by non-homologous end joining, which would produce \"resistant\" alleles unable to further propagate themselves. When Cas9 is expressed outside of meiosis, it seems like non-homologous end joining predominates, making this the biggest hurdle to practical application of gene drives.\nMathematical theory.\nMuch of the confusion regarding ideas about selfish genetic elements center on the use of language and the way the elements and their evolutionary dynamics are described. Mathematical models allow the assumptions and the rules to be given \"a priori\" for establishing mathematical statements about the expected dynamics of the elements in populations. The consequences of having such elements in genomes can then be explored objectively. The mathematics can define very crisply the different classes of elements by their precise behavior within a population, sidestepping any distracting verbiage about the inner hopes and desires of greedy selfish genes. There are many good examples of this approach, and this article focuses on segregation distorters, gene drive systems and transposable elements.\nSegregation distorters.\nThe mouse t-allele is a classic example of a segregation distorter system that has been modeled in great detail. Heterozygotes for a t-haplotype produce &gt;90% of their gametes bearing the t (see Segregation distorters), and homozygotes for a t-haplotype die as embryos. This can result in a stable polymorphism, with an equilibrium frequency that depends on the drive strength and direct fitness impacts of t-haplotypes. This is a common theme in the mathematics of segregation distorters:virtually every example we know entails a countervailing selective effect, without which the allele with biased transmission would go to fixation and the segregation distortion would no longer be manifested. Whenever sex chromosomes undergo segregation distortion, the population sex ratio is altered, making these systems particularly interesting. Two classic examples of segregation distortion involving sex chromosomes include the \"Sex Ratio\" X chromosomes of \"Drosophila pseudoobscura\" and Y chromosome drive suppressors of \"Drosophila mediopunctata\". A crucial point about the theory of segregation distorters is that just because there are fitness effects acting against the distorter, this does not guarantee that there will be a stable polymorphism. In fact, some sex chromosome drivers can produce frequency dynamics with wild oscillations and cycles.\nGene-drive systems.\nThe idea of spreading a gene into a population as a means of population control is actually quite old, and models for the dynamics of introduced compound chromosomes date back to the 1970s. Subsequently, the population genetics theory for homing endonucleases and CRISPR-based gene drives has become much more advanced. An important component of modeling these processes in natural populations is to consider the genetic response in the target population. For one thing, any natural population will harbor standing genetic variation, and that variation might well include polymorphism in the sequences homologous to the guide RNAs, or the homology arms that are meant to direct the repair. In addition, different hosts and different constructs may have quite different rates of non-homologous end joining, the form of repair that results in broken or resistant alleles that no longer spread. Full accommodation of the host factors presents considerable challenge for getting a gene drive construct to go to fixation, and Unckless and colleagues show that in fact the current constructs are quite far from being able to attain even moderate frequencies in natural populations. This is another excellent example showing that just because an element appears to have a strong selfish transmission advantage, whether it can successfully spread may depend on subtle configurations of other parameters in the population.\nTransposable elements.\nTo model the dynamics of transposable elements (TEs) within a genome, one has to realize that the elements behave like a population within each genome, and they can jump from one haploid genome to another by horizontal transfer. The mathematics has to describe the rates and dependencies of these transfer events. It was observed early on that the rate of jumping of many TEs varies with copy number, and so the first models simply used an empirical function for the rate of transposition. This had the advantage that it could be measured by experiments in the lab, but it left open the question of why the rate differs among elements and differs with copy number. Stan Sawyer and Daniel L. Hartl fitted models of this sort to a variety of bacterial TEs, and obtained quite good fits between copy number and transmission rate and the population-wide incidence of the TEs. TEs in higher organisms, like \"Drosophila\", have a very different dynamics because of sex, and Brian Charlesworth, Deborah Charlesworth, Charles Langley, John Brookfield and others modeled TE copy number evolution in \"Drosophila\" and other species. What is impressive about all these modeling efforts is how well they fitted empirical data, given that this was decades before discovery of the fact that the host fly has a powerful defense mechanism in the form of piRNAs. Incorporation of host defense along with TE dynamics into evolutionary models of TE regulation is still in its infancy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44354", "revid": "38758555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44354", "title": "Carole Lombard", "text": "American actress (1908\u20131942)\nCarole Lombard (born Jane Alice Peters; October 6, 1908\u00a0\u2013 January 16, 1942) was an American actress, particularly noted for her energetic, often off-beat roles in screwball comedies. In 1999, the American Film Institute ranked Lombard 23rd on its list of the greatest female stars of Classic Hollywood Cinema.\nLombard was born into a wealthy family in Fort Wayne, Indiana, but was raised in Los Angeles by her single mother. At 12, she was recruited by director Allan Dwan and made her screen debut in \"A Perfect Crime\" (1921). She signed a contract with the Fox Film Corporation at age 16, but mainly played bit parts and was dropped after a year. Her career came close to ending shortly before her 19th birthday when a shattered windshield from a car accident left a scar on her face, but she overcame this challenge and appeared in 15 short comedies for Mack Sennett from 1927 to 1929, and then began appearing in feature films such as \"High Voltage\" (1929) and \"The Racketeer\" (1929). After a successful appearance in \"The Arizona Kid\" (1930), she was signed to a contract by Paramount Pictures.\nParamount quickly began casting Lombard as a leading lady, primarily in drama films. Her profile increased when she married William Powell in 1931, but the couple divorced amicably after two years. A turning point in Lombard's career came when she starred in Howard Hawks's pioneering screwball comedy \"Twentieth Century\" (1934). The actress found her niche in this genre, and continued to appear in films such as \"Hands Across the Table\" (1935, forming a popular partnership with Fred MacMurray); \"My Man Godfrey\" (1936), for which she was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress and co-starring with Powell; and \"Nothing Sacred\" (1937). At this time, Lombard married Clark Gable, and the supercouple gained much attention from the media. Keen to win an Oscar, Lombard began to move toward serious roles at the end of the decade. Unsuccessful in this aim, she returned to comedy in Alfred Hitchcock's \"Mr. &amp; Mrs. Smith\" (1941) and Ernst Lubitsch's \"To Be or Not to Be\" (1942), her final film role.\nLombard died at the age of 33 in the crash of TWA Flight 3 on Mount Potosi, Nevada, while returning from a war bond tour. She was one of the definitive actresses of the screwball comedy genre and American comedy and an icon of American cinema.\nLife and career.\nEarly life and education (1908\u20131920).\nLombard was born in Fort Wayne, Indiana, on October 6, 1908, at 704 Rockhill Street. Christened Jane Alice Peters, she was the third child and only daughter of Frederic Christian Peters and Elizabeth Jayne \"Bessie\" (Knight) Peters. Her two older brothers, with whom she was close all her life, were Frederic Charles and John Stuart. Lombard's parents both came from wealthy families, and biographer Robert Matzen called her early years her \"silver spoon period\". Her parents' marriage was strained, and in October 1914, her mother took the children and moved to Los Angeles. Although the couple did not divorce, the separation was permanent. Her father's continued financial support allowed the family to live comfortably, and they settled into an apartment near Venice Boulevard.\nAt Virgil Junior High School, Lombard participated in tennis, volleyball, and swimming, and won trophies in athletics. At the age of 12, her passion for sports landed Lombard her first screen role. While playing baseball, she caught the attention of film director Allan Dwan, who later recalled seeing \"a cute-looking little tomboy... out there knocking the hell out of the other kids, playing better baseball than they were. And I needed someone of her type for this picture.\" With the encouragement of her mother, Lombard took a small role in the melodrama \"A Perfect Crime\" (1921). She was on set for two days, playing the sister of Monte Blue. Dwan later said \"She ate it up.\"\nCareer beginnings and Fox contract (1921\u20131926).\nThough \"A Perfect Crime\" was not widely distributed, the experience spurred Lombard and her mother to audition for more film work, but she was unsuccessful. While appearing as the queen of Fairfax High School's May Day Carnival at the age of 15, Lombard was scouted by an employee of Charlie Chaplin and offered a screen test to appear in \"The Gold Rush\" (1925). Lombard did not win the role, but her test was seen by the Vitagraph Film Company, which expressed interest in signing her. Although this did not materialize, their condition that she adopt a new first name led to her selecting the name \"Carole\" after a girl with whom she played tennis at Virgil Jr. High School.\nIn October 1924, 16-year-old Lombard signed a contract with the Fox Film Corporation. Lombard's mother contacted gossip columnist Louella Parsons, who arranged a screen test. According to biographer Larry Swindell, Lombard's beauty convinced studio head Winfield Sheehan to sign her to a $75-per-week contract, and she abandoned her schooling to pursue the new career. Fox disliked her surname and she was renamed Carole Lombard, the surname of a family friend.\nMost of Lombard's appearances with Fox were bit parts in low-budget Westerns and adventure films. She later said, \"All I had to do was simper prettily at the hero and scream with terror when he battled with the villain.\" However, she enjoyed other aspects of film work such as photo shoots, costume fittings, and socializing with actors on the studio set. Lombard embraced the flapper lifestyle and became a regular at the Cocoanut Grove nightclub, where she won several Charleston dance competitions.\nIn March 1925, Lombard landed a leading role in the drama \"Marriage in Transit\" with Edmund Lowe. A reviewer for \"Motion Picture News\" wrote that Lombard displayed \"good poise and considerable charm\". However, the studio heads were unconvinced that Lombard was leading-lady material, and her contract was not renewed. Wes D. Gehring, in his 2003 biography \"Carole Lombard: The Hoosier Tornado\", has suggested a facial scar resulting from a car crash was a factor in this decision, but that incident occurred nearly two years later on September 9, 1927. According to historian Olympia Kiriakou, on the night of the crash, Lombard was on a date with a man named Harry Cooper. On Santa Monica Boulevard, Cooper hit another car; the windshield shattered and shards of glass cut \"Lombard's face from her nose and across her left cheek to her eye.\" Lombard underwent reconstructive surgery and faced a long recovery period. For the remainder of her career, Lombard learned to hide the mark with makeup and careful lighting. At the time of the crash, Lombard was already under contract with Mack Sennett. In October 1927, Lombard and her mother Bess sued Cooper for $35,000 in damages, citing in the lawsuit that \"where she formerly was able to earn a salary of $300 monthly as a Sennett girl, she is now unable to obtain employment of any kind.\" The lawsuit was settled out of court, and Lombard received $3,000. Although Lombard feared that the incident would end her career, Sennett pledged to help her recover. He afforded her \"lucrative film roles and ample publicity\", including the nickname \"Carole of the Curves\". Kiriakou explains, \"the nickname simultaneously drew audiences' focus away from her facial scars and worked harmoniously with the physicality and female sensuality that were emblematic of Lombard's performances\" in Sennett's films.\nBreakthrough and early success (1927\u20131929).\nAlthough Lombard initially had reservations about slapstick comedies, she became one of Sennett Bathing Beauties and appeared in 18 short films from September 1927 to March 1929. Lombard's first experiences in comedy provided valuable training for her future comedic work. In 1940, she called her Sennett years \"the turning point of [my] acting career\".\nSennett's productions were distributed by Path\u00e9 Exchange, and the company began casting Lombard in feature films. She had prominent roles in \"Show Folks\" and \"Ned McCobb's Daughter\" (both 1928), and reviewers observed that she made a \"good impression\" and was \"worth watching\". The following year, Path\u00e9 elevated Lombard to a leading lady. Her success in Raoul Walsh's picture \"Me, Gangster\" (also 1928), with June Collyer and Don Terry in his film debut, finally eased the pressure that her family had been exerting for her to succeed.\nIn Howard Higgin's \"High Voltage\" (1929), Lombard's first sound film, she played a criminal in the custody of a deputy sheriff, both of whom are among bus passengers stranded in deep snow. Her next film, the comedy \"Big News\" (1929), cast her with Robert Armstrong and was a critical and commercial success. Lombard was reunited with Armstrong for the crime drama \"The Racketeer\", released in late 1929. The review in \"Film Daily\" wrote: \"Carol Lombard proves a real surprise, and does her best work to date. In fact, this is the first opportunity she has had to prove that she has the stuff to go over.\"\nParamount contract and first marriage (1930\u20131933).\nLombard returned to Fox for a one-off role in the Western \"The Arizona Kid\" (1930). It was a big release for the studio, starring the popular actor Warner Baxter, in which Lombard received third billing. Following the success of the film, Paramount Pictures recruited Lombard and signed her to a $350-per-week contract, gradually increasing to $3,500 per week by 1936. They cast her in the Buddy Rogers comedy \"Safety in Numbers\" (also 1930), and one critic observed of her work, \"Lombard proves [to be] an ace comedienne.\" For her second assignment, \"Fast and Loose\" (also 1930) with Miriam Hopkins, Paramount mistakenly credited the actress as \"Carole Lombard\". She decided she liked this spelling and it became her permanent screen name.\nLombard appeared in five films released during 1931, beginning with the Frank Tuttle comedy \"It Pays to Advertise\". Her next two films, \"Man of the World\" and \"Ladies Man\", both featured William Powell, Paramount's top male star. Lombard had been a fan of the actor before they met and they were soon in a relationship. The differences between the pair have been noted by biographers: She was 22, carefree, and famously foul-mouthed, and he was 38, intellectual, and sophisticated. Despite this, Lombard married Powell on June 26, 1931, at her Beverly Hills home. Talking to the media, she argued for the benefits of \"love between two people who are diametrically different\", claiming that their relationship allowed for a \"perfect see-saw love\".\nThe marriage to Powell increased Lombard's fame, while she continued to please critics with her work in \"Up Pops the Devil\" and \"I Take this Woman\" (both 1931). In reviews for the latter film, which co-starred Gary Cooper, several critics predicted that Lombard was set to become a major star. She went on to appear in five films throughout 1932. \"No One Man\" and \"Sinners in the Sun\" were not successful, but Edward Buzzell's romantic picture \"Virtue\" was well received. After featuring in the drama \"No More Orchids\", Lombard was cast as the wife of a con artist in \"No Man of Her Own\" with Clark Gable The film was a critical and commercial success, and Wes Gehring writes that it was \"arguably Lombard's finest film appearance\" to that point. It was the only picture that Gable and Lombard made together. There was no romantic interest at this time, however, as she recounted to Garson Kanin: \"[we] did all kinds of hot love scenes\u00a0... and I never got any kind of tremble out of him at all\".\nIn August 1933, Lombard and Powell divorced after 26 months of marriage, but they remained friends until the end of Lombard's life. At the time, she blamed it on their careers, but in a 1936 interview, she admitted that this \"had little to do with the divorce. We were just two completely incompatible people\".\nShe appeared in five films that year, beginning with the drama \"From Hell to Heaven\" and continuing with \"Supernatural\", her only horror vehicle. After a small role in \"The Eagle and the Hawk\", a war film starring Fredric March and Cary Grant, she starred in two melodramas: \"Brief Moment\", which critics enjoyed, and \"White Woman\", where she was paired with Charles Laughton.\nLombard was involved romantically with Russ Columbo, the famous crooner killed in a tragic accident in 1934. Lombard had been guiding Columbo's movie and radio career and told Sonia Lee of \"Mirror\" magazine in 1934 that they had been engaged. Other press outlets had reported on their relationship earlier that year; \"Screenland Magazine\" declared, \"the Russ Columbo and Carole Lombard romance is one of Hollywood's most charming.\"\nSuccess in screwball comedies (1934\u20131935).\n1934 marked a high point in Lombard's career, beginning with Wesley Ruggles's musical drama \"Bolero\", where George Raft and she showcased their dancing skills in an extravagantly staged performance to Maurice Ravel's \"Bol\u00e9ro\". She had been offered the lead female role in \"It Happened One Night\" but turned it down because of scheduling conflicts. \"Bolero\" was favorably received, while her next film \"We're Not Dressing\" was a box-office hit with Bing Crosby.\nLombard was then recruited by director Howard Hawks to star in his screwball \"Twentieth Century\" which proved a watershed in her career and made her a major star. Hawks had seen her inebriated at a party, where he found her to be \"hilarious and uninhibited and just what the part needed\", and she was cast with John Barrymore. In \"Twentieth Century\", Lombard plays an actress who is pursued by her former mentor, a flamboyant Broadway impresario. Hawks and Barrymore were unimpressed with her work in rehearsals, finding that she was \"acting\" too hard and giving a stiff performance. The director encouraged Lombard to relax, be herself, and act on her instincts. She responded well to this tutoring, and reviews for the film commented on her unexpectedly \"fiery talent\", \"a Lombard like no Lombard you've ever seen\". The \"Los Angeles Times\"' critic felt that she was \"entirely different\" from her formerly cool, \"calculated\" persona: \"she vibrates with life and passion, abandon and diablerie\".\nThe next films in which Lombard appeared were Henry Hathaway's \"Now and Forever\" (1934), featuring Gary Cooper and the new child star Shirley Temple, and \"Lady by Choice\" (1934), which was a critical and commercial success. \"The Gay Bride\" (1934) placed her with Chester Morris in a gangster comedy, but it was panned by critics. She reunited with George Raft for \"Rumba\" (1935) where she was given the opportunity to repeat the screwball success of \"Twentieth Century\". In Mitchell Leisen's \"Hands Across the Table\" (1935), she portrays a manicurist in search of a rich husband, played by Fred MacMurray. Critics praised the film, and \"Photoplay\"'s reviewer stated that Lombard had reaffirmed her talent for the genre. It is remembered as one of her best films, and the pairing of Lombard and MacMurray proved so successful that they made three more pictures together.\nCritical recognition (1936\u20131937).\nLombard's first film of 1936 was \"Love Before Breakfast\", described by Gehring as \"\"The Taming of the Shrew\", screwball style\". In William K. Howard's \"The Princess Comes Across\", her second comedy with MacMurray, she played a budding actress who wins a film contract by masquerading as a Swedish princess. The performance was considered a satire of Greta Garbo and was widely praised by critics. Lombard's success continued as she was recruited by Universal Studios to star in the screwball comedy \"My Man Godfrey\" (1936). William Powell, who was playing the eponymous Godfrey, insisted on her being cast as the female lead; despite their divorce, the pair remained friendly and Powell felt she would be perfect in the role of Irene, a zany heiress who employs a \"forgotten man\" as the family butler. The film was directed by Gregory LaCava, who knew Lombard personally and advised that she draw on her \"eccentric nature\" for the role. She worked hard on the performance, particularly with finding the appropriate facial expressions for Irene. \"My Man Godfrey\" was released to great acclaim and was a box-office hit. It received six nominations at the 9th Academy Awards, including Lombard for Best Actress. Biographers cite it as her finest performance, and Frederick Ott says it \"clearly established [her] as a comedienne of the first rank.\"\nBy 1937, Lombard was one of Hollywood's most popular actresses, and also the highest-paid star in Hollywood following the deal which Myron Selznick negotiated with Paramount that brought her $450,000, more than five times the salary of the U.S. president. As her salary was widely reported in the press, Lombard stated that 80% of her earnings went in taxes, but that she was happy to help improve her country. The comments earned her much positive publicity, and President Franklin D. Roosevelt sent her a personal letter of thanks.\nHer first release of the year was Leisen's \"Swing High, Swing Low\", a third pairing with MacMurray. The film focused on a romance between two cabaret performers, and was a critical and commercial success. It had been primarily a drama, with occasional moments of comedy, but for her next project, \"Nothing Sacred\", Lombard returned to the screwball genre. Producer David O. Selznick, impressed by her work in \"My Man Godfrey\", was eager to make a comedy with the actress and hired Ben Hecht to write an original screenplay for her. \"Nothing Sacred\", directed by William Wellman and co-starring Fredric March, satirized the journalism industry and \"the gullible urban masses\". Lombard portrayed a small-town girl who pretends to be dying and finds her story exploited by a New York reporter. The film was Lombard's only Technicolor feature-length production, and she later praised it highly as one of her personal favorites.\nLombard continued with screwball comedies, next starring in \"True Confession\" (1937), what Swindell calls one of her \"wackiest\" films, . She played a compulsive liar who wrongly confesses to murder. Lombard loved the script and was excited about the project, which reunited her with John Barrymore and was her final appearance with MacMurray. Her prediction that it \"smacked of a surefire success\" proved accurate as critics responded positively, and it was popular at the box office.\nDramatic efforts and second marriage (1938\u20131940).\n\"True Confession\" was the last film Lombard made on her Paramount contract, and she remained an independent performer for the rest of her career. Her next film was made at Warner Bros., where she played a famous actress in Mervyn LeRoy's \"Fools for Scandal\" (1938). The comedy met with scathing reviews and was a commercial failure, with Swindell calling it \"one of the most horrendous flops of the thirties\".\n\"Fools for Scandal\" was the only film Lombard made in 1938. By this time, she was devoted to her relationship with Clark Gable. The pair had reunited at a Hollywood party Lombard hosted in January 1936, having met on the set of \"No Man of Her Own\" in 1932. They had initially disliked each other due to their different personalities, but that night, Gable brought Lombard to his hotel, hoping to have sex with her, to which she replied, \"Who do you think you are, Clark Gable?\" He brought her back to the party, then back to her house, where she insulted him about his affair with Loretta Young (which whom he had fathered a secret child). The next morning, regretting her harshness, she sent him doves as a peace offering, and they began a romance early in 1936. The media took great interest in their partnership and frequently questioned if they would wed. Gable was separated from his wife, Maria, but she did not want to grant him a divorce. As his relationship with Lombard became serious, Maria eventually agreed to a settlement. The divorce was finalized in March 1939, and Gable and Lombard eloped in Kingman, Arizona on March 29. The couple bought a ranch in Encino, California, where they kept barnyard animals and enjoyed hunting trips. Almost immediately, Lombard wanted to start a family, but her attempts failed; after two miscarriages and numerous trips to fertility specialists, she was unable to have children. In addition, Gable was frequently unfaithful. Lombard once said, \"My God, you know how I love Pa, but I can't say he's a helluva good lay.\" In early 1938, Lombard officially joined the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, which her mother had been a member of since 1922.\nWhile continuing with a slower work-rate, Lombard decided to move away from comedies and return to dramatic roles. She appeared in \"Made for Each Other\" (1939) with James Stewart playing a couple facing domestic difficulties. Reviews for the film were highly positive, and praised Lombard's dramatic effort; financially, it was a disappointment. Lombard's next appearance came with Cary Grant in the John Cromwell romance \"In Name Only\" (1939), a credit she personally negotiated with RKO Radio Pictures upon hearing of the script and Grant's involvement. The role reflected her recent experiences, as she played a woman in love with a married man whose wife refuses to divorce. She was paid $150,000 for the film, continuing her status as one of Hollywood's highest-paid actresses, and it was a moderate success. At the 12th Academy Awards ceremony in February 1940, Lombard was quoted as comforting Gable after his loss as Rhett Butler from \"Gone with the Wind\", with the comment \"Don't worry, Pappy. We'll bring one home next year\". Gable replied that he felt this had been his last chance to which Lombard was said to have replied, \"Not you, you self-centered bastard. I meant me.\"\nLombard was eager to win an Academy Award, and selected her next project with the expectation that it would bring her the trophy. \"Vigil in the Night\" (1940), directed by George Stevens, featured Lombard as a nurse who faces a series of personal difficulties. Although the performance was praised, she did not get her nomination, as the sombre mood of the picture turned audiences away and box-office returns were poor. Despite the realization that she was best suited to comedies, Lombard completed the drama \"They Knew What They Wanted\" (1940), co-starring Charles Laughton, which was mildly successful, and which did receive an Oscar nomination\u2014for her co-star, William Gargan, for Best Supporting Actor.\nFinal roles (1941\u20131942).\nAccepting that \"my name doesn't sell tickets to serious pictures\", Lombard returned to comedy in \"Mr. &amp; Mrs. Smith\" (1941), about a couple who learns that their marriage is invalid, with Robert Montgomery. Lombard was influential in bringing Alfred Hitchcock, whom she knew through David O. Selznick, to direct one of his most atypical films. It was a commercial success, and audiences were happy with what Swindell calls \"the belated happy news\u00a0... that Carole Lombard was a screwball once more.\"\nIt was nearly a year before Lombard committed to another film, as she focused instead on her home and marriage. Determined that her next film be \"an unqualified smash hit\", she was also careful in selecting a new project. Through her agent, Lombard heard of Ernst Lubitsch's upcoming film: \"To Be or Not to Be\" (1942), a dark comedy that satirized the Nazi takeover of Poland. The actress had long wanted to work with Lubitsch, and felt that the material\u2014although controversial\u2014was a worthy subject. Lombard accepted the role of actress Maria Tura, despite it being a smaller part than she was used to, and was given top billing over the film's male lead Jack Benny. Filming took place in the fall of 1941, and it was reportedly one of the happier experiences of Lombard's career.\nDeath.\nWhen the U.S. entered World War II, Lombard traveled to her home state of Indiana for a war bond rally with her mother and Clark Gable's press agent, Otto Winkler. Lombard raised more than $2 million in defense bonds in a single evening. Her party had been scheduled to return to Los Angeles by train, but Lombard was eager to reach home more quickly and wanted to travel by air. Her mother and Winkler were afraid of flying and insisted that the group follow their original travel plans.\nIn the early morning hours of January 16, 1942, Lombard, her mother and Winkler boarded a Transcontinental and Western Air Douglas DST (Douglas Sleeper Transport) aircraft to return to California. After refueling in Las Vegas, TWA Flight 3 took off at 7:07\u00a0p.m. and crashed into Double Up Peak near the level of Potosi Mountain, southwest of the Las Vegas airport. All 22 aboard, including Lombard, her mother, Winkler and 15 U.S. Army soldiers, were killed. Lombard was 33 years old. The crash's cause was attributed to the flight crew's inability to properly navigate over the mountains surrounding Las Vegas. As a precaution against the possibility of enemy Japanese bomber aircraft coming into American airspace from the Pacific, safety beacons normally used to direct night flights had been turned off, leaving the pilot and crew of the TWA flight without visual warnings of the mountains in their flight path.\nAftermath.\nWhen \"The Jack Benny Program\" aired on January 18, Jack Benny did not attend the live radio broadcast. At its opening, announcer Don Wilson stated Benny would not appear that night, but did not explain why. The show that night did not feature any comedy, just musical numbers. Lombard had been scheduled to appear on the following Sunday's broadcast.\nLombard's funeral was January 21 at Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery in Glendale, California. She was interred beside her mother under the name of Carole Lombard Gable. Despite remarrying twice following her death, Gable was interred beside Lombard when he died in 1960.\n\"To Be or Not to Be\", Lombard's final film, was in post-production at the time of her death. Allegedly, the film's producers decided to cut a line in which Lombard's character asks \"What can happen on a plane?\" out of respect for the circumstances surrounding her death. Although, there is no indication that this line existed and was removed posthumously, the film's script as filed with the Production Code Administration included the addendum:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This certificate is issued with the understanding that Anna's speech: \"No, not at all...\" down to and including: \"She might hit an air pocket.\" has been replaced; also that Sigorsky's speech \"-- maybe you'll want to take care of her after my departure.\" has been omitted.\nAt the time of her death, Lombard had been scheduled to star in the film \"They All Kissed the Bride\"; when production started, she was replaced by Joan Crawford. Crawford donated all of her salary for the film to the Red Cross, which had helped extensively in the recovery of bodies from the air crash.\nShortly after Lombard's death, Gable, who was inconsolable and devastated by his loss, joined the United States Army Air Forces. Lombard had asked him to do that numerous times after the United States had entered World War II. After officer training, Gable headed a six-man motion picture unit attached to a B-17 bomb group in England to film aerial gunners in combat, flying five missions himself. In December 1943, the United States Maritime Commission announced that a Liberty ship named in her honor would be launched. Gable attended the launch of the SS \"Carole Lombard\" on January 15, 1944, the second anniversary of Lombard's war bond drive. The ship was involved in rescuing hundreds of survivors from sunken ships in the Pacific and returning them to safety.\nIn 1962, Jill Winkler Rath, widow of publicist Otto Winkler, filed a $100,000 lawsuit against the $2 million estate of Clark Gable in connection with Winkler's death. The suit was dismissed in Los Angeles Superior Court. Rath, in her action, claimed Gable promised to provide financial aid for her if she would not bring suit against the airline involved. Rath stated she later learned that Gable settled his claim against the airline for $10. He did so because he did not want to repeat his grief in court, and subsequently he provided her no financial aid in his will.\nLegacy.\nAuthor Robert D. Matzen has cited Lombard as \"among the most commercially successful and admired film personalities in Hollywood in the 1930s\", and feminist writer June Sochen believes that Lombard \"demonstrated great knowledge of the mechanics of film making\". George Raft, her co-star in \"Bolero\", was extremely fond of the actress, remarking \"I truly loved Carole Lombard. She was the greatest girl that ever lived and we were the best of pals. Completely honest and outspoken, she was liked by everyone\".\nHistorian Olympia Kiriakou identifies Lombard as a progressive, feminist studio-era star. She describes Lombard's politics as \"proto-feminist\", explaining that \"many of her political and social statements pre-date the second-wave feminist movement, yet were very much in line with the second wave's focus,\" particularly her views about women's roles in the home and workplace. Lombard's independent star persona balanced her femininity and screen glamour with \"male business sense\". She was described by \"Photoplay\" columnist Hart Seymore as the \"perfect example of a modern Career Girl\", which was based on Lombard's capability to \"live by the logical premise that women have equal rights with men.\" In 1937, \"Photoplay\" published an article about Lombard's business acumen entitled \"Carole Lombard tells: 'How I Live by a Man's Code',\" in which she offers readers rules for how to be successful in business and at home such as \"play fair [with men]...don't burn over criticism\u2014stand up to it like a man.\" Notably, in the article Lombard tells readers that she \"doesn't believe in a man's world,\" and encourages women to \"work\u2014and like it,\" adding: \"All women should have something worthwhile to do, and cultivate efficiency at it, whether it be housekeeping or raising chickens. Working women are interesting women.\" But as Kiriakou explains, such an article was published in order \"to elicit a specific response from the fan magazine readers\u2014namely, to view Lombard's independent star as indistinguishable from the Lombard heroines they saw on screen.\"\nMoreover, according to scholar Emily Carman, Lombard's independent female star persona was able to emerge only when she \"attained greater professional autonomy in the mid-1930s,\" ultimately leading her to become one of the first stars of the studio-era to go freelance. Freelancing gave Lombard more autonomy over her career decisions, and the types of roles she was able to play. Additionally, Lombard was the first Hollywood star to propose profit participation: in 1938, she negotiated with Selznick International Pictures to take a reduced salary of $100,000 in exchange for a 20 percent cut of the distributor's gross of $1.6 to $1.7 million, and subsequent smaller percentages as the gross increased. Carman explains that this contract also included a \"no-loan out\" clause, the right to employ Travis Banton as her costume designer of choice, as well as all legal rights to her image. Carman concludes that Lombard's strategic business sense and easy-going nature were central to her independent star persona, and the control she maintained over her career was a challenge to the \"paternalistic structure\" of the studio system.\nLombard was particularly noted for the zaniness of her performances, described as a \"natural prankster, a salty tongued straight-shooter, a feminist precursor and one of the few stars who was beloved by the technicians and studio functionaries who worked with her\". \"Life\" magazine noted that her film personality transcended to real life, \"her conversation, often brilliant, is punctuated by screeches, laughs, growls, gesticulations and the expletives of a sailor's parrot\". Graham Greene praised the \"heartbreaking and nostalgic melodies\" of her faster-than-thought delivery, whereas \"The Independent\" wrote \"Platinum blonde, with a heart-shaped face, delicate, impish features and a figure made to be swathed in silver lam\u00e9, Lombard wriggled expressively through such classics of hysteria as \"Twentieth Century\" and \"My Man Godfrey\".\"\nIn 1999, the American Film Institute ranked Lombard 23rd on its list of the 25 greatest American female screen legends of classic Hollywood cinema, and she has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6930 Hollywood Blvd. Lombard received one Academy Award for Best Actress nomination for \"My Man Godfrey\". Actresses who have portrayed her in films include Jill Clayburgh in \"Gable and Lombard\" (1976), Sharon Gless in \"\" (1980), Denise Crosby in \"Malice in Wonderland\" (1985), Anastasia Hille in \"RKO 281\" (1999) and Vanessa Gray in \"Lucy\" (2003). Lombard's Fort Wayne childhood home has been designated a historic landmark. The city named the nearby bridge over the St. Mary's River the Carole Lombard Memorial Bridge.\nLombard's star at the Hollywood Walk of Fame is shown in the movie \"Pretty Woman\".\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44355", "revid": "26021349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44355", "title": "Selfish gene", "text": "Selfish gene may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44356", "revid": "46072425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44356", "title": "Peter the Great", "text": "Tsar of Russia from 1682 to 1725\nPeter I (, ; 9 June\u00a0[O.S. 30 May]\u00a01672\n\u2013 8\u00a0February\u00a0[O.S. 28 January]\u00a01725), better known as Peter the Great, was the Tsar of all Russia from 1682 and the first Emperor of Russia from 1721 until his death in 1725. He reigned jointly with his half-brother Ivan V until 1696. Peter, as an autocrat, organized a well ordered police state.\nMuch of Peter's reign was consumed by lengthy wars against the Ottoman and Swedish empires. His Azov campaigns were followed by the foundation of the Russian Navy; after his victory in the Great Northern War, Russia annexed a significant portion of the eastern Baltic coastline and was officially renamed from a tsardom to an empire. Peter led a cultural revolution that replaced some of the traditionalist and medieval social and political systems with ones that were modern, scientific, Westernized, and based on the radical Enlightenment.\nIn December 1699, he introduced the Julian calendar, and in 1703, he introduced the first Russian newspaper, \"Sankt-Peterburgskie Vedomosti\", and ordered the civil script, a reform of Russian orthography largely designed by himself. On the shores of the Neva River, he founded Saint Petersburg, a city famously dubbed by Francesco Algarotti as the \"window to the West\". In 1712, Peter relocated the capital from Moscow to St. Petersburg, a status it retained until 1918. Peter had a great interest in plants, animals and minerals, in malformed creatures or exceptions to the law of nature for his cabinet of curiosities. He encouraged research of deformities, all along trying to debunk the superstitious fear of monsters. He promoted industrialization in the Russian Empire and higher education. The Russian Academy of Sciences and the Saint Petersburg State University were founded in 1724, and invited Christian Wolff and Willem 's Gravesande.\nPeter is primarily credited with the modernization of the country, quickly transforming it into a major European power. His administrative reforms, creating a Governing Senate in 1711, the Collegium in 1717 and the Table of Ranks in 1722 had a lasting impact on Russia, and many institutions of the Russian government trace their origins to his reign.\nEarly life.\nPeter grew up at Izmaylovo Estate and was educated at the Amusement Palace from an early age by several tutors commissioned by his father, most notably Nikita Zotov, Patrick Gordon, and Paul Menesius. When his father died in 1676, he left the sovereignty to Peter's elder half-brother, the crippled Feodor\u00a0III. Throughout this period, the government was largely run by Artamon Matveyev, an enlightened friend of Alexis, the political head of the Naryshkin family and one of Peter's greatest childhood benefactors.\nThis position changed when Feodor died in 1682. As Feodor did not leave any children, a dispute arose between the Miloslavsky family (Maria Miloslavskaya was the first wife of Alexis I) and Naryshkin family (Natalya Naryshkina was his second wife) over who should inherit the throne. He jointly ruled with his elder half-brother, Ivan\u00a0V, until 1696. Ivan was next in line but was weakminded and blind. Consequently, the Boyar Duma (a council of Russian nobles) chose the 10-year-old Peter to become tsar, with his mother as regent. A hole was cut in the back of the throne, so that she, literally behind the scenes, could whisper to the two boys.\nThe \"Moscow Grand Discharge\" started in 1677 and was completed in 1688; it affected noble families with high ranks in the administration; the ministries were also reduced in number. This provoked fierce reactions. Sophia, one of Alexis' daughters from his first marriage, led a rebellion of the \"streltsy\" (Russia's elite military corps) in April\u2013May 1682. In the subsequent conflict, some of Peter's relatives and friends were murdered, including Artamon Matveyev, and Peter witnessed some of these acts of political violence.\nThe \"streltsy\" made it possible for Sophia, the Miloslavskys (the clan of Ivan), and their allies to insist that Peter and Ivan be proclaimed joint tsars, with Ivan being acclaimed as the senior. Sophia then acted as regent during the minority of the sovereigns and exercised all power. For seven years, she ruled as an autocrat.\nFrom 1682 to 1689, Peter and his mother were banned to Preobrazhenskoye. At the age of 16, he discovered an English boat on the estate, had it restored and learned to sail. He received a sextant, but did not know how to use it. Peter was fascinated by sundials. Therefore, he began a search for a foreign expert in the German Quarter. Peter befriended Andrew Vinius, a bibliophile, who taught him Dutch and two Dutch carpenters, Frans Timmerman and Karsten Brandt. Peter studied arithmetic, geometry, and military sciences (fortification). He was not interested in a musical education but liked fireworks and drumming.\nPeter was not particularly concerned that others ruled in his name; Boris Golitsyn and Fyodor Apraksin played an important role. He engaged in such pastimes as shipbuilding in Pereslavl-Zalessky and sailing at Lake Pleshcheyevo, as well as mock battles with his toy army. Peter's mother sought to force him to adopt a more conventional approach and arranged his marriage to Eudoxia Lopukhina in 1689. The marriage was a failure, and 10 years later, Peter forced his wife to become a nun and thus freed himself from the union.\nBy the summer of 1689, Peter, planned to take power from his half-sister Sophia, whose position had been weakened by two unsuccessful Crimean campaigns against the Crimean Khanate in an attempt to stop devastating Crimean Tatar raids into Russia's southern lands. When she learned of his designs, Sophia conspired with some leaders of the Streltsy, who continually aroused disorder and dissent. Peter, warned by others from the Streltsy, escaped in the middle of the night to the impenetrable monastery of Troitse-Sergiyeva Lavra; there he slowly gathered adherents who perceived he would win the power struggle. Sophia was eventually overthrown, with Peter\u00a0I and Ivan\u00a0V continuing to act as co-tsars. Peter forced Sophia to enter a convent, where she gave up her name and her position as a member of the royal family.\nMeanwhile, he was a frequent guest in the German quarter, where he met Anna and Willem Mons. In 1692 he sent Eberhard Isbrand Ides as envoy to the Kangxi Emperor of China. In 1693 he sailed to Solovetsky Monastery and accepted divine providence after surviving a storm.\nStill, Peter could not acquire actual control over Russian affairs. Power was instead exercised by his mother. It was only when Natalya died in 1694 that Peter, then aged 22, became an independent sovereign. Formally, Ivan\u00a0V was a co-ruler with Peter, though being ineffective. Peter became the sole ruler when Ivan died in 1696 without male offspring.\nPeter grew to be extremely tall, especially for the time period, reportedly standing . He was seen as a \"second Goliath\" or Samson. Saint-Simon described him in 1717 as \"tall, well-formed and slim... with a look both bewildered and fierce\". Peter had noticeable facial tics, and he may have suffered from neck spasm.\nIdeology of Peter's reign.\nAs a young man, Peter I adopted the Protestant model of existence in a pragmatic world of competition and personal success, which largely shaped the philosophy of his reformism. He perceived the Russian people as rude, unintelligent, stubborn in their sluggishness, a child, a lazy student. He highly appreciated the state's role in the life of society, saw it as an ideal instrument for achieving high goals, saw it as a universal institution for transforming people, with the help of violence and fear, into educated, conscious, law-abiding and useful to the whole society subjects. Peter had a keen interest in \"The Education of a Christian Prince\" which offers advice to rulers on how to govern justly and wisely.\nHe introduced into the concept of the autocrat's power the notion of the monarch's duties. He considered it necessary to take care of his subjects, to protect them from enemies, to work for their benefit. Above all, he put the interests of Russia. He saw his mission in turning it into a power similar to Western countries, and subordinated his own life and the lives of his subjects to the realization of this idea. Gradually penetrated the idea that the task should be solved with the help of reforms, which will be carried out at the autocrat's will, who creates good and punishes evil. He considered the morality of a statesman separately from the morality of a private person and believed that the sovereign in the name of state interests can go to murder, violence, forgery and deceit.\nHe went through the naval service, starting from the lowest ranks: bombardier (1695), captain (1696), colonel (1706), schout-bij-nacht (1709), vice-admiral (1714), admiral (1721). By hard daily work (according to the figurative expression of Peter the Great himself, he was simultaneously \"forced to hold a sword and a quill in one right hand\") and courageous behavior he demonstrated to his subjects his personal positive example, showed how to act, fully devoting himself to the fulfillment of duty and service to the fatherland.\nReign.\nPeter reigned for around 43 years. He implemented sweeping reforms aimed at modernizing Russia. Heavily influenced by his advisors, like Jacob Bruce, Peter reorganized the Russian army along modern lines and dreamed of making Russia a maritime power. He faced much opposition to these policies at home but brutally suppressed rebellions against his authority, including by the Streltsy, Bashkirs, Astrakhan, and the greatest civil uprising of his reign, the Bulavin Rebellion.\nIn his process to westernize Russia, he wanted members of his family to marry other European royalty. In the past, his ancestors had been snubbed at the idea; however, it was proving fruitful. He negotiated with Frederick William, Duke of Courland to marry his niece, Anna Ivanovna. He used the wedding in order to launch his new capital, St Petersburg, where he had already ordered building projects of westernized palaces and buildings. Peter hired Italian and German architects to design it. He attracted Domenico Trezzini, Carlo Bartolomeo Rastrelli, Jean-Baptiste Alexandre Le Blond and Andreas Schl\u00fcter.\nTo improve his nation's position on the seas, Peter sought more maritime outlets. His only outlet at the time was the White Sea at Arkhangelsk. The Baltic Sea was at the time controlled by Sweden in the north, while the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea were controlled by the Ottoman Empire and Safavid Empire respectively in the south. The country's need for metal was exacerbated by the outbreak of wars for access to the Black and Baltic Seas.\nPeter attempted to acquire control of the Black Sea, which would require expelling the Tatars from the surrounding areas. As part of an agreement with Poland that ceded Kiev to Russia, Peter was forced to wage war against the Crimean Khan and against the Khan's overlord, the Ottoman Sultan. Peter's primary objective became the capture of the Ottoman fortress of Azov, near the Don River. In the summer of 1695 Peter organized the Azov campaigns to take the fortress, but his attempts ended in failure.\nPeter returned to Moscow in November 1695 and began building a large navy in Voronezh. He launched about thirty ships against the Ottomans in 1696, capturing Azov in July of that year. He appointed Alexander Gordon, who later would publish a biography on Peter. Peter used to hold all his important meetings and numerous celebrations in Le Fort's palace.\nGrand Embassy.\nPeter knew that Russia could not face the Ottoman Empire alone. In March 1697, he traveled \"incognito\" to Western Europe on an 18-month journey with a large Russian delegation\u2014the so-called \"Grand Embassy\". Peter was the first tsar to leave Russia for more than 100 years. He used a fake name, allowing him to escape social and diplomatic events, but since he was far taller than most others, he could not fool anyone. One goal was to seek the aid of European monarchs, but Peter's hopes were dashed. France was a traditional ally of the Ottoman Sultan, and Austria was eager to maintain peace in the east while conducting its own wars in the west. Peter, furthermore, had chosen an inopportune moment: the Europeans at the time were more concerned about the War of the Spanish Succession over who would succeed the childless King Charles II of Spain than about fighting the Ottoman Sultan. Peter failed to expand the anti-Ottoman alliance.\nIn Riga, the local Swedish commander Erik Dahlbergh decided to pretend that he did not recognize Peter and did not allow him to inspect the fortifications. (Three years later, Peter would cite the inhospitable reception as one of the reasons for starting the Great Northern War). He met Frederick Casimir Kettler, the Duke of Courland. In K\u00f6nigsberg, the tsar was apprenticed for two months to an artillery engineer. (Decrees were issued on the construction of the first Ural blast furnace plants.) In July he met Sophia of Hanover at Coppenbr\u00fcgge castle. She described him: \"The tsar is a tall, handsome man, with an attractive face. He has a lively mind is very witty. Only, someone so well endowed by nature could be a little better mannered.\" Peter rented a ship in Emmerich am Rhein and sailed to Zaandam, where he arrived on 18 August 1697.\nAmsterdam.\nPeter studied saw-mills, manufacturing and shipbuilding in Zaandam but left after a week. He sailed to Amsterdam after he was recognized and attacked. The log-cabin he rented became the Czar Peter House. He sailed to Texel to see a fleet. Through the mediation of Nicolaas Witsen, an expert on Russia, the tsar was given the opportunity to gain practical experience in shipyard, belonging to the Dutch East India Company, for a period of four months, under the supervision of . The diligent and capable tsar assisted in the construction of an East Indiaman \"Peter and Paul\" specially laid down for him. Peter felt that the ship's carpenters in Holland worked too much by eye and lacked accurate construction drawings. During his stay the tsar engaged many skilled workers such as builders of locks, fortresses, shipwrights, and seamen\u2014including Cornelis Cruys, a vice-admiral who became, under Franz Lefort, the tsar's advisor in maritime affairs; engineer Menno van Coehoorn refused. Peter put his knowledge of shipbuilding to use in helping build Russia's navy.\nPeter and Witsen visited Frederik Ruysch who had all the specimens exposed in five rooms. He taught Peter how to catch butterflies and how to preserve them. They also had a common interest in lizards. Together they went to see patients. He arrived in Utrecht on a barge and met stadtholder William III in a tavern. When he visited the States-General of the Netherlands he left the hall and the astonished attendees with his wig pulled over his head, according to Massie. He visited Jan van der Heyden, the inventor of a fire hose. He collected paintings by Adam Silo with ships and seascapes. In October 1697, the Tsar visited Delft and received an \"eal viewer\" from the microscopist Antoni van Leeuwenhoek. After the Peace of Ryswick he was invited by King of England to visit him. The Dutch regents considered the Tsar too inquisitive, and this affected their willingness to help the Russians.\nDeptford.\nOn 11 January 1698 (O.S.), Peter arrived at Victoria Embankment with four chamberlains, three interpreters (Peter Shafirov, LeFort), two clock makers, a cook, a priest, six trumpeters, 70 soldiers from the Preobrazhensky regiment, four dwarfs and a monkey which he purchased in Amsterdam; Jacob Bruce accompanied him. Peter stayed at 21 Norfolk Street, Strand, and met with Bishop of Salisbury Gilbert Burnet and Thomas Osborne and posed for Sir Godfrey Kneller. He watched the proceedings within the Parliament from a rooftop window. At some time, he had an affair with actress Letitia Cross. He visited the Royal Mint four times; it is not clear whether he ever met Isaac Newton, the mint's warden, who introduced milling on the coinage. Peter was impressed by the Great Recoinage of 1696, according to Massie.\nAt some time he visited Spithead, Plymouth, with captain John Perry to watch a mock battle. In February he attended a Fleet Review in Deptford, and inspected the Woolwich Dockyard and Royal Arsenal with Anthony Deane. For three months he stayed at Sayes Court as the guest of John Evelyn, a member of the Royal Society. He was trained on a telescope at the Greenwich Observatory by John Flamsteed. Peter communicated with Thomas Story and William Penn about their position that believers should not join the military. King William III presented a schooner with a whole crew to Peter I in exchange for the monopoly right of English merchants to trade tobacco in Russia (see Charles Whitworth). At the end of April 1698 he left after being shown how to make watches, and carpeting coffins. Back in Holland he visited Harderwijk and Cleves.\nThe Embassy next went to Leipzig, Dresden, where he met with Queen Christiane Eberhardine of Poland-Lithuania. Three times he visited the Kunstsammlung, then K\u00f6nigstein Fortress, Prague, and Vienna, where he paid a visit to Leopold I. At Rava-Ruska, he crossed the border and Peter spoke with Augustus II the Strong. Peter's visit was cut short, when he was informed of the second Streltsy uprising in June. The rebellion was easily crushed by General Gordon before Peter returned home early September. Peter nevertheless acted ruthlessly towards the mutineers; 4,600 rebels were sent to prison. Around 1,182 were tortured and executed, and Peter ordered that their bodies be publicly exhibited as a warning to future conspirators. The Streltsy were disbanded, and Peter's half-sister Sophia, who they sought to put on the throne, was kept in strictest seclusion at Novodevichy Convent.\nPeter's visits to the West impressed upon him the notion that European customs were in several respects superior to Russian traditions. He commanded all of his courtiers and officials to wear European clothing (no caftans) and cut off their long beards, causing Boyars and Old Believers, who were very fond of their beards, great upset. Boyars who sought to retain their beards were required to pay an annual beard tax of one hundred rubles. In the same year, Peter also sought to end arranged marriages, which were the norm among the Russian nobility, because he thought such a practice was barbaric and led to domestic violence, since the partners usually resented each other.\nReforms.\nIn 1698, Peter sent a delegation to Malta, under boyar Boris Sheremetev, to observe the training and abilities of the Knights of Malta and their fleet. Sheremetev investigated the possibility of future joint ventures with the Knights, including action against the Turks and the possibility of a future Russian naval base. On 12 September 1698, Peter officially founded the first Russian Navy base, Taganrog on the Sea of Azov.\nIn 1699, Peter changed the date of the celebration of the new year from 1 September to 1 January. Traditionally, the years were reckoned from the purported creation of the World, but after Peter's reforms, they were to be counted from the birth of Christ. Thus, in the year 7207 of the old Russian calendar, Peter proclaimed that the Julian Calendar was in effect and the year was 1700. On the death of Lefort in 1699, Menshikov succeeded him as Peter's prime favourite and confidant.\nIn 1700, Peter I prevented the election of a new patriarch and deprived the Russian Church of the opportunity to regain a single spiritual leader. Reducing the number of monasteries, he converted all monasteries with less than 30 monks into schools or churches. He encouraged the development of private entrepreneurship, but under strict state control. He initiated the construction of canals by John Perry and implemented a monetary reform, using the decimal principle as the basis of the monetary system (1698-\u20131704).\nPeter attracted many foreign specialists and opened an educational institution for surgery, led by Nicolaas Bidloo. In 1701, the Moscow School of Mathematics and Navigation was founded, led by Jacob Bruce; for fifteen years, naval officers, surveyors, engineers, and gunners were educated there.\nIn 1700, Jan Thesingh (-1701) received a monopoly on printing and importing books, maps and prints into Russia for fifteen years. In 1701 he appointed Fedor Polikarpov-Orlov as head of the Moscow Print Yard. In 1707, Tsar Peter I bought a fully equipped printing house in Holland, including staff. Peter replaced the Cyrillic numerals with Arabic numerals (1705\u20131710) and the Cyrillic font with a civil script (1708\u20131710).\nIn 1708, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz became an advisor and offered to write new laws for the country. In December Russia was divided into eight governorates (\"guberniya\"). was the first governor of Siberia. Peter was visited by Cornelis de Bruijn, who spent six years in Russia and made drawings of the Kremlin. In 1711, Peter visited elector August II of Poland in Dresden, Carlsbad and Torgau where his son Aleksei married. In 1713 he visited Hamburg, sieged with his allies. He then traveled to Hanover and was a guest of Duke Anton Ulrich of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel in Salzdahlum. From Danzig he sailed to Riga, Helsingfors and Turku.\nIn 1711, Peter established by decree a new state body known as the Governing Senate. Normally, the Boyar duma would have exercised power during his absence. Peter, however, mistrusted the boyars; he instead abolished the Duma and created a Senate of ten members. The Senate was founded as the highest state institution to supervise all judicial, financial and administrative affairs. Originally established only for the time of the monarch's absence, the Senate became a permanent body after his return. A special high official, the Ober-Procurator, served as the link between the ruler and the senate and acted, in Peter own words, as \"the sovereign's eye\". Without his signature no Senate decision could go into effect; the Senate became one of the most important institutions of Imperial Russia.\nIn 1701, 1705 and 1712, Peter I issued decrees establishing an Engineering School in Sukharev Tower, which was supposed to recruit up to 100 students, but had only 23. Therefore, he issued another decree in 1714 calling for compulsory education, which dictated that all Russian 10- to 15-year-old children of the nobility, government clerks, and lesser-ranked officials must learn basic arithmetic, trigonometry and geometry, and should be tested on the subjects at the end of their studies.\nAreskine, an iatrochemist, became head of the court apothecary; Johann Daniel Schumacher was appointed secretary and librarian of the Kunstkamera. The country's first scientific library was opened in his palace in the Summer Garden. Peter ordered the development of Aptekarsky Island, headquarters for the Medical Clerical Office and the Main Pharmacy. Gottlieb Schober was commissioned to examine hot springs and discovered rich deposits of sulfur; Peter immediately set up a factory for the development in the Samara Oblast. In 1721 the shipyard Petrozavod and Petrodvorets Watch Factory was established. Some 3,500 new words\u2014German, French, Dutch, English, Italian, Swedish in origin\u2014entered Russian in Peter's period, roughly one-fourth of them shipping and naval terms.\nAs part of his reforms, Peter started an industrialization effort that was slow but eventually successful. Russian manufacturing and main exports were based on the mining and lumber industries. In 1719, the privileges of miners were enshrined in law with the Berg Privilege, which allowed representatives of all classes to search for ores and build metallurgical plants. At the same time, manufacturers and artisans were exempted from state taxes and recruiting, and their houses were exempt from the post of troops. The law also guaranteed the inheritance of the ownership of factories, proclaimed industrial activity a matter of state importance and protected manufacturers from interference in their affairs by local authorities. The same law established the Collegium of Mining, and managed the entire mining and metallurgical industry, and local administrations. The Demidovs became the first Russian exporters of iron to Western Europe. In 1721, a decree was issued that allowed factory owners, regardless of whether they had a noble rank, to buy serfs.\nGreat Northern War.\nPeter made a temporary peace with the Ottoman Empire that allowed him to keep the captured fort of Azov, and turned his attention to Russian maritime supremacy. He sought to acquire control of the Baltic Sea, which had been taken by the Swedish Empire a half-century earlier. Peter declared war on Sweden, which was at the time led by the young King Charles XII. Sweden was also opposed by Denmark\u2013Norway, Saxony, and the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. The Preobrazhensky regiment took part in all major battles of the Great Northern War.\nRussia was ill-prepared to fight the Swedes, and their first attempt at seizing the Baltic coast ended in disaster at the Battle of Narva in 1700. In the conflict, the forces of Charles XII, rather than employ a slow methodical siege, attacked immediately using a blinding snowstorm to their advantage. After the battle, Charles XII decided to concentrate his forces against the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, which gave Peter time to reorganize the Russian army and conquered Nyenschantz in the Ingrian campaign. Bidloo had to organize a military hospital. Robert Bruce was appointed commander-in-chief of St. Petersburg. After the defeat at Narva, Peter I gave the order to melt the church bells into cannons and mortars. In 1701, Peter ordered the construction of Novodvinsk Fortress north of Archangelsk. Everybody was convinced they knew: his Majesty will wage war. In the siege of N\u00f6teborg Russian forces captured the Swedish fortress, renamed Shlisselburg. In 1702 Peter the Great established the Olonets Shipyard at Lodeynoye Pole, where Russian frigate Shtandart was built.\nWhile the Poles fought the Swedes, Peter founded the city of Saint Petersburg on 29 June 1703 on Hare Island. He forbade the building of stone edifices outside Saint Petersburg, which he intended to become Russia's capital, so that all stonemasons could participate in the construction of the new city. While the city was being built along the Neva he lived in a modest three-room log cabin (with a study but without a fire-place) which had to make room for the first version of the Winter Palace. The first buildings which appeared were a shipyard at the Admiralty, Kronstadt (1704-1706) and the Peter and Paul Fortress (1706). Peter took his whole family on a boat trip to Kronstadt.\nFollowing several defeats, Polish King Augustus II the Strong abdicated in 1706. Swedish king Charles XII turned his attention to Russia, invading it in 1708. After crossing into Russia, Charles defeated Peter at Golovchin in July. In the Battle of Lesnaya, Charles suffered his first loss after Peter crushed a group of Swedish reinforcements marching from Riga. Deprived of this aid, Charles was forced to abandon his proposed march on Moscow.\nCharles XII refused to retreat to Poland or back to Sweden and instead invaded Ukraine. Peter withdrew his army southward, employing scorched earth, destroying along the way anything that could assist the Swedes. Deprived of local supplies, the Swedish army was forced to halt its advance in the winter of 1708\u20131709. In the summer of 1709, they resumed their efforts to capture Russian-ruled Ukraine, culminating in the Battle of Poltava on 27 June. The battle was a decisive defeat for the Swedish forces, ending Charles' campaign in Ukraine and forcing him south to seek refuge in the Ottoman Empire. Russia had defeated what was considered to be one of the world's best militaries, and the victory overturned the view that Russia was militarily incompetent. In Poland, Augustus II was restored as King.\nPeter, overestimating the support he would receive from his Balkan allies, attacked the Ottoman Empire, initiating the Russo-Turkish War of 1710. Peter's campaign in the Ottoman Empire was disastrous, and in the ensuing Treaty of the Pruth, Peter was forced to return the Black Sea ports he had seized in 1697. In return, the Sultan expelled Charles XII. The Ottomans called him \"Mad Peter\" (), for his willingness to sacrifice large numbers of his troops in wartime.\nPeter's northern armies took the Swedish province of Livonia (the northern half of modern Latvia, and the southern half of modern Estonia), driving the Swedes out of Finland. In 1714, the Russian fleet won the Battle of Gangut. During the Great Wrath most of Finland was occupied by Russian forces.\nSecond Embassy.\nIn January 1716, Tsar Peter traveled in the Baltic region to discuss peace negotiations and how to protect the sea trade route from the Swedes. He visited Riga, K\u00f6nigsberg and Danzig. There his niece married the quarrelsome Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin with which Peter wanted an alliance. He obtained the assistance of the Frederick William I of Prussia who sieged the strong Swedish . In Altona he met with Danish diplomats, supporting Prussia. He sailed to Copenhagen heading an allied fleet. In Wittenberg he visited the monastery, where Luther lived. In May he went on to Bad Pyrmont, and, because of his physical problems he stayed at this spa. There he met with the genius Leibniz. Blumentrost and Areskine accompanied him.\nIn early December Peter arrived in Amsterdam and visited Nicolaas Witsen. He bought the anatomic and herbarium collection of Frederik Ruysch, Levinus Vincent and Albertus Seba. He obtained many paintings among other from Maria Sibylla Merian for his Kunstkamera and Rembrandt's \"David and Jonathan\" for Peterhof Palace. He paid a visit to a friend's mansion near Nigtevecht, a silk manufacture and a paper-mill. At five in the morning he was received by Herman Boerhaave who showed Peter the Botanical Garden. In April 1717 he continued his travel to Austrian Netherlands, Dunkirk and Calais. In Paris he obtained many books, requested to become a member of the Academie de Sciences and visited the parliament, the Sorbonne and Madame Maintenon. Via the Palace of Saint-Cloud, the Grand Trianon at Versailles, Fontainebleau, Spa he travelled on to Maastricht, at that time one of the most important fortresses in Europe. He went back Amsterdam to attend a with France and Prussia on 15 August. He achieved a diplomatic success, and his international prestige, consolidated. Again he visited the Hortus Botanicus and left the city early September 1717, heading for Berlin. In October he was back in St Petersburg. In 1719 New Holland Island was created.\nThe tsar's navy was powerful enough that the Russians could penetrate Sweden. Still, Charles XII refused to yield, and not until his death in battle in 1718 did peace become feasible. After the battle of Grengam, Sweden made peace with all powers but Russia by 1720. In 1721, the Treaty of Nystad ended the Great Northern War. Russia acquired Ingria, Estonia, Livonia, and a substantial portion of Karelia. In turn, Russia paid two million Riksdaler and surrendered most of Finland.\nLater years.\nIn 1717, Alexander Bekovich-Cherkassky led the first Russian military expedition into Central Asia against the Khanate of Khiva. The expedition ended in complete disaster when the entire expeditionary force was slaughtered.\nTo the end of 1717, the preparatory phase of administrative reform in Russia was completed. After 1718, Peter established collegiums in place of the old central agencies of government, including foreign affairs, war, navy, expense, income, justice, and inspection. Later others were added, to regulate mining and industry. Each college consisted of a president, a vice-president, a number of councilors and assessors, and a procurator. Some foreigners were included in various colleges but not as president. Pavel Yaguzhinsky was entrusted with the observation of the \"soonest possible establishment of colleges by their presidents\". Peter did not have enough loyal, talented or educated persons to put in full charge of the various departments. Peter preferred to rely on groups of individuals who would keep check on one another. Decisions depended on the majority vote.\nIn 1718, Peter investigated why the formerly Swedish province of Livonia was so orderly. He discovered that the Swedes spent as much administering Livonia (300 times smaller than his empire) as he spent on the entire Russian bureaucracy. He was forced to dismantle the province's government. In June 1721 he had Gagarin, the governor of Siberia, executed.\nPeter's last years were marked by further reform in Russia. On 2 November 1721 (N.S.), soon after peace was made with Sweden, he was officially proclaimed \"Emperor of All Russia\". The coronation of the Russian monarch took place in Uspensky Cathedral, Moscow. Some proposed that he take the title \"Emperor of the East\", but he refused. Gavrila Golovkin, the State Chancellor, was the first to add \"the Great, Father of His Country, Emperor of All the Russias\" to Peter's traditional title of tsar following a speech by Theophan Prokopovich in 1721. Peter's imperial title was recognized by Augustus II of Poland, Frederick William I of Prussia, and Frederick I of Sweden, but not by the other European monarchs. In the minds of many, the word \"emperor\" connoted superiority or pre-eminence over kings. Several rulers feared that Peter would claim authority over them, just as the Holy Roman Emperor had claimed suzerainty over all Christian nations.\nBy the grace of God, the most excellent and great sovereign emperor Pyotr Alekseevich the ruler of all the Russias: of Moscow, of Kiev, of Vladimir, of Novgorod, Tsar of Kazan, Tsar of Astrakhan and Tsar of Siberia, sovereign of Pskov, great prince of Smolensk, of Tver, of Yugorsk, of Perm, of Vyatka, of Bulgaria and others, sovereign and great prince of the Novgorod Lower lands, of Chernigov, of Ryazan, of Rostov, of Yaroslavl, of Belozersk, of Udora, of Kondia and the sovereign of all the northern lands, and the sovereign of the Iverian lands, of the Kartlian and Georgian Kings, of the Kabardin lands, of the Circassian and Mountain princes and many other states and lands western and eastern here and there and the successor and sovereign and ruler.\nIn 1722, Peter issued a Decree on the succession to the throne, in which he abolished the ancient custom of transferring the throne to direct descendants in the male line (as he had no son). The decree was so unusual for Russian society that it was necessary to explain it. Peter created a new order of precedence for landowners known as the Table of Ranks. Formerly, precedence had been determined by birth. To deprive the Boyars of their high positions, Peter directed that precedence should be determined by merit and service to the Emperor. The Table of Ranks continued to remain in effect until the Russian monarchy was overthrown in 1917.\nIn 1722, John Bell accompanied Peter the Great on a military expedition to the city of Derbent near the Caspian Sea. The once powerful Persian Safavid Empire to the south was in deep decline. Taking advantage of the profitable situation, Peter launched the Russo-Persian War of 1722\u20131723, otherwise known as \"The Persian Expedition of Peter the Great\", which drastically increased Russian influence for the first time in the Caucasus and Caspian Sea region, and prevented the Ottoman Empire from making territorial gains in the region. After considerable success and the capture of many provinces and cities in the Caucasus and northern mainland Persia, the Safavids were forced to hand over territory to Russia, comprising Derbent, Shirvan, Gilan, Mazandaran, Baku, and Astrabad. Within twelve years all the territories were ceded back to Persia, now led by the charismatic military genius Nader Shah, as part of the Treaty of Resht, the Treaty of Ganja, and as the result of a Russo-Persian alliance against the Ottoman Empire, which was the common enemy of both.\nPeter changed the system of direct taxation. He abolished the land tax and household tax and replaced them with a poll tax. The taxes on land and on households were payable only by individuals who owned property or maintained families. The new head taxes were payable by serfs and paupers. Peter began construction of the Monplaisir Palace based on his own sketches. He ordered to purchase 2,000 lime trees which were shipped to St Petersburg. In 1725, the construction of Peterhof, a palace near Saint Petersburg, was completed. Peterhof was a grand residence, becoming known as the \"Russian Versailles\".\nIllness and death.\nIn the winter of 1723, Peter, whose overall health was never robust, began having problems with his urinary tract and bladder. In the summer of 1724, a team of doctors performed surgery releasing upwards of four pounds of blocked urine. Peter remained bedridden until late autumn. In the first week of October, restless and certain he was cured, Peter began a lengthy inspection tour of various projects. Rastrelli finished his monument to Peter I (St. Michael's Castle). According to legend, in November, at Lakhta along the Gulf of Finland to inspect some ironworks, Peter saw a group of soldiers drowning near shore and, wading out into near-waist deep water, came to their rescue. This icy water rescue is said to have exacerbated Peter's bladder problems and caused his death. The story, however, has been viewed with skepticism by some historians, pointing out that the German chronicler Jacob von Staehlin is the only source for the story.\nIn early January 1725, Peter was struck once again with uremia or azotemia. Legend has it that before lapsing into unconsciousness Peter asked for a paper and pen and scrawled an unfinished note that read: \"Leave all to\u00a0...\" and then, exhausted by the effort, asked for his daughter Anna to be summoned.\nPeter died between four and five in the morning 8 February. An autopsy revealed his bladder to be infected with gangrene. He was fifty-two years, seven months old when he died, having reigned forty-two years. He is interred in Saints Peter and Paul Cathedral.\nAfter his death, students came to the Military College with a request to \"leave science\" under the pretext of \"unconsciousness and incomprehensibility.\"\nReligion.\nPeter had a great interest in dissenters and visited gatherings of Quakers and Mennonites. He did not believe in miracles and founded The All-Joking, All-Drunken Synod of Fools and Jesters, an organization that mocked the Orthodox and Catholic Church, when he was eighteen. In January 1695, Peter refused to partake in a traditional Russian Orthodox Epiphany Ceremony, and would often schedule events for The All-Joking, All-Drunken Synod of Fools and Jesters to directly conflict with the Church. He often used the nickname \"Pakhom Mikhailov\" () among the ministers of religion who made up his relatively close circle of long-term drinking companions.\nPeter was brought up in the Russian Orthodox faith, but he had low regard for the Church hierarchy, which he kept under tight governmental control. The traditional leader of the Church was the Patriarch of Moscow. In 1700, when the office fell vacant, Peter refused to name a replacement, allowing the patriarch's coadjutor (or deputy) to discharge the duties of the office. Peter could not tolerate the patriarch exercising power superior to the tsar, as indeed had happened in the case of Philaret (1619\u20131633) and Nikon (1652\u201366). The Alexander Nevsky Lavra was constructed between 1710\u20131712; Saints Peter and Paul Cathedral between 1712\u20131733. In 1716 he invited Theophan Prokopovich, a pietist and astronomer, to come to the capital. The \"Ecclesiastical Regulations\" of 1721 are based on the ideas of August Hermann Francke. The Church reform of Peter the Great therefore abolished the patriarchate, replacing it with a Holy Synod that was under the control of a Procurator.\nIn 1721, Peter followed the advice of Prokopovich in designing the Holy Synod as a council of ten clergymen. For leadership in the Church, Peter turned increasingly to Ukrainians, who were more open to reform, but were not well loved by the Russian clergy. Peter implemented a law that stipulated that no Russian man could join a monastery before the age of fifty. He felt that too many able Russian men were being wasted on clerical work when they could be joining his new and improved army.\nMarriages and family.\nPeter the Great had two wives, with whom he had fifteen children, three of whom survived to adulthood. Peter's mother selected his first wife, Eudoxia Lopukhina, when he was only 16. This was consistent with previous Romanov tradition by choosing a daughter of a minor noble. This was done to prevent fighting between the stronger noble houses and to bring fresh blood into the family. Upon his return from his European tour in 1698, Peter sought to end his unhappy marriage. He divorced the tsaritsa and forced her to join a convent. She had borne him three children, although only one, Alexei Petrovich, Tsarevich of Russia, survived past his childhood.\nMenshikov introduced him to Marta Helena Skowro\u0144ska, the daughter of a Polish-Lithuanian peasant, and took her as a mistress some time between 1702 and 1704. Marta converted to the Russian Orthodox Church and was given the name Catherine. Though no record exists, Catherine and Peter married secretly between 23 October and 1 December 1707 in St. Petersburg. Peter valued Catherine and married officially, at Saint Isaac's Cathedral on 19 February 1712.\nIn 1718, his son Alexei Petrovich was locked up in the Peter and Paul fortress, whom he regarded as the rebellious Absalom. He was suspected of being involved in a plot to overthrow the Emperor. Alexei was tried and confessed under torture during questioning conducted by a secular court (count Tolstoy). He was convicted and sentenced to be executed. The sentence of high treason could only be carried out with Peter's signed authorization, and Alexei died in prison, as Peter hesitated before making the decision. Alexei's death most likely resulted from injuries suffered during his torture. Alexei's mother Eudoxia was punished. She was dragged from her home, tried on false charges of adultery, publicly flogged, and confined in monasteries while being forbidden to be talked to. \nIn 1724, Peter had his second wife, Catherine, crowned as Empress, although he remained Russia's actual ruler.\nIssue.\nBy his two wives, he had fifteen children: three by Eudoxia and twelve by Catherine. These included four sons named \"Pavel\" and three sons named \"Peter\", all of whom died in infancy. Only three of his children survived to adulthood. He had only three grandchildren: Tsar Peter II and Grand Duchess Natalia by Alexei and Tsar Peter III by Anna.\nLegacy.\nPeter's legacy has always been a major concern of Russian intellectuals. Peter is a more complex character than he is sometimes given credit for. Some believe Peter's reforms divided the country socially and weakened it spiritually. Riasanovsky points to a \"paradoxical dichotomy\" in the black and white images such as God/Antichrist, educator/ignoramus, architect of Russia's greatness/destroyer of national culture, father of his country/scourge of the common man. For Old Believers he was the Antichrist, because of the calendar changes and poll tax. Peter compared himself with King David or Noah with a divine mission. At his funeral Prokopovich compared him with Moses and Solomon. Voltaire's 1759 biography gave 18th-century Russians a man of the Enlightenment, while Alexander Pushkin's \"The Bronze Horseman\" poem of 1833 gave a powerful romantic image of a creator-god. Slavophiles in mid-19th century deplored Peter's westernization of Russia.\nWestern writers and political analysts recounted \"The Testimony\" or secret will of Peter the Great. It supposedly revealed his grand evil plot for Russia to control the world via conquest of Constantinople, Afghanistan and India. It was a forgery made in Paris at Napoleon's command when he started the invasion of Russia in 1812. Nevertheless, it is still quoted in foreign policy circles.\nThe Communists executed the last Romanovs, and their historians such as Mikhail Pokrovsky presented strongly negative views of the entire dynasty. Stalin however admired how Peter strengthened the state, and wartime, diplomacy, industry, higher education, and government administration. Stalin wrote in 1928, \"when Peter the Great, who had to deal with more developed countries in the West, feverishly built works in factories for supplying the army and strengthening the country's defenses, this was an original attempt to leap out of the framework of backwardness.\" As a result, Soviet historiography emphasizes both the positive achievement and the negative factor of oppressing the common people.\nAfter the fall of Communism in 1991, scholars and the general public in Russia and the West gave fresh attention to Peter and his role in Russian history. His reign is now seen as the decisive formative event in the Russian imperial past. Many new ideas have merged, such as whether he strengthened the autocratic state or whether the tsarist regime was not statist enough given its small bureaucracy. Modernization models have become contested ground.\nHe initiated a wide range of economic, social, political, administrative, educational and military reforms which ended the dominance of traditionalism and religion in Russia and initiated its westernization. His efforts included secularization of education, organization of administration for effective governance, enhanced use of technology, establishing an industrial economy, modernization of the army and establishment of a strong navy.\nHistorian Y. Vodarsky said in 1993 that Peter, \"did not lead the country on the path of accelerated economic, political and social development, did not force it to 'achieve a leap' through several stages... On the contrary, these actions to the greatest degree put a brake on Russia's progress and created conditions for holding it back for one and a half centuries!\" The autocratic powers that Stalin admired appeared as a liability to , who complained that Peter was, \"the creator of the administrative command system and the true ancestor of Stalin.\" In the period from 1678 to 1710, however, the population grew 2 times.\nAccording to \"Encyclopaedia Britannica\", \"He did not completely bridge the gulf between Russia and the Western countries, but he achieved considerable progress in development of the national economy and trade, education, science and culture, and foreign policy. Russia became a great power, without whose concurrence no important European problem could thenceforth be settled. His internal reforms achieved progress to an extent that no earlier innovator could have envisaged.\"\nWhile the cultural turn in historiography has downplayed diplomatic, economic and constitutional issues, new cultural roles have been found for Peter, for example in architecture (Petrine Baroque) and dress. James Cracraft argues:\nThe Petrine revolution in Russia\u2014subsuming in this phrase the many military, naval, governmental, educational, architectural, linguistic, and other internal reforms enacted by Peter's regime to promote Russia's rise as a major European power\u2014was essentially a cultural revolution, one that profoundly impacted both the basic constitution of the Russian Empire and, perforce, its subsequent development.\nThe iconic representations of dead saints typical for centuries of Russian visual culture suddenly give way to naturalistic portraiture.\nIn popular culture.\nPeter has been featured in many histories, novels, plays, films, monuments and paintings. They include the poems \"The Bronze Horseman\", \"Poltava\" and the unfinished novel \"The Moor of Peter the Great\", all by Alexander Pushkin. The former dealt with The Bronze Horseman, an equestrian statue raised in Peter's honour. Aleksey Nikolayevich Tolstoy wrote a biographical historical novel about him, named \"Peter I\", in the 1930s.\n&lt;poem&gt;There was a man named Peter the Great who was a Russian Tzar;\nWhen remodeling his the castle put the throne behind the bar;\nHe lined the walls with vodka, rum, and 40 kinds of beers;\nAnd advanced the Russian culture by 120 years!&lt;/poem&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44359", "revid": "51012040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44359", "title": "Gary Cooper", "text": "American actor (1901\u20131961)\nGary Cooper (born Frank James Cooper; May 7, 1901\u00a0\u2013 May 13, 1961) was an American actor known for his strong, silent screen persona and understated acting style. He won the Academy Award for Best Actor twice and had a further three nominations, as well as an Academy Honorary Award in 1961 for his career achievements. He was one of the top-10 film personalities for 23 consecutive years and one of the top money-making stars for 18 years. The American Film Institute (AFI) ranked Cooper at number11 on its list of the 50 greatest screen legends.\nCooper's career spanned 36 years, from 1925 to 1961, and included leading roles in 84 feature films. He was a major movie star from the end of the silent film era through to the end of the golden age of classical Hollywood. His screen persona appealed strongly to both men and women, and his range included roles in most major film genres. His ability to project his own personality onto the characters he played contributed to his natural and authentic appearance on screen. Throughout his career, he sustained a screen persona that represented the ideal American hero.\nCooper began his career as a film extra and stunt rider, but soon landed acting roles. After establishing himself as a Western hero in his early silent films, he became a movie star with his first sound picture, playing the title role in 1929's \"The Virginian\". In the early 1930s, he expanded his heroic image to include more cautious characters in adventure films and dramas such as \"A Farewell to Arms\" (1932) and \"The Lives of a Bengal Lancer\" (1935). During the height of his career, Cooper portrayed a new type of hero, a champion of the common man in films such as \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\" (1936), \"Meet John Doe\" (1941), \"Sergeant York\" (1941), \"The Pride of the Yankees\" (1942), and \"For Whom the Bell Tolls\" (1943). He later portrayed more mature characters at odds with the world in films such as \"The Fountainhead\" (1949) and \"High Noon\" (1952). In his final films, he played nonviolent characters searching for redemption in films such as \"Friendly Persuasion\" (1956) and \"Man of the West\" (1958).\nEarly life.\nFrank James Cooper was born in Helena, Montana, on May 7, 1901, the younger of two sons of English immigrant parents Alice (n\u00e9e Brazier) and Charles Henry Cooper. His brother, Arthur, was six years his senior. Cooper's father came from Houghton Regis in Bedfordshire, and became a prominent lawyer, rancher, and Montana Supreme Court justice. His mother hailed from Gillingham in Kent, and married Charles in Montana. In 1906, Charles purchased the Seven-Bar-Nine cattle ranch, about north of Helena, near Craig. Cooper and Arthur spent their summers at the ranch and learned to ride horses, hunt and fish. Cooper attended Central Grade School in Helena.\nAlice wanted their sons to have a British education, so she took them back to the United Kingdom in 1909 to enroll them in Dunstable Grammar School in Dunstable, England. While there, Cooper and his brother lived with their father's cousins, William and Emily Barton, at their home in Houghton Regis. Cooper studied Latin, French and English history at Dunstable until 1912. While he adapted to English school discipline and learned the requisite social graces, he never adjusted to the formal Eton collars he was required to wear. He received his confirmation in the Church of England at the Church of All Saints in Houghton Regis on December 3, 1911. His mother accompanied their sons back to the U.S. in August 1912 and Cooper resumed his education in Montana, at Johnson Grammar School in Helena.\nAt age fifteen, Cooper injured his hip in a car accident. On his doctor's recommendation, he returned to the Seven-Bar-Nine ranch to recuperate with horseback riding. The misguided therapy left Cooper with his characteristic stiff, off-balanced walk and slightly angled horse-riding style. He left Helena High School after two years in 1918 and returned to the family ranch to work full-time as a cowboy. In 1919, his father arranged for his son to attend Gallatin County High School in Bozeman, where English teacher Ida Davis encouraged him to focus on academics and participate in debating and dramatics. Cooper later called Davis \"the woman partly responsible for [his] giving up cowboy-ing and going to college\".\nWhile in high school in 1920, Cooper took three art courses at Montana Agricultural College (now Montana State University) in Bozeman. His interest in art was inspired years earlier by the Western paintings of Charles Marion Russell and Frederic Remington. Cooper especially admired and studied Russell's \"Lewis and Clark Meeting Indians at Ross' Hole\" (1910), which still hangs in the state capitol building in Helena. \nIn 1922, to continue his art education, Cooper enrolled in Grinnell College in Grinnell, Iowa. He did well academically in most of his courses but was not accepted into the school's drama club. His drawings and watercolor paintings were exhibited throughout the dormitory and he was named art editor for the college yearbook. During the summers of 1922 and 1923, Cooper worked at Yellowstone National Park as a tour guide driving the yellow open-top buses. Despite a promising first 18 months at Grinnell, he left college suddenly in February 1924, spent a month in Chicago looking for work as an artist, and then returned to Helena, where he sold editorial cartoons to the local \"Independent\" newspaper.\nIn autumn 1924, Cooper's father left the state supreme court bench and moved with his wife to Los Angeles to administer the estates of two relatives, and Cooper joined his parents there in November at his father's request. After briefly working a series of unpromising jobs, he met two friends from Montana, who were working as film extras and stunt riders in low-budget Western films for the small movie studios on Poverty Row. They introduced him to another Montana cowboy, rodeo champion Jay \"Slim\" Talbot, who took him to see a casting director. Wanting money for a professional art course, Cooper worked as a film extra for five dollars a day and as a stunt rider for $10. Cooper and Talbot became close friends and hunting companions; Talbot later worked as Cooper's stuntman and stand-in for over three decades.\nCareer.\nSilent films, 1925\u20131928.\nIn early 1925, Cooper began his film career in silent pictures such as \"The Thundering Herd\" and \"Wild Horse Mesa\" with Jack Holt, \"Riders of the Purple Sage\" and \"The Lucky Horseshoe\" with Tom Mix, and \"The Trail Rider\" with Buck Jones. He worked for several Poverty Row studios, but also the already emergent major studios, Famous Players\u2013Lasky and Fox Film Corporation. While his skilled horsemanship led to steady work in Westerns, Cooper found the stunt work, which sometimes injured horses and riders, \"tough and cruel\". Hoping to move beyond the risky stunt work and obtain acting roles, Cooper paid for a screen test and hired casting director Nan Collins to work as his agent. Knowing that other actors were using the name \"Frank Cooper\", Collins suggested he change his first name to \"Gary\" after her hometown of Gary, Indiana. Cooper immediately liked the name.\nCooper also found work in a variety of non-Western films, appearing, for example, as a masked Cossack in \"The Eagle\" (1925), as a Roman guard in \"Ben-Hur\" (1925), and as a flood survivor in \"The Johnstown Flood\" (1926). Gradually, he began to land credited roles that offered him more screen time, in films such as \"Tricks\" (1925), in which he played the film's antagonist, and the short film \"Lightnin' Wins\" (1926). As a featured player, he began to attract the attention of major film studios. On June 1, 1926, Cooper signed a contract with Samuel Goldwyn Productions for $50 a week.\nCooper's first important film role was a supporting part in \"The Winning of Barbara Worth\" (1926) starring Ronald Colman and Vilma B\u00e1nky, in which he plays a young engineer who helps a rival suitor save the woman he loves and her town from an impending dam disaster. Cooper's experience living among the Montana cowboys gave his performance an \"instinctive authenticity\", according to biographer Jeffrey Meyers. The film was a major success. Critics singled out Cooper as a \"dynamic new personality\" and future star. Goldwyn rushed to offer Cooper a long-term contract, but he held out for a better deal \u2013 a five-year contract with Jesse L. Lasky at Paramount Pictures for $175 a week. In 1927, with help from Clara Bow, Cooper landed high-profile roles in \"Children of Divorce\" and \"Wings\" (both 1927), the latter being the first film to win an Academy Award for Best Picture. That year, Cooper also appeared in his first starring roles in \"Arizona Bound\" and \"Nevada\", both films directed by John Waters.\nParamount paired Cooper with Fay Wray in \"The Legion of the Condemned\" and \"The First Kiss\" (both 1928), advertising them as the studio's \"glorious young lovers\". Their on-screen chemistry failed to generate much excitement with audiences. With each new film, Cooper's acting skills improved and his popularity continued to grow, especially among female movie-goers. During this time, he was earning as much as $2,750 per film and receiving 1,000 fan letters a week. Looking to exploit Cooper's growing audience appeal, the studio placed him opposite popular leading ladies such as Evelyn Brent in \"Beau Sabreur\", Florence Vidor in \"Doomsday\", and Esther Ralston in \"Half a Bride\" (all 1928). Around the same time, Cooper made \"Lilac Time\" (1928) with Colleen Moore for First National Pictures, his first movie with synchronized music and sound effects. It became one of the most commercially successful films of 1928.\nHollywood stardom, 1929\u20131935.\nCooper became a major movie star in 1929 playing the lead role in his first talking picture, \"The Virginian\" (1929), which was directed by Victor Fleming and co-starred Mary Brian and Walter Huston. Based on the popular novel by Owen Wister, \"The Virginian\" was one of the first sound films to define the Western code of honor and helped establish many of the conventions of the Western movie genre that persist to the present day. According to biographer Jeffrey Meyers, the romantic image of the tall, handsome, and shy cowboy hero who embodied male freedom, courage, and honor was created in large part by Cooper in the film. Unlike some silent-film actors who had trouble adapting to the new sound medium, Cooper transitioned naturally, with his \"deep and clear\" and \"pleasantly drawling\" voice, which perfectly suited the characters he portrayed on screen. Looking to capitalize on Cooper's growing popularity, Paramount cast him in several Westerns and wartime dramas, including \"Only the Brave\", \"The Texan\", \"Seven Days' Leave\", \"A Man from Wyoming\", and \"The Spoilers\" (all released in 1930). Norman Rockwell depicted Cooper in his role as \"The Texan\" for the cover of \"The Saturday Evening Post\" on May 24, 1930.\nOne of the most important performances in Cooper's early career was his portrayal of a sullen legionnaire in Josef von Sternberg's film \"Morocco\" (also 1930) with Marlene Dietrich in her introduction to American audiences. During production, von Sternberg focused his energies on Dietrich and treated Cooper dismissively. Tensions came to a head after von Sternberg yelled directions at Cooper in German. The actor approached the director, picked him up by the collar, and said, \"If you expect to work in this country, you'd better get on to the language we use here.\" Despite the tensions on the set, Cooper produced \"one of his best performances\", according to Thornton Delehanty of the \"New York Evening Post\".\nAfter returning to the Western genre in Zane Grey's \"Fighting Caravans\" (1931) with French actress Lili Damita, Cooper appeared in the Dashiell Hammett crime film \"City Streets\" (also 1931), co-starring Sylvia Sidney and Paul Lukas, playing a westerner who gets involved with big-city gangsters to save the woman he loves. Cooper concluded the year with appearances in two unsuccessful films: \"I Take This Woman\" (also 1931) with Carole Lombard, and \"His Woman\" with Claudette Colbert. The demands and pressures of making 10 films in two years left Cooper exhausted and in poor health, suffering from anemia and jaundice. He had lost , and felt lonely, isolated, and depressed by his sudden fame and wealth. In May 1931, Cooper left Hollywood and sailed to Algiers and then Italy, where he lived for the next year.\nDuring his time abroad, Cooper stayed with the Countess Dorothy di Frasso, the former Dorothy Cadwell Taylor, at the Villa Madama in Rome, where she taught him about good food and vintage wines, how to read Italian and French menus, and how to socialize among Europe's nobility and upper classes. After guiding him through the great art museums and galleries of Italy, she accompanied him on a 10-week big-game hunting safari on the slopes of Mount Kenya in East Africa, where he was credited with more than 60 kills, including two lions, a rhinoceros, and various antelopes. His safari experience in Africa had a profound influence on Cooper and intensified his love of the wilderness. After returning to Europe, the countess and he set off on a Mediterranean cruise of the Italian and French Rivieras. Rested and rejuvenated by his year-long exile, a healthy Cooper returned to Hollywood in April 1932 and negotiated a new contract with Paramount for two films per year, a salary of $4,000 a week, and director and script approval.\nIn 1932, after completing \"Devil and the Deep\" with Tallulah Bankhead to fulfill his old contract, Cooper appeared in \"A Farewell to Arms\", the first film adaptation of an Ernest Hemingway novel. Co-starring Helen Hayes, a leading New York theatre star and Academy Award winner, and Adolphe Menjou, the film presented Cooper with one of his most ambitious and challenging dramatic roles, playing an American ambulance driver wounded in Italy, who falls in love with an English nurse during World War I. Critics praised his highly intense and emotional performance, and the film became one of the year's most commercially successful pictures. In 1933, after making \"Today We Live\" with Joan Crawford and \"One Sunday Afternoon\" with Fay Wray, Cooper appeared in the Ernst Lubitsch comedy film \"Design for Living\", based on the successful No\u00ebl Coward play. Co-starring Miriam Hopkins and Fredric March, the film was a box-office success, ranking as one of the top-10 highest-grossing films of 1933. All three of the lead actors\u00a0\u2013 March, Cooper, and Hopkins\u00a0\u2013 received attention from this film, as they were all at the peak of their careers. Cooper's performance, as an American artist in Europe competing with his playwright friend for the affections of a beautiful woman, was singled out for its versatility and revealed his genuine ability to do light comedy. Cooper changed his name legally to \"Gary Cooper\" in August 1933.\nIn 1934, Cooper was lent out to MGM for the Civil War drama film \"Operator 13\" with Marion Davies, about a beautiful Union spy who falls in love with a Confederate soldier. Despite Richard Boleslawski's imaginative direction and George J. Folsey's lavish cinematography, the film did poorly at the box office.\nBack at Paramount, Cooper appeared in his first of seven films by director Henry Hathaway, \"Now and Forever\", with Carole Lombard and Shirley Temple. In the film, he plays a confidence man who tries to sell his daughter to the relatives who raised her, but is eventually won over by the adorable girl. Impressed by Temple's intelligence and charm, Cooper developed a close rapport with her, both on and off screen. The film was a box-office success.\nIn 1935, Cooper was lent to Samuel Goldwyn Productions to appear in King Vidor's romance film \"The Wedding Night\" with Anna Sten, who was being groomed as \"another Garbo\". In the film, Cooper plays an alcoholic novelist who retreats to his family's New England farm, where he meets and falls in love with a beautiful Polish neighbor. Cooper delivered a performance of surprising range and depth, according to biographer Larry Swindell. Despite receiving generally favorable reviews, the film was not popular with American audiences, who may have been offended by the film's depiction of an extramarital affair and its tragic ending.\nAlso in 1935, Cooper appeared in two Henry Hathaway films: the melodrama \"Peter Ibbetson\" with Ann Harding, about a man caught up in a dream world created by his love for a childhood sweetheart, and the adventure film \"The Lives of a Bengal Lancer\", about a daring British officer and his men who defend their stronghold at Bengal against rebellious local tribes. While the former, championed by the surrealists became more successful in Europe than in the United States, the latter was nominated for seven Academy Awards and became one of Cooper's most popular and successful adventure films. Hathaway had the highest respect for Cooper's acting ability, calling him \"the best actor of all of them\".\nAmerican folk hero, 1936\u20131943.\nFrom \"Mr. Deeds\" to \"The Real Glory\", 1936\u20131939.\nCooper's career took an important turn in 1936. After making Frank Borzage's romantic comedy film \"Desire\" with Marlene Dietrich at Paramount, in which he delivered a performance considered by some contemporary critics as one of his finest, Cooper returned to Poverty Row for the first time since his early silent-film days to make Frank Capra's \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\" with Jean Arthur for Columbia Pictures. In the film, Cooper plays Longfellow Deeds, a quiet, innocent writer of greeting cards who inherits a fortune, leaves behind his idyllic life in Vermont, and travels to New York City, where he faces a world of corruption and deceit. Capra and screenwriter Robert Riskin were able to use Cooper's well-established screen persona as the \"quintessential American hero\"\u00a0\u2013 a symbol of honesty, courage, and goodness\u00a0\u2013 to create a new type of \"folk hero\" for the common man. Commenting on Cooper's impact on the character and the film, Capra observed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As soon as I thought of Gary Cooper, it wasn't possible to conceive anyone else in the role. He could not have been any closer to my idea of Longfellow Deeds, and as soon as he could think in terms of Cooper, Bob Riskin found it easier to develop the Deeds character in terms of dialogue. So it just had to be Cooper. Every line in his face spelled honesty. Our Mr. Deeds had to symbolize incorruptibility, and in my mind Gary Cooper was that symbol.\nBoth \"Desire\" and \"Mr. Deeds\" opened in April 1936 to critical praise and were major box-office successes. In his review in \"The New York Times\", Frank Nugent wrote that Cooper was \"proving himself one of the best light comedians in Hollywood\". For his performance in \"Mr. Deeds\", Cooper received his first Academy Award nomination for Best Actor.\nCooper appeared in two other Paramount films in 1936. In Lewis Milestone's adventure film \"The General Died at Dawn\" with Madeleine Carroll, he plays an American soldier of fortune in China who helps the peasants defend themselves against the oppression of a cruel warlord. Written by playwright Clifford Odets, the film was a critical and commercial success.\nIn Cecil B. DeMille's sprawling frontier epic \"The Plainsman\", his first of four films with the director, Cooper portrays Wild Bill Hickok in a highly fictionalized version of the opening of the American western frontier. The film was an even greater box-office hit than its predecessor, due in large part to Jean Arthur's definitive depiction of Calamity Jane and Cooper's inspired portrayal of Hickok as an enigmatic figure of \"deepening mythic substance\". That year, Cooper appeared for the first time on the \"Motion Picture Herald\" exhibitor's poll of top-10 film personalities, where he remained for the next 23 years.\nIn late 1936, Paramount was preparing a new contract for Cooper that would raise his salary to $8,000 a week, when Cooper signed a contract with Samuel Goldwyn for six films over six years with a minimum guarantee of $150,000 per picture. Paramount brought suit against Goldwyn and Cooper, and the court ruled that Cooper's new Goldwyn contract afforded the actor sufficient time to also honor his Paramount agreement. Cooper continued to make films with both studios, and by 1939, the United States Treasury reported that Cooper was the country's highest wage earner, at $482,819 (equivalent to $million in 2024).\nIn contrast to his output the previous year, Cooper appeared in only one picture in 1937, Henry Hathaway's adventure film \"Souls at Sea\". A critical and box-office failure, Cooper referred to it as his \"almost picture\", saying, \"It was almost exciting, and almost interesting. And I was almost good.\" In 1938, he appeared in Archie Mayo's biographical film \"The Adventures of Marco Polo\". Plagued by production problems and a weak screenplay, the film became Goldwyn's biggest failure to date, losing $700,000. During this period, Cooper turned down several important roles, including the role of Rhett Butler in \"Gone with the Wind\". Cooper was producer David O. Selznick's first choice for the part. He made several overtures to the actor, but Cooper had doubts about the project, and did not feel suited to the role. Cooper later admitted, \"It was one of the best roles ever offered in Hollywood... But I said no. I didn't see myself as quite that dashing, and later, when I saw Clark Gable play the role to perfection, I knew I was right.\"\nBack at Paramount, Cooper returned to a more comfortable genre in Ernst Lubitsch's romantic comedy \"Bluebeard's Eighth Wife\" (1938) with Claudette Colbert. In the film, Cooper plays a wealthy American businessman in France who falls in love with an impoverished aristocrat's daughter and persuades her to become his eighth wife. Despite the clever screenplay by Charles Brackett and Billy Wilder, and solid performances by Cooper and Colbert, American audiences had trouble accepting Cooper in the role of a shallow philanderer. It succeeded only at the European box-office market.\nIn the fall of 1938, Cooper appeared in H. C. Potter's romantic comedy \"The Cowboy and the Lady\" with Merle Oberon, about a sweet-natured rodeo cowboy who falls in love with the wealthy daughter of a presidential hopeful, believing her to be a poor, hard-working lady's maid. The efforts of three directors and several eminent screenwriters could not salvage what could have been a fine vehicle for Cooper. While more successful than its predecessor, the film was Cooper's fourth consecutive box-office failure in the American market.\nIn the next two years, Cooper was more discerning about the roles he accepted and made four successful large-scale adventure and cowboy films. In William A. Wellman's adventure film \"Beau Geste\" (1939), he plays one of three daring English brothers who join the French Foreign Legion in the Sahara to fight local tribes. Filmed in the same Mojave Desert locations as the original 1926 version with Ronald Colman, \"Beau Geste\" provided Cooper with magnificent sets, exotic settings, high-spirited action, and a role tailored to his personality and screen persona. This was the last film in Cooper's contract with Paramount.\nIn Henry Hathaway's \"The Real Glory\" (1939), he plays a military doctor who accompanies a small group of American Army officers to the Philippines to help the Christian Filipinos defend themselves against Muslim radicals. Many film critics praised Cooper's performance, including author and film critic Graham Greene, who recognized that he \"never acted better\".\nFrom \"The Westerner\" to \"For Whom the Bell Tolls\", 1940\u20131943.\nCooper returned to the Western genre in William Wyler's \"The Westerner\" (1940) with Walter Brennan and Doris Davenport, about a drifting cowboy who defends homesteaders against Roy Bean, a corrupt judge known as the \"law west of the Pecos\". Screenwriter Niven Busch relied on Cooper's extensive knowledge of Western history while working on the script. The film received positive reviews and did well at the box office, with reviewers praising the performances of the two lead actors. That same year, Cooper appeared in his first all-Technicolor feature, Cecil B. DeMille's adventure film \"North West Mounted Police\" (1940). In the film, Cooper plays a Texas Ranger who pursues an outlaw into western Canada, where he joins forces with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police who are after the same man, a leader of the North-West Rebellion. While not as popular with critics as its predecessor, the film was another box-office success, the sixth-highest grossing film of 1940.\nThe early 1940s were Cooper's prime years as an actor. In a relatively short period, he appeared in five critically successful and popular films that produced some of his finest performances. When Frank Capra offered him the lead role in \"Meet John Doe\" before Robert Riskin even developed the script, Cooper accepted his friend's offer, saying, \"It's okay, Frank, I don't need a script.\" In the film, Cooper plays Long John Willoughby, a down-and-out bush-league pitcher hired by a newspaper to pretend to be a man who promises to commit suicide on Christmas Eve to protest all the hypocrisy and corruption in the country. Considered by some critics to be Capra's best film at the time, \"Meet John Doe\" was received as a \"national event\" with Cooper appearing on the front cover of \"Time\" on March 3, 1941. In his review in the \"New York Herald Tribune\", Howard Barnes called Cooper's performance a \"splendid and utterly persuasive portrayal\" and praised his \"utterly realistic acting which comes through with such authority\". Bosley Crowther, in \"The New York Times\", wrote, \"Gary Cooper, of course, is 'John Doe' to the life and in the whole\u00a0\u2013 shy, bewildered, nonaggressive, but a veritable tiger when aroused.\"\nThat same year, Cooper made two films with director and good friend Howard Hawks. In the biographical film \"Sergeant York\", Cooper portrays war hero Alvin C. York, one of the most decorated American soldiers in World WarI. The film chronicles York's early backwoods days in Tennessee, his religious conversion and subsequent piety, his stand as a conscientious objector, and finally his heroic actions at the Battle of the Argonne Forest, which earned him the Medal of Honor. Initially, Cooper was nervous and uncertain about playing a living hero, so he traveled to Tennessee to visit York at his home, and the two quiet men established an immediate rapport and discovered they had much in common. Inspired by York's encouragement, Cooper delivered a performance that Howard Barnes of the \"New York Herald Tribune\" called \"one of extraordinary conviction and versatility\", and that Archer Winston of the \"New York Post\" called \"one of his best\". After the film's release, Cooper was awarded the Distinguished Citizenship Medal by the Veterans of Foreign Wars for his \"powerful contribution to the promotion of patriotism and loyalty\". York admired Cooper's performance and helped promote the film for Warner Bros. \"Sergeant York\" became the top-grossing film of the year and was nominated for 11 Academy Awards. Accepting his first Academy Award for Best Actor from his friend James Stewart, Cooper said, \"It was Sergeant Alvin York who won this award. Shucks, I've been in the business 16 years and sometimes dreamed I might get one of these. That's all I can say... Funny when I was dreaming I always made a better speech.\"\nCooper concluded the year back at Goldwyn with Howard Hawks to make the romantic comedy \"Ball of Fire\" with Barbara Stanwyck. In the film, Cooper plays a shy linguistics professor who leads a team of seven scholars who are writing an encyclopedia. While researching slang, he meets Stanwyck's flirtatious burlesque stripper Sugarpuss O'Shea who blows the dust off their staid life of books. The screenplay by Charles Brackett and Billy Wilder provided Cooper the opportunity to exercise the full range of his light comedy skills. In his review for the \"New York Herald Tribune\", Howard Barnes wrote that Cooper handled the role with \"great skill and comic emphasis\" and that his performance was \"utterly delightful\". Though small in scale, \"Ball of Fire\" was one of the top-grossing films of the year and Cooper's fourth consecutive picture to make the top 20.\nCooper's only film appearance in 1942 was also his last under his Goldwyn contract. In Sam Wood's biographical film \"The Pride of the Yankees\", Cooper portrays baseball star Lou Gehrig, who established a record with the New York Yankees for playing in 2,130 consecutive games. Cooper was reluctant to play the seven-time All-Star, who had died only the previous year from ALS (now commonly called \"Lou Gehrig's disease\"). Beyond the challenges of effectively portraying such a popular and nationally recognized figure, Cooper knew very little about baseball and was not left-handed like Gehrig.\nAfter Gehrig's widow visited the actor and expressed her desire that he portray her husband, Cooper accepted the role that covered a 20-year span of Gehrig's life: his early love of baseball, his rise to greatness, his loving marriage, and his struggle with illness, culminating in his farewell speech at Yankee Stadium on July 4, 1939, before 62,000 fans. Cooper quickly learned the physical movements of a baseball player and developed a fluid, believable swing. The handedness issue was solved by reversing the print for certain batting scenes. The film was one of the year's top-10 pictures and received 11 Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture and Best Actor (Cooper's third).\nSoon after the publication of Ernest Hemingway's novel \"For Whom the Bell Tolls\", Paramount paid $150,000 for the film rights with the express intent of casting Cooper in the lead role of Robert Jordan, an American explosives expert who fights alongside the Republican loyalists during the Spanish Civil War. The original director, Cecil B. DeMille, was replaced by Sam Wood, who brought in Dudley Nichols for the screenplay. After the start of principal photography in the Sierra Nevada in late 1942, Ingrid Bergman was brought in to replace ballerina Vera Zorina as the female lead, a change supported by Cooper and Hemingway. The love scenes between Bergman and Cooper were \"rapturous\" and passionate. Howard Barnes in the \"New York Herald Tribune\" wrote that both actors performed with \"the true stature and authority of stars\". While the film distorted the novel's original political themes and meaning, \"For Whom the Bell Tolls\" was a critical and commercial success and received 10 Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture and Best Actor (Cooper's fourth).\nWorld War II related activities.\nDue to his age and health, Cooper did not serve in the military during World War II, but like many of his colleagues, he got involved in the war effort by entertaining the troops. In June 1943, he visited military hospitals in San Diego, and often appeared at the Hollywood Canteen serving food to the servicemen. In late 1943, Cooper undertook a tour of the South West Pacific with actresses Una Merkel and Phyllis Brooks and accordionist Andy Arcari.\nTraveling on a B-24A Liberator bomber, the group toured the Cook Islands, Fiji, New Caledonia, Queensland, Brisbane\u00a0\u2013 where General Douglas MacArthur told Cooper he was watching \"Sergeant York\" in a Manila theater when Japanese bombs began falling\u00a0\u2013 New Guinea and Jayapura, then throughout the Solomon Islands.\nThe group often shared the same sparse living conditions and K-rations as the troops. Cooper met with the servicemen and women, visited military hospitals, introduced his attractive colleagues and participated in occasional skits. The shows concluded with Cooper's moving recitation of Lou Gehrig's farewell speech. When he returned to the United States, he visited military hospitals throughout the country. Cooper later called his time with the troops the \"greatest emotional experience\" of his life.\nMature roles, 1944\u20131952.\nIn 1944, Cooper appeared in Cecil B. DeMille's wartime adventure film \"The Story of Dr. Wassell\" with Laraine Day\u00a0\u2013 his third movie with the director. In the film, Cooper plays American doctor and missionary Corydon M. Wassell, who leads a group of wounded sailors through the jungles of Java to safety. Despite receiving poor reviews, \"Dr. Wassell\" was one of the top-grossing films of the year. With his Goldwyn and Paramount contracts now concluded, Cooper decided to remain independent and formed his own production company, International Pictures, with Leo Spitz, William Goetz, and Nunnally Johnson. The fledgling studio's first offering was Sam Wood's romantic comedy \"Casanova Brown\" with Teresa Wright, about a man who learns his soon-to-be ex-wife is pregnant with his child, just as he is about to marry another woman. The film received poor reviews, with the \"New York Daily News\" calling it \"delightful nonsense\", and Bosley Crowther, in \"The New York Times\", criticizing Cooper's \"somewhat obvious and ridiculous clowning\". The film was barely profitable.\nIn 1945, Cooper starred in and produced Stuart Heisler's Western comedy \"Along Came Jones\" with Loretta Young for International. In this lighthearted parody of his past heroic image, Cooper plays comically inept cowboy Melody Jones, who is mistaken for a ruthless killer. Audiences embraced Cooper's character, and the film was one of the top box-office pictures of the year\u00a0\u2013 a testament to Cooper's still vital audience appeal. It was also International's biggest financial success during its brief history before being sold off to Universal Studios in 1946.\nCooper's career during the postwar years drifted in new directions as American society was changing. While he still played conventional heroic roles, his films now relied less on his heroic screen persona and more on novel stories and exotic settings. In November 1945, Cooper appeared in Sam Wood's 19th-century period drama \"Saratoga Trunk\" with Ingrid Bergman, about a Texas cowboy and his relationship with a beautiful fortune hunter. Filmed in early 1943, the movie's release was delayed for two years due to the increased demand for war movies. Despite poor reviews, \"Saratoga Trunk\" did well at the box office and became one of the top moneymakers of the year for Warner Bros. Cooper's only film in 1946 was Fritz Lang's romantic thriller \"Cloak and Dagger\", about a mild-mannered physics professor recruited by the Office of Strategic Services during the last years of World War II to investigate the German atomic-bomb program. Playing a part loosely based on physicist J.\u00a0Robert Oppenheimer, Cooper was uneasy with the role and unable to convey the \"inner sense\" of the character. The film received poor reviews and was a box-office failure. In 1947, Cooper appeared in Cecil B. DeMille's epic adventure film \"Unconquered\" with Paulette Goddard, about a Virginia militiaman who defends settlers against an unscrupulous gun trader and hostile Indians on the Western frontier during the 18th century. The film received mixed reviews, but even long-time DeMille critic James Agee acknowledged the picture had \"some authentic flavor of the period\". This last of four films made with DeMille was Cooper's most lucrative, earning the actor over $300,000 (equal to $ today) in salary and percentage of profits. \"Unconquered\" was his last unqualified box-office success for the next five years.\nIn 1948, after making Leo McCarey's romantic comedy \"Good Sam\", Cooper sold his company to Universal Studios and signed a long-term contract with Warner Bros. that gave him script and director approval and a guaranteed $295,000 (equal to $ today) per picture. His first film under the new contract was King Vidor's drama \"The Fountainhead\" (1949) with Patricia Neal and Raymond Massey. In the film, Cooper plays an idealistic and uncompromising architect who struggles to maintain his integrity and individualism in the face of societal pressures to conform to popular standards. Based on the novel by Ayn Rand, who also wrote the screenplay, the film reflects her philosophy and attacks the concepts of collectivism while promoting the virtues of individualism. For most critics, Cooper was hopelessly miscast in the role of Howard Roark. In his review for \"The New York Times\", Bosley Crowther concluded he was \"Mr. Deeds out of his element\". Cooper returned to his element in Delmer Daves' war drama \"Task Force\" (1949), about a retiring rear admiral, who reminisces about his long career as a naval aviator and his role in the development of aircraft carriers. Cooper's performance and the Technicolor newsreel footage supplied by the United States Navy made the film one of Cooper's most popular during this period. In the next two years, Cooper made four poorly received films: Michael Curtiz' period drama \"Bright Leaf\" (1950), Stuart Heisler's Western melodrama \"Dallas\" (1950), Henry Hathaway's wartime comedy \"You're in the Navy Now\" (1951), and Raoul Walsh's Western action film \"Distant Drums\" (1951).\nCooper's most important film during the postwar years was Fred Zinnemann's Western drama \"High Noon\" (1952) with Grace Kelly and Katy Jurado for United Artists. In the film, Cooper plays retiring sheriff Will Kane, who is preparing to leave town on his honeymoon when he learns that an outlaw he helped put away and his three henchmen are returning to seek their revenge. Unable to gain the support of the frightened townspeople, and abandoned by his young bride, Kane nevertheless stays to face the outlaws alone. During the filming, Cooper was in poor health and in considerable pain from stomach ulcers. His ravaged face and discomfort in some scenes \"photographed as self-doubt\", according to biographer Hector Arce, and contributed to the effectiveness of his performance. Considered one of the first \"adult\" Westerns for its theme of moral courage, \"High Noon\" received enthusiastic reviews for its artistry, with \"Time\" placing it in the ranks of \"Stagecoach\" and \"The Gunfighter\". Bosley Crowther, in \"The New York Times\", wrote that Cooper was \"at the top of his form\", and John McCarten, in \"The New Yorker\", wrote that Cooper was never more effective. The film earned $3.75million in the United States and $18million worldwide. Following the example of his friend James Stewart, Cooper accepted a lower salary in exchange for a percentage of the profits, and ended up making $600,000. Cooper's understated performance was widely praised, and earned him his second Academy Award for Best Actor.\nLater films, 1953\u20131959.\nAfter appearing in Andre de Toth's Civil War drama \"Springfield Rifle\" (1952)\u00a0\u2013 a standard Warner Bros. film that was overshadowed by the success of its predecessor\u00a0\u2013 Cooper made four films outside the United States. In Mark Robson's drama \"Return to Paradise\" (1953), Cooper plays an American wanderer who liberates the inhabitants of a Polynesian island from the puritanical rule of a misguided pastor. Cooper endured spartan living conditions, long hours, and ill health during the three-month location shoot on the island of Upolu in Western Samoa. Despite its beautiful cinematography, the film received poor reviews. Cooper's next three films were shot in Mexico. In Hugo Fregonese's action adventure film \"Blowing Wild\" (1953) with Barbara Stanwyck, he plays a wildcatter in Mexico, who gets involved with an oil-company executive and his unscrupulous wife with whom he once had an affair.\nIn 1954, Cooper appeared in Henry Hathaway's Western drama \"Garden of Evil\", with Susan Hayward, about three soldiers of fortune in Mexico hired to rescue a woman's husband. That same year, he appeared in Robert Aldrich's Western adventure \"Vera Cruz\" with Burt Lancaster. In the film, Cooper plays an American adventurer hired by Emperor MaximilianI to escort a countess to Vera Cruz during the Mexican Rebellion of 1866. All these films received poor reviews, but did well at the box office. For his work in \"Vera Cruz\", Cooper earned $1.4million in salary and a percentage of the gross.\nDuring this period, Cooper struggled with health problems. He suffered a severe shoulder injury during the filming of \"Blowing Wild\" when he was hit by metal fragments from a dynamited oil well, as well as his ongoing treatment for ulcers. During the filming of \"Vera Cruz\", he reinjured his hip by falling from a horse, and was burned when Lancaster fired his rifle too close and the wadding from the blank shell pierced his clothing.\nCooper appeared in Otto Preminger's 1955 biographical war drama \"The Court-Martial of Billy Mitchell\", about the World WarI general who tried to convince government officials of the importance of air power, and was court-martialed after blaming the War Department for a series of air disasters. Some critics felt Cooper was miscast, and that his dull, tight-lipped performance did not reflect Mitchell's dynamic and caustic personality. In 1956, Cooper was more effective playing a gentle Indiana Quaker in William Wyler's Civil War drama \"Friendly Persuasion\" with Dorothy McGuire. Like \"Sergeant York\" and \"High Noon\", the film addresses the conflict between religious pacifism and civic duty. For his performance, Cooper received his second Golden Globe nomination for Best Motion Picture Actor. The film was nominated for six Academy Awards, was awarded the Palme d'Or at the 1957 Cannes Film Festival, and went on to earn $8million worldwide.\nCooper traveled to France in 1956 to make Billy Wilder's romantic comedy \"Love in the Afternoon\" with Audrey Hepburn and Maurice Chevalier. In the film, Cooper plays a middle-aged American playboy in Paris who is pursued by\u2014and eventually falls in love with\u2014a much younger woman. Despite receiving some positive reviews, including from Bosley Crowther, who praised the film's \"charming performances\", most reviewers concluded that Cooper was simply too old for the part. While audiences may not have welcomed seeing Cooper's heroic screen image tarnished by his playing an aging \"rou\u00e9\" having an affair with a young girl, the film was still a box-office success. The following year, Cooper appeared in Philip Dunne's romantic drama \"Ten North Frederick\". In the film, which was based on the novel by John O'Hara, Cooper plays an attorney whose life is ruined by a double-crossing politician and his own secret affair with his daughter's young roommate. While Cooper brought \"conviction and controlled anguish\" to his performance, according to biographer Jeffrey Meyers, it was not enough to save what Bosley Crowther called a \"hapless film\".\nDespite his ongoing health problems and several operations for ulcers and hernias, Cooper continued to work in action films. In 1958, he appeared in Anthony Mann's Western drama \"Man of the West\" (1958) with Julie London and Lee J. Cobb, about a reformed outlaw and killer who is forced to confront his violent past when the train in which he is riding is held up by his former gang members. The film has been called Cooper's \"most pathological Western\", with its themes of impotent rage, sexual humiliation, and sadism. According to biographer Jeffrey Meyers, Cooper, who struggled with moral conflicts in his personal life, \"understood the anguish of a character striving to retain his integrity... [and] brought authentic feeling to the role of a tempted and tormented, yet essentially decent man\". Mostly ignored by critics at the time, the film is now well-regarded by film scholars and is considered Cooper's last great film.\nAfter his Warner Bros. contract ended, Cooper formed his own production company, Baroda Productions, and made three unusual films in 1959 about redemption. In Delmer Daves' Western drama \"The Hanging Tree\", Cooper plays a frontier doctor who saves a criminal from a lynch mob, and later tries to exploit his sordid past. Cooper delivered a \"powerful and persuasive\" performance of an emotionally scarred man whose need to dominate others is transformed by the love and sacrifice of a woman. In Robert Rossen's historical adventure \"They Came to Cordura\" with Rita Hayworth, he plays an army officer who is found guilty of cowardice and assigned the degrading task of recommending soldiers for the Medal of Honor during the Pancho Villa Expedition of 1916. While Cooper received positive reviews, \"Variety\" and \"Films in Review\" felt he was too old for the part. \nIn Michael Anderson's action drama \"The Wreck of the Mary Deare\" with Charlton Heston, Cooper plays a disgraced merchant-marine officer who decides to stay aboard his sinking cargo ship to prove the vessel was deliberately scuttled and to redeem his good name. Like its two predecessors, the film was physically demanding. Cooper, who was a trained scuba diver, did most of his own underwater scenes. Biographer Jeffrey Meyers observed that in all three roles Cooper effectively conveyed the sense of lost honor and desire for redemption\u00a0\u2013 what Joseph Conrad in \"Lord Jim\" called the \"struggles of an individual trying to save from the fire his idea of what his moral identity should be\".\nPersonal life.\nMarriage and family.\nCooper was formally introduced to his future wife, 20-year-old New York debutante Veronica Balfe, on Easter Sunday 1933 at a party given by her uncle, art director Cedric Gibbons. Called \"Rocky\" by her family and friends, she grew up on Park Avenue and attended finishing schools. Her stepfather was Wall Street tycoon Paul Shields. Cooper and Rocky were quietly married at her parents' Park Avenue residence on December 15, 1933. According to his friends, the marriage had a positive impact on Cooper, who turned away from past indiscretions and took control of his life. Athletic and a lover of the outdoors, Rocky shared many of Cooper's interests, including riding, skiing, and skeet-shooting. While she organized their social life, her wealth and social connections provided Cooper access to New York high society. Cooper and his wife owned homes in the Los Angeles area in Encino (1933\u201336), Brentwood (1936\u201353), and Holmby Hills (1954\u201361), and owned a vacation home in Aspen, Colorado (1949\u201353).\nGary and Veronica Cooper's daughter, Maria Veronica Cooper, was born on September 15, 1937. By all accounts, he was a patient and affectionate father, teaching Maria to ride a bicycle, play tennis, ski, and ride horses. Sharing many of her parents' interests, she accompanied them on their travels and was often photographed with them. Like her father, she developed a love for art and drawing. As a family, they vacationed together in Sun Valley, Idaho, spent time at Rocky's parents' country house in Southampton, New York, and took frequent trips to Europe. Cooper and Rocky were legally separated on May 16, 1951, when Cooper moved out of their home. For over two years, they maintained a fragile and uneasy family life with their daughter. Cooper moved back into their home in November 1953, and their formal reconciliation occurred in February 1954.\nRomantic relationships.\nPrior to his marriage, Cooper had a series of romantic relationships with leading actresses, beginning in 1927 with Clara Bow, who advanced his career by helping him get one of his first leading roles in \"Children of Divorce\". Bow was also responsible for getting Cooper a role in \"Wings\", which generated an enormous amount of fan mail for the young actor. In 1928, he had a relationship with another experienced actress, Evelyn Brent, whom he met while filming \"Beau Sabreur\". In 1929, while filming \"The Wolf Song\", Cooper began an intense affair with Lupe V\u00e9lez, which was the most important romance of his early life. During their two years together, Cooper also had brief affairs with Marlene Dietrich while filming \"Morocco\" in 1930 and with Carole Lombard while making \"I Take This Woman\" in 1931. During his year abroad in 1931\u201332, Cooper had an affair with the married Countess Dorothy di Frasso, the former Dorothy Cadwell Taylor, while staying at her Villa Madama near Rome.\nAfter he was married in December 1933, Cooper remained faithful to his wife until the summer of 1942, when he began an affair with Ingrid Bergman during the production of \"For Whom the Bell Tolls\". Their relationship lasted through the completion of filming \"Saratoga Trunk\" in June 1943. In 1948, after finishing work on \"The Fountainhead\", Cooper began an affair with Patricia Neal, his co-star. At first, they kept their affair discreet, but eventually it became an open secret in Hollywood, and Cooper's wife confronted him with the rumors, which he admitted were true. He also confessed that he was in love with Neal, and continued to see her. Cooper and his wife were legally separated in May 1951, but he did not seek a divorce. Neal later claimed that Cooper hit her after she went on a date with Kirk Douglas, and that he arranged for her to have an abortion when she became pregnant with Cooper's child. Neal ended their relationship in late December 1951. During his three-year separation from his wife, Cooper was rumored to have had affairs with Grace Kelly, Lorraine Chanel, and Gis\u00e8le Pascal.\nCooper biographers have explored his relationship in the late '20s with the actor Anderson Lawler, with whom Cooper shared a house on and off for a year, while at the same time seeing Clara Bow, Evelyn Brent, and Lupe V\u00e9lez. V\u00e9lez once told Hedda Hopper of Lawler's alleged affair with Cooper; whenever he would come home after seeing Lawler, she would sniff for Lawler's cologne. V\u00e9lez's biographer Michelle Vogel wrote that V\u00e9lez consented to Cooper's alleged sexual behavior with Lawler, but only as long as she, too, could participate.\nIn later life, Cooper became involved with costume designer Irene, and was, according to her, \"the only man she ever loved\". A year after his death in 1961, Irene committed suicide by jumping from the 11th floor of the Knickerbocker Hotel, after telling Doris Day of her grief over Cooper's death.\nFriendships, interests, and character.\nAccording to Cooper\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCooper's 20-year friendship with Ernest Hemingway began at Sun Valley in October 1940. The previous year, Hemingway drew upon Cooper's image when he created the character of Robert Jordan for the novel \"For Whom the Bell Tolls\". The two shared a passion for the outdoors, and for years they hunted duck and pheasant, and skied together in Sun Valley. Both men admired the work of Rudyard Kipling--Cooper kept a copy of the poem \"If\u2014\" in his dressing room--and retained as adults Kipling's sense of boyish adventure.\nAs well as admiring Cooper's hunting skills and knowledge of the outdoors, Hemingway believed his character matched his screen persona, once telling a friend, \"If you made up a character like Coop, nobody would believe it. He's just too good to be true.\" They saw each other often, and their friendship remained strong through the years.\nCooper's social life generally centered on sports, outdoor activities, and dinner parties with his family and friends from the film industry, including directors Henry Hathaway, Howard Hawks, William Wellman, and Fred Zinnemann, and actors Joel McCrea, Barbara Stanwyck, James Stewart, and Robert Taylor. In addition to hunting, Cooper enjoyed riding, fishing, skiing, and, later in life, scuba diving. He never abandoned his early love for art and drawing, and over the years, he and his wife acquired a private collection of modern paintings, including works by Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Paul Gauguin, and Georgia O'Keeffe. Cooper owned several works by Pablo Picasso, whom he met in 1956. Cooper also had a lifelong passion for automobiles, with a collection that included a 1930 Duesenberg.\nCooper was naturally reserved and introspective, and loved the solitude of outdoor activities. Not unlike his screen persona, his communication style frequently consisted of long silences with an occasional \"yup\" and \"shucks\". He once said, \"If others have more interesting things to say than I have, I keep quiet.\" His friends said that Cooper was also an articulate, well-informed conversationalist on topics ranging from horses, guns, and Western history to film production, sports cars, and modern art. He was modest and unpretentious, frequently downplaying his acting abilities and career accomplishments. His friends and colleagues described him as charming, well-mannered, and thoughtful, with a lively, boyish sense of humor. He maintained a sense of propriety throughout his career and never misused his movie-star status, never seeking special treatment or refusing to work with a director or leading lady. Cooper's close friend Joel McCrea recalled, \"Coop never fought, he never got mad, he never told anybody off that I know of; everybody [who] worked with him liked him.\"\nPolitical views.\nLike his father, Cooper was a conservative Republican; he voted for Calvin Coolidge in 1924 and Herbert Hoover in 1928 and 1932, and campaigned for Wendell Willkie in 1940. When Franklin D. Roosevelt ran for an unprecedented fourth presidential term in 1944, Cooper campaigned for Thomas E. Dewey and criticized Roosevelt for being dishonest and adopting \"foreign\" ideas. In a radio address he had paid for himself just before the election, Cooper said, \"I disagree with the New Deal belief that the America all of us love is old and worn-out and finished\u00a0\u2013 and has to borrow foreign notions that don't even seem to work any too well where they come from... Our country is a young country that just has to make up its mind to be itself again.\" He also attended a Republican rally at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum that drew 93,000 Dewey supporters. In 1952, Cooper, along with Glenn Ford, Adolphe Menjou, and John Wayne, supported Robert A. Taft over Dwight D. Eisenhower in the Republican primaries.\nCooper was one of the founding members of the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals, a conservative organization dedicated, according to its statement of principles, to preserving the \"American way of life\" and opposing communism and fascism. The organization (members included Walter Brennan, Laraine Day, Walt Disney, Clark Gable, Hedda Hopper, Ronald Reagan, Barbara Stanwyck, and John Wayne) advised the United States Congress to investigate communist influence in the motion-picture industry. On October 23, 1947, Cooper was subpoenaed to appear before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) and was asked if he had observed any \"communistic influence\" in Hollywood.\nCooper recounted statements he had heard suggesting the Constitution was out of date and that Congress was an unnecessary institution, comments which Cooper said he found to be \"very un-American\", and testified that he had rejected several scripts because he thought they were \"tinged with communist ideas\". Unlike some other witnesses, Cooper did not name any individuals or scripts.\nIn 1951, while making \"High Noon\", Cooper befriended the film's screenwriter, Carl Foreman, who had been a member of the Communist Party. When Foreman was subpoenaed by the HUAC, Cooper put his career on the line to defend Foreman. When John Wayne and others threatened Cooper with blacklisting and the loss of his passport if he did not walk off the film, Cooper gave a statement to the press in support of Foreman, calling him \"the finest kind of American\". When producer Stanley Kramer removed Foreman's name as screenwriter, Cooper and director Fred Zinnemann threatened to walk off the film if Foreman's name were not restored. Foreman later said that of all his friends and allies and colleagues in Hollywood, \"Cooper was the only big one who tried to help. The only one.\" Cooper even offered to testify on Foreman's behalf before the committee, but character witnesses were not allowed. Foreman always sent future scripts to Cooper for first refusal, including \"The Bridge on the River Kwai, The Key\", and \"The Guns of Navarone\". Cooper had to turn them down because of his age.\nReligion.\nCooper was baptized in the Church of All Saints, Houghton Regis, in Bedfordshire, England, in December 1911, and was raised in the Episcopal Church in the United States. While he was not an observant Christian for most of his adult life, many of his friends believed he had a deeply spiritual side.\nOn June 26, 1953, Cooper accompanied his wife and daughter, who were devout Catholics, to Rome, where they had an audience with Pope Pius\u00a0XII. Cooper and his wife were still separated at the time, but the papal visit marked the beginning of their gradual reconciliation. In the following years, Cooper contemplated his mortality and his personal behavior, and started discussing Catholicism with his family. He began attending Mass with them regularly, and met with their parish priest, who offered Cooper spiritual guidance. After several months of study, Cooper was baptized as a Catholic on April 9, 1959, before a small group of family and friends at the Church of the Good Shepherd in Beverly Hills.\nFinal years and death.\nCooper was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 1960. On April 14, 1960, Cooper underwent surgery at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston as the cancer metastasized to his colon. He fell ill again on May 13 and underwent further surgery at Cedars of Lebanon Hospital in Los Angeles in early June to remove a malignant tumor from his large intestine. After recuperating over the summer, Cooper took his family on vacation to the south of France before traveling to the UK in the fall to star in \"The Naked Edge\". In December 1960, he worked on the NBC television documentary \"The Real West\", which was part of the company's \"Project 20\" series.\nOn December 27, his wife learned from their family doctor that Cooper's cancer had metastasized to his lungs and bones and was inoperable. His family decided not to tell him immediately.\nOn January 9, 1961, Cooper attended a dinner given in his honor and hosted by Frank Sinatra and Dean Martin at the Friars Club. The dinner was attended by many of his industry friends and concluded with a brief speech by Cooper, who said, \"The only achievement I'm proud of is the friends I've made in this community.\"\nIn mid-January, Cooper took his family to Sun Valley for their last vacation together. Cooper and Ernest Hemingway hiked through the snow together for the last time. On February 27, after returning to Los Angeles, Cooper learned that he was dying. He later told his family, \"We'll pray for a miracle; but if not, and that's God's will, that's all right, too.\" On April 17, Cooper watched the Academy Awards ceremony on television and saw his good friend James Stewart, who had presented Cooper with his first Oscar years earlier, accept on Cooper's behalf an honorary award for lifetime achievement\u00a0\u2013 his third Oscar. Holding back tears, Stewart said, \"Coop, I'll get this to you right away. And Coop, I want you to know this, that with this goes all the warm friendship and the affection and the admiration and the deep, the deep respect of all of us. We're very, very proud of you, Coop. All of us are tremendously proud.\" The following day, newspapers around the world announced that Cooper was dying. In the coming days, he received numerous messages of appreciation and encouragement, including telegrams from Pope John\u00a0XXIII and Queen Elizabeth\u00a0II, and a telephone call from President John F. Kennedy.\nIn his last public statement on May 4, 1961, Cooper said, \"I know that what is happening is God's will. I am not afraid of the future.\" He received the last rites on Friday, May 12, and died quietly the next day.\nA requiem was held on May 18 at the Church of the Good Shepherd, attended by many of Cooper's friends, including Fred Astaire, Jack Benny, Marlene Dietrich, John Ford, Henry Hathaway, Audrey Hepburn, Bob Hope, Dean Martin, Joel McCrea, Walter Pidgeon, Edward G. Robinson, Randolph Scott, Frank Sinatra, James Stewart, Jack L. Warner, and John Wayne. Cooper was buried in the Grotto of Our Lady of Lourdes in Holy Cross Cemetery in Culver City, California. In May 1974, after his family relocated to New York, Cooper's remains were exhumed and reburied in Sacred Hearts Cemetery in Southampton. His grave is marked next to a three-ton boulder from a Montauk quarry.\nActing style and reputation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Naturalness is hard [for me] to talk about, but I guess it boils down to this: you find out what people expect of your type of character and then you give them what they want. That way, an actor never seems unnatural or affected, no matter what role he plays.\nCooper's acting style consisted of three essential characteristics - his ability to project elements of his own personality onto the characters he portrayed, to appear natural and authentic in his roles, and to underplay and deliver restrained performances calibrated for the camera and the screen. Acting teacher Lee Strasberg once observed: \"The simplest examples of Stanislavsky's ideas are actors such as Gary Cooper, John Wayne, and Spencer Tracy. They try not to act, but to be themselves, to respond or react. They refuse to say or do anything they feel not to be consonant with their own characters.\" Film director Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut ranked Cooper among \"the greatest actors\" because of his ability to deliver great performances \"without direction\". This ability to project elements of his own personality onto his characters produced a continuity across his performances to the extent that critics and audiences were convinced he was simply \"playing himself\".\nCooper's ability to project his personality onto his characters played an important part in his appearing natural and authentic on screen. Actor John Barrymore said of Cooper, \"This fellow is the world's greatest actor. He does without effort what the rest of us spend our lives trying to learn\u00a0\u2013 namely, to be natural.\" Charles Laughton, who played opposite Cooper in \"Devil and the Deep\" agreed, \"In truth, that boy hasn't the least idea how well he acts... He gets at it from the inside, from his own clear way of looking at life.\" William Wyler, who directed Cooper in two films, called him a \"superb actor, a master of movie acting\".\nIn his review of Cooper's performance in \"The Real Glory\", Graham Greene wrote, \"Sometimes his lean photogenic face seems to leave everything to the lens, but there is no question here of his not acting. Watch him inoculate the girl against cholera\u00a0\u2013 the casual jab of the needle, and the dressing slapped on while he talks, as though a thousand arms had taught him where to stab and he doesn't have to think anymore.\"\nCooper's style of underplaying before the camera surprised many of his directors and fellow actors. Even in his earliest feature films, he recognized the camera's ability to pick up slight gestures and facial movements. Commenting on Cooper's performance in \"Sergeant York\", director Howard Hawks observed, \"He worked very hard and yet he didn't seem to be working. He was a strange actor because you'd look at him during a scene and you'd think... this isn't going to be any good. But when you saw the rushes in the projection room the next day you could read in his face all the things he'd been thinking.\" Sam Wood, who directed Cooper in four films, had similar observations about Cooper's performance in \"Pride of the Yankees\", noting, \"What I thought was underplaying turned out to be just the right approach. On the screen he's perfect, yet on the set you'd swear it's the worst job of acting in the history of motion pictures.\"\nFellow actors admired his abilities as an actor. Commenting on her two films playing opposite Cooper, actress Ingrid Bergman concluded, \"The personality of this man was so enormous, so overpowering\u00a0\u2013 and that expression in his eyes and his face, it was so delicate and so underplayed. You just didn't notice it until you saw it on the screen. I thought he was marvelous; the most underplaying and the most natural actor I ever worked with.\"\nTom Hanks declared, \"In only one scene in the first film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture, we see the future of screen acting in the form of Gary Cooper. He is quiet and natural, somehow different from the other cast members. He does something mysterious with his eyes and shoulders that is much more like 'being' than 'acting'.\"\nDaniel Day-Lewis said, \"I don't particularly like westerns as a genre, but I do love certain westerns. \"High Noon\" means a lot to me\u00a0\u2013 I love the purity and the honesty, I love Gary Cooper in that film, the idea of the last man standing.\"\nChris Pratt stated, \"I started watching Westerns when I was shooting in London about four or five years ago. I really fell in love with Gary Cooper, and his stuff. That sucked me into the Westerns. Before, I never got engrossed in the story. I'd just dip in, and there were guys on horses in black and white. \"High Noon\"'s later Gary Cooper, I liked that. But I liked \"The Westerner\". That's my favorite one. I have that poster hung up in my house because I really like that one.\"\nTo Al Pacino, \"Gary Cooper was a phenomenon\u00a0\u2013 his ability to take some thing and elevate it, give it such dignity. One of the great presences.\"\nMyl\u00e8ne Demongeot first met Gary Cooper at the opening of the first escalator to be installed in a cinema, at the Rex Theatre in Paris, on June 7, 1957. She declared in a 2015 filmed interview: \"Gary Cooper... il est sublime ! Aaahhh \"(Myl\u00e8ne pushing a cry of love not to say ecstasy)\" il est sublime... Ah ! Ah ! Ah ! L\u00e0 je dois dire que \u00e7a fait partie des stars, y'a Gary Cooper, Cary Grant, John Wayne, ces grands Am\u00e9ricains que j'ai rencontr\u00e9s comme \u00e7a, c'est vraiment des mecs incroyables. Y'en a plus des comme \u00e7a ! Euh non. (Gary Cooper was sublime, there I have to say, now he, was part of the stars, Gary Cooper, Cary Grant, John Wayne, those great\nAmericans who I've met really were unbelievable guys, there aren't any like them anymore).\"\nCareer assessment and legacy.\nCooper's career spanned thirty-six years, from 1925 to 1961. During that time he appeared in eighty-four feature films in a leading role. He was a major movie star from the end of the silent film era to the end of the golden age of Classical Hollywood. His natural and authentic acting style appealed powerfully to both men and women, and his range of performances included roles in most major movie genres, including Westerns, war films, adventure films, drama films, crime films, romance films, comedy films, and romantic comedy films. He appeared on the \"Motion Picture Herald\" exhibitor's poll of top ten film personalities for twenty-three consecutive years, from 1936 to 1958. According to Quigley's annual poll, Cooper was one of the top money-making stars for eighteen years, appearing in the top ten in 1936\u201337, 1941\u201349, and 1951\u201357. He topped the list in 1953. In Quigley's list of all-time money-making stars, Cooper is listed fourth, after John Wayne, Clint Eastwood, and Tom Cruise. At the time of his death, it was estimated that his films grossed well over $200million (equivalent to $billion in 2024).\nIn more than half his feature films, Cooper portrayed Westerners, soldiers, pilots, sailors, and explorers, all men of action. In the rest, he played a wide range of characters, included doctors, professors, artists, architects, clerks, and baseball players. Cooper's heroic screen image changed with each period of his career. In his early films, he played the young naive hero sure of his moral position and trusting in the triumph of simple virtues (\"The Virginian\"). After becoming a major star, his Western screen persona was replaced by a more cautious hero in adventure films and dramas (\"A Farewell to Arms\"). During the height of his career, from 1936 to 1943, he played a new type of hero: a champion of the common man willing to sacrifice himself for others (\"Mr. Deeds\", \"Meet John Doe\", and \"For Whom the Bell Tolls\").\nIn the postwar years, Cooper attempted broader variations on his screen image, which now reflected a hero increasingly at odds with the world, who must face adversity alone (\"The Fountainhead\" and \"High Noon\"). In his final films, Cooper's hero rejects the violence of the past, and seeks to reclaim lost honor and find redemption (\"Friendly Persuasion\" and \"Man of the West\"). The screen persona he developed and sustained throughout his career represented the ideal American hero\u00a0\u2013 a tall, handsome, and sincere man of steadfast integrity who emphasized action over intellect, and combined the heroic qualities of the romantic lover, the adventurer, and the common man.\nOn February 6, 1960, Cooper was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6243 Hollywood Boulevard for his contribution to the film industry. He was also awarded a star on the sidewalk outside the Ellen Theater in Bozeman, Montana.\nOn May 6, 1961, Cooper was awarded the French Order of Arts and Letters in recognition of his significant contribution to the arts. On July 30, 1961, he was posthumously awarded the David di Donatello Special Award in Italy for his career achievements.\nIn 1966, Cooper was inducted into the Hall of Great Western Performers at the National Cowboy &amp; Western Heritage Museum in Oklahoma City. In 2015, he was inducted into the Utah Cowboy and Western Heritage Hall of Fame. The American Film Institute (AFI) ranked Cooper 11th on its list of the 25 male stars of classic Hollywood. Three of his characters\u00a0\u2013 Will Kane, Lou Gehrig, and Sergeant York\u00a0\u2013 made AFI's list of the 100 greatest heroes and villains, all of them as heroes. His Lou Gehrig line, \"Today, I consider myself the luckiest man on the face of the earth.\", is ranked by AFI as the 38th greatest movie quote of all time.\nMore than half a century after his death, Cooper's enduring legacy, according to biographer Jeffrey Meyers, is his image of the ideal American hero preserved in his film performances. Charlton Heston once observed, \"He projected the kind of man Americans would like to be, probably more than any actor that's ever lived.\"\nIn popular culture.\nIn the 1930s hit song \"Puttin' On the Ritz\", Cooper is referenced in the line \"dress up like a million-dollar trooper/Tryin' hard to look like Gary Cooper, Super duper!\" More than two decades after Cooper's death, a new version of the song was released in 1983 by Taco; the original lyrics were kept, including the references to Cooper.\nGary Cooper is referenced several times in the critically acclaimed television series \"The Sopranos\", with protagonist Tony Soprano asking, \"Whatever happened to Gary Cooper? The strong, silent type...\" whilst complaining about his problems to his therapist Dr. Melfi.\nPatricia Neal named the Abbey of Regina Laudis' outdoor theater building The Gary-The Olivia in honor of Cooper and her daughter Olivia Dahl.\nA San Antonio, Texas, subdivision has several streets named after Hollywood stars, including a Gary Cooper Drive.\nFilmography.\nThe following is a list of feature films in which Cooper appeared in a leading role.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44361", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44361", "title": "Congo River", "text": "River in Central Africa\nThe Congo River, formerly also known as the Zaire River, is the second-longest river in Africa, shorter only than the Nile, as well as the third largest river in the world by discharge volume, following the Amazon and Ganges\u2013Brahmaputra rivers. It is the world's deepest recorded river, with measured depths of around . The Congo\u2013Lualaba\u2013Luvua\u2013Luapula\u2013Chambeshi River system has an overall length of , which makes it the world's ninth-longest river. The Chambeshi is a tributary of the Lualaba River, and \"Lualaba\" is the name of the Congo River upstream of Boyoma Falls, extending for .\nMeasured along with the Lualaba, the main tributary, the Congo River has a total length of . It is the only major river to cross the equator twice. The Congo Basin has a total area of about , or 13% of the entire African landmass.\nName.\nThe name \"Congo/Kongo\" originates from the Kingdom of Kongo once located on the southern bank of the river. The kingdom in turn was named after the indigenous Bantu Kongo people, known in the 17th century as \"Esikongo\". South of the Kingdom of Kongo proper lay the similarly named Kakongo kingdom, mentioned in 1535. Abraham Ortelius labelled \"Manicongo\" as the city at the mouth of the river in his world map of 1564. The tribal names in \"Kongo\" possibly derive from a word for a public gathering or tribal assembly. The modern name of the Kongo people or \"Bakongo\" was introduced in the early 20th century.\nThe name \"Zaire\" is from a Portuguese adaptation of a Kikongo word, (\"river\"), a truncation of (\"river swallowing rivers\"). The river was known as \"Zaire\" during the 16th and 17th centuries; \"Congo\" seems to have replaced \"Zaire\" gradually in English usage during the 18th century, and \"Congo\" is the preferred English name in 19th-century literature, although references to \"Zahir\" or \"Zaire\" as the name used by the inhabitants remained common. The Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic of the Congo are named after it, as was the previous Republic of the Congo which had gained independence in 1960 from the Belgian Congo. The Republic of Zaire during 1971\u20131997 was also named after the river's name in French and Portuguese.\nBasin and course.\nThe Congo's drainage basin covers , an area nearly equal to that of the European Union. The Congo's discharge at its mouth ranges from , with an average of . The river transports annually 86 million tonnes of suspended sediment to the Atlantic Ocean and an additional 6% of bedload.\nThe river and its tributaries flow through the Congo rainforest, the second largest rainforest area in the world, after the Amazon rainforest in South America. The third-largest river in the world by discharge volume (at mouth 41,860 m3/s), following the Amazon (219,530 m3/s) and Ganges\u2013Brahmaputra\u2013Meghna (total discharge at delta 43,950 m3/s) rivers; the second-largest drainage basin of any river, behind the Amazon; and is one of the deepest rivers in the world, at depths greater than . Because its drainage basin includes areas both north and south of the Equator, its flow is stable, as there is always at least one part of the river experiencing a rainy season.\nThe sources of the Congo are in the highlands and mountains of the East African Rift, as well as Lake Tanganyika and Lake Mweru, which feed the Lualaba River, which then becomes the Congo below Boyoma Falls. The Chambeshi River in Zambia is generally taken as the source of the Congo in line with the accepted practice worldwide of using the longest tributary, as with the Nile River.\nThe Congo flows generally toward the northwest from Kisangani just below the Boyoma Falls, then gradually bends southwestward, passing by Mbandaka, joining with the Ubangi River and running into the Pool Malebo (Stanley Pool). Kinshasa (formerly L\u00e9opoldville) and Brazzaville are on opposite sides of the river at the Pool, where the river narrows and falls through a number of cataracts in deep canyons (collectively known as the Livingstone Falls), running by Matadi and Boma, and into the sea at Muanda.\nLower Congo constitutes the \"lower\" parts of the great river; that is the section of the river from the river mouth at the Atlantic coast to the twin capitals of Brazzaville and Kinshasa. In this section of the river, there are two significant tributaries, both on the left or south side. The \"Kwilu River\" originates in the hills near the Angolan border and enters the Congo some 100 km upstream from Matadi. The other is the Inkisi River, that flows in a northerly direction from the U\u00edge Province in Angola to the confluence with the Congo at \"Zongo\" some downstream from the twin capitals. Because of the vast number of rapids, in particular the Livingstone Falls, this section of the river is not operated continuously by riverboats.\nDrainage basin.\nThe Congo basin covers ten countries and accounts for about 13% of Africa. The highest point in the Congo basin is in the Ruwenzori Mountains, at an altitude of around above sea level.\nDistribution of the Congo basin area between countries:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nTributaries.\nLower Congo (river mouth to Kinshasa) Downstream of Kinshasa, from the river mouth at Banana, there are a few major tributaries.\nMiddle Congo (Kinshasa to the Boyoma Falls)\nUpper Congo (Lualaba; upstream from the Boyoma Falls)\nEconomic importance.\nAlthough the Livingstone Falls prevent access from the sea, nearly the entire Congo above them is readily navigable in sections, especially between Kinshasa and Kisangani. Large river steamers worked the river until quite recently. The Congo River still is a lifeline in a land with few roads or railways. Railways now bypass the three major falls, and much of the trade of Central Africa passes along the river, including copper, palm oil (as kernels), sugar, coffee, and cotton.\nHydroelectric power.\nThe Congo River is the most powerful river in Africa. During the rainy season over of water per second flows into the Atlantic Ocean. Opportunities for the Congo River and its tributaries to generate hydropower are therefore enormous. Scientists have calculated that the entire Congo Basin accounts for 13 percent of global hydropower potential. This would provide sufficient power for all of Sub-Saharan Africa's electricity needs.\nCurrently, there are about 40 hydropower plants in the Congo Basin. The largest are the Inga dams, about southwest of Kinshasa. The project was launched in the early 1970s, when the first dam was completed. The plan (as originally conceived) called for the construction of five dams that would have had a total generating capacity of 34,500 megawatts (MW). To date only the Inga I and Inga II dams have been built, generating 1,776 MW.\nIn February 2005, South Africa's state-owned power company, Eskom, announced a proposal to expand generation through improvements and the construction of a new hydroelectric dam. The project would bring the maximum output of the facility to 40,000 megawatts (MW). It is feared that these new hydroelectric dams could lead to the extinction of many of the fish species that are native to the river.\nNatural history.\nThe current course of the Congo River formed between 1.5 and 2 million years BP, during the Pleistocene. It is likely that during this period many upper tributaries of the Congo were captured from adjacent river basins, including the Uele and upper Ubangi from the Chari system and the Chambeshi River alongside a number of upper Kasai River tributaries from the Zambezi system.\nThe Congo's formation may have led to the allopatric speciation of the bonobo and the common chimpanzee from their most recent common ancestor. The bonobo is endemic to the humid forests in the region, as are other iconic species like the Allen's swamp monkey, dryas monkey, aquatic genet, okapi, and Congo peafowl.\nIn terms of aquatic life, the Congo River Basin has a very high species richness and among the highest known densities of endemics. As of 2009[ [update]], almost 800 fish species have been recorded from the Congo River Basin (not counting Lake Tanganyika, which is connected but ecologically very different), and large sections remain virtually unstudied. For example, the section in Salonga National Park, which is about the size of Belgium, had still not been sampled at all in 2006. New fish species are scientifically described with some regularity from the Congo River Basin, and many undescribed species are known.\nThe Congo has by far the highest diversity of any African river system; in comparison, the next richest are the Niger, Volta and Nile with about 240, 140 and 130 fish species, respectively. Because of the great ecological differences between the regions in the Congo basin\u2014including habitats such as river rapids, deep rivers, swamps, and lakes\u2014it is often divided into multiple ecoregions (instead of treating it as a single ecoregion). Among these ecoregions, the Livingstone Falls cataracts has more than 300 fish species, including approximately 80 endemics while the southwestern part (Kasai River basin) has more than 200 fish species, of which about a quarter are endemic.\nThe dominant fish families\u2014at least in parts of the river\u2014are Cyprinidae (carp/cyprinids, such as \"Labeo simpsoni\"), Mormyridae (elephant fishes), Alestidae (African tetras), Mochokidae (squeaker catfishes), and Cichlidae (cichlids). Among the natives in the river is the huge, highly carnivorous giant tigerfish. Three of the more unusual endemics are the whitish (non-pigmented) and blind \"Lamprologus lethops\", which is believed to live as deep as below the surface, \"Heterochromis multidens\", which is more closely related to cichlids of the Americas than other African cichlids, and \"Caecobarbus geertsii\", the only known cavefish in Central Africa. There are also numerous endemic frogs and snails. Several hydroelectric dams are planned on the river, and these may lead to the extinction of many of the endemics.\nSeveral species of turtles and the slender-snouted, Nile and dwarf crocodile are native to the Congo River Basin. African manatees inhabit the lower parts of the river.\nHistory.\nPre-colonial history.\nThe entire Congo basin is populated by Bantu peoples, divided into several hundred ethnic groups. Bantu expansion is estimated to have reached the middle Congo by about 500 BC and the upper Congo by the first century AD. Remnants of the aboriginal population displaced by the Bantu migration, Pygmies/\"Abatwa\" of the Ubangian phylum, remain in the remote forest areas of the Congo Basin.\nBy the 13th century there were three main confederations of states in the western Congo Basin. In the east were the Seven Kingdoms of Kongo dia Nlaza, considered to be the oldest and most powerful, which likely included Nsundi, Mbata, Mpangu, and possibly Kundi and Okanga. South of these was Mpemba which stretched from modern-day Angola to the Congo River. It included various kingdoms such as Mpemba Kasi and Vunda. To its west across the Congo River was a confederation of three small states; Vungu (its leader), Kakongo, and Ngoyo.\nThe Kingdom of Kongo was formed in the late 14th century from a merging of the kingdoms of Mpemba Kasi and Mbata Kingdom on the left banks of the lower Congo River. Its territorial control along the river remained limited to what corresponds to the modern Kongo Central province. European exploration of the Congo began in 1482 when Portuguese explorer Diogo C\u00e3o discovered the river estuary (likely in August 1482), which he marked by a Padr\u00e3o, or stone pillar (still existing, but only in fragments) erected on Shark Point. C\u00e3o sailed up the river for a short distance, establishing contact with the Kingdom of Kongo. The full course of the river remained unknown throughout the early modern period.\nThe upper Congo basin runs west of the Albertine Rift. Its connection to the Congo was unknown until 1877. The extreme northeast of the Congo basin was reached by the Nilotic expansion at some point between the 15th and 18th centuries, by the ancestors of the Southern Luo speaking Alur people. Francisco de Lacerda followed the Zambezi and reached the uppermost part of the Congo basin (the Kazembe in the upper Luapula basin) in 1796.\nThe upper Congo River was first reached by the Arab slave trade by the 19th century. Nyangwe was founded as a slavers' outpost around 1860. David Livingstone was the first European to reach Nyangwe in March 1871. Livingstone proposed to prove that the Lualaba connected to the Nile, but on 15 July, he witnessed a massacre of about 400 Africans by Arab slavers in Nyangwe, which experience left him too horrified and shattered to continue his mission to find the sources of the Nile, so he turned back to Lake Tanganyika.\nEarly European colonization.\nThe Europeans had not reached the central regions of the Congo basin from either the east or west, until Henry Morton Stanley's expedition of 1876\u201377, supported by the Committee for Studies of the Upper Congo. At the time one of the last open questions of the European exploration of Africa was whether the Lualaba River fed the Nile (Livingstone's theory), the Congo, or even the Niger River. Financed in 1874, Stanley's first trans-Africa exploration started in Zanzibar and reached the Lualaba on October 17, 1876. Overland he reached Nyangwe, the center of a lawless area containing cannibal tribes at which Tippu Tip based his trade in slaves. Stanley managed to hire a force from Tippu Tip to guard him for the next or so, for 90 days.\nThe party left Nyangwe overland through the dense Matimba forest. On November 19 they reached the Lualaba again. Since the going through the forest was so heavy, Tippu Tip turned around with his party on December 28, leaving Stanley on his own, with 143 people, including eight children and 16 women. They had 23 canoes. His first encounter with a local tribe was with the cannibal Wenya. In total Stanley reports 32 unfriendly meetings on the river, some violent, even though he attempted to negotiate a peaceful thoroughfare. But the tribes were wary as their only experience of outsiders was with slave traders.\nOn January 6, 1877, after , they reached Boyoma Falls (called Stanley Falls for some time after), consisting of seven cataracts spanning which they had to bypass overland. It took them to February 7 to reach the end of the falls. Here Stanley learned that the river was called \"Ikuta Yacongo\", proving to him that he had reached the Congo and that the Lualaba did not feed the Nile.\nFrom this point, the tribes were no longer cannibals but possessed firearms, apparently as a result of Portuguese influence. Some four weeks and later he reached Stanley Pool (now Pool Malebo), the site of the present day cities Kinshasa and Brazzaville. Further downstream were the Livingstone Falls, misnamed as Livingstone had never been on the Congo: a series of 32 falls and rapids with an elevation change of over . On 15 March they started the descent of the falls, which took five months and cost numerous lives. From the Isangile Falls, five falls from the foot, they beached the canoes and \"Lady Alice\" and left the river, aiming for the Portuguese outpost of Boma via land.\nOn August 3 they reached the hamlet Nsada. From there Stanley sent four men with letters forward to Boma, asking for food for his starving people. On August 7 relief came, being sent by representatives from the Liverpool trading firm Hatton &amp; Cookson. On August 9 they reached Boma, 1,001 days since leaving Zanzibar on November 12, 1874. The party then consisted of 108 people, including three children born during the trip. Most probably (Stanley's own publications give inconsistent figures), he lost 132 people through disease, hunger, drowning, killing and desertion.\nKinshasa was founded as a trading post by Stanley in 1881 and named L\u00e9opoldville in honor of Leopold II of Belgium. The Congo Basin was privately claimed by Leopold II as Congo Free State in 1885 where the many Atrocities in the Congo Free State were committed until the region was called the Belgian Congo.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44363", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44363", "title": "Wien's displacement law", "text": "Relation between peak wavelengths of black body radiation and temperature\nIn physics, Wien's displacement law states that the black-body radiation curve for different temperatures will peak at different wavelengths that are inversely proportional to the temperature. The shift of that peak is a direct consequence of the Planck radiation law, which describes the spectral brightness or intensity of black-body radiation as a function of wavelength at any given temperature. However, it had been discovered by German physicist Wilhelm Wien several years before Max Planck developed that more general equation, and describes the entire shift of the spectrum of black-body radiation toward shorter wavelengths as temperature increases.\nFormally, the wavelength version of Wien's displacement law states that the spectral radiance of black-body radiation per unit wavelength, peaks at the wavelength formula_1 given by:\nformula_2\nwhere T is the absolute temperature and b is a constant of proportionality called \"Wien's displacement constant\", equal to , or .\nThis is an inverse relationship between wavelength and temperature. So the higher the temperature, the shorter or smaller the wavelength of the thermal radiation. The lower the temperature, the longer or larger the wavelength of the thermal radiation. For visible radiation, hot objects emit bluer light than cool objects. If one is considering the peak of black body emission per unit frequency or per proportional bandwidth, one must use a different proportionality constant. However, the form of the law remains the same: the peak wavelength is inversely proportional to temperature, and the peak frequency is directly proportional to temperature.\nThere are other formulations of Wien's displacement law, which are parameterized relative to other quantities. For these alternate formulations, the form of the relationship is similar, but the proportionality constant, b, differs.\nWien's displacement law may be referred to as \"Wien's law\", a term which is also used for the Wien approximation.\nIn \"Wien's displacement law\", the word displacement refers to how the intensity-wavelength graphs appear shifted (displaced) for different temperatures.\nExamples.\nWien's displacement law is relevant to some everyday experiences:\nDiscovery.\nThe law is named for Wilhelm Wien, who derived it in 1893 based on a thermodynamic argument. Wien considered adiabatic expansion of a cavity containing waves of light in thermal equilibrium. Using Doppler's principle, he showed that, under slow expansion or contraction, the energy of light reflecting off the walls changes in exactly the same way as the frequency. A general principle of thermodynamics is that a thermal equilibrium state, when expanded very slowly, stays in thermal equilibrium.\nWien himself deduced this law theoretically in 1893, following Boltzmann's thermodynamic reasoning. It had previously been observed, at least semi-quantitatively, by an American astronomer, Langley. This upward shift in formula_3 with formula_4 is familiar to everyone\u2014when an iron is heated in a fire, the first visible radiation (at around 900 K) is deep red, the lowest frequency visible light. Further increase in formula_4 causes the color to change to orange then yellow, and finally blue at very high temperatures (10,000 K or more) for which the peak in radiation intensity has moved beyond the visible into the ultraviolet.\nThe adiabatic principle allowed Wien to conclude that for each mode, the adiabatic invariant energy/frequency is only a function of the other adiabatic invariant, the frequency/temperature. From this, he derived the \"strong version\" of Wien's displacement law: the statement that the blackbody spectral radiance is proportional to formula_6 for some function F of a single variable. A modern variant of Wien's derivation can be found in the textbook by Wannier and in a paper by E. Buckingham\nThe consequence is that the shape of the black-body radiation function (which was not yet understood) would shift proportionally in frequency (or inversely proportionally in wavelength) with temperature. When Max Planck later formulated the correct black-body radiation function it did not explicitly include Wien's constant formula_7. Rather, the Planck constant formula_8 was created and introduced into his new formula. From the Planck constant formula_8 and the Boltzmann constant formula_10, Wien's constant formula_7 can be obtained.\nPeak differs according to parameterization.\nThe results in the tables above summarize results from other sections of this article. Percentiles are percentiles of the Planck blackbody spectrum. Only 25 percent of the energy in the black-body spectrum is associated with wavelengths shorter than the value given by the peak-wavelength version of Wien's law.\nNotice that for a given temperature, different parameterizations imply different maximal wavelengths. In particular, the curve of intensity per unit frequency peaks at a different wavelength than the curve of intensity per unit wavelength.\nFor example, using formula_4 = and parameterization by wavelength, the wavelength for maximal spectral radiance is formula_13 = 482.962 nm with corresponding frequency formula_14 = 620.737 THz. For the same temperature, but parameterizing by frequency, the frequency for maximal spectral radiance is formula_14 = 352.735 THz with corresponding wavelength formula_13 = 849.907 nm.\nThese functions are radiance \"density\" functions, which are probability \"density\" functions scaled to give units of radiance. The density function has different shapes for different parameterizations, depending on relative stretching or compression of the abscissa, which measures the change in probability density relative to a linear change in a given parameter. Since wavelength and frequency have a reciprocal relation, they represent significantly non-linear shifts in probability density relative to one another.\nThe total radiance is the integral of the distribution over all positive values, and that is invariant for a given temperature under \"any\" parameterization. Additionally, for a given temperature the radiance consisting of all photons between two wavelengths must be the same regardless of which distribution you use. That is to say, integrating the wavelength distribution from formula_17 to formula_18 will result in the same value as integrating the frequency distribution between the two frequencies that correspond to formula_17 and formula_18, namely from formula_21 to formula_22. However, the distribution \"shape\" depends on the parameterization, and for a different parameterization the distribution will typically have a different peak density, as these calculations demonstrate.\nThe important point of Wien's law, however, is that \"any\" such wavelength marker, including the median wavelength (or, alternatively, the wavelength below which \"any\" specified percentage of the emission occurs) is proportional to the reciprocal of temperature. That is, the shape of the distribution for a given parameterization scales with and translates according to temperature, and can be calculated once for a canonical temperature, then appropriately shifted and scaled to obtain the distribution for another temperature. This is a consequence of the strong statement of Wien's law.\nFrequency-dependent formulation.\nFor spectral flux considered per unit frequency formula_23 (in hertz), Wien's displacement law describes a peak emission at the optical frequency formula_24 given by:\nformula_25\nor equivalently\nformula_26\nwhere formula_27 = is a constant resulting from the maximization equation, k is the Boltzmann constant, h is the Planck constant, and T is the absolute temperature. With the emission now considered per unit frequency, this peak now corresponds to a wavelength about 76% longer than the peak considered per unit wavelength. The relevant math is detailed in the next section.\nDerivation from Planck's law.\nParameterization by wavelength.\nPlanck's law for the spectrum of black-body radiation predicts the Wien displacement law and may be used to numerically evaluate the constant relating temperature and the peak parameter value for any particular parameterization. Commonly a wavelength parameterization is used and in that case the black body spectral radiance (power per emitting area per solid angle) is:\nformula_28\nDifferentiating formula_29 with respect to formula_13 and setting the derivative equal to zero gives:\nformula_31\nwhich can be simplified to give:\nformula_32\nBy defining:\nformula_33\nthe equation becomes one in the single variable \"x\":\nformula_34\nwhich is equivalent to:\nformula_35\nThis equation is solved by\nformula_36\nwhere formula_37 is the principal branch of the Lambert \"W\" function, and gives formula_38. Solving for the wavelength formula_13 in millimetres, and using kelvins for the temperature yields:\nformula_40()formula_41.\nParameterization by frequency.\nAnother common parameterization is by \"frequency\". The derivation yielding peak parameter value is similar, but starts with the form of Planck's law as a function of frequency formula_14:\nformula_43\nThe preceding process using this equation yields:\nformula_44\nThe net result is:\nformula_45\nThis is similarly solved with the Lambert \"W\" function:\nformula_46\ngiving formula_27 =.\nSolving for formula_14 produces:\nformula_49 ()formula_50.\nParameterization by the logarithm of wavelength or frequency.\nUsing the implicit equation formula_51 yields the peak in the spectral radiance density function expressed in the parameter radiance \"per proportional bandwidth\". (That is, the density of irradiance per frequency bandwidth proportional to the frequency itself, which can be calculated by considering infinitesimal intervals of formula_52 (or equivalently formula_53) rather of frequency itself.) This is perhaps a more intuitive way of presenting \"wavelength of peak emission\". That yields formula_27 =.\nMean photon energy as an alternate characterization.\nAnother way of characterizing the radiance distribution is via the mean photon energy\nformula_55\nwhere formula_56 is the Riemann zeta function.\nThe wavelength corresponding to the mean photon energy is given by \nformula_57\nCriticism.\nMarr and Wilkin (2012) contend that the widespread teaching of Wien's displacement law in introductory courses is undesirable, and it would be better replaced by alternate material. They argue that teaching the law is problematic because:\nThey suggest that the average photon energy be presented in place of Wien's displacement law, as being a more physically meaningful indicator of changes that occur with changing temperature. In connection with this, they recommend that the average number of photons per second be discussed in connection with the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law. They recommend that the Planck spectrum be plotted as a \"spectral energy density per fractional bandwidth distribution,\" using a logarithmic scale for the wavelength or frequency.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44364", "revid": "16364713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44364", "title": "Black body", "text": "Idealized physical body that absorbs all incident electromagnetic radiation\nA black body or blackbody is an idealized physical body that absorbs all incident electromagnetic radiation, regardless of frequency or angle of incidence. The radiation emitted by a black body in thermal equilibrium with its environment is called \"black-body radiation\". The name \"black body\" is given because it absorbs all colors of light. In contrast, a white body is one with a \"rough surface that reflects all incident rays completely and uniformly in all directions.\"\nA black body in thermal equilibrium (that is, at a constant temperature) emits electromagnetic black-body radiation. The radiation is emitted according to Planck's law, meaning that it has a spectrum that is determined by the temperature alone (see figure at right), not by the body's shape or composition.\nAn ideal black body in thermal equilibrium has two main properties:\nReal materials emit energy at a fraction\u2014called the emissivity\u2014of black-body energy levels. By definition, a black body in thermal equilibrium has an emissivity \"\u03b5\" \n 1. A source with a lower emissivity, independent of frequency, is often referred to as a gray body.\nConstructing black bodies with an emissivity as close to 1 as possible remains a topic of current interest.\nIn astronomy, the radiation from stars and planets is sometimes characterized in terms of an effective temperature, the temperature of a black body that would emit the same total flux of electromagnetic energy.\nDefinition.\nIsaac Newton introduced the notion of a black body in his 1704 book \"Opticks\", with query 6 of the book stating:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Do not black Bodies conceive heat more easily from Light than those of other Colours do, by reason that the Light falling on them is not reflected outwards, but enters into the Bodies, and is often reflected and refracted within them, until it be stifled and lost?The idea of a black body originally was introduced by Gustav Kirchhoff in 1860 as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...the supposition that bodies can be imagined which, for infinitely small thicknesses, completely absorb all incident rays, and neither reflect nor transmit any. I shall call such bodies \"perfectly black\", or, more briefly, \"black bodies\".\nA more modern definition drops the reference to \"infinitely small thicknesses\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;An ideal body is now defined, called a \"blackbody\". A \"blackbody\" allows \"all\" incident radiation to pass into it (no reflected energy) and internally absorbs \"all\" the incident radiation (no energy transmitted through the body). This is true for radiation of all wavelengths and for all angles of incidence. Hence the blackbody is \"a perfect absorber for all incident radiation.\"\nIdealizations.\nThis section describes some concepts developed in connection with black bodies.\nCavity with a hole.\nA widely used model of a black surface is a small hole in a cavity with walls that are opaque to radiation. Radiation incident on the hole will pass into the cavity, and is very unlikely to be re-emitted if the cavity is large. Lack of any re-emission, means that the hole is behaving like a perfect black surface. The hole is not quite a perfect black surface\u2014in particular, if the wavelength of the incident radiation is greater than the diameter of the hole, part will be reflected. Similarly, even in perfect thermal equilibrium, the radiation inside a finite-sized cavity will not have an ideal Planck spectrum for wavelengths comparable to or larger than the size of the cavity.\nSuppose the cavity is held at a fixed temperature \"T\" and the radiation trapped inside the enclosure is at thermal equilibrium with the enclosure. The hole in the enclosure will allow some radiation to escape. If the hole is small, radiation passing in and out of the hole has negligible effect upon the equilibrium of the radiation inside the cavity. This escaping radiation will approximate black-body radiation that exhibits a distribution in energy characteristic of the temperature \"T\" and does not depend upon the properties of the cavity or the hole, at least for wavelengths smaller than the size of the hole. See the figure in the Introduction for the spectrum as a function of the frequency of the radiation, which is related to the energy of the radiation by the equation \"E\" = \"hf\", with \"E\" = energy, \"h\" = Planck constant, \"f\" = frequency.\nAt any given time the radiation in the cavity may not be in thermal equilibrium, but the second law of thermodynamics states that if left undisturbed it will eventually reach equilibrium, although the time it takes to do so may be very long. Typically, equilibrium is reached by continual absorption and emission of radiation by material in the cavity or its walls. Radiation entering the cavity will be \"thermalized\" by this mechanism: the energy will be redistributed until the ensemble of photons achieves a Planck distribution. The time taken for thermalization is much faster with condensed matter present than with rarefied matter such as a dilute gas. At temperatures below billions of Kelvin, direct photon\u2013photon interactions are usually negligible compared to interactions with matter. Photons are an example of an interacting boson gas, and as described by the H-theorem, under very general conditions any interacting boson gas will approach thermal equilibrium.\nTransmission, absorption, and reflection.\nA body's behavior with regard to thermal radiation is characterized by its transmission \"\u03c4\", absorption \"\u03b1\", and reflection \"\u03c1\".\nThe boundary of a body forms an interface with its surroundings, and this interface may be rough or smooth. A nonreflecting interface separating regions with different refractive indices must be rough, because the laws of reflection and refraction governed by the Fresnel equations for a smooth interface require a reflected ray when the refractive indices of the material and its surroundings differ. A few idealized types of behavior are given particular names:\nAn \"opaque body\" is one that transmits none of the radiation that reaches it, although some may be reflected. That is, \"\u03c4\" = 0 and \"\u03b1\" + \"\u03c1\" = 1.\nA \"transparent body\" is one that transmits all the radiation that reaches it. That is, \"\u03c4\" = 1 and \"\u03b1\" = \"\u03c1\" = 0.\nA grey body is one where \"\u03b1\", \"\u03c1\" and \"\u03c4\" are constant for all wavelengths; this term also is used to mean a body for which \"\u03b1\" is temperature- and wavelength-independent.\nA \"white body\" is one for which all incident radiation is reflected uniformly in all directions: \"\u03c4\" = 0, \"\u03b1\" = 0, and \"\u03c1\" = 1.\nFor a black body, \"\u03c4\" = 0, \"\u03b1\" = 1, and \"\u03c1\" = 0. Planck offers a theoretical model for perfectly black bodies, which he noted do not exist in nature: besides their opaque interior, they have interfaces that are perfectly transmitting and non-reflective.\nKirchhoff's perfect black bodies.\nKirchhoff in 1860 introduced the theoretical concept of a perfect black body with a completely absorbing surface layer of infinitely small thickness, but Planck noted some severe restrictions upon this idea. Planck noted three requirements upon a black body: the body must (i) allow radiation to enter but not reflect; (ii) possess a minimum thickness adequate to absorb the incident radiation and prevent its re-emission; (iii) satisfy severe limitations upon scattering to prevent radiation from entering and bouncing back out. As a consequence, Kirchhoff's perfect black bodies that absorb all the radiation that falls on them cannot be realized in an infinitely thin surface layer, and impose conditions upon scattering of the light within the black body that are difficult to satisfy.\nRealizations.\nA \"realization\" of a black body refers to a real world, physical embodiment. Here are a few.\nCavity with a hole.\nIn 1898, Otto Lummer and Ferdinand Kurlbaum published an account of their cavity radiation source. Their design has been used largely unchanged for radiation measurements to the present day. It was a hole in the wall of a platinum box, divided by diaphragms, with its interior blackened with iron oxide. It was an important ingredient for the progressively improved measurements that led to the discovery of Planck's law. A version described in 1901 had its interior blackened with a mixture of chromium, nickel, and cobalt oxides. See also Hohlraum.\nNear-black materials.\nThere is interest in blackbody-like materials for camouflage and radiation-absorbent materials for radar invisibility. They also have application as solar energy collectors, and infrared thermal detectors. As a perfect emitter of radiation, a hot material with black body behavior would create an efficient infrared heater, particularly in space or in a vacuum where convective heating is unavailable. They are also useful in telescopes and cameras as anti-reflection surfaces to reduce stray light, and to gather information about objects in high-contrast areas (for example, observation of planets in orbit around their stars), where blackbody-like materials absorb light that comes from the wrong sources.\nIt has long been known that a carbon black coating will make a body nearly black. An improvement on lamp-black is found in manufactured carbon nanotubes. Nano-porous materials can achieve refractive indices nearly that of vacuum, in one case obtaining average reflectance of 0.045%. In 2009, a team of Japanese scientists created a material called nanoblack which is close to an ideal black body, based on vertically aligned single-walled carbon nanotubes. This absorbs between 98% and 99% of the incoming light in the spectral range from the ultra-violet to the far-infrared regions.\nOther examples of nearly perfect black materials are super black, prepared by chemically etching a nickel\u2013phosphorus alloy, vertically aligned carbon nanotube arrays (like Vantablack) and flower carbon nanostructures; all absorb 99.9% of light or more.\nStars and planets.\nA star or planet often is modeled as a black body, and electromagnetic radiation emitted from these bodies as black-body radiation. The figure shows a highly schematic cross-section to illustrate the idea. The photosphere of the star, where the emitted light is generated, is idealized as a layer within which the photons of light interact with the material in the photosphere and achieve a common temperature \"T\" that is maintained over a long period of time. Some photons escape and are emitted into space, but the energy they carry away is replaced by energy from within the star, so that the temperature of the photosphere is nearly steady. Changes in the core lead to changes in the supply of energy to the photosphere, but such changes are slow on the time scale of interest here. Assuming these circumstances can be realized, the outer layer of the star is somewhat analogous to the example of an enclosure with a small hole in it, with the hole replaced by the limited transmission into space at the outside of the photosphere. With all these assumptions in place, the star emits black-body radiation at the temperature of the photosphere.\nUsing this model the effective temperature of stars is estimated, defined as the temperature of a black body that yields the same surface flux of energy as the star. If a star were a black body, the same effective temperature would result from any region of the spectrum. For example, comparisons in the \"B\" (blue) or \"V\" (visible) range lead to the so-called \"B-V\" color index, which increases the redder the star, with the Sun having an index of +0.648 \u00b1 0.006. Combining the \"U\" (ultraviolet) and the \"B\" indices leads to the \"U-B\" index, which becomes more negative the hotter the star and the more the UV radiation. Assuming the Sun is a type G2 V star, its \"U-B\" index is +0.12. The two indices for two types of most common star sequences are compared in the figure (diagram) with the effective surface temperature of the stars if they were perfect black bodies. There is a rough correlation. For example, for a given \"B-V\" index measurement, the curves of both most common sequences of star (the main sequence and the supergiants) lie below the corresponding black-body \"U-B\" index that includes the ultraviolet spectrum, showing that both groupings of star emit less ultraviolet light than a black body with the same \"B-V\" index. It is perhaps surprising that they fit a black body curve as well as they do, considering that stars have greatly different temperatures at different depths. For example, the Sun has an effective temperature of 5780 K, which can be compared to the temperature of its photosphere (the region generating the light), which ranges from about 5000 K at its outer boundary with the chromosphere to about 9500 K at its inner boundary with the convection zone approximately deep.\nBlack holes.\nA black hole is a region of spacetime from which nothing escapes. Around a black hole there is a mathematically defined surface called an event horizon that marks the point of no return. It is called \"black\" because it absorbs all the light that hits the horizon, reflecting nothing, making it almost an ideal black body (radiation with a wavelength equal to or larger than the diameter of the hole may not be absorbed, so black holes are not perfect black bodies). Physicists believe that to an outside observer, black holes have a non-zero temperature and emit black-body radiation, radiation with a nearly perfect black-body spectrum, ultimately evaporating. The mechanism for this emission is related to vacuum fluctuations in which a virtual pair of particles is separated by the gravity of the hole, one member being sucked into the hole, and the other being emitted. The energy distribution of emission is described by Planck's law with a temperature \"T\":\nformula_1\nwhere \"c\" is the speed of light, \u210f is the reduced Planck constant, \"k\"B is the Boltzmann constant, \"G\" is the gravitational constant and \"M\" is the mass of the black hole. These predictions have not yet been tested either observationally or experimentally.\nCosmic microwave background radiation.\nThe Big Bang theory is based upon the cosmological principle, which states that on large scales the Universe is homogeneous and isotropic. According to theory, the Universe approximately a second after its formation was a near-ideal black body in thermal equilibrium at a temperature above 1010 K. The temperature decreased as the Universe expanded and the matter and radiation in it cooled. The cosmic microwave background radiation observed today is \"the most perfect black body ever measured in nature\". It has a nearly ideal Planck spectrum at a temperature of about 2.7\u00a0K. It departs from the perfect isotropy of true black-body radiation by an observed anisotropy that varies with angle on the sky only to about one part in 100,000.\nRadiative cooling.\nThe integration of Planck's law over all frequencies provides the total energy per unit of time per unit of surface area radiated by a black body maintained at a temperature \"T\", and is known as the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law:\nformula_2\nwhere \"\u03c3\" is the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann constant, \"\u03c3\"\u00a0\u2248\u00a0\u200d To remain in thermal equilibrium at constant temperature \"T\", the black body must absorb or internally generate this amount of power \"P\" over the given area \"A\".\nThe cooling of a body due to thermal radiation is often approximated using the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law supplemented with a \"gray body\" emissivity \"\u03b5\" \u2264 1 (\"P\"/\"A\" = \"\u03b5\u03c3T\"4). The rate of decrease of the temperature of the emitting body can be estimated from the power radiated and the body's heat capacity. This approach is a simplification that ignores details of the mechanisms behind heat redistribution (which may include changing composition, phase transitions or restructuring of the body) that occur within the body while it cools, and assumes that at each moment in time the body is characterized by a single temperature. It also ignores other possible complications, such as changes in the emissivity with temperature, and the role of other accompanying forms of energy emission, for example, emission of particles like neutrinos.\nIf a hot emitting body is assumed to follow the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law and its power emission \"P\" and temperature \"T\" are known, this law can be used to estimate the dimensions of the emitting object, because the total emitted power is proportional to the area of the emitting surface. In this way it was found that X-ray bursts observed by astronomers originated in neutron stars with a radius of about 10\u00a0km, rather than black holes as originally conjectured. An accurate estimate of size requires some knowledge of the emissivity, particularly its spectral and angular dependence.\nReferences.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44365", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44365", "title": "Typewriter", "text": "Mechanical device for typing characters\nA typewriter is a mechanical or electromechanical machine for typing characters. Typically, a typewriter has an array of keys, and each one causes a different single character to be produced on paper by striking an inked ribbon selectively against the paper with a type element. Thereby, the machine produces a legible written document composed of ink and paper. By the end of the 19th century, a \"person\" who used such a device was also referred to as a \"typewriter\".\nThe first commercial typewriters were introduced in 1874, but did not become common in offices in the United States until after the mid-1880s. The typewriter quickly became an indispensable tool for practically all writing other than personal handwritten correspondence. It was widely used by professional writers, in offices, in business correspondence in private homes, and by students preparing written assignments.\nTypewriters were a standard fixture in most offices up to the 1980s. After that, they began to be largely supplanted by personal computers running word processing software. Nevertheless, typewriters remain common in some parts of the world. For example, typewriters are still used in many Indian cities and towns, especially in roadside and legal offices, due to a lack of continuous, reliable electricity.\nThe QWERTY keyboard layout, developed for typewriters in the 1870s, remains the de facto standard for English-language computer keyboards. The origins of this layout still need to be clarified. Similar typewriter keyboards, with layouts optimised for other languages and orthographies, emerged soon afterward, and their layouts have also become standard for computer keyboards in their respective markets.\nHistory.\nAlthough many modern typewriters have one of several similar designs, their invention was incremental, developed by numerous inventors working independently or in competition with each other over a series of decades. As with the automobile, the telephone, and telegraph, several people contributed insights and inventions that eventually resulted in ever more commercially successful instruments. Historians have estimated that some form of the typewriter was invented 52 times as thinkers and tinkerers tried to come up with a workable design.\nSome early typing instruments include:\nBy the mid-19th century, the increasing pace of business communication had created a need to mechanize the writing process. Stenographers and telegraphers could take down information at rates up to 130 words per minute, whereas a writer with a pen was limited to a maximum of 30 words per minute (the 1853 speed record).\nFrom 1829 to 1870, many printing or typing machines were patented by inventors in Europe and America, but none went into commercial production.\nHansen Writing Ball.\nIn 1865, Rev. Rasmus Malling-Hansen of Denmark invented the Hansen Writing Ball, which went into commercial production in 1870 and was the first commercially sold typewriter. It was a success in Europe and was reported as being used in offices on the European continent as late as 1909.\nMalling-Hansen used a solenoid escapement to return the carriage on some of his models, which makes him a candidate for the title of inventor of the first \"electric\" typewriter.\nThe Hansen Writing Ball was produced with only upper-case characters. The Writing Ball was a template for inventor Frank Haven Hall to create a derivative that would produce letter prints cheaper and faster.\nMalling-Hansen developed his typewriter further through the 1870s and 1880s and made many improvements, but the writing head remained the same. On the first model of the writing ball from 1870, the paper was attached to a cylinder inside a wooden box. In 1874, the cylinder was replaced by a carriage, moving beneath the writing head. Then, in 1875, the well-known \"tall model\" was patented, which was the first of the writing balls that worked without electricity. Malling-Hansen attended the world exhibitions in Vienna in 1873 and Paris in 1878 and he received the first-prize for his invention at both exhibitions.\nSholes and Glidden typewriter.\nThe first typewriter to be commercially successful was patented in 1868 by Americans Christopher Latham Sholes, Frank Haven Hall, Carlos Glidden and Samuel W. Soule in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. The working prototype was made by clock-maker and machinist Matthias Schwalbach. Hall, Glidden and Soule sold their shares in the patent (US 79,265) to Sholes and James Densmore, who made an agreement with E. Remington and Sons (then famous as a manufacturer of sewing machines) to commercialize the machine as the \"Sholes and Glidden Type-Writer\". This was the origin of the term \"typewriter\".\nRemington began production of its first typewriter on March 1, 1873, in Ilion, New York. It had a QWERTY keyboard layout, which, because of the machine's success, was slowly adopted by other typewriter manufacturers. As with most other early typewriters, because the typebars struck upwards, the typist could not see the characters as they were typed. This arrangement, retronymically known as \"understrike\" would eventually give way to so-called frontstrike mechanisms in later, competing machines.\nIndex typewriter.\nThe index typewriter came into the market in the early 1880s. The index typewriter uses a pointer or stylus to choose a letter from an index. The pointer is mechanically linked so that the letter chosen could then be printed, most often by the activation of a lever.\nThe index typewriter was briefly popular in niche markets. Although they were slower than keyboard type machines, they were mechanically simpler and lighter. They were therefore marketed as being suitable for travellers and, because they could be produced more cheaply than keyboard machines, as budget machines for users who needed to produce small quantities of typed correspondence. For example, the Simplex Typewriter Company made index typewriters for 1/40 the price of a Remington typewriter.\nThe index typewriter's niche appeal however soon disappeared as, on the one hand new keyboard typewriters became lighter and more portable, and on the other refurbished second-hand machines began to become available. The last widely available western index machine was the Mignon typewriter produced by AEG which was produced until 1934. Considered one of the very best of the index typewriters, part of the Mignon's popularity was that it featured interchangeable indexes as well as type, fonts and character sets. This is something very few keyboard machines were capable of\u2014and only at considerable added cost.\nAlthough they were pushed out of the market in most of the world by keyboard machines, successful Japanese and Chinese typewriters are of the index type\u2014albeit with a very much larger index and number of type elements.\nEmbossing tape label makers are the most common index typewriters today, and perhaps the most common typewriters of any type still being manufactured.\nThe platen was mounted on a carriage that moved horizontally to the left, automatically advancing the typing position, after each character was typed. The carriage-return lever at the far left was then pressed to the right to return the carriage to its starting position and rotating the platen to advance the paper vertically. A small bell was struck a few characters before the right hand margin was reached to warn the operator to complete the word and then use the carriage-return lever.\nStandardization.\nBy about 1910, the \"manual\" or \"mechanical\" typewriter had reached a somewhat standardized design. There were minor variations from one manufacturer to another, but most typewriters followed the concept that each key was attached to a typebar that had the corresponding letter molded, in reverse, into its striking head. When a key was struck briskly and firmly, the typebar hit a ribbon (usually made of inked fabric), making a printed mark on the paper wrapped around a cylindrical platen.\nThe platen was mounted on a carriage that moved horizontally to the left, automatically advancing the typing position, after each character was typed. The carriage-return lever at the far left was then pressed to the right to return the carriage to its starting position and rotating the platen to advance the paper vertically. A small bell was struck a few characters before the right hand margin was reached to warn the operator to complete the word and then use the carriage-return lever. Typewriters for languages written right-to-left operate in the opposite direction.\nBy 1900, notable typewriter manufacturers included E. Remington and Sons, IBM, Godrej, Imperial Typewriter Company, Oliver Typewriter Company, Olivetti, Royal Typewriter Company, Smith Corona, Underwood Typewriter Company, Facit, Adler, and Olympia-Werke.\nAfter the market had matured under the market dominance of large companies from Britain, Europe and the United States\u2014but before the advent of daisywheel and electronic machines\u2014the typewriter market faced strong competition from less expensive typewriters from Asia, including Brother Industries and Silver Seiko Ltd. of Japan.\nFrontstriking.\nIn most of the early typewriters, the typebars struck upward against the paper and pressed against the bottom of the platen (understrike), so the typist could not see the text as it was typed. What was typed was not visible until a carriage return caused it to scroll into view.\nThe difficulty with any other arrangement was ensuring the typebars fell back into place reliably when the key was released. This was eventually achieved with various ingenious mechanical designs and so-called \"visible typewriters\" which used frontstriking, in which the typebars struck forward against the front side of the platen, which became standard. One of the first front-strike typewriters was the Daugherty Visible, introduced in 1893.\nFour-bank keyboard.\nThe Daugherty Visible also introduced the four-bank keyboard, which also became standard, although the Underwood, which came out two years later, was the first \"major\" typewriter to support frontstriking and a four-bank keyboard.\nShift key.\nA significant innovation was the shift key, introduced with the Remington No. 2 in 1878. This key physically \"shifted\" either the basket of typebars, in which case the typewriter is described as \"basket shift\", or the paper-holding carriage, in which case the typewriter is described as \"carriage shift\". Either mechanism caused a different portion of the typebar to come in contact with the ribbon/platen.\nThe result is that each typebar could type two different characters, cutting the number of keys and typebars in half (and simplifying the internal mechanisms considerably). The obvious use for this was to allow letter keys to type both upper and lower case, but normally the number keys were also duplexed, allowing access to special symbols such as percent, %, and ampersand, &amp;.\nBefore the shift key, typewriters had to have a separate key and typebar for upper-case letters; in essence, the typewriter had two full keyboards, one above the other. With the shift key, manufacturing costs (and therefore purchase price) were greatly reduced, and typist operation was simplified; both factors contributed greatly to mass adoption of the technology.\nThree-bank typewriters.\nCertain models further reduced the number of keys and typebars by making each key perform three functions\u2014each typebar could type three different characters. These little three-row machines were portable and could be used by journalists.\nSuch three-row machines were popular with WWI journalists because they were lighter and more compact than four-bank typewriters, while they could type just as fast and use just as many symbols. To include those symbols, three-row machines like the Bar-Let and the Corona No. 3 Typewriter had two distinct shift keys performing different functions, a \"CAP\" shift (for uppercase) and a \"FIG\" shift (for numbers and symbols). They were thus also known as \"double-shift typewriters\".\nTeletypewriters also often used a three-row typewriter keyboard,\nwhich looked superficially similar in that it also had two shift keys, \"FIGS\" (figures) and \"LTRS\" (letters). However, these Murray code-based machines generally did not allow each key to perform three functions and were a different technology from double-shift typewriters.\nTab key.\nTo facilitate typewriter use in business settings, a tab (tabulator) key was added in the late 19th century. Before using the key, the operator had to set mechanical \"tab stops\" (pre-designated locations to which the carriage would advance when the tab key was pressed). This facilitated the typing of columns of numbers, freeing the operator from the need to manually position the carriage. The first models had one tab stop and one tab key; later ones allowed as many stops as desired, and sometimes had multiple tab keys, each of which moved the carriage a different number of spaces ahead of the decimal point (the tab stop), to facilitate the typing of columns with numbers of different length ($1.00, $10.00, $100.00, etc.) such that the decimal points were vertically aligned. Typically, tab stops could be set by a key-set tabulator control (either by a lever or keys on the keyboard\u2014usually labelled with \"+\" or \"-\", or \"set\" and \"clear\") or moveable tab stops at the back of the machine, similar to margin stops.\nDead keys.\nLanguages such as French, Spanish, and German required diacritics, special signs attached to or on top of the base letter: for example, a combination of the acute accent \u00b4 plus e produced \u00e9; ~ plus n produced \u00f1. In metal typesetting, \u27e8\u00e9\u27e9, \u27e8\u00f1\u27e9, and others were separate sorts. With mechanical typewriters, the number of whose characters (sorts) was constrained by the physical limits of the machine, the number of keys required was reduced by the use of dead keys. Diacritics such as \u00b4 (acute accent) would be assigned to a dead key, which did not move the platen forward, permitting another character to be imprinted at the same location; thus a single dead key such as the acute accent could be combined with a,e,i,o and u to produce \u00e1,\u00e9,\u00ed,\u00f3 and \u00fa, reducing the number of sorts needed from 5 to 1. The typebars of \"normal\" characters struck a rod as they moved the metal character desired toward the ribbon and platen, and each rod depression moved the platen forward the width of one character. Dead keys had a typebar shaped so as not to strike the rod.\nCharacter sizes.\nIn English-speaking countries, ordinary typewriters printing fixed-width characters were standardized to print six horizontal lines per vertical inch, and had either of two variants of character width, one called \"pica\" for ten characters per horizontal inch and the other \"elite\", for twelve. This differed from the use of these terms in printing, where pica is a linear unit (approximately &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20446 of an inch) used for any measurement, the most common one being the height of a typeface.\nColor.\nSome ribbons were inked in black and red stripes, each being half the width and running the entire length of the ribbon. A lever on most machines allowed switching between colors, which was useful for bookkeeping entries where negative amounts were highlighted in red. The red color was also used on some selected characters in running text, for emphasis. When a typewriter had this facility, it could still be fitted with a solid black ribbon; the lever was then used to switch to fresh ribbon when the first stripe ran out of ink. Some typewriters also had a third position which stopped the ribbon being struck at all. This enabled the keys to hit the paper unobstructed, and was used for cutting stencils for stencil duplicators (aka mimeograph machines).\n\"Noiseless\" designs.\nThe first typewriter to have the sliding type bars (laid out horizontally like a fan) that enable a typewriter to be \"noiseless\" was the American made Rapid which appeared briefly on the market in 1890. The Rapid also had the remarkable ability for the typist to have entire control of the carriage by manipulation of the keyboard alone. The two keys that achieve this are positioned at the top of the keyboard (seen in the detail image below). They are a \"Lift\" key that advances the paper, on the platen, to the next line and a \"Return\" key that causes the carriage to automatically swing back to the right, ready for one to type the new line. So an entire page could be typed without one's hands leaving the keyboard.\nIn the early part of the 20th century, a typewriter was marketed under the name Noiseless and advertised as \"silent\". It was developed by Wellington Parker Kidder and the first model was marketed by the Noiseless Typewriter Company in 1917. Noiseless portables sold well in the 1930s and 1940s, and noiseless standards continued to be manufactured until the 1960s.\nIn a conventional typewriter the type bar reaches the end of its travel simply by striking the ribbon and paper. The Noiseless, developed by Kidder, has a complex lever mechanism that decelerates the type bar mechanically before pressing it against the ribbon and paper in an attempt to dampen the noise.\nElectric designs.\nAlthough electric typewriters would not achieve widespread popularity until nearly a century later, the basic groundwork for the electric typewriter was laid by the Universal Stock Ticker, invented by Thomas Edison in 1870. This device remotely printed letters and numbers on a stream of paper tape from input generated by a specially designed typewriter at the other end of a telegraph line.\nEarly electric models.\nSome electric typewriters were patented in the 19th century, but the first machine known to be produced in series is the Cahill of 1900.\nAnother electric typewriter was produced by the Blickensderfer Manufacturing Company, of Stamford, Connecticut, in 1902. Like the manual Blickensderfer typewriters, it used a cylindrical typewheel rather than individual typebars. The machine was produced in several variants but apparently not a commercial success, having come to market ahead of its time, before ubiquitous electrification.\nThe next step in the development of the electric typewriter came in 1910, when Charles and Howard Krum filed a patent for the first practical teletypewriter. The Krums' machine, named the Morkrum Printing Telegraph, used a typewheel rather than individual typebars. This machine was used for the first commercial teletypewriter system on Postal Telegraph Company lines between Boston and New York City in 1910.\nJames Fields Smathers of Kansas City invented what is considered the first practical power-operated typewriter in 1914. In 1920, after returning from Army service, he produced a successful model and in 1923 turned it over to the Northeast Electric Company of Rochester for development. Northeast was interested in finding new markets for their electric motors and developed Smathers's design so that it could be marketed to typewriter manufacturers, and from 1925 Remington Electric typewriters were produced powered by Northeast's motors.\nAfter some 2,500 electric typewriters had been produced, Northeast asked Remington for a firm contract for the next batch. However, Remington was engaged in merger talks, which would eventually result in the creation of Remington Rand and no executives were willing to commit to a firm order. Northeast instead decided to enter the typewriter business for itself, and in 1929 produced the first Electromatic Typewriter.\nIn 1928, Delco, a division of General Motors, purchased Northeast Electric, and the typewriter business was spun off as Electromatic Typewriters, Inc. In 1933, Electromatic was acquired by IBM, which then spent $1\u00a0million on a redesign of the Electromatic Typewriter, launching the IBM Electric Typewriter Model 01.\nIn 1931, an electric typewriter was introduced by Varityper Corporation. It was called the Varityper, because a narrow cylinder-like wheel could be replaced to change the typeface.\nIn 1941, IBM announced the Electromatic Model 04 electric typewriter, featuring the revolutionary concept of proportional spacing. By assigning varied rather than uniform spacing to different sized characters, the Type 4 recreated the appearance of a typeset page, an effect that was further enhanced by including the 1937 innovation of carbon-film ribbons that produced clearer, sharper words on the page.\nIBM Selectric.\nIBM introduced the IBM Selectric typewriter in 1961, which replaced the typebars with a spherical element (or typeball) slightly smaller than a golf ball, with reverse-image letters molded into its surface. The Selectric used a system of latches, metal tapes, and pulleys driven by an electric motor to rotate the ball into the correct position and then strike it against the ribbon and platen. The typeball moved laterally in front of the paper, instead of the previous designs using a platen-carrying carriage moving the paper across a stationary print position.\nDue to the physical similarity, the typeball was sometimes referred to as a \"golfball\". The typeball design had many advantages, especially the elimination of \"jams\" (when more than one key was struck at once and the typebars became entangled) and in the ability to change the typeball, allowing multiple typefaces to be used in a single document.\nThe IBM Selectric became a commercial success, dominating the office typewriter market for at least two decades. IBM also gained an advantage by marketing more heavily to schools than did Remington, with the idea that students who learned to type on a Selectric would later choose IBM typewriters over the competition in the workplace as businesses replaced their old manual models.\nLater models of IBM Executives and Selectrics replaced inked fabric ribbons with \"carbon film\" ribbons that had a dry black or colored powder on a clear plastic tape. These could be used only once, but later models used a cartridge that was simple to replace. A side effect of this technology was that the text typed on the machine could be easily read from the used ribbon, raising issues where the machines were used for preparing classified documents (ribbons had to be accounted for to ensure that typists did not carry them from the facility).\nA variation known as \"Correcting Selectrics\" introduced a correction feature, later imitated by competing machines, where a sticky tape in front of the carbon film ribbon could remove the black-powdered image of a typed character, eliminating the need for little bottles of white dab-on correction fluid and for hard erasers that could tear the paper. These machines also introduced selectable \"pitch\" so that the typewriter could be switched between pica type (10 characters per inch) and elite type (12 per inch), even within one document. Even so, all Selectrics were monospaced\u2014each character and letterspace was allotted the same width on the page, from a capital \"W\" to a period. IBM did produce a successful typebar-based machine with five levels of proportional spacing, called the IBM Executive.\nThe only fully electromechanical Selectric Typewriter with fully proportional spacing and which used a Selectric type element was the expensive Selectric Composer, which was capable of right-margin justification (typing each line twice was required, once to calculate and again to print) and was considered a typesetting machine rather than a typewriter. Composer typeballs physically resembled those of the Selectric typewriter but were not interchangeable. \nIn addition to its electronic successors, the Magnetic Tape Selectric Composer (MT/SC), the Mag Card Selectric Composer, and the Electronic Selectric Composer, IBM also made electronic typewriters with proportional spacing using the Selectric element that were considered typewriters or word processors instead of typesetting machines.\nThe first of these was the relatively obscure Mag Card Executive, which used 88-character elements. Later, some of the same typestyles used for it were used on the 96-character elements used on the IBM Electronic Typewriter 50 and the later models 65 and 85.\nBy 1970, as offset printing began to replace letterpress printing, the Composer would be adapted as the output unit for a phototypesetting system. The system included a computer-driven input station to capture the key strokes on magnetic tape and insert the operator's format commands, and a Composer unit to read the tape and produce the formatted text for photo reproduction.\nThe IBM 2741 terminal was a popular example of a Selectric-based computer terminal, and similar mechanisms were employed as the console devices for many IBM System/360 computers. These mechanisms used \"ruggedized\" designs compared to those in standard office typewriters.\nLater electric models.\nSome of IBM's advances were later adopted in less expensive machines from competitors. For example, Smith-Corona electric typewriters introduced in 1973 switched to interchangeable Coronamatic (SCM-patented) ribbon cartridges.\nElectronic typewriters.\nThe final major development of the typewriter was the electronic typewriter. Most of these replaced the typeball with a plastic or metal daisy wheel mechanism (a disk with the letters molded on the outside edge of the \"petals\"), or a thermal print head. The daisy wheel concept first emerged in printers developed by Diablo Systems in the 1970s. The first electronic daisywheel typewriter marketed in the world (in 1976) is the Olivetti Tes 501, and subsequently in 1978, the Olivetti ET101 (with function display) and Olivetti TES 401 (with text display and floppy disk for memory storage). This has allowed Olivetti to maintain the world record in the design of electronic typewriters, proposing increasingly advanced and performing models in the following years.\nUnlike the Selectrics and earlier models, these really were \"electronic\" and relied on integrated circuits and electromechanical components. These typewriters were sometimes called \"display typewriters\", \"dedicated word processors\" or \"word-processing typewriters\", although the latter term was also frequently applied to less sophisticated machines that featured only a tiny, sometimes just single-row display. Sophisticated models were also called \"word processors\", although today that term almost always denotes a type of software program. Manufacturers of such machines included Olivetti (TES501, first totally electronic Olivetti word processor with daisywheel and floppy disk in 1976; TES621 in 1979, etc.), Brother (Brother WP1 and WP500, etc., where WP stood for word processor), Canon (Canon Cat), Smith-Corona (PWP, i.e. Personal Word Processor line) and Philips/Magnavox (VideoWriter).\nDecline.\nThe pace of change was so rapid that it was common for clerical staff to have to learn several new systems, one after the other, in just a few years. While such rapid change is commonplace today, and is taken for granted, this was not always so; in fact, typewriting technology changed very little in its first 80 or 90 years.\nDue to falling sales, IBM sold its typewriter division in 1991 to the newly formed Lexmark, completely exiting from a market it once dominated.\nThe increasing dominance of personal computers, desktop publishing, the introduction of low-cost, truly high-quality laser and inkjet printer technologies, and the pervasive use of web publishing, email, text messaging, and other electronic communication techniques have largely replaced typewriters in the United States. Still, as of 2009[ [update]], typewriters continued to be used by a number of government agencies and other institutions in the US, where they are primarily used to fill preprinted forms. According to a Boston typewriter repairman quoted by \"The Boston Globe\", \"Every maternity ward has a typewriter, as well as funeral homes.\"\nA rather specialized market for typewriters exists due to the regulations of many correctional systems in the US, where prisoners are prohibited from having computers or telecommunication equipment, but are allowed to own typewriters. The Swintec corporation (headquartered in Moonachie, New Jersey), which, as of 2011, still produced typewriters at its overseas factories (in Japan, Indonesia, and/or Malaysia), manufactures a variety of typewriters for use in prisons, made of clear plastic (to make it harder for prisoners to hide prohibited items inside it). As of 2011, the company had contracts with prisons in 43 US states.\nIn April 2011, Godrej and Boyce, a Mumbai-based manufacturer of mechanical typewriters, closed its doors, leading to a flurry of news reports that the \"world's last typewriter factory\" had shut down. The reports were quickly contested, with opinions settling to agree that it was indeed the world's last producer of standard manual typewriters.\nIn November 2012, Brother's UK factory manufactured what it claimed to be the last typewriter ever made in the UK; the typewriter was donated to the London Science Museum.\nRussian typewriters use Cyrillic, which has made the ongoing Azerbaijani reconversion from Cyrillic to Latin alphabet more difficult. In 1997, the government of Turkey offered to donate western typewriters to the Republic of Azerbaijan in exchange for more zealous and exclusive promotion of the Latin alphabet for the Azerbaijani language; this offer, however, was declined.\nIn Latin America and Africa, mechanical typewriters are still common because they can be used without electrical power. In Latin America, the typewriters used are most often Brazilian models; in 2012, Brazil was continuing to produce mechanical (Facit) and electronic (Olivetti) typewriters.\nAs of 2025, manual portable typewriters are still being produced by Shanghai Weilv Mechanism Company in China.\nThe early 21st century saw revival of interest in typewriters among certain subcultures, including makers, steampunks, hipsters, and street poets. They also remained in use for filling out forms, and retained interest for some novelists who preferred writing without the distractions of a personal computer.\nCorrection technologies.\nAccording to the standards taught in secretarial schools in the mid-20th century, a business letter was supposed to have no mistakes and no visible corrections.\nTypewriter erasers.\nThe traditional correction method involved the use of a special typewriter eraser made of hard rubber that contained an abrasive material. Some were thin, flat disks, pink or gray, approximately in diameter by thick, with a brush attached from the center, while others looked like pink pencils, with a sharpenable eraser at the \"lead\" end and a stiff nylon brush at the other end. Either way, these tools made possible erasure of individual typed letters. Business letters were typed on heavyweight, high-rag-content bond paper, not merely to provide a luxurious appearance, but also to stand up to erasure.\nTypewriter eraser brushes were necessary for clearing eraser crumbs and paper dust, and using the brush properly was an important element of typewriting skill; if erasure detritus fell into the typewriter, a small buildup could cause the typebars to jam in their narrow supporting grooves.\nErasing shield.\nErasing a set of carbon copies was particularly difficult, and called for the use of a device called an erasing shield or eraser shield, a thin stainless-steel rectangle about with several tiny holes in it. This would prevent the pressure of erasing on the upper copies from producing carbon smudges on the lower copies. To correct copies, typists had to go from one carbon copy layer to the next carbon copy layer, trying not to get their fingers dirty as they leafed through the carbon papers, and moving and repositioning the eraser shield and eraser for each copy.\nErasable bond.\nPaper companies produced a special form of typewriter paper called erasable bond (for example, Eaton's Corrasable Bond). This incorporated a thin layer of material that prevented ink from penetrating and was relatively soft and easy to remove from the page. An ordinary soft pencil eraser could quickly produce perfect erasures on this type of paper. However, the same characteristics that made the paper erasable made the characters subject to smudging due to ordinary friction and deliberate alteration after the fact, making it unacceptable for business correspondence, contracts, or any archival use.\nCorrection fluid.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, correction fluid made its appearance, under brand names such as Liquid Paper, Wite-Out and Tipp-Ex; it was invented by Bette Nesmith Graham. Correction fluid was a type of opaque, white, fast-drying paint that produced a fresh white surface onto which, when dry, a correction could be retyped. However, when held to the light, the covered-up characters were visible, as was the patch of dry correction fluid (which was never perfectly flat, and frequently not a perfect match for the color, texture, and luster of the surrounding paper). The standard trick for solving this problem was photocopying the corrected page, but this was possible only with high quality photocopiers.\nA different fluid was available for correcting stencils. It sealed up the stencil ready for retyping but did not attempt to color match.\nLegacy.\nKeyboard layouts.\nQWERTY.\nThe 1874 Sholes &amp; Glidden typewriters established the \"QWERTY\" layout for the letter keys. During the period in which Sholes and his colleagues were experimenting with this invention, other keyboard arrangements were apparently tried, but these are poorly documented. The QWERTY layout of keys has become the de facto standard for English-language typewriter and computer keyboards. Other languages written in the Latin alphabet sometimes use variants of the QWERTY layouts, such as the French AZERTY, the Italian QZERTY and the German QWERTZ layouts.\nThe QWERTY layout is not the most efficient layout possible for the English language. Touch-typists are required to move their fingers between rows to type the most common letters. Although the QWERTY keyboard was the most commonly used layout in typewriters, a better, less strenuous keyboard was being searched for throughout the late 1900s.\nOne popular but incorrect explanation for the QWERTY arrangement is that it was designed to reduce the likelihood of internal clashing of typebars by placing commonly used combinations of letters farther from each other inside the machine.\nOther layouts for English.\nA number of radically different layouts such as Dvorak have been proposed to reduce the perceived inefficiencies of QWERTY, but none have been able to displace the QWERTY layout; their proponents claim considerable advantages, but so far none has been widely used. The Blickensderfer typewriter with its DHIATENSOR layout may have possibly been the first attempt at optimizing the keyboard layout for efficiency advantages.\nOn modern keyboards, the exclamation point is the shifted character on the 1 key, because these were the last characters to become \"standard\" on keyboards. Holding the spacebar down usually suspended the carriage advance mechanism (a so-called \"dead key\" feature), allowing one to superimpose multiple keystrikes on a single location. The \u00a2 symbol (meaning cents) was located above the number 6 on American electric typewriters, whereas ANSI-INCITS-standard computer keyboards have ^ instead.\nKeyboards for other languages.\nThe keyboards for other Latin languages are broadly similar to QWERTY but are optimised for the relevant orthography. In addition to some changes in the order of letters, perhaps the most obvious is the presence of precomposed characters and diacritics.\nMany non-Latin alphabets have keyboard layouts that have nothing to do with QWERTY. The Russian layout, for instance, puts the common trigrams \u044b\u0432\u0430, \u043f\u0440\u043e, and \u0438\u0442\u044c on adjacent keys so that they can be typed by rolling the fingers.\nText in the Arabic alphabet is written from right to left (rather than from left to right): consequently, the carriage on an Arabic typewriter moves to the right after each keystroke. In Arabic script, letters take different shapes depending upon their position in the word and whether they are connected to a preceding letter. A special key is used to allow switching between independent and connected letters.\nTypewriters were also made for East Asian languages with thousands of characters, such as Chinese or Japanese. They were not easy to operate, but professional typists used them for a long time until the development of electronic word processors and laser printers in the 1980s.\nTypewriter conventions.\nA number of typographical conventions stem from the typewriter's characteristics and limitations. For example, the QWERTY keyboard typewriter did not include keys for the en dash and the em dash. To overcome this limitation, users typically typed more than one adjacent hyphen to approximate these symbols. This typewriter convention is still sometimes used today, although modern computer word processing applications can input the correct en and em dashes for each font type.\nOther examples of typewriter practices that are sometimes still used in desktop publishing systems include inserting a double space between sentences, and the use of the typewriter apostrophe, ', and straight quotes, \", as quotation marks and prime marks. The practice of underlining text in place of italics and the use of all capitals to provide emphasis are additional examples of typographical conventions that derived from the limitations of the typewriter keyboard that still carry on today.\nMany older typewriters did not include a separate key for the numeral 1 or the exclamation point !, and some even older ones also lacked the numeral zero, 0. Typists who trained on these machines learned the habit of using the lowercase letter l (\"ell\") for the digit 1, and the uppercase O (\"oh\") for the zero. A cents symbol, \u00a2 was created by combining (over-striking) a lower case c with a slash character (typing c, then backspace, then /). Similarly, the exclamation point was created by combining an apostrophe and a period ( \u2248!).\nTerminology repurposed for the computer age.\nSome terminology from the typewriter age has survived into the computer era.\nSocial effects.\nTypewriter manufacturers at first found selling the device difficult. Potential customers compared the $125 Remington product to a pen costing one penny. Recipients of typewritten letters sometimes felt insulted, believing that the sender was implying that the recipient was unable to read handwriting. Manufacturers had to train customers to use their products, and offered free services referring typists and stenographers to employers. Business colleges began teaching typing.\nWhen Remington started marketing typewriters, the company assumed the machine would not be used for composing but for transcribing dictation, and that the person typing would be a woman. The 1800s Sholes and Glidden typewriter had floral ornamentation on the case.\nDuring World Wars I and II, increasing numbers of women were entering the workforce. In the United States, women often started in the professional workplace as copy typists. Being a typist was considered the right choice for a \"good girl\", meaning women who presented themselves as being chaste and having good conduct. According to the 1900 census, 94.9% of stenographers and typists were unmarried women.\nQuestions about morals made a salacious businessman making sexual advances to a female typist into a clich\u00e9 of office life, appearing in vaudeville and movies. The \"Tijuana bibles\"\u2014adult comic books produced in Mexico for the American market, starting in the 1930s\u2014often featured women typists. In one panel, a businessman in a three-piece suit, ogling his secretary's thigh, says, \"Miss Higby, are you ready for\u2014ahem!\u2014er\u2014dictation?\"\nThe typewriter was a useful machine during the censorship era of the Soviet government, starting during the Russian Civil War (1917\u20131922). Samizdat was a form of surreptitious self-publication used when the government was censoring what literature the public could see. The Soviet government signed a Decree on Press which prohibited the publishing of any written work that had not been previously officially reviewed and approved. Unapproved work was copied manually, most often on typewriters. In 1983, a new law required anyone who needed a typewriter to get police permission to buy or keep one. In addition, the owner would have to register a typed sample of all its letters and numbers, to ensure that any illegal literature typed with it could be traced back to its source. The typewriter became increasingly popular as the interest in prohibited books grew.\nForensic examination.\nTypewritten documents may be examined by forensic document examiners. This is done primarily to determine the make and/or model of the typewriter used to produce a document, or whether or not a particular suspect typewriter might have been used to produce a document.\nThe determination of a make and/or model of typewriter is a \"classification\" problem and several systems have been developed for this purpose. These include the original Haas Typewriter Atlases (Pica version) and (Non-Pica version) and the TYPE system developed by Philip Bouffard, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police's Termatrex Typewriter classification system, and Interpol's typewriter classification system, among others.\nThe earliest reference in fictional literature to the potential identification of a typewriter as having produced a document was by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, who wrote the Sherlock Holmes short story \"A Case of Identity\" in 1891.\nIn non-fiction, the first document examiner to describe how a typewriter might be identified was William E. Hagan who wrote, in 1894, \"All typewriter machines, even when using the same kind of type, become more or less peculiar by use as to the work done by them.\" Other early discussions of the topic were provided by A. S. Osborn in his 1908 treatise, \"Typewriting as Evidence\", and again in his 1929 textbook, \"Questioned Documents\".\nA modern description of the examination procedure is laid out in ASTM Standard E2494-08 (Standard Guide for Examination of Typewritten Items).\nTypewriter examination was used in the Leopold and Loeb and Alger Hiss cases.\nIn Romania, according to State Council Decree No. 98 of 28 March 1983, owning a typewriter, both by businesses or by private persons, was subject to an approval given by the local police authorities. People previously convicted of any crime or those who, because of their behaviour, were considered to be \"a danger to public order or to the security of the state\" were refused approval. In addition, once a year, typewriter owners had to take the typewriter to the local police station, where they would be asked to type a sample of all the typewriter's characters. It was also forbidden to borrow, lend, or repair typewriters other than at the places that had been authorized by the police.\nCollections.\nPublic and private collections of typewriters exist around the world, including:\nSeveral online-only virtual museums collect and display information about typewriters and their history:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44366", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44366", "title": "Where the Heart Is (2000 film)", "text": "Where the Heart Is is a 2000 American romantic drama film directed by Matt Williams and starring Natalie Portman, Stockard Channing, Ashley Judd, and Joan Cusack with supporting roles by James Frain, Dylan Bruno, Keith David, and Sally Field. The screenplay, written by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel, is based on the best-selling 1995 novel of the same name by Billie Letts. The film follows five years in the life of Novalee Nation, a pregnant 17-year-old who is abandoned by her boyfriend at a Walmart in a small Oklahoma town. She secretly moves into the store, where she eventually gives birth to her baby, which attracts media attention. With the help of friends, she makes a new life for herself in the town.\nPlot.\nNovalee Nation\u2014a 17-year-old with a seven-month pregnancy and an aversion to the \nnumber 5\u2014is abandoned by her boyfriend Willy Jack Pickens at a Walmart store in Sequoyah, Oklahoma when they stop to buy shoes. While stranded, she befriends Thelma \"Sister\" Husband, who presents her with a buckeye tree, and local photographer Moses Whitecotton, who advises her to give her baby a strong name. Novalee also becomes acquainted with surly librarian Forney Hull, who cares for his invalid sister Mary Elizabeth. During a thunderstorm, Novalee, who has been living undetected inside the Walmart, goes into labor. Forney, now in awe of Novalee, smashes through the window to help deliver the child, whom Novalee names Americus. Novalee instantly becomes a media darling and is befriended by local nurse Lexie Coop. Her estranged mother Mama Lil visits after seeing her daughter on television, but disappears with the money donated by well-wishers, after which Sister Husband offers to take in both Novalee and Americus\nNovalee trains as a photographer under Moses' mentorship while working at Walmart. A tornado blows through Sequoyah and Sister Husband is killed, but Novalee discovers she is the beneficiary of Sister's estate, and builds a new home for herself and Americus. Meanwhile, Willy Jack, who had continued his trip to California, is sent to prison for transporting a minor across state lines whilst possessing stolen goods. He writes a song, and upon release travels to Santa Fe, where he teams with cranky music agent Ruth Meyers, who gives him a makeover and the stage name \"Billy Shadow.\" Novalee arrives in Las Vegas to accept a photo contest award after submitting an image of Americus and the still-standing buckeye tree amidst the damage from the storm. Simultaneously, Willy Jack\u2014who happens to be in the same hotel\u2014is informed that his old cellmate is suing him for plagiarism, and Ruth drops Willy Jack as a client for disloyalty. Upon her return to Sequoyah, Novalee discovers Lexie has been attacked by a new love interest who molested her two eldest children. Lexie's injuries hinder her nursing job, and since she is unable to pay rent, she and her children move in with Novalee and Americus.\nMary Elizabeth later dies, and when Forney does not appear at the funeral, Novalee finds him in a hotel and comforts him. They act on the feelings they have long denied and spend the night together. Forney confesses his love, but Novalee confides in Lexie she has never considered herself good enough for Forney and is confused about her feelings for him. Believing his life would be a dead end with her, Novalee lies to Forney, claiming she does not love him, leaving Forney heartbroken. Novalee learns that Lexie is seeing Ernie, an exterminator who lacks the physical attributes that she prefers, but whom she fell in love with after learning he gave his ex-wife his restored 1967 Chevy Camaro in exchange for custody of his stepdaughter whom he adopted as his own. The couple marry, and Lexie informs Novalee that she is pregnant.\nSeverely depressed at his ruined career following the lawsuit, Willy Jack becomes a depressed alcoholic. He wanders off drunk one night and collapses on a railroad track, resulting in a passing train severing both his legs. On Americus's 5th birthday, Novalee reads an article about Willy Jack's accident, visits him in hospital, and realises he is a changed man, but warns him never to contact Americus. After driving Willy Jack home to Tennessee, she visits Forney at Bowdoin College where she confesses her love for him, and they return to Sequoyah where they marry in a ceremony held in the Walmart, surrounded by their close friends.\n NOTE: Jim Beaver had a part in the film as \"Clawhammer\", but his scene was deleted\nMusic.\nOriginal music for the film was produced by Mason Daring. A soundtrack of the original music was released by RCA Records, as well as a music compilation soundtrack featuring songs used in the film by artists such as Emmylou Harris, Lyle Lovett, Martina McBride, and John Hiatt.\nThe song \"That's the Beat of a Heart\" was performed by The Warren Brothers and Sara Evans. A music video was made for the song, which is included as a bonus extra on the DVD release and features a number of scenes from the film.\nReception.\nCritical response.\nThe film received mostly negative reviews. Metacritic gives it a score of 30% based on reviews from 28 critics. Rotten Tomatoes gives it a 35% approval rating, based on reviews from 97 critics, with the site's consensus stating that the film's \"poor script and messy plot undermines the decent cast.\"\nBox office.\nThe film opened in theaters in the United States on April 28, 2000. \"Where the Heart Is\" accumulated USD $8,292,939 in its opening weekend, opening at number 4. It went on to make $33,772,838 at the North American box office, and an additional $7,090,880 internationally for a worldwide total of $40,863,718.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44367", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44367", "title": "Animal trap", "text": ""}
{"id": "44368", "revid": "997609809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44368", "title": "Transom", "text": "Transom may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44369", "revid": "29146395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44369", "title": "Treble", "text": "Treble may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44370", "revid": "1301223108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44370", "title": "Trefoil", "text": "Artistic representation of three circular leaf shapes used in architecture\nA trefoil (from la\u00a0'three-leaved plant') is a graphic form composed of the outline of three overlapping rings, used in architecture, Pagan and Christian symbolism, among other areas. The term is also applied to other symbols with a threefold shape. A similar shape with four rings is called a quatrefoil.\nArchitecture.\nOrnamentation.\n'Trefoil' is a term in Gothic architecture given to the ornamental foliation or cusping introduced in the heads of window-lights, tracery, and panellings, in which the centre takes the form of a three-lobed leaf (formed from three partially overlapping circles). One of the earliest examples is in the plate tracery at Winchester Cathedral (1222\u20131235). The fourfold version of an architectural trefoil is a quatrefoil.\nA simple trefoil shape in itself can be symbolic of the Trinity, while a trefoil combined with an equilateral triangle was also a moderately common symbol of the Christian Trinity during the late Middle Ages in some parts of Europe, similar to a barbed quatrefoil. Two forms of a trefoil combined with a triangle are shown below:\nA dove, which symbolizes the Holy Spirit, is sometimes depicted within the outlined form of the trefoil combined with a triangle.\nArchitectural layout.\nIn architecture and archaeology, a 'trefoil' describes a layout or floor plan consisting of three apses in clover-leaf shape, as for example in the Megalithic temples of Malta.\nParticularly in church architecture, such a layout may be called a \"triconchos\".\nHeraldry.\nThe heraldic 'trefoil' is a stylized clover. It should not be confused with the figure named in French heraldry (\"threefoil\"), which is a stylized flower with three petals, and differs from the heraldic trefoil in being not slipped.\nSymbols.\nSymmetrical trefoils are particularly popular as warning and informational symbols. If a box containing hazardous material is moved around and shifted into different positions, it is still easy to recognize the symbol, while the distinctive trefoil design of the recycling symbol makes it easy for a consumer to notice and identify the packaging the symbol has been printed on as recyclable. Easily stenciled symbols are also favored.\nWhile the green trefoil is considered by many to be the symbol of Ireland, the harp has much greater officially recognized status. Therefore, shamrocks generally do not appear on Irish coins or postage stamps.\nA trefoil is also part of the logo for Adidas Originals, which also includes three stripes.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44371", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44371", "title": "Triton (moon)", "text": "Largest moon of Neptune\nTriton is the largest natural satellite of the planet Neptune. It is the only moon of Neptune massive enough to be rounded under its own gravity and hosts a thin, hazy atmosphere. Triton orbits Neptune in a retrograde orbit\u2014revolving in the opposite direction to the parent planet's rotation\u2014the only large moon in the Solar System to do so. Triton is thought to have once been a dwarf planet from the Kuiper belt, captured into Neptune's orbit by the latter's gravity.\nAt in diameter, Triton is the seventh-largest moon in the Solar System, the second-largest planetary moon in relation to its primary (after Earth's Moon), and larger than all of the known dwarf planets. The mean density is , reflecting a composition of approximately 30\u201345% water ice by mass, with the rest being mostly rock and metal. Triton is differentiated, with a crust of primarily ice atop a probable subsurface ocean of liquid water and a solid rocky-metallic core at its center. Although Triton's orbit is nearly circular with a very low orbital eccentricity of , its interior may still experience tidal heating through obliquity tides.\nTriton is one of the most geologically active worlds in the Solar System, with an estimated average surface age of less than 100 million years old. Its surface is covered by frozen nitrogen and is geologically young, with very few impact craters. Young, intricate cryovolcanic and tectonic terrains suggest a complex geological history. The atmosphere of Triton is composed primarily of nitrogen, with minor components of methane and carbon monoxide. Triton's atmosphere is relatively thin and strongly variable, with its atmospheric surface pressure varying by up to a factor of three within the past 30 years. Triton's atmosphere supports clouds of nitrogen ice crystals and a layer of organic atmospheric haze. \nTriton was the first Neptunian moon to be discovered, on October 10, 1846, by English astronomer William Lassell. The 1989 flyby of Triton by the \"Voyager 2\" spacecraft remains the only up-close visit to the moon as of 2025. As the probe was able to study only about 40% of the moon's surface, multiple concept missions have been developed to revisit Triton. These include a Discovery-class \"Trident\" and New Frontiers-class \"Triton Ocean Worlds Surveyor\" and \"Nautilus\".\nDiscovery and naming.\nTriton was discovered by British astronomer William Lassell on October 10, 1846, just 17\u00a0days after the discovery of Neptune. When John Herschel received news of Neptune's discovery, he wrote to Lassell suggesting he search for possible moons. Lassell discovered Triton eight days later. Lassell also claimed for a period to have discovered rings. Although Neptune was later confirmed to have rings, they are so faint and dark that it is not plausible he saw them. A brewer by trade, Lassell spotted Triton with his self-built aperture metal mirror reflecting telescope (also known as the \"two-foot\" reflector). This telescope was donated to the Royal Observatory, Greenwich in the 1880s, but was eventually dismantled.\nTriton is named after the Greek sea god Triton (\u03a4\u03c1\u03af\u03c4\u03c9\u03bd), the son of Poseidon (the Greek god corresponding to the Roman Neptune). The name was first proposed by Camille Flammarion in his 1880 book \"Astronomie Populaire\", and was officially adopted many decades later. Until the discovery of the second moon Nereid in 1949, Triton was commonly referred to as \"the satellite of Neptune\". Lassell did not name his discovery; he later successfully suggested the name Hyperion for the eighth moon of Saturn when he discovered it.\nPlanetary moons other than Earth's were never given symbols in the astronomical literature. Denis Moskowitz, a software engineer who designed most of the dwarf planet symbols, proposed a Greek tau (the initial of Triton) combined with Neptune's trident as the symbol of Triton (). This symbol is not widely used.\nOrbit and rotation.\nTriton is unique among all large moons in the Solar System for its retrograde orbit around its planet (i.e. it orbits in a direction opposite to the planet's rotation). Most of the outer irregular moons of Jupiter and Saturn also have retrograde orbits, as do some of the irregular moons of Uranus and Neptune. However, these moons are all much more distant from their primaries and are small in comparison, with the largest of them (Phoebe) having only 8% of the diameter (and 0.03% of the mass) of Triton.\nTriton's orbit is associated with two tilts, the obliquity of Neptune's rotation to Neptune's orbit, 30\u00b0, and the inclination of Triton's orbit to Neptune's rotation, 157\u00b0 (an inclination over 90\u00b0 indicates retrograde motion). Triton's orbit precesses forward relative to Neptune's rotation with a period of about 678 Earth years (4.1 Neptunian years), making its Neptune-orbit-relative inclination vary between 127\u00b0 and 173\u00b0. That inclination is currently 130\u00b0; Triton's orbit is now near its maximum departure from coplanarity with Neptune's.\nTriton's rotation is tidally locked to be synchronous with its orbit around Neptune: it keeps one face oriented toward the planet at all times. Its equator is almost exactly aligned with its orbital plane. At present, Triton's rotational axis is about 40\u00b0 from Neptune's orbital plane, hence as Neptune orbits the Sun, Triton's polar regions take turns facing the Sun, resulting in seasonal changes as one pole, then the other moves into the sunlight. Such changes were observed in 2010.\nTriton's revolution around Neptune has become a nearly perfect circle with an eccentricity of almost zero. Viscoelastic damping from tides alone is not thought to be capable of circularizing Triton's orbit in the time since the origin of the system, and gas drag from a prograde debris disc is likely to have played a substantial role. Tidal interactions also cause Triton's orbit, which is already closer to Neptune than the Moon is to Earth, to gradually decay further; predictions are that 3.6\u00a0billion years from now, Triton will pass within Neptune's Roche limit. This will result in either a collision with Neptune's atmosphere or the breakup of Triton, forming a new ring system similar to that found around Saturn.\nCapture.\nThe current understanding of moons in retrograde orbits means they cannot form in the same region of the solar nebula as the planets they orbit. Therefore, Triton must have been captured from elsewhere in the Solar System. Astrophysicists believe it might have originated in the Kuiper belt, a ring of small icy objects extending from just inside the orbit of Neptune to about 50\u00a0AU from the Sun. Thought to be the point of origin for the majority of short-period comets observed from Earth, the belt is also home to several large, planet-like bodies including Pluto, which is now recognized as the largest in a population of Kuiper belt objects (the plutinos) locked in resonant orbits with Neptune. Triton is only slightly larger than Pluto and is nearly identical in composition, which has led to the hypothesis that the two share a common origin.\nThis has been further supported in a 2024 study of the chemical composition of Pluto and Triton which suggests they originated in the same region of the outer Solar System before the latter was pulled into Neptune's orbit.\nStudying prior data on the two bodies, the team found that both have a large amount of nitrogen and trace amounts of methane and carbon monoxide, which could have accumulated in the outer regions of the young nebula \"For some reason, Triton was then ejected from this region and ensnared by Neptune\". \"They had to have formed beyond the water-ice line,\" says Mandt, referring to the distance from the sun where water would freeze into ice or snow, which is why Triton and Pluto have similar amounts of certain key elements. \"One possibility is that the giant planets moved closer to the sun early in the first 100 million years or so of the Solar System, which may have disrupted the orbits of some bodies like Triton\", says Mandt.\nThe proposed capture of Triton may explain several features of the Neptunian system, including the extremely eccentric orbit of Neptune's moon Nereid and the scarcity of moons as compared to the other giant planets. Triton's initially eccentric orbit would have intersected the orbits of irregular moons and disrupted those of smaller regular moons, dispersing them through gravitational interactions.\nTriton's eccentric post-capture orbit would have also resulted in tidal heating of its interior, which could have kept Triton fluid for a billion years; this inference is supported by evidence of differentiation in Triton's interior. This source of internal heat disappeared following tidal locking and circularization of the orbit.\nTwo types of mechanisms have been proposed for Triton's capture. To be gravitationally captured by a planet, a passing body must lose sufficient energy to be slowed down to a speed less than that required to escape. An early model of how Triton may have been slowed was by collision with another object, either one that happened to be passing by Neptune (which is unlikely), or a moon or proto-moon in orbit around Neptune (which is more likely). A more recent hypothesis suggests that, before its capture, Triton was part of a binary system. When this binary encountered Neptune, it interacted in such a way that the binary dissociated, with one portion of the binary expelled, and the other, Triton, becoming bound to Neptune. This event is more likely for more massive companions. This hypothesis is supported by several lines of evidence, including binaries being very common among the large Kuiper belt objects. The event was brief but gentle, saving Triton from collisional disruption. Events like this may have been common during the formation of Neptune, or later when it migrated outward.\nHowever, simulations in 2017 showed that after Triton's capture, and before its orbital eccentricity decreased, it probably did collide with at least one other moon, and caused collisions between other moons.\nPhysical characteristics.\nTriton is the seventh-largest moon and sixteenth-largest object in the Solar System and is modestly larger than the dwarf planets Pluto and Eris. It is the largest known object believed to have originated in the Kuiper Belt. It is also the largest retrograde moon in the Solar System. It accounts for more than 99.5% of all the mass known to orbit Neptune, including the planet's rings and fifteen other known moons, and is also more massive than all known moons in the Solar System smaller than itself combined. Also, with a diameter 5.5% that of Neptune, it is the largest moon of a gas giant relative to its planet in terms of diameter, although Titan is bigger relative to Saturn in terms of mass (the ratio of Triton's mass to that of Neptune is approximately 1:4788). It has a radius, density (2.061 g/cm3), temperature, and chemical composition similar to that of Pluto.\nTriton's surface is covered with a transparent layer of annealed frozen nitrogen. Only 40% of Triton's surface has been observed and studied, but it may be entirely covered in such a thin sheet of nitrogen ice. Triton's surface consists of 55% nitrogen ice with other ices mixed in. Water ice comprises 15\u201335% and frozen carbon dioxide (dry ice) the remaining 10\u201320%. Trace ices include 0.1% methane and 0.05% carbon monoxide. There could also be ammonia ice on the surface, as there are indications of ammonia dihydrate in the lithosphere. Triton's mean density implies that it probably consists of about 30\u201345% water ice (including relatively small amounts of volatile ices), with the remainder being rocky material. Triton's surface area is 23\u00a0million\u00a0km2, which is 4.5% of Earth, or 15.5% of Earth's land area. Triton has an unusually high albedo, reflecting 60\u201395% of the sunlight that reaches it, and it has changed only slightly since the first observations. By comparison, the Moon reflects only 11%. This high albedo causes Triton to reflect a lot of whatever little sunlight there is instead of absorbing it, causing it to have the coldest recorded temperature in the Solar System at . Triton's reddish color is thought to be the result of methane ice, which is converted to tholins under exposure to ultraviolet radiation.\nBecause Triton's surface indicates a long history of melting, models of its interior posit that Triton is differentiated, like Earth, into a solid core, a mantle and a crust. Water, the most abundant volatile in the Solar System, comprises Triton's mantle, enveloping a core of rock and metal. There is enough rock in Triton's interior for radioactive decay to maintain a liquid subsurface ocean to this day, similar to what is thought to exist beneath the surface of Europa and several other icy outer Solar System worlds. This is not thought to be adequate to power convection in Triton's icy crust. However, the strong obliquity tides are believed to generate enough additional heat to accomplish this and produce the observed signs of recent surface geological activity. The black material ejected is suspected to contain organic compounds, and if liquid water is present on Triton, it has been speculated that this could make it habitable for some form of life.\nAtmosphere.\nTriton has a tenuous but well-structured and global nitrogen atmosphere, with trace amounts of carbon monoxide and small amounts of methane near its surface. Like Pluto's atmosphere, the atmosphere of Triton is thought to result from the evaporation of nitrogen from its surface. Its surface temperature is at least because Triton's nitrogen ice is in the warmer, hexagonal crystalline state, and the phase transition between hexagonal and cubic nitrogen ice occurs at that temperature. An upper limit in the low 40s (K) can be set from vapor pressure equilibrium with nitrogen gas in Triton's atmosphere. This is colder than Pluto's average equilibrium temperature of . Triton's surface atmospheric pressure is only about .\nTurbulence at Triton's surface creates a troposphere (a \"weather region\") rising to an altitude of 8\u00a0km. Streaks on Triton's surface left by geyser plumes suggest that the troposphere is driven by seasonal winds capable of moving material over a micrometer in size. Unlike other atmospheres, Triton's lacks a stratosphere and instead has a thermosphere from altitudes of 8 to 950\u00a0km and an exosphere above that. The temperature of Triton's upper atmosphere, at , is higher than that at its surface, due to heat absorbed from solar radiation and Neptune's magnetosphere. A haze permeates most of Triton's troposphere, thought to be composed largely of hydrocarbons and nitriles created by the action of sunlight on methane. Triton's atmosphere also has clouds of condensed nitrogen that lie between 1 and 3\u00a0km from its surface.\nIn 1997, observations from Earth were made of Triton's limb as it passed in front of stars. These observations indicated a denser atmosphere than was deduced from \"Voyager 2\" data. Other observations have shown an increase in temperature by 5% from 1989 to 1998. These observations indicated Triton was approaching an unusually warm southern hemisphere summer season that happens only once every few hundred years. Hypotheses for this warming include a change of frost patterns on Triton's surface and a change in ice albedo, which would allow more heat to be absorbed. Another hypothesis argues that temperature changes are a result of the deposition of dark, red material from geological processes. Because Triton's Bond albedo is among the highest in the Solar System, it is sensitive to small variations in spectral albedo. Based on the increase in atmospheric pressure between 1989 and 1997, it is estimated that by 2010 Triton's atmospheric pressure may have increased to as much as 4 Pa. By 2017, however, Triton's atmospheric surface pressure had nearly returned to \"Voyager 2\" levels; the cause for the rapid spike in atmospheric pressure between 1989 and 2017 remains unexplained.\nSurface features.\nAll detailed knowledge of the surface of Triton was acquired from a distance of 40,000\u00a0km by the \"Voyager 2\" spacecraft during a single encounter in 1989. The 40% of Triton's surface imaged by \"Voyager 2\" revealed blocky outcrops, ridges, troughs, furrows, hollows, plateaus, icy plains, and a few craters. Triton is relatively flat; its observed topography never varies beyond a kilometer. The impact craters observed are concentrated almost entirely in Triton's leading hemisphere. Analysis of crater density and distribution has suggested that in geological terms, Triton's surface is extremely young, with regions varying from an estimated 50\u00a0million years old to just an estimated 6\u00a0million years old. Fifty-five percent of Triton's surface is covered with frozen nitrogen, with water ice comprising 15\u201335% and frozen CO2 forming the remaining 10\u201320%. The surface also has deposits of tholins, a dark, tarry slurry of various organic chemical compounds.\nCryovolcanism.\nOne of the largest cryovolcanic features found on Triton is Leviathan Patera, a caldera-like feature roughly 100\u00a0km in diameter seen near the equator. Surrounding this caldera is a massive cryovolcanic plain, Cipango Planum, which is at least 490,000 km2 in area; assuming Leviathan Patera is the primary vent, Leviathan Patera is one of the largest volcanic or cryovolcanic constructs in the Solar System. This feature is also connected to two enormous cryolava lakes seen northwest of the caldera. Because the cryolava on Triton is believed to be primarily water ice with some ammonia, these lakes would qualify as stable bodies of surface liquid water while they were molten. This is the first place such bodies have been found apart from Earth, and Triton is the only icy body known to feature cryolava lakes, although similar cryomagmatic extrusions can be seen on Ariel, Ganymede, Charon, and Titan.\nPlumes.\nThe \"Voyager 2\" probe in 1989 observed a handful of geyser-like eruptions of nitrogen gas or water and entrained dust from beneath the surface of Triton in plumes up to 8\u00a0km high. Triton is thus one of the few bodies in the Solar System on which active eruptions of some sort have been observed. The best-observed examples are the Hili plume and Mahilani plume (named after a Zulu water sprite and a Tongan sea spirit, respectively).\nThe precise mechanism behind Triton's plumes is debated; one hypothesis is that Triton's plumes are driven by solar heating underneath a transparent or translucent layer of nitrogen ice, creating a sort of \"solid greenhouse effect\". As solar radiation warms the darker material beneath, this causes a rapid increase in pressure as the nitrogen begins to sublimate until enough pressure accumulates for it to erupt through the translucent layer. This model is largely supported by the observation that Triton was near peak southern summer at the time of \"Voyager 2\"'s flyby, ensuring its southern polar cap was receiving prolonged sunlight. CO2 geysers on Mars are thought to erupt from its south polar cap each spring in the same way.\nThe significant geological activity on Triton has led to alternative proposals that the plumes may be cryovolcanic in nature, rather than driven by solar radiation. A cryovolcanic origin better explains the estimated output of Triton's plumes, which possibly exceeds . This is similar to that which is estimated for Enceladus's cryovolcanic plumes at . If Triton's plumes are cryovolcanically driven, it remains to be explained why they predominantly appear over its southern polar cap. Triton's high surface heat flux may directly melt or vaporize nitrogen ice at the base of its polar caps, creating 'hot spots' which break through the ice or move to the ice caps' margins, before erupting explosively.\nThough only observed up close once by the \"Voyager 2\" spacecraft, it is estimated that a plume eruption on Triton may last up to a year. \nPolar cap, plains and ridges.\nTriton's south polar region is covered by a highly reflective cap of frozen nitrogen and methane sprinkled by impact craters and openings of geysers. Little is known about the north pole because it was on the night side during the \"Voyager 2\" encounter, but it is thought that Triton must also have a north polar ice cap.\nThe high plains found on Triton's eastern hemisphere, such as Cipango Planum, cover over and blot out older features, and are therefore almost certainly the result of icy lava washing over the previous landscape. The plains are dotted with pits, such as Leviathan Patera, which are probably the vents from which this lava emerged. The composition of the lava is unknown, although a mixture of ammonia and water is suspected.\nFour roughly circular \"walled plains\" have been identified on Triton. They are the flattest regions so far discovered, with a variance in altitude of less than 200\u00a0m. They are thought to have formed from the eruption of icy lava. The plains near Triton's eastern limb are dotted with black spots, the \"maculae\". Some maculae are simple dark spots with diffuse boundaries, and others comprise a dark central patch surrounded by a white halo with sharp boundaries. The maculae typically have diameters of about 100\u00a0km and widths of the halos of between 20 and 30\u00a0km.\nThere are extensive ridges and valleys in complex patterns across Triton's surface, probably the result of freeze\u2013thaw cycles. Many also appear to be tectonic and may result from an extension or strike-slip faulting. There are long double ridges of ice with central troughs bearing a strong resemblance to Europan lineae (although they have a larger scale), and which may have a similar origin, possibly shear heating from strike-slip motion along faults caused by diurnal tidal stresses experienced before Triton's orbit was fully circularized. These faults with parallel ridges expelled from the interior cross complex terrain with valleys in the equatorial region. The ridges and furrows, or \"sulci,\" such as Yasu Sulci, Ho Sulci, and Lo Sulci, are thought to be of intermediate age in Triton's geological history, and in many cases to have formed concurrently. They tend to be clustered in groups or \"packets\".\nCantaloupe terrain.\nTriton's western hemisphere consists of a strange series of fissures and depressions known as \"cantaloupe terrain\" because it resembles the skin of a cantaloupe melon. Although it has few craters, it is thought that this is the oldest terrain on Triton. It probably covers much of Triton's western half.\nCantaloupe terrain, which is mostly dirty water ice, is known to exist only on Triton. It contains depressions 30\u201340\u00a0km in diameter. The depressions (\"cavi\") are probably not impact craters because they are all of the similar size and have smooth curves. The leading hypothesis for their formation is diapirism, the rising of \"lumps\" of less dense material through a stratum of denser material. Alternative hypotheses include formation by collapses, or by flooding caused by cryovolcanism.\nImpact craters.\nDue to constant erasure and modification by ongoing geological activity, impact craters on Triton's surface are relatively rare. A census of Triton's craters imaged by \"Voyager 2\" found only 179 that were incontestably of impact origin, compared with 835 observed for Uranus's moon Miranda, which has only three percent of Triton's surface area. The largest crater observed on Triton thought to have been created by an impact is a feature called Mazomba. Although larger craters have been observed, they are generally thought to be volcanic.\nThe few impact craters on Triton are almost all concentrated in the leading hemisphere\u2014that facing the direction of the orbital motion\u2014with the majority concentrated around the equator between 30\u00b0 and 70\u00b0 longitude, resulting from material swept up from orbit around Neptune. Because it orbits with one side permanently facing the planet, astronomers expect that Triton should have fewer impacts on its trailing hemisphere, due to impacts on the leading hemisphere being more frequent and more violent. \"Voyager 2\" imaged only 40% of Triton's surface, so this remains uncertain. However, the observed cratering asymmetry exceeds what can be explained based on the impactor populations, and implies a younger surface age for the crater-free regions (\u2264 6\u00a0million years old) than for the cratered regions (\u2264 50\u00a0million years old).\nObservation and exploration.\nThe orbital properties of Triton were already determined with high accuracy in the 19th century. It was found to have a retrograde orbit, at a very high angle of inclination to the plane of Neptune's orbit. The first detailed observations of Triton were not made until 1930. Little was known about the satellite until \"Voyager 2\" flew by in 1989.\nBefore the flyby of \"Voyager 2\", astronomers suspected that Triton might have liquid nitrogen seas and a nitrogen/methane atmosphere with a density as much as 30% that of Earth. Like the famous overestimates of the atmospheric density of Mars, this proved incorrect. As with Mars, a denser atmosphere is postulated for its early history.\nThe first attempt to measure the diameter of Triton was made by Gerard Kuiper in 1954. He obtained a value of 3,800\u00a0km. Subsequent measurement attempts arrived at values ranging from 2,500 to 6,000\u00a0km, or from slightly smaller than the Moon (3,474.2\u00a0km) to nearly half the diameter of Earth. Data from the approach of \"Voyager 2\" to Neptune on August 25, 1989, led to a more accurate estimate of Triton's diameter (2,706\u00a0km).\nIn the 1990s, various observations from Earth were made of the limb of Triton using the occultation of nearby stars, which indicated the presence of an atmosphere and an exotic surface. Observations in late 1997 suggest that Triton is heating up and the atmosphere has become significantly denser since \"Voyager 2\" flew past in 1989.\nNew concepts for missions to the Neptune system to be conducted in the 2010s were proposed by NASA scientists on numerous occasions over the last decades. All of them identified Triton as being a prime target and a separate Triton lander comparable to the \"Huygens\" probe for Titan was frequently included in those plans. No efforts aimed at Neptune and Triton went beyond the proposal phase and NASA's funding for missions to the outer Solar System is currently focused on the Jupiter and Saturn systems. A proposed lander mission to Triton, called \"Triton Hopper\", would mine nitrogen ice from the surface of Triton and process it to be used as a propellant for a small rocket, enabling it to fly or 'hop' across the surface. Another concept, involving a flyby, was formally proposed in 2019 as part of NASA's Discovery Program under the name \"Trident\". Neptune Odyssey is a mission concept for a Neptune orbiter with a focus on Triton being studied beginning April 2021 as a possible large strategic science mission by NASA that would launch in 2033 and arrive at the Neptune system in 2049. Two lower-cost mission concepts were subsequently developed for the New Frontiers program: the first the following June and the second in 2023. The first is \"Triton Ocean World Surveyor\", which would launch in 2031 and arrive in 2047, and the second is \"Nautilus\", which would launch August 2042 and arrive in April 2057.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44372", "revid": "11498870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44372", "title": "Sermon on the Mount", "text": "Collection of sayings and teachings of Jesus\nThe Sermon on the Mount (translated from Vulgate Latin section title ) is a collection of sayings spoken by Jesus of Nazareth found in the Gospel of Matthew (chapters 5, 6, and 7) that summarizes his moral teachings. It is the first of five discourses in the Gospel and has been one of the most widely quoted sections of the Gospels.\nBackground and setting.\nThe Sermon on the Mount is placed relatively early in Matthew's portrayal of Jesus's ministry\u2014following, in chapter 3, his baptism by John and, in chapter 4, his sojourn and temptation in the desert, his call of four disciples, and his early preaching in Galilee.\nThe five discourses in the Gospel of Matthew are: the Sermon on the Mount (5\u20137), the discourse on discipleship (10), the discourse of parables (13), the discourse on the community of faith (18), and the discourse on future events (24-25). Also, like all the other \"discourses\", this one has Matthew's concluding statement (7:28-29) that distinguishes it from the material that follows. For similar statements at the end of the other discourses, see ; ; ; .\nTraditionally, the Mount of Beatitudes has been commemorated by Christians as the physical site at which the sermon took place. Other locations, such as Mount Arbel and the Horns of Hattin, have also been suggested as possibilities.\nThis sermon is one of the most widely quoted sections of the canonical gospels, including some of the best-known sayings attributed to Jesus, such as the Beatitudes and the commonly recited version of the Lord's Prayer. It also contains what many consider to be the central tenets of Christian discipleship.\nThe setting for the sermon is given in -. There, Jesus is said to see the crowds, to go up the mountain accompanied by his disciples, to sit down, and to begin his speech. He comes down from the mountain in .\nComponents.\nAlthough the issues of Matthew's compositional plan for the Sermon on the Mount remain unresolved among scholars, its structural components are clear.\nMatthew 5:3\u201312 includes the Beatitudes. These describe the character of the people of the Kingdom of Heaven, expressed as \"blessings\". The Greek word most versions of the Gospel render as \"blessed,\" can also be translated \"happy\" (Matthew 5:3\u201312 in Young's Literal Translation for an example). In Matthew, there are eight (or nine) blessings, while in Luke there are four, followed by four woes.\nIn almost all cases, the phrases used in the Beatitudes are familiar from an Old Testament context, but in the sermon Jesus gives them new meaning. Together, the Beatitudes present a new set of ideals that focus on love and humility rather than force and mastery; they echo the highest ideals of Jesus's teachings on spirituality and compassion.\nIn Christian teachings, the Works of Mercy, which have corporal and spiritual components, have resonated with the theme of the Beatitude for mercy. These teachings emphasize that these acts of mercy provide both temporal and spiritual benefits.\nMatthew 5:13\u201316 presents the metaphors of salt and light. This completes the profile of God's people presented in the Beatitudes and acts as the introduction to the next section.\nThere are two parts in this section, using the terms \"salt of the earth\" and Light of the World to refer to the disciples\u00a0\u2013 implying their value. Elsewhere, in John 8:12, Jesus applies 'Light of the World' to himself.\nJesus preaches about Hell and what Hell is like: \"But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother \"\"Raca\" (fool)\" shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.\"\nThe longest section of the Sermon is Matthew 5:17\u201348, traditionally referred to as \"the Antitheses\" or \"Matthew's Antitheses\". In the section, Jesus fulfils and reinterprets the Old Covenant and in particular its Ten Commandments, contrasting with what \"you have heard\" from others. For example, he advises turning the other cheek, and , in contrast to taking an eye for an eye. According to most interpretations of , , , and , and most Christian views of the Old Covenant, these new interpretations of the Law and Prophets are not opposed to the Old Testament, which was the position of Marcion, but form Jesus's new teachings which bring about salvation, and hence must be adhered to, as emphasized in Matthew 7:24\u201327 towards the end of the sermon.\nIn Matthew 6, Jesus condemns doing what would normally be \"good works\" simply for recognition and not from the heart, such as those of alms (6:1\u20134), prayer (6:5\u201315), and fasting (6:16\u201318). The discourse goes on to condemn the superficiality of materialism and calls the disciples not to worry about material needs or fret about the future, but to \"seek\" God's kingdom first. Within the discourse on ostentation, Matthew presents an example of correct prayer. Luke places this in a different context. The Lord's Prayer (6:9\u201313) contains parallels to 1 Chronicles 29:10\u201318.\nThe first part of Matthew 7 (Matthew 7:1\u20136) deals with judging. Jesus condemns those who judge others without first sorting out their own affairs on the matter: \"Judge not, that ye be not judged.\" Jesus concludes the sermon in Matthew 7:17\u201329 by warning against false prophets.\nTeachings and theology.\nThe teachings of the Sermon on the Mount have been a key element of Christian ethics, and for centuries the sermon has acted as a fundamental recipe for the conduct of the followers of Jesus. Various religious and moral thinkers (e.g. Leo Tolstoy and Mahatma Gandhi) have admired its message, and its teachings were a major component of the nonviolent 1954-1968 American civil rights movement and one of the main sources of Christian pacifism.\nIn the 5th century, Saint Augustine began his book \"Our Lord's Sermon on the Mount\" by stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If anyone will piously and soberly consider the sermon which our Lord Jesus Christ spoke on the mount, as we read it in the Gospel according to Matthew, I think that he will find in it, so far as regards the highest morals, a perfect standard of the Christian life.\nThe last verse of chapter 5 of Matthew (Matthew 5:48) is a focal point of the Sermon that summarizes its teachings by advising the disciples to seek perfection. The Greek word used to refer to perfection also implies an end, or destination, advising the disciples to seek the path towards perfection and the Kingdom of God. It teaches that God's children are those who act like God.\nThe teachings of the sermon are often referred to as the \"Ethics of the Kingdom\": they place a high level of emphasis on \"purity of the heart\" and embody the basic standard of Christian righteousness.\nTheological structure.\nThe theological structure of the Sermon on the Mount is widely discussed. One group of theologians ranging from Saint Augustine in the 5th century to Michael Goulder in the 20th century, see the Beatitudes as the central element of the Sermon. Others such as G\u00fcnther Bornkamm see the Sermon arranged around the Lord's Prayer, while Daniel Patte, closely followed by Ulrich Luz, see a chiastic structure in the sermon. Dale Allison and Glen Stassen have proposed a structure based on triads. Jack Kingsbury and Hans Dieter Betz see the sermon as composed of theological themes, e.g. righteousness or way of life.\nExtension.\nThe \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" suggests that \"it is fitting to add [to the Sermon on the Mount] the moral catechesis of the apostolic teachings, such as Romans 12-15, 1 Corinthians 12-13, Colossians 3-4, Ephesians 4-5, etc.\"\nInterpretation.\nA central debate over the sermon is how literally its high ethical standards are meant to be applied to everyday life. Almost all Christian groups have developed non-literal ways to interpret and apply the sermon. North American Biblical scholar Craig S. Keener finds at least 36 different interpretations. Biblical scholar Harvey K. McArthur lists 12 basic schools of thought:\nComparison with the Sermon on the Plain.\nWhile Matthew groups Jesus's teachings into sets of similar material, the same material is scattered when found in Luke. The Sermon on the Mount may be compared with the similar but shorter Sermon on the Plain as recounted by the Gospel of Luke (), which occurs at the same moment in Luke's narrative, and also features Jesus heading up a mountain, but giving the sermon on the way down at a level spot. Some scholars believe that they are the same sermon, while others hold that Jesus frequently preached similar themes in different places.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44373", "revid": "138402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44373", "title": "Triton (mythology)", "text": "Greek god, messenger of the sea\nTriton (; ) is a Greek god of the sea, the son of Poseidon and Amphitrite. Triton lived with his parents in a golden palace on the bottom of the sea. Later he is often depicted as having a conch shell he would blow like a trumpet.\nTriton is usually represented as a merman, with the upper body of a human and the tailed lower body of a fish. At some time during the Greek and Roman era, Triton(s) became a generic term for a merman (mermen) in art and literature. In English literature, Triton is portrayed as the messenger or herald for the god Poseidon.\nTriton of Lake Tritonis of ancient Libya is a namesake mythical figure that appeared and aided the Argonauts. Moreover, according to Apollonius Rhodius, he married the Oceanid of the said region, Libya.\nSea god.\nTriton was the son of Poseidon and Amphitrite according to Hesiod's \"Theogony\". He was the ruler (possessor) of the depths of the sea, who is either \"dreadful\" or \"mighty\" () according to the epithet given him by Hesiod.\nTriton dwelt with his parents in underwater golden palaces. Poseidon's golden palace was located at Aegae on Euboea in one passage of Homer's \"Iliad\" 12.21.\nUnlike his father Poseidon who is always fully anthropomorphic in ancient art, Triton's lower half is that of a fish, while the top half is presented in a human figure.\nTriton in later times became associated with possessing a conch shell, which he blew like a trumpet to calm or raise the waves. He was \"trumpeter and bugler\" to Oceanus and Poseidon. Its sound was so cacophonous that when loudly blown, it put the giants to flight, who imagined it to be the roar of a dark wild beast.\nThe original Greek Triton only sometimes bore a trident. In literature, Triton carries a trident in Accius's \"Medea\" fragment.\nTriton is \"sea-hued\" according to Ovid and \"his shoulders barnacled with sea-shells\". Ovid actually here calls Triton \"cerulean\" in color, to choose a cognate rendering to the original language (); Ovid also includes Triton among other deities (Proteus, Aegaeon, Doris) of being this blue color, with green (\"viridis\") hair, as well describing the steed Triton rides as cerulean.\nLibyan lake god.\nThere is also Triton, the god of Lake Tritonis of Ancient Libya encountered by the Argonauts. This Triton is treated as a separate deity in some references. He had a different parentage, as his father was Poseidon but his mother Europa according to the Greek writers of this episode.\nThis Triton first appeared in the guise of Eurypylus before eventually revealing his divine nature. This local deity has thus been euhemeristically rationalized as \"then ruler over Libya\" by Diodorus Siculus.\nTriton-Eurypylus welcomed the Argonauts with a guest-gift of a clod of earth which was a pledge that the Greeks would be granted the land of Cyrene, Libya in the future. The \"Argo\" had been driven ashore in the Syrtes (Gulf of Syrtes Minor according to some), and Triton guided them through the lake's marshy outlet back to the Mediterranean.\nOne of the works which recounts this adventure is Apollonius of Rhodes' \"Argonautica\" (3rd century BC), the first work in written literature that describes a Triton as \"fish-tailed\".\nTriton with men and heroes.\nIn Virgil's \"Aeneid\", book 6, it is told that Triton killed Misenus, son of Aeolus, by drowning him after he challenged the gods to play as well as he did.\nIconography of Triton duels.\nHerakles wrestling Triton is a common theme in Classical Greek art particularly black-figure pottery, but no literature survives that tells the story. In fewer examples, the Greek pottery depicting apparently the same motif are labeled \"Nereus\" or \"Old Man of the Sea\" instead, and among these, Nereus' struggle with Herakles is attested in literature (Pseudo-Apollodorus, \"Bibliotheca\"). \"Old Man of the Sea\" is a generic term applicable to Nereus, who was also frequently depicted as half-fishlike. One explanation is that some vase painters developed the convention of depicting Nereus as a fully human form, so that Triton had to be substituted in the depiction of the sea-monster wrestling Herakles. And Nereus appears as a spectator in some examples of this motif.\nIn the red-figure period, the Triton-Herakles theme became completely outmoded, supplanted by such scenes as Theseus's adventures in Poseidon's golden mansion, embellished with the presence of Triton. Again, extant literature describing the adventure omits any mention of Triton, but placement of Triton in the scene is not implausible.\nFurther genealogy.\nTriton was the father of a daughter named Pallas and foster parent to the goddess Athena, according to Pseudo-Apollodorus's \"Bibliotheca\". Elsewhere in the \"Bibliotheca\", there appears a different Pallas, a male figure overcome by Athena.\nAthena bears the epithet \"Tritogeneia\" () \"Triton-born\" and while this is suggestive of Triton's daughter being Athena, the appellation is otherwise explainable in several ways, e.g., as Athena's birth (from Zeus's head) taking place at the River Triton or Lake Tritonis.\nTriton also had a daughter named Triteia. According to Pausanias writing in the 2nd century CE, one origin story of the city of Triteia held that this was an eponymous city after Triteia, founded by her and Ares's son, named Melanippus (\"Black Horse\").\nTritons.\nAt some time during the Greco-Roman period, \"Tritons\", in the plural, came to be used a generic term for mermen.\nHellenistic and Roman art.\nGreek pottery depicting a half-human, half-fish being bearing an inscription of \"Triton\" is popular by the 6th century BC. It has also been hypothesized that by this time \"Triton\" has become a generic term for a merman.\nFurthermore, Tritons in groups or multitudes began to be depicted in Classical Greek art by around the 4th century BC. Among these is the work by Greek sculptor Scopas (d. 350 BC) which was later removed to Rome. The sirens of Homer's \"Odyssey\" were sometimes being depicted, not as human-headed birds but as tritonesses by around this time, as seen in a bowl dated to the 3rd century BC, and this is explained as a conflation with Odysseus's Scylla and Charybdis episode.\nThough not a contemporaneous inscription or commentary, Pliny (d. 79 CE) commented on the work that \"there are Nereids riding on dolphins\u2026 and also Tritons\" in this sculpture.\nIn later Greek periods into the Roman period Tritons were depicted as ichthyocentaurs, i.e., merman with a horse's forelegs in place of arms. The earliest known examples are from the 2nd century BC. The term \"Ichthyocentaur\" did not originate in Ancient Greece, and only appeared in writing in the Byzantine period (12th century); \"Centaur-Triton\" is another word for a Triton with horse-legs.\nBesides examples in which the horse-like forelimbs have been replaced by wings, there are other examples where the forelegs have several clawed digits (somewhat like lions), as in one relief at the Glyptothek in Munich, Germany. A Triton with a lower extremity like a lobster or crayfish, in a fresco unearthed from Herculanum has been mentioned.\nDouble-tailed tritons began to be depicted by the late 2nd century BC, such as in the Altar of Domitius Ahenobarbus. Rumpf thought that might be the earliest example of a \"Triton with two fish-tails (Triton mit zwei Fischschw\u00e4nzen)\". However the double-tailed tritonesses in Damophon's sculptures at Lycosura predates it, and even this is doubted to be the first example. Lattimore believed the two-tailed triton should be dated to the 4th century BC, and speculated that Skopas was the one to devise it.\nAs aforementioned, there is the female version of the half-human, half-fishlike being, sometimes called a \"tritoness\" or a \"female triton\".\nLiterature in the Roman period.\nThe first literary attestation of Tritons () in the plural was Virgil's \"Aeneid\" (c.\u200929\u201319 BC). In the 1st century CE, another Latin poet Valerius Flaccus wrote in \"Argonautica\" that there was a huge Triton at each side of Neptune's chariot, holding the reins of horses. And Statius (1st century) makes a Triton figurehead adorn the prow of the \"Argo\".\nTritons and nereids appear as marine retinues () to the goddess Venus in Apuleius's \"Metamorphoses\", or \"The Golden Ass\".\nPausanias.\nTritons () were described in detail in the 2nd century CE by Pausanias (ix. 21).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Tritons have the following appearance. On their heads they grow hair like that of marsh frogs (, plants of the \"Ranunculus\" or buttercup genus) not only in color, but in the impossibility of separating one hair from another. The rest of their body is rough with fine scales just as is the shark. Under their ears they have gills and a man's nose; but the mouth is broader and the teeth are those of a beast. Their eyes seem to me blue, and they have hands, fingers, and nails like the shells of the murex. Under the breast and belly is a tail like a dolphin's instead of feet.\nPausanias was basing his descriptions on a headless Triton exhibited in Tanagra and another curiosity in Rome. These Tritons were preserved mummies or taxidermied real animals or humans (or fabrication made to appear as such). The Tanagran Triton was seen by Aelian who described it as an embalmed or stuffed mummy (). While Pausanias related a legend around the Tanagran Triton that its head was cut off, J. G. Frazer conjectured that such a cover story had to be invented after a sea mammal's carcass with a severed or severely mutilated head was passed off as a Triton.\nRenaissance.\nTriton was referred to as \"trumpeter of Neptune (\"Neptuni tubicen\")\" in Cristoforo Landino (d. 1498)'s commentary on Virgil; this phrasing later appeared in the gloss for \"Triton\" in Marius Nizolius's \"Thesaurus\" (1551), and Konrad Gesner's book (1558).\nTriton makes appearance in English literature as the messenger for the god Poseidon. In Edmund Spenser's \"Faerie Queene\", Triton blew \"his trompet shrill before\" Neptune and Amphitrite. And in Milton (1637), \"Lycidas\" v. 89, \"The Herald of the Sea\" refers to Triton.\nGianlorenzo Bernini sculpted the \"Neptune and Triton\" fountain (1622\u201323) now in the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Triton Fountain (1642\u201343) in Bernini Square, Rome. There is differing opinion on what earlier works he may have drawn from near-contemporary works or examples from antiquity. He may have been influenced by Battista di Domenico Lorenzi's \"Alpheus and Arethusa\" (1568\u201370) or his Triton blowing the conch (late 1570s), or Stoldo Lorenzi's Neptune fountain. But Rudolf Wittkower has cautioned against exaggerating the influences of Florentine fountains. It has been pointed out that Bernini had access to the Papal collection of genuine Greco-Roman sculptures, and worked with restoring ancient fragments, although it is unclear if any Triton was among these. It is within the realm of possibilities that Bernini might have used as his model the ancient Altar of Domitius Ahenobarbus, which does include Triton in its composition. The Triton of this altar, the Stoldo Lorenzi Triton and the Bernini Triton are all double-tailed, like a pair of human legs.\nRomantic era.\nIn Wordsworth's sonnet \"The World Is Too Much with Us\" (c.\u20091802, published 1807), the poet regrets the prosaic humdrum modern world, yearning for\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left: 2em\"&gt;glimpses that would make me less forlorn;\nHave sight of Proteus rising from the sea;\nOr hear old Triton blow his wreath\u00e8d horn.&lt;/poem&gt;\nMascot.\nThere are numerous universities, colleges, and high schools and businesses that use Triton as their mascot. These include the following:\nMany club sports teams, especially swimming leagues, use the symbol of Triton.\nEponyms.\nThe largest moon of the planet Neptune has been given the name Triton, as Neptune is the Roman equivalent of Poseidon. A family of large sea snails, the shells of some of which have been used as trumpets since antiquity, are commonly known as \"tritons\", see Triton (gastropod).\nThe name Triton is associated in modern industry with tough hard-wearing machines such as the Ford Triton engine and Mitsubishi Triton pickup truck.\nThe USS Triton (SSN-586) was the only attack submarine of her class, and the only US Navy nuclear-powered submarine to have two reactors. She was decommissioned in 1969 and languished awaiting scrapping until 2007, which began at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard, and was completed as of 30 November 2009.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44380", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44380", "title": "Anna of Russia", "text": "Empress of Russia from 1730 to 1740\nAnna Ioannovna (; 7 February\u00a0[O.S. 28 January]\u00a01693\u00a0\u2013 28 October\u00a0[O.S. 17 October]\u00a01740), also russified as Anna Ivanovna and sometimes anglicized as Anne, served as regent of the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia from 1711 until 1730 and then ruled as Empress of Russia from 1730 to 1740. Much of her administration was defined or heavily influenced by actions set in motion by her uncle, Peter the Great (r.\u20091682\u00a0\u2013\u00a01725), such as the lavish building projects in St. Petersburg, funding the Russian Academy of Science, and measures which generally favored the nobility, such as the repeal of a primogeniture law in 1730. In the West, Anna's reign was traditionally viewed as a continuation of the transition from the old Muscovy ways to the European court envisioned by Peter the Great. Within Russia, Anna's reign is often referred to as a \"dark era\".\nEarly life.\nAnna was born in Moscow as the daughter of Tsar Ivan V by his wife Praskovia Saltykova. Ivan V was co-ruler of Russia along with his younger half-brother Peter the Great, but he was mentally disabled and reportedly had limited capacity for administering the country effectively, and thus Peter effectively ruled alone. Ivan V died in February 1696, when Anna was only three years old, and her half-uncle became the sole ruler of Russia.\nAlthough Anna was the fourth child of her parents, she had only one surviving elder sister, Catherine, and one younger sister, Praskovya. The three girls were raised in a disciplined and austere manner by their widowed mother, a stern lady of sterling character. Born into a family of relatively modest means, Praskovia Saltykova had been an exemplary wife to a mentally disabled man, and expected her daughters to live up to her own high standards of morality and virtue. Anna grew up within a milieu which cherished womanly virtue and domesticity above all else, and placed strong emphasis on thrift, charity and religious observances. Her education consisted of French, German, religious texts and folklore, leavened with some music and dancing. As she grew older, she developed into an obstinate girl, with a mean streak, earning her the nickname \"Iv-anna the Terrible\". Anna was famed for her big cheeks, \"which, as shown in her portraits\", says Thomas Carlyle, were \"comparable to a Westphalian ham\".\nIn time, her uncle Peter the Great ordered the family to move from Moscow to St. Petersburg. This meant a change of not just location but also society, and this had a significant effect on Anna. She greatly enjoyed the splendour of court and the lavishness of high society, which was very different from the austerity preferred by her mother.\nCourland Regency.\nIn 1710, Peter the Great arranged for the 17-year-old Anna to marry Frederick William, Duke of Courland, who was about the same age as her. Her wedding was held on a grand scale, as per her own inclinations, on 11 November 1710; and her uncle gave her a fabulous dowry of 200,000 roubles. At the feast which followed the wedding, two dwarfs performed a parody by jumping out of enormous pies and dancing on the tables.\nThe newly wedded couple spent several weeks in Russia before proceeding to Courland. Only twenty miles out of St. Petersburg, on the road to Courland, on 21 January 1711, Duke Frederick died. The cause of death was uncertain: it has been attributed variously to a chill or to the effects of alcohol.\nAfter her husband died, Anna proceeded to Mitau (now known as Jelgava), the capital of Courland (now western Latvia) and ruled that province for almost twenty years, from 1711 to 1730. During this period, the Russian resident, Count Peter Bestuzhev, was her adviser (and sometimes lover). She never remarried after the death of her husband, but her enemies claimed she conducted a love affair with Duke Ernst Johann von Biron, a prominent courtier, for many years.\nAccession.\nIn 1730, Tsar Peter II (grandson of Anna's uncle Peter the Great) died childless at a young age. His death rendered extinct the male line of the Romanov dynasty, which had ruled Russia for over a century, since 1613. There were four possible candidates for the throne: the three surviving daughters of Ivan V, namely Catherine (born 1691), Anna herself (born 1693) and Praskovya (born 1694), and the sole surviving daughter of Peter the Great, Elizabeth (born 1709).\nIvan V had been the older brother of Peter the Great and co-ruler with him, and by that reckoning, his daughters may be considered to have the prior claim. However, if seen from the perspective that the successor should be the nearest kin of the most recent monarch, then the daughters of Peter the Great were nearer to the throne, because they were the aunts of the recently deceased Tsar Peter II. The dilemma was made greater because the daughters of Peter the Great had been born out of wedlock, and had been legitimized later by him, after he formally married their mother Catherine I, who had previously been a maid in his household. On the other hand, Praskovia Saltykova, the wife of Ivan V, had been a nobleman's daughter and a devoted wife and mother; moreover, she had been a lady greatly respected for her many virtues, not least her chastity. \nFinally, the Russian Supreme Privy Council led by Prince Dmitri Golitzyn selected Anna, the second daughter of Ivan V, to be the new Empress of Russia. She was selected in preference to her elder sister Catherine even though Catherine was at that time resident in Russia whereas Anna was not. There were some reasons for this: Anna was a childless widow and there was no immediate danger of an unknown foreigner wielding power in Russia; she also had some experience of government, because she had been administering her late husband's duchy of Courland for almost two decades. Catherine, on the other hand, was married to the Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin. She was now separated from him and living in Russia, which was in itself disgraceful; and whether her husband was present or absent, his existence could raise problems at her very coronation. His intervention in government affairs at some later point could hardly be prevented, especially since Catherine had a daughter by him. In that event, since he was ruling prince of ancient lineage with years of experience, he would not be as amenable to the council's advice as a Russian princess. Also, the fact that Catherine had a daughter already would provide a certainty of succession which the nobles perhaps preferred not to have.\nThe Supreme Privy Council preferred the childless and widowed Duchess of Courland. They hoped that she would feel indebted to the nobles and remain a figurehead at best, and malleable at worst. To make sure of that, the Council convinced Anna to sign a declaration of \"Conditions\" to her accession, modeled after a Swedish precedent, which stated that Anna was to govern according to their counsel and was not permitted to declare war, call for peace, impose new taxes or spend the revenue of the state without their consent. Without the consent of the council, she could not punish nobility without trial, make grants of estates or villages, appoint high officials, or promote anyone (foreign or Russian) to court office.\nThe deliberations of the council were held even as Peter II lay dying of smallpox during the winter of 1729\u201330. The document of \"Conditions\" was presented to Anna in January, and she signed the same on 18 January 1730, which was just around the time of his death. The ceremony of endorsement was held at her capital, Mitau in Courland (now known as Jelgava), and she then proceeded to the Russian capital. On 20 February 1730, shortly after her arrival, Empress Anna exercised her prerogative to do away with her predecessor's Privy Council and dissolved that body. The Supreme Privy Council which had stipulated those onerous \"Conditions\" had been composed largely of the families of the princes Dolgorouki and Galitzin. Within a matter of days, another faction rose at court which was opposed to the domination of these two families. On 7 March 1730, a group of people belonging to this faction (numbering between 150 and 800 people, depending on the source) arrived at the palace and petitioned the empress to repudiate the \"Conditions\" and assume the autocracy of her predecessors. Among those who urged Anna to do so was her elder sister Catherine. Anna duly repudiated the document of Conditions, and for good measure sent some of the framers of the document to the scaffold, and many others to Siberia. She then assumed autocratic powers and ruled as an absolute monarch, in the same fashion as her predecessors. On the night that Anna tore up the Conditions, an aurora borealis appeared in the sky, making the horizon \"appear in all blood\" in the words of one contemporary, which was widely taken to be a dark omen of what Anna's reign would be like.\nStrong-willed and eccentric, Anna was known for her cruelty and vulgar sense of humor. She forced Prince Mikhail Alekseevich Golitsyn to become her court jester and had him married off to her unattractive Kalmyk maid Avdotya Buzheninova. To celebrate the wedding, the Empress had an ice palace measuring thirty-three feet high and eighty feet long built together with icy beds, steps, chairs, windows and even logs of ice in a fireplace of ice. Prince Golitsyn and his bride were placed in a cage atop an elephant and paraded through the streets to this structure, to spend their wedding night in the ice palace, despite it being an extremely cold night in the dead of winter. Empress Anna told the couple to make love and keep their bodies close if they did not wish to freeze to death. Eventually, the couple survived when the maid traded a pearl necklace for a sheepskin coat from one of the guards.\nAn enthusiastic hunter, Anna always kept a shotgun by her window so she could blast away at birds at all hours of the day whenever she felt the urge to hunt.\nEmpress of Russia.\nAnna continued to lavish architectural projects on St. Petersburg. She completed a waterway that began construction under Peter the Great and called for seafaring ships to accompany this new canal and continue naval expansion. Anna's lover Ernst Johann von Biron was a Baltic German and due to his influence Baltic Germans were favored with government offices, leading to the resentment of the ethnic Russian nobility, though the American historian Walter Moss cautioned that the popular image of the \"Bironovschina\" as one of total Baltic German domination of Russia is exaggerated.\nCadet Corps.\nAnna founded the Cadet Corps in 1731, one year after coming to the throne. The Cadet Corps was a group of young boys starting at the age of eight being trained for the military. It incorporated a very rigorous training program which included all the schooling necessary for someone to hold an important position in the military. As time went on, the program was improved upon by other emperors and empresses, such as Catherine the Great. These began to include the arts and sciences into cadets' schooling, alongside established studies of military topics.\nAcademy of Science.\nAnna continued to fund the Russian Academy of Science, started by Peter the Great. This school was designed to further the sciences in Russia, in order to help the country reach the level of the Western countries of that period. Some of the subjects taught were mathematics, astronomy, and botany. The Academy of Science was also responsible for many expeditions; a notable example was the Bering Sea Expedition. While attempting to determine if America and Asia had been at one point connected, Siberia and its people was also studied. These studies were referenced long after the expedition returned from Siberia.\nThe academy suffered interference from outside parties. Frequently the government and the church would meddle with funding and experimentation, altering data to match their respective points of view.\nThis school of science was very small, never exceeding a population of twelve students in the university and barely over a hundred in the secondary school. Still, it was a huge step forward for education in Russia. Many of the teachers and professors were imported from Germany, bringing a Western viewpoint to instruction students received. Some of the students taught by these German professors later became advisors or teachers to future leaders, such as Catherine the Great's tutor, Adodurov.\nDuring Anna's reign the Academy of Science began to include the Arts into the program, as there was no school for the arts yet, and the Empress was a firm supporter of the arts. Theatre, architecture, engraving, and journalism were all added to the curriculum. It was during this time the foundation of what is now the world-famous Russian Ballet was laid down.\nThe Secret Office of Investigation.\nAnna resurrected the Secret Office of Investigation, whose purpose was to punish those convicted of political crimes, although some cases were occasionally taken that were not of a political nature. It has been rumored since Anna's reign that Biron was the power behind the Secret Office of Investigation when in fact it was run by the senator A. I. Ushakov. The punishments meted out for the convicted were often very painful and disgusting. For example, some people that had supposedly been plotting against the government had their noses slit in addition to being beaten with the knout. Russian authorities listed a total of around 20,000 Russians\u2014including some of the highest native nobility\u2014who fell victim to Biron and Anna's police.\nOffice for the Affairs of New Converts.\nThe government under Anna established an Office for the Affairs of New Converts in 1740 to expand the conversion to Orthodoxy. The office which was situated in the Bogoroditsky Monastery in Kazan was staffed by monks and aided by state authorities. Under the empress' decree, they presided under a huge increase in conversions, where converts were provided goods and cash in return for a \"reward for accepting baptism\". However, intimidation and violence also played a role in conversions, as a Chuvash petition described how the clergy \"mercilessly beat them and baptized them against their will\". In addition, hundreds of mosques were destroyed. By the 1750s, over 400,000 pagans and Muslims had converted.\nNobility.\nAnna gave many privileges to the nobility. In 1730 she ensured the repeal of Peter the Great's primogeniture law prohibiting the division of estates among heirs. Starting in 1731 landlords were made responsible for their serfs' taxes, which had the effect of tightening their economic bondage further. In 1736, the age for a noble to begin his compulsory service to the state changed to 20 with a 25-year service time. Anna and her government also determined that if a family had more than one son, one could now stay behind to run the family estate.\nWesternization.\nWesternization continued after Peter the Great's reign in areas of prominent Western culture such as the Academy of Science, cadet corps education, and imperial culture including theater and opera. Although not at the fast-paced speed of Westernization under her Uncle Peter's reign, it is evident that a culture of the expansion of knowledge continued during Anna's rule and affected mostly the nobility. It is argued that this success in Westernization is due to the efforts of the German court nobility; the foreigners' impacts are viewed both positively and negatively.\nAnna's reign was different from that of other imperial Russian rulers in one respect: her court was almost entirely made up of foreigners, the majority of whom were German. Some observers have argued that historians isolate her rule from Russian history due to their long-term prejudice towards Germans, towards whom Anna seems to have been sympathetic.\nThere is a lot of mention of Germans throughout the reign of Anna. For example, she often gave them ruling positions in her cabinet and other important decision-making positions. This was because she had very little trust in the Russians. It was because of this strong German influence in government that many Russians came to resent them.\nThe Imperial Theatre School, known as Vaganova Academy of Russian Ballet after 1957, was founded during Anna's reign on May 4, 1738. It was the first ballet school in Russia, as well as the second in the world. The school was established through the initiative of the French ballet master and teacher Jean-Baptiste Land\u00e9.\nForeign affairs.\nDuring Anna's reign Russia became involved in two major conflicts, the War of the Polish Succession (1733\u20131735) and another Turkish war. In the former, Russia worked with Austria to support Augustus II's son Augustus against the candidacy of Stanis\u0142aw Leszczy\u0144ski who was dependent on the French and amiable with Sweden and the Ottomans. Russia's involvement with the conflict was quickly over, however, and the Russo-Turkish War (1735\u20131739) was much more important.\nIn 1732 Nader Shah had forced Russia to return the lands in northern mainland Persia that had been taken during Peter the Great's Russo-Persian War; the Treaty of Resht furthermore permitted an alliance against the Ottoman Empire, the common enemy and, in any case, the provinces of Shirvan, Ghilan, and Mazanderan had been a net drain on the imperial treasury for the entirety of their occupation. Three years later, in 1735, conforming to the Treaty of Ganja, the remainder of the territories taken more than a decade earlier from Persia in the North Caucasus and South Caucasus were returned as well.\nThe war against the Turks took four and a half years, a hundred thousand men, and millions of rubles; its burdens caused great stress on the people of Russia, and it only gained Russia the city of Azov and its environs. Its effects, however, were greater than they first appeared. Osterman's policy of southern expansion prevailed over the 1711 Peace of Pruth signed by Peter the Great. M\u00fcnnich had given Russia its first campaign against Turkey that had not ended in crushing disaster and dissipated the illusion of Ottoman invincibility. He had further shown that Russia's grenadiers and hussars could defeat twice their number of janissaries and spahis. The Tatar hordes of the Crimea had been exterminated and Russia's signal and unexpected successes greatly increased its prestige within Europe.\nThe Russians also established a protectorate over the khan of the Kirghiz, sending officers to assist his short-lived conquest of Khiva.\nTwo Chinese embassies to Anna's court, first at Moscow in 1731, then at St Petersburg the following year, were the only ones China dispatched to Europe through the 18th century. These embassies were unique also in that they represented the only occasions where officials of the Chinese Empire kowtowed before a foreign ruler.\nRelationship with Biron.\nAfter being widowed just weeks following her wedding, Anna never remarried. As empress of Russia, she enjoyed the power she held over all men and may have thought that marriage would undermine her power and position. Nevertheless, Anna's reign is often referred to as \"The Age of Biron\" (\"\"), after her German lover Ernst Johann Biron. Historians concur that Biron not only had a strong influence on Anna's domestic and foreign policies, but also that at times he wielded power solely without reference to the Empress. Anna was attracted to Biron's personal charm and he proved to be a good companion to her, but his name became synonymous with cruelty and terror. In public perception these negative qualities became the hallmark of Anna's reign.\nDeath and succession.\nAs her health declined Anna declared her grandnephew, Ivan VI, as her successor and appointed Biron as regent. This was an attempt to secure the line of her father, Ivan V, and exclude the descendants of Peter the Great from inheriting the throne. It was recorded that she had an ulcer on her kidneys, and she continued having attacks of gout; as her condition worsened, her health began to fail.\nAnna died on 28 October 1740 at the age of 47 from a kidney stone that made for a slow and painful death. The tsaritsa's final words focused on Biron. Ivan VI was only a two-month-old baby at the time, and his mother, Anna Leopoldovna, was detested for her German counsellors and relations. As a consequence, shortly after Anna's death, Elizabeth Petrovna, legitimized daughter of Peter the Great, managed to gain the favor of the populace, locked Ivan VI in a dungeon, and exiled his mother. Anna was buried three months later on 15 January 1741, leaving behind uncertainty for the future of Russia.\nLegacy.\nIn the West, Anna's reign was traditionally viewed as a continuation of the transition from the old Muscovy ways to the European court envisioned by Peter the Great. Her severe government was universally unpopular. Within Russia Anna's reign is often referred to as a \"dark era\". Her unpopularity also derived from personality flaws. Even considering the need of Russian rulers to avoid displays of weakness, Anna's rule involved questionable actions towards her subjects. She was known to enjoy hunting animals from the palace windows and, on more than a few occasions, humiliated individuals with disabilities. The issues of serfdom, peasant and lower class slavery, taxation, dishonesty, and rule through constant fear persisted in Russia during her rule. Her empire was described by Lefort, the Saxon minister, as being \"comparable to a storm-threatened ship, manned by a pilot and crew who are all drunk or asleep. . . with no considerable future\". Anna's war with Turkey, economic issues, and conspiracy revolving around her accession all bring to light an ominous glow of the empress' reign. She restored the court in St. Petersburg and brought Russia's political atmosphere back to where Peter the Great had intended, and its grandeur was almost unmatched in Europe or Asia; but such lavish court life was overshadowed by the thousands of men slaughtered in war.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44383", "revid": "49818435", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44383", "title": "Gunderic", "text": "King of the Vandals (c. 379 \u2013 428)\nGunderic (; c. 379 \u2013 428), King of Hasding Vandals (407\u2013418), then King of Vandals and Alans (418\u2013428), led the Hasding Vandals, a Germanic tribe originally residing near the Oder River, to take part in the barbarian invasions of the Western Roman Empire in the fifth century.\nHistory.\nHe was a son of King Godigisel, the Hasdingi's Vandal king when his people breached the Rhine river frontier of the Empire on the last day of 406. During that year, the Vandals had become heavily involved in a war with the Franks, who were already settled as allies of the Romans, and who attempted to keep the Vandals out. Godigisel was killed in the fighting and Gunderic succeeded him.\nGunderic and his people ultimately crossed the Pyrenees into the Iberian Peninsula in October 409. With the Hasdingi portion of the Vandals he established the Kingdom in the Roman province of Gallaecia (north-western Iberia). They were driven out by the Visigoths in 418 on the orders of the Romans (the Visigoths were recalled and settled as a reward for their service in Aquitania). In 418 Attaces, the king of the Alans, fell in battle against the Visigoths, who at the time were allies of Rome, in Hispania, and most of the surviving Alans appealed to Gunderic who accepted their request and thus became King of the Vandals and Alans. \nIn 420 Comes Hispaniarum attacked the Vandals who had gone to war with the Sueves in Galicia where the tribes were confined after the Visigoths had severely defeated them in 418. The imperial vicar (head of a diocese) defeated Maximus, son of earlier usurper Gerontius (409), in 420\u2013421, but it resulted in the Vandals moving south to Baetica. Conflicts with the Suebi drove him into Baetica in the south of Hispania, where he joined the surviving Silingi portion of the Vandals. The Vandals moved south to Baetica in 420\u20131. They defeated a Roman army, led by magister militum Castinus, outside the walls of Cordoba in 422. \nThe Vandals attacked Mauretania Tingitana, the Balearics, and sacked Cartagena and Seville in 425. They did not remain in these cities. Gunderic re-took the city in 428. The Vandals departed Spain in 429 and for 10 years Roman Spain was intact except for Galicia under the control of the Sueves. Hydatius writes that in 428 Gunderic laid \"hands on the church of that very city, by the will of God he was seized by a demon and died.\" It is unclear how Gunderic died, however it is theorized that Hydatius' writing was in reference to Gunderic's attempt to convert a Catholic church to an Arian church. \nThe attempt was short-lived: not long after his attempt to seize the church in Hispalis, he unexpectedly died. After Gunderic died early in 428, the Vandals elected his half-brother Genseric as his successor, and Genseric left Iberia to the Visigoths in favor of invading Roman Africa.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44384", "revid": "514304", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44384", "title": "TLS", "text": "TLS may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44385", "revid": "16849003", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44385", "title": "Muggle", "text": "People without magical abilities in the Harry Potter universe\nIn J. K. Rowling's \"Harry Potter\" series, a Muggle () is a person who lacks any sort of magical ability and was not born in a magical family. Muggles can also be described as people who do not have any magical blood inside them. It differs from the term \"Squib\", which refers to a person with one or more magical parents yet without any magical power or ability, and from the term Muggle-born (or the derogatory and offensive term \"mudblood\", which is used to imply the supposed impurity of Muggle blood), which refers to a person with magical abilities but with non-magical parents. Equivalent terms used by the in-universe magic community of the United States include No-Maj and No-Majs (short for \"no magic\"); French equivalents are Non-Magiques and No-Majes. Other terms are Can't-Spells and Non-Wizards.\nUsage in \"Harry Potter\".\nThe term \"Muggle\" is sometimes used in a pejorative manner in the novels. Since \"Muggle\" refers to a person who is not a member of the magical community, Muggles are simply ordinary human beings without any magical abilities and almost always with no awareness of the existence of magic. Witches and wizards with non-magical parents are called \"Muggle-borns\". There have also been some children known to have been born to one magical and one non-magical parent. People of this mixed parentage are called \"half-bloods\"; magical people with any Muggle ancestry on the one side or the other are half-bloods as well. The most prominent Muggle-born in the \"Harry Potter\" series is Hermione Granger, who was born to Muggles of undisclosed names. Witches and wizards with all-magical heritage are called \"pure bloods\".\nIn the \"Harry Potter\" novels, Muggles are often portrayed as foolish, sometimes befuddled characters, who are completely oblivious to the wizarding world that exists in their midst. If, by unfortunate means, Muggles do happen to observe the working of magic, the Ministry of Magic sends Obliviators to cast Memory Charms upon them, causing them to forget the event.\nSome Muggles are aware of the wizarding world. These include Muggle parents of magical children, such as Hermione Granger's parents, the Muggle Prime Minister (and predecessors), the Dursley family (Harry Potter's unsupportive non-magical and only living relatives), and the non-magical spouses of some witches and wizards.\nRowling has created the word \"Muggle\" from \"mug\", an English term for someone who is easily fooled.\nOther usages.\nThe word \"muggle\", or \"muggles\", is now used in various contexts in which its meaning is similar to the sense in which it appears in the Harry Potter book series. Generally speaking, it is used by members of a group to describe those outside the group, comparable to \"civilian\" as used by military personnel. Whereas in the books \"muggle\" is consistently capitalized, in other uses it is often predominantly lowercase.\nTrademark lawsuit.\nNancy Stouffer, author of \"The Legend of Rah and the Muggles\" (1984) accused Rowling of a trademark violation for the use of the term \"muggles\", as well as copyright violations for some similarities to her book. Rowling and Scholastic, her publisher, sued for declaratory judgment and won on a summary judgment motion, based on a lack of likelihood of confusion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44387", "revid": "34329925", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44387", "title": "Socrates of Constantinople", "text": "Greek Christian church historian\nSocrates of Constantinople (c. 380 \u2013 after 439), also known as Socrates Scholasticus (), was a 5th-century Greek Christian church historian, a contemporary of Sozomen and Theodoret.\nHe is the author of a \"Historia Ecclesiastica\" (\"Church History\", \u1f18\u03ba\u03ba\u03bb\u03b7\u03c3\u03b9\u03b1\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03ae \u1f39\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03c1\u03af\u03b1) which covers the history of late ancient Christianity during the years 305 to 439.\nLife.\nHe was born in Constantinople. Even in ancient times, nothing seems to have been known of his life except what can be gathered from notices in his \"Historia Ecclesiastica\", which departed from its ostensible model, Eusebius of Caesarea, in emphasizing the place of the emperor in church affairs and in giving secular as well as church history.\nSocrates' teachers, noted in his prefaces, were the grammarians Helladius and Ammonius, who came to Constantinople from Alexandria, where in 391 they had been involved in a violent revolt that culminated in the destruction of the Serapeum of Alexandria. \nIt is not proved that Socrates of Constantinople later profited from the teachings of the sophist Troilus. No certainty exists as to Socrates' precise vocation, though it may be inferred from his work that he was a layman.\nIn later years, he traveled and visited, among other places, Paphlagonia and Cyprus.\nThe \"Historia Ecclesiastica\".\nThe history covers the years 305 to 439, and experts believe it was finished in 439 or soon thereafter, and certainly during the lifetime of Emperor Theodosius II, i.e., before 450. The purpose of the history is to continue the work of Eusebius of Caesarea (1.1). It relates in simple Greek language what the Church experienced from the days of Constantine to the writer's time. Ecclesiastical dissensions occupy the foreground, for when the Church is at peace, there is nothing for the church historian to relate (7.48.7). In the preface to Book 5, Socrates defends dealing with Arianism and with political events in addition to writing about the church.\nSocrates' account is in many respects well-balanced. He is careful not to use hyperbolic titles when referring to prominent personalities in the church and the government and he even criticizes Eusebius for his excessive praises to Emperor Constantine the Great in his \"Vita Constantini\".\nThe \"Historia Ecclesiastica\" is one of the few sources of information about Hypatia, the female mathematician and philosopher of Alexandria, who was brutally murdered by a mob, allegedly by order of Patriarch Cyril of Alexandria. Socrates presents Hypatia's murder as entirely politically motivated and makes no mention of any role that Hypatia's neoplatonism might have played in her death, arguing instead that she was killed for supporting local prefect Orestes in his political struggle against Cyril. Socrates unequivocally condemns the actions of the mob, declaring, \"Surely nothing can be farther from the spirit of Christianity than the allowance of massacres, fights, and transactions of that sort.\"\nSocrates is often assumed to have been a follower of Novatianism, but this is based on the fact that he gives a lot of details about the Novatianists, and speaks of them in generous terms, as he does of Arians and other groups. He speaks of himself as belonging to the church.\nSocrates asserts that he owed the impulse to write his work to a certain Theodorus, who is alluded to in the proemium to the second book as \"a holy man of God\" and seems therefore to have been a monk or one of the higher clergy. The contemporary historians Sozomen and Theodoret were combined with Socrates in a sixth-century compilation, which has obscured their differences until recently, when their individual portrayals of the series of Christian emperors were distinguished one from another and contrasted by Hartmut Leppin, \"Von Constantin dem Gro\u00dfen zu Theodosius II\" (G\u00f6ttingen 1996).\nEditions and translations.\nThe \"Historia Ecclesiastica\" was first edited in Greek by Robert Estienne, on the basis of \"Codex Regius\" 1443 (Paris, 1544); a translation into Latin by Johannes Christophorson (1612) is important for its variant readings. The fundamental early modern edition, however, was produced by Henricus Valesius (Henri Valois) (Paris, 1668), who used the \"Codex Regius\", a Codex Vaticanus, and a Codex Florentinus, and also employed the indirect tradition of Theodorus Lector (\"Codex Leonis Alladi\").\nThe text was edited in \"Patrologia Graeca\" vol. 67 (online at https://). The new critical edition of the text is edited by G. C. Hansen, and published in the series \"Die Griechischen Christlichen Schriftsteller\" (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1995). An English translation by A. C. Zenos was published in \" Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers\", Second Series, Vol. 2. Edited by Philip Schaff and Henry Wallace. (Buffalo, NY: Christian Literature Publishing Co., 1890) (online editions: https:// https://https://. More recently (2004-2007), Socrates' \"History\" has been published in four bilingual (Greek/Latin and French) volumes by Pierre Maraval in the \"Sources Chr\u00e9tiennes\" collection.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44389", "revid": "28550269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44389", "title": "Gregory the Great", "text": ""}
{"id": "44390", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44390", "title": "Hallowe'en documents", "text": ""}
{"id": "44392", "revid": "49917098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44392", "title": "Andrzej Wajda", "text": "Polish film director (1926\u20132016)\nAndrzej Witold Wajda (; 6 March 1926 \u2013 9 October 2016) was a Polish film and theatre director. Recipient of an Honorary Oscar, the Palme d'Or, as well as Honorary Golden Lion and Honorary Golden Bear Awards, he was a prominent member of the \"Polish Film School\". He was known especially for his trilogy of war films consisting of \"A Generation\" (1955), \"Kana\u0142\" (1957) and \"Ashes and Diamonds\" (1958).\nHe is considered one of the world's most renowned filmmakers, whose works chronicled his native country's political and social evolution and dealt with the myths of Polish national identity offering insightful analyses of the universal element of the Polish experience \u2013 the struggle to maintain dignity under the most trying circumstances.\nFour of his films have been nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film: \"The Promised Land\" (1975), \"The Maids of Wilko\" (1979), \"Man of Iron\" (1981) and \"Katy\u0144\" (2007).\nEarly life.\nWajda was born in Suwa\u0142ki, the son of Aniela (n\u00e9e Bia\u0142ow\u0105s), a school teacher, and Jakub Wajda, an army officer. In 1942, he joined the Polish resistance and served in the Home Army. After the war, he studied to be a painter at Krak\u00f3w's Academy of Fine Arts before entering the \u0141\u00f3d\u017a Film School, where many famous Polish directors, such as Roman Polanski, studied.\nEarly career.\nAfter Wajda's apprenticeship to director Aleksander Ford, Wajda was given the opportunity to direct his own film. \"A Generation\" (1955) was his first major film. At the same time Wajda began his work as a director in theatre, including Michael V. Gazzo's \"A Hatful of Rain\" (1959), \"Hamlet\" (1960), and \"Two for the Seesaw\" (1963) by William Gibson. Wajda made two more increasingly accomplished films, which developed further the anti-war theme of \"A Generation\": \"Kana\u0142\" (1957) (Special Jury Prize at Cannes Film Festival in 1957, shared with Bergman's \"The Seventh Seal\") and \"Ashes and Diamonds\" (1958) with Zbigniew Cybulski.\nWhile capable of turning out mainstream commercial fare (often dismissed as \"trivial\" by critics), Wajda was more interested in works of allegory and symbolism, and certain symbols (such as setting fire to a glass of liquor, representing the flame of youthful idealism that was extinguished by the war) recur often in his films. \"Lotna\" (1959) is full of surrealistic and symbolic scenes and shots, but he managed to explore other styles, making new wave style \"Innocent Sorcerers\" (1960) with music by Krzysztof Komeda, starring Roman Polanski and Jerzy Skolimowski (who was also a co-script writer) in the episodes. Then Wajda directed \"Samson\" (1961), the story of Jacob, a Jewish boy, who wants to survive during the Nazi occupation of Poland. In the mid-1960s Wajda made \"The Ashes\" (1965) based on the novel by Polish writer Stefan \u017beromski and directed several films abroad: \"Love at Twenty\" (1962), \"Siberian Lady Macbeth\" (1962) and \"Gates To Paradise\" (1968).\nIn 1967, Cybulski, a popular screen actor at the time, was killed in a train accident, whereupon the director articulated his grief with \"Everything for Sale\" (1968), considered one of his most personal films, using the technique of a film-within-a-film to tell the story of a film maker's life and work. The following year he directed an ironic satire \"Hunting Flies\" with the script written by Janusz G\u0142owacki and a short television film called \"Przek\u0142adaniec\" based on a screenplay by Stanis\u0142aw Lem.\nArtistic recognition.\nThe 1970s were the most prolific artistic period for Wajda, who made over ten films: \"Landscape After the Battle\" (1970), \"Pilate and Others\" (1971), \"The Wedding\" (1972) \u2013 the film version of the famous Polish poetic drama by Stanis\u0142aw Wyspia\u0144ski, \"The Promised Land\" (1975), \"Man of Marble\" (1977) \u2013 the film takes place in two time periods, the first film showing the episodes of Stalinism in Poland, \"The Shadow Line\" (1976), \"Rough Treatment\" (a.k.a. \"Without Anesthesia\") (1978), \"The Orchestra Conductor\" (1980), starring John Gielgud; and two psychological and existential films based upon novels by Jaros\u0142aw Iwaszkiewicz \u2013 \"The Birch Wood\" (1970) and \"The Maids of Wilko\" (1979). \"The Birch Wood\" was entered into the 7th Moscow International Film Festival where Wajda won the Golden Prize for Direction.\nWajda continued to work in theatre, including \"Play Strindberg\", Dostoyevsky's \"The Possessed\" and \"Nastasja Filippovna\" \u2013 Wajda's version of \"The Idiot\", \"November Night\" by Wyspia\u0144ski, \"The Immigrants\" by S\u0142awomir Mro\u017cek, \"The Danton Affair\" or \"The Dreams of Reason\".\nWajda's later commitment to Poland's burgeoning Solidarity movement was manifested in \"Man of Iron\" (1981), a thematic sequel to \"The Man of Marble\", with Solidarity leader Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa appearing as himself in the latter film. The film sequence is loosely based on the life of Anna Walentynowicz, a hero of socialist labor Stakhanovite turned dissident and alludes to events from real life, such as the firing of Walentynowicz from the shipyard and the underground wedding of Bogdan Borusewicz to Alina Pienkowska. The director's involvement in this movement would prompt the Polish government to force Wajda's production company out of business. For the film, Wajda won the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival.\nIn 1983, he directed \"Danton\", starring G\u00e9rard Depardieu in the title role, a film set in 1794 (Year Two of the French Republican calendar) dealing with the Post-Revolutionary Terror. Made against the backdrop of the martial law in Poland, Wajda showed how easily revolution can change into terror and start to \"eat its own children.\" For this film Wajda was honoured with the Louis Delluc Prize and a C\u00e9sar Award for Best Director. In the 1980s, he also made \"A Love in Germany\" (1983) featuring Hanna Schygulla, \"The Chronicle of Amorous Incidents\" (1986) an adaptation of Tadeusz Konwicki's novel and \"The Possessed\" (1988) based on Dostoyevsky's novel. In theatre he prepared an interpretation of Dostoyevsky's \"Crime and Punishment\" (1984) and other unique spectacles such as \"Antygone\", his sequential \"Hamlet\" versions and the early 20th-century Jewish play \"The Dybbuk\". In 1989, he was the president of the jury at the 16th Moscow International Film Festival.\nCareer after 1990.\nIn 1990, Andrzej Wajda was honoured by the European Film Awards for his lifetime achievement, only the third director to be so honoured, after Federico Fellini and Ingmar Bergman. In the early 1990s, he was elected a senator and also appointed artistic director of Warsaw's Teatr Powszechny. He continued to make films set during World War II, including \"Korczak\" (1990), a story about a Jewish-Polish doctor who takes care of orphan children, in \"The Crowned-Eagle Ring\" (1993) and \"Holy Week\" (1995) specifically on Jewish-Polish relations. In 1994, Wajda presented his own film version of Dostoyevsky's novel The Idiot in the movie \"Nastasja\", starring Japanese actor Tamasoburo Bando in the double role of Prince Mishkin and Nastasja. The film's cinematographer was Pawe\u0142 Edelman, who subsequently became one of Wajda's great collaborators. In 1996, the director went in a different direction with \"Miss Nobody\", a coming-of-age drama that explored the darker and more spiritual aspects of a relationship between three high-school girls. In 1999, Wajda released the epic film \"Pan Tadeusz\", based on the epic poem of the Polish 19th-century romantic poet Adam Mickiewicz.\nA year later, at the 2000 Academy Awards, Wajda was presented with an honorary Oscar for his contribution to world cinema; he subsequently donated the award to Krak\u00f3w's Jagiellonian University. In 2002, Wajda directed \"The Revenge\", a film version of his 1980s comedy theatre production, with Roman Polanski in one of the main roles. In February 2006, Wajda received an Honorary Golden Bear for lifetime achievement at the Berlin International Film Festival. In 2007, \"Katy\u0144\" was released, a well-received film about the Katy\u0144 massacre, in which Wajda's father was murdered; the director also shows the dramatic situation of those who await their relatives (mothers, wives and children). The film was nominated for the Best Foreign Language Film Oscar in 2008.\nWajda followed it with \"Sweet Rush\" (2009) with Krystyna Janda as a main character. It is partly based upon a short Jaros\u0142aw Iwaszkiewicz novel. The film is dedicated to Edward K\u0142osi\u0144ski, Janda's husband, a cinematographer and a long-time Wajda friend and co-worker who died of cancer the same year. For this film Wajda was awarded by Alfred Bauer Prize at the 2009 Berlin International Film Festival. He received the Prix FIPRESCI during the 2009 European Film Awards. \"Walesa. Man of Hope\" (\"Wa\u0142\u0119sa. Cz\u0142owiek z nadziei\"), Wajda's biography of Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa, based on a script by Janusz G\u0142owacki and starring Robert Wi\u0119ckiewicz in the title role, had its world premiere at the 2013 Venice International Film Festival. His last film was the 2016 \"Afterimage\" (\"Powidoki\"), starring Bogus\u0142aw Linda as Polish avant-garde painter W\u0142adys\u0142aw Strzemi\u0144ski.\nWajda founded The Japanese Centre of Art and Technology in Krak\u00f3w in 1994. In 2002, he founded and led his own film school with Polish filmmaker Wojciech Marczewski. Students of Wajda School take part in different film courses led by famous European film makers.\nPersonal life and death.\nWajda was married four times. His third wife was actress Beata Tyszkiewicz with whom he had a daughter, Karolina (born 1967). His fourth wife was the theatre costume designer and actress Krystyna Zachwatowicz.\nIn September 2009, Wajda called for the release of director Roman Polanski after Polanski was arrested in Switzerland in relation to his 1977 charge for drugging and raping a 13-year-old girl.\nWajda died in Warsaw on 9 October 2016 at the age of 90 from pulmonary failure. He was buried at Salwator Cemetery in Krak\u00f3w.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44393", "revid": "1299509784", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44393", "title": "Claudius Gothicus", "text": "Roman emperor from 268 to 270\nMarcus Aurelius Claudius \"Gothicus\" (10 May 214 \u2013 August/September 270), also known as Claudius II, was Roman emperor from 268 to 270. During his reign he fought successfully against the Alemanni and decisively defeated the Goths at the Battle of Naissus. He died after succumbing to a \"pestilence\", possibly the Plague of Cyprian that had ravaged the provinces of the Empire.\nEarly life and origin.\nThe most significant source for Claudius II (and the only one regarding his early life) is the collection of imperial biographies called the \"Historia Augusta\". However, his story, like the rest of the \"Historia Augusta\", is riddled with fabrications and obsequious praises. In 4th century, Claudius was declared a relative of Constantine the Great's father, Constantius Chlorus, and, consequently, of the ruling dynasty. The \"Historia Augusta\" should be used with extreme caution and supplemented with information from other sources: the works of Aurelius Victor, Pseudo-Aurelius Victor, Eutropius, Orosius, Joannes Zonaras, and Zosimus, as well as coins and inscriptions.\nThe future emperor Marcus Aurelius Claudius was born on 10 May 214. Some researchers suggest a later date of 219 or 220. Nevertheless, most historians adhere to the first version. Moreover, as the 6th century Byzantine historian John Malalas reports, at the time of his death Claudius was 56 years old. The birthplace of Claudius is unknown. He might have been born somewhere near the Danube.\nAccording to the fourth-century \"Epitome de Caesaribus\", he was thought to be a bastard son of Gordian II, although this is doubted by some historians.\nThe \"Historia Augusta\" refers to him as a member of the \"gens Flavia\", likely an attempt to further connect him with the future emperor Flavius Valerius Constantius.\nRise to power.\nBefore coming to power, Claudius served with the Roman army, where he had a successful career and secured appointments to the highest military posts. The \"Historia Augusta\" says that he was a military tribune in the reign of Decius (249\u2013251). The same source describes his being sent to defend Thermopylae, in connection with which the governor of Achaea was ordered to supply him with soldiers. However, there is no evidence that the Goths who invaded at that time threatened the region, since their activities did not extend beyond the middle Balkans. Most likely the account in the \"Historia Augusta\" is an anachronism, since it is known that the garrison at Thermopylae appeared in 254. Historian Fran\u00e7ois Pashau suggests that this passage was invented in order to contrast the successful pagan commander Claudius with the unlucky Christian generals who allowed the ruin of Greece by the Gothic leader Alaric I in 396. In addition, Trebellius Pollio reveals that Decius rewarded Claudius after he demonstrated his strength while fighting another soldier at the Games of Mars.\nHis troops then proclaimed him emperor amid charges, never proven, that he murdered his predecessor Gallienus. However, he soon showed himself to be less than bloodthirsty, as he asked the Roman Senate to spare the lives of Gallienus's family and supporters. He was less magnanimous toward Rome's enemies and it was to this that he owed his popularity.\nIt is possible Claudius gained his position and the respect of the soldiers by being physically strong and especially cruel. A legend tells of Claudius knocking out a horse's teeth with one punch. When Claudius performed as a wrestler in the 250s, he supposedly knocked out the teeth of his opponent when his genitalia had been grabbed in the match.\nClaudius, like Maximinus Thrax before him, was of barbarian birth. After a period of failed aristocratic Roman emperors following Maximinus's death, Claudius was the first in a series of tough \"soldier emperors\" who would eventually restore the Empire after the Crisis of the Third Century.\nDownfall of Gallienus.\nDuring the 260s, the breakup of the Roman Empire into three distinct governing entities (the core Roman Empire, the Gallic Empire and the Palmyrene Empire) placed the whole Roman imperium in a precarious position. Gallienus was seriously weakened by his failure to defeat Postumus in the West, and his acceptance of Odaenathus ruling a de facto independent kingdom within the Roman Empire in the East. By 268, this situation had changed, as Odaenathus was assassinated, most likely due to court intrigue, and Gallienus fell victim to a mutiny in his own ranks. Upon the death of Odaenathus, power fell to his younger son, who was dominated by his mother, Zenobia.\nUnder threat of invasion in the Balkans by multiple Germanic tribes, Gallienus's troubles primarily lay with Postumus, whom he could not attack because his attention was required in dealing with an insurrection led by Macrianus and the threats created by the invading Scythians. After four years of delay, Postumus had established some control over the Empire. In 265, when Gallienus and his men crossed the Alps, they defeated and besieged Postumus in an (unnamed) Gallic city. When victory appeared to be near, Gallienus made the mistake of approaching the city walls too closely and was gravely injured, compelling him to cease his campaign against Postumus. Over the next three years, Gallienus's troubles only got worse. The Scythians successfully invaded the Balkans in the early months of 268, and Aureolus, a commander of the Roman cavalry based in Milan, declared himself an ally of Postumus and went so far as to claim the imperial throne for himself.\nAt this time, another invasion was taking place. In 268, a tribe or grouping called the Herulians moved through Asia Minor and then into Greece on a naval expedition. Despite this, scholars assume Gallienus's efforts were focused on Aureolus, the officer who betrayed him, and the defeat of the Herulians was left to his successor, Claudius Gothicus.\nThe death of Gallienus was surrounded by conspiracy and betrayal, as were many emperors' deaths. Different accounts of the incident have been recorded, but they agree that senior officials wanted Gallienus dead. According to two accounts, the prime conspirator was Aurelius Heraclianus, the Praetorian Prefect. One version of the story tells of Heraclianus bringing Claudius into the plot while the account given by the \"Historia Augusta\" exculpates the soon-to-be emperor and adds the prominent general Lucius Aurelius Marcianus into the plot. The removal of Claudius from the conspiracy may be due to his later role as the progenitor of the house of Constantine, a fiction of Constantine's time, and suggests that the original version from which these two accounts derive was current prior to the reign of Constantine. It was written that while sitting down at dinner, Gallienus was told that Aureolus and his men were approaching the camp. Gallienus rushed to the front lines, ready to give orders, when he was struck down by a commander of his cavalry. In a different and more controversial account, Aureolus forges a document in which Gallienus appears to be plotting against his generals and makes sure it falls into the hands of the emperor's senior staff. In this plot, Aurelian is added as a possible conspirator. The tale of his involvement in the conspiracy might be seen as at least partial justification for the murder of Aurelian himself under circumstances that seem remarkably similar to those in this story.\nWhichever story is true, Gallienus was killed in the summer of 268, probably between July and October, and Claudius was chosen by the army outside of Milan to succeed him. Accounts tell of people hearing the news of the new emperor, and reacting by murdering Gallienus's family members until Claudius declared he would respect the memory of his predecessor. Claudius had the deceased emperor deified and buried in a family tomb on the Appian Way. The traitor Aureolus was not treated with the same reverence, as he was killed by his besiegers after a failed attempt to surrender.\nReign.\nAt the time of Claudius's accession, the Roman Empire was in serious danger from several incursions, both inside and outside its borders. The most pressing of these was an invasion of Illyricum and Pannonia by the Goths. Although Gallienus had already inflicted some damage on them at the Battle of Nestus, Claudius, not long after being named emperor, followed this up by winning his greatest victory, and one of the greatest in the history of Roman arms.\nAt the Battle of Naissus, Claudius and his legions routed a huge Gothic army. Together with his cavalry commander, the future Emperor Aurelian, the Romans took thousands of prisoners and destroyed the Gothic cavalry as a force. The victory earned Claudius his surname of \"Gothicus\" (conqueror of the Goths). The Goths were soon driven back across the Danube by Aurelian, and nearly a century passed before they again posed a serious threat to the empire.\nAround the same time, the Alamanni had crossed the Alps and attacked the empire. Claudius responded quickly, routing the Alamanni at the Battle of Lake Benacus in the late fall of 268, a few months after the Battle of Naissus. For this he was awarded the title of \"Germanicus Maximus.\" He then turned on the Gallic Empire, ruled by a pretender for the past eight years and encompassing Britain, Gaul, and the Iberian Peninsula. He won several victories and soon regained control of Hispania and the Rhone river valley of Gaul. This set the stage for the later destruction of the Gallic Empire under Aurelian.\nGovernment and foreign affairs.\nClaudius was not the only man to reap the benefits of holding high office after the death of Gallienus. Before the rule of Claudius Gothicus, there had only been two emperors from the Balkans, but afterwards there would only be one emperor who did not hail from the provinces of Pannonia, Moesia or Illyricum until 378, when Theodosius I from Hispania would take the throne. Four inscriptions provide an insight into the government at the time. The first is a dedication to Aurelius Heraclianus, the prefect involved in the conspiracy against Gallienus, from Traianus Mucianus, who also gave a dedication to Heraclianus's brother, Aurelius Appollinaris, who was the equestrian governor of the province of Thracia in 267\u201368 AD. Because these men shared the family name, Marcus Aurelius, a name given to those made citizens by the constitutio Antoniniana, these men did not come from the imperial \"\u00e9lite\". The third inscription reveals the career of Marcianus, another leading general by the time that Gallienus died. The fourth honours Julius Placidianus, the prefect of the vigiles. Heraclianus, Appollinaris, Placidianus, or Marcianus may not have been of Danubian origin themselves, but none of them were members of the Severan aristocracy, and all of them appear to owe their prominence to their military roles. Marcus Aurelius Probus (another emperor in waiting) was also of Balkan background, and from a family enfranchised in the time of Caracalla.\nAlthough their influence was weakened, there were still a number of men with influence from the older aristocracy. Claudius assumed the consulship in 269 with Paternus, a member of the prominent senatorial family, the Paterni, who had supplied consuls and urban prefects throughout Gallienus's reign, and thus were quite influential. In addition, Flavius Antiochianus, one of the consuls of 270, who was an urban prefect the year before, would continue to hold his office for the following year. A colleague of Antiochianus, Virius Orfitus, also the descendant of a powerful family, would continue to hold influence during his father's term as prefect. Aurelian's colleague as consul was another such man, Pomponius Bassus, a member of one of the oldest senatorial families, as was one of the consuls in 272, Junius Veldumnianus.\nIn his first full year of power, Claudius was greatly assisted by the sudden destruction of the imperium Galliarum. When Ulpius Cornelius Laelianus, a high official under Postumus, declared himself emperor in Germania Superior, in the spring of 269, Postumus defeated him, but in doing so, refused to allow the sack of Mainz, which had served as Laelianus's headquarters. This proved to be his downfall, for out of anger, Postumus's army mutinied and murdered him. Selected by the troops, Marcus Aurelius Marius was to replace Postumus as ruler. Marius's rule did not last long though, as Victorinus, Postumus's praetorian prefect, defeated him. Now emperor of the Gauls, Victorinus was soon in a precarious position, for the Spanish provinces had deserted the Gallic Empire and declared their loyalty to Claudius, while in southern Gaul, Placidianus had captured Grenoble. Luckily, it was there that Placidianus stopped and Victorinus's position stabilized. In the next year, when Autun revolted, declaring itself for Claudius, the central government made no moves to support it. As a result, the city went through a siege, lasting many weeks, until it was finally captured and sacked by Victorinus.\nIt is still unknown why Claudius did nothing to help the city of Autun, but sources tell us his relations with Palmyra were waning in the course of 269. An obscure passage in the \"Historia Augusta\"'s life of Gallienus states that he had sent an army under Aurelius Heraclianus to the region that had been annihilated by Zenobia. But because Heraclianus was not actually in the east in 268 (instead, at this time, he was involved in the conspiracy of Gallienus's death), this cannot be correct. But the confusion evident in this passage, which also places the bulk of Scythian activity during 269 a year earlier, under Gallienus, may stem from a later effort to pile all possible disasters in this year into the reign of the former emperor. This would keep Claudius's record of being an ancestor of Constantine from being tainted. If this understanding of the sources is correct, it might also be correct to see the expedition of Heraclianus to the east as an event of Claudius's time.\nThe victories of Claudius over the Goths would not only make him a hero in Latin tradition, but an admirable choice as an ancestor for Constantine I, who was born at Naissus, the site of Claudius's victory in 269. Claudius is also held in high esteem by Zonaras, whose Greek tradition seems to have been influenced by Latin. For Zosimus, a more reasoned contemporary view shows Claudius as less grand. Claudius's successes in the year 269 were not continued in his next year as emperor. As the Scythians starved in the mountains or surrendered, the legions pursuing them began to see an epidemic spreading throughout the men. Also, Claudius's unwillingness to do anything at the siege of Autun likely provoked a quarrel with Zenobia.\nAlthough it is not proven that the invasion of Gaul was the breaking point between Claudius and Zenobia, the sequence of events point to the siege as an important factor. The issue at hand was the position that Odaenathus held as \"corrector totius orientis\" (imparting overall command of the Roman armies and authority over the Roman provincial governors in the designated region). Vaballathus, the son of Zenobia, was given this title when Zenobia claimed it for him. From then on, tension between the two empires would only get worse. Aurelius Heraclianus's fabled arrival might have been an effort to reassert central control after the death of Odaenathus, but, if so, it failed. Although coins were never minted with the face of Odaenathus, soon after his death coins were made with image of his son \u2013 outstripping his authority under the emperor.\nUnder Zabdas, a Palmyrene army invaded Arabia and moved into Egypt in the late summer. At this time, the prefect of Egypt was Tenagino Probus, described as an able soldier who not only defeated an invasion of Cyrenaica by the nomadic tribes to the south in 269, but also was successful in hunting down Scythian ships in the Mediterranean. However, he did not see the same success in Egypt, for a group allied to the Palmyrene empire, led by Timagenes, undermined Probus, defeated his army, and killed him in a battle near the modern city of Cairo in the late summer of 270.\nGenerally, when a Roman commander is killed it is taken as a sign that a state of war is in existence, and if we can associate the death of Heraclianus in 270, as well as an inscription from Bostra recording the rebuilding of a temple destroyed by the Palmyrene army, then these violent acts could be interpreted the same way. Yet they apparently were not. As David Potter writes, \"The coins of Vaballathus avoid claims to imperial power: he remains vir consularis, rex, imperator, dux Romanorum, a range of titles that did not mimic those of the central government. The status vir consularis was, as we have seen, conferred upon Odaenathus; the title rex, or king, is simply a Latin translation of mlk, or king; imperator in this context simply means \"victorious general\"; and dux Romanorum looks like yet another version of corrector totius orientis\" (Potter, 263). These titles suggest that Odaenathus's position was inheritable. In Roman culture, the status gained in procuring a position could be passed on, but not the position itself. It is possible that the thin line between office and the status that accompanied it were dismissed in the Palmyrene court, especially when the circumstance worked against the interests of a regime that was able to defeat Persia, which a number of Roman emperors had failed to do. Vaballathus stressed the meanings of titles, because in the Palmyrene context, the titles of Odaenathus meant a great deal. When the summer of 270 ended, things were looking very different in the empire than they did a year before. After its success, Gaul was in a state of inactivity and the empire was failing in the east. Insufficient resources plagued the state, as a great deal of silver was used for the antoninianus, which was again diluted.\nDeath.\nClaudius did not live long enough to fulfil his goal of reuniting all the lost territories of the empire. Late in 269 he had travelled to Sirmium and was preparing to go to war against the Vandals, who were raiding in Pannonia. However, he fell victim to the Plague of Cyprian (possibly smallpox), and died early in 270. Before his death, he is thought to have named Aurelian as his successor, though Claudius's brother Quintillus briefly seized power. The Senate immediately deified Claudius as \"Divus Claudius Gothicus\".\nHistorians date Claudius's death in either January, April, August, or September. These discrepancies are the result of the various conflicting sources. The \"Chronograph of 354\" gives Claudius a reign of \"1 year and 4 months\", Jerome and Aurelius Victor both give \"1 year and 9 months\". Some Alexandrian coins have been dated to his third year, suggesting that he died in September 270 (the Coptic calendar began on 29 August). Arthur Stein dated Claudius' death to April, citing a document of Aurelian that he dated to 25 May 270. However, modern scholars believe this document to be dated to 271. The date is strangely given as the \"3rd\" and \"1st year\", which most likely refers to the third year of Claudius and first of Aurelian (who dated his reign from Claudius' death). The last confirmed document is dated to 20 September 270, although another undated papyri could be tentatively dated to October.\nReligion.\nA short history of imperial Rome, entitled \"De Caesaribus\", written by Aurelius Victor in 361, states that Claudius consulted the \"Sibylline Books\" prior to his campaigns against the Goths. Hinting that Claudius \"revived the tradition of the Decii\", Victor illustrates the senatorial view, which saw Claudius's predecessor, Gallienus, as too relaxed when it came to religious policies.\nLinks to the Constantinian dynasty.\nThe unreliable \"Historia Augusta\" reports Claudius and Quintillus having another brother named Crispus and through him a niece, Claudia, who reportedly married Eutropius and was mother to Constantius Chlorus. The same source also gives Claudius the nomina \"Flavius Valerius\" to strengthen his connection to Constantius. Zonaras and Eutropius on the other hand claim Chlorus was Claudia's daughter's son. Historians suspect these accounts to be a genealogical fabrication intended to link the family of Constantine I to that of a well-respected emperor.\nSaint Valentine.\nClaudius Gothicus has been linked to Saint Valentine since the Middle Ages. Contemporary records of his deeds were most probably destroyed during the Diocletianic Persecution in early 4th century and a tale of martyrdom was recorded in \"Passio Marii et Marthae\", a work published in the 5th or 6th century. 20th-century historians agree that the accounts from this period cannot be verified. The legend refers to \"Emperor Claudius\", but Claudius I did not persecute Christians (minus the one mention by Suetonius of Jewish followers of \"Chrestus\" being expelled from Rome; \"see\" Suetonius on Christians), so people believe he was Claudius II even though this emperor spent most of his time warring outside his territory.\nThe legend was retold in later texts, and in the \"Nuremberg Chronicle\" of 1493, involved the Roman priest being martyred during a general persecution of Christians. The text states that St. Valentine was beaten with clubs and finally beheaded for giving aid to Christians in Rome. The \"Golden Legend\" of 1260 recounts how St. Valentine refused to deny Christ before the \"Emperor Claudius\" in 270 and as a result was beheaded. Since then, February 14 marks Valentine's Day, a day set aside by the Christian church in memory of the Roman priest and physician.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44397", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44397", "title": "Defenestrations of Prague", "text": "Incidents of political violence (1419, 1483, 1618)\nThe Defenestrations of Prague (, , ) were three incidents in the history of Bohemia in which people were defenestrated (thrown out of a window). Though already existing in Middle French, the word \"defenestrate\" is believed to have first been used in English in reference to the episodes in Prague in 1618 when the disgruntled Protestant estates threw two royal governors and their secretary out of a window of the Hrad\u010dany Castle and wrote an extensive apologia explaining their action. In the Middle Ages and early modern times, defenestration was not uncommon\u2014the act carried elements of lynching and mob violence in the form of murder committed together. \nThe first governmental defenestration occurred in 1419, the second in 1483 and the third in 1618, although the term \"Defenestration of Prague\" more commonly refers to the third. Often, however, the 1483 event is not recognized as a \"significant defenestration\", which leads to some ambiguity when the 1618 defenestration is referred to as the \"second Prague defenestration\". The first and third defenestrations helped to trigger prolonged religious conflicts, either inside Bohemia (the Hussite Wars, 1st defenestration) or beyond (Thirty Years' War, 3rd defenestration), while the second helped establish a religious peace in the country for 31 years (Peace of Kutn\u00e1 Hora, 2nd defenestration).\n1419 Defenestration of Prague.\nThe First Defenestration of Prague involved the killing of several members of the city council by a crowd of Czech Hussites on 30 July 1419. Jan \u017delivsk\u00fd, the priest of the Church of the Virgin Mary of the Snows, led his congregation on a procession through the streets of Prague to the New Town Hall on Charles Square. The town council members had refused to exchange their Hussite prisoners. While they were marching, a stone was thrown at \u017delivsk\u00fd from the town hall and allegedly hit him. This enraged the mob and they stormed the town hall. Once inside the hall, the group defenestrated the judge, the burgomaster, and several members of the town council, killing them all.\nThe First Defenestration led pro-Hussite Bohemian nobles to take control of Bohemia, and the Pope responded by declaring a crusade against \"Wycliffites, Hussites and all other heretics in Bohemia\", starting the prolonged Hussite Wars.\n1483 Defenestration of Prague.\nThis defenestration took place on 24 September 1483 during the storms of the Prague population during the reign of King Vladislaus II of Hungary. He was king of Bohemia at that time but he became the ruler of Moravia and Hungary only after Matthias Corvinus died in 1490. \nIt was then that the party of the Communion under both kinds, fearing for their influence, carried out a violent coup in the Old and New towns and Mal\u00e1 Strana. The Old Town Burgomaster and the dead bodies of seven New Town councilors were defenestrated from the respective town halls. The coup in Prague contributed to the limitation of ruling power and prevented the resumption of pre-Hussite conditions. \nOn 6 October 1483, three Prague municipalities signed a treaty on unity and common action, which brought the dominion of the Utraquism. The development then led to religious reconciliation and the declaration of equality of both churches at the Kutn\u00e1 Hora Assembly in 1485.\n1618 Defenestration of Prague.\nThis defenestration significantly influenced the history of Europe and led to the Thirty Years' War.\nBackground.\nIn 1555, the Peace of Augsburg had settled religious disputes in the Holy Roman Empire by enshrining the principle of \"Cuius regio, eius religio\", allowing a prince to determine the religion of his subjects. The Kingdom of Bohemia since 1526 had been governed by Habsburg kings, who did not force their Catholic religion on their largely Protestant subjects. In 1609, Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor and King of Bohemia (1576\u20131612), increased Protestant rights. He was increasingly viewed as unfit to govern, and other members of the Habsburg dynasty declared his younger brother, Matthias, to be family head in 1606. Matthias began to gradually wrest territory from Rudolf, beginning with Hungary. In 1609, to strengthen his hold on Bohemia, Rudolf issued the \"Letter of Majesty\", which granted Bohemia's largely Protestant estates the right to freely exercise their religion, essentially setting up a Protestant Bohemian state church controlled by the estates, \"dominated by the towns and rural nobility\". Upon Rudolf's death, Matthias succeeded in the rule of Bohemia (1612\u20131619) and extended his offer of more legal and religious concessions to Bohemia, relying mostly on the advice of his chancellor, Bishop Melchior Klesl.\nConflict was precipitated by two factors: Matthias, already aging, and without children, made his cousin, Ferdinand of Styria, his heir and had him elected king in 1617. Ferdinand was a proponent of the Catholic Counter-Reformation and not likely to be well-disposed to Protestantism or Bohemian freedoms. Bohemian Protestants opposed the royal government as they interpreted the Letter of Majesty to extend not only to the land controlled by the nobility or self-governing towns but also to the king's own lands. Whereas Matthias and Klesl were prepared to appease these demands, Ferdinand was not; in 1618 he forced the Emperor to order the cessation of construction of some Protestant chapels on royal land. When the Bohemian estates protested against this order, Ferdinand had their assembly dissolved.\nDefenestration.\nOn 23 May 1618, four Catholic lords regent, Count Jaroslav Bo\u0159ita of Martinice, Count Vilem Slavata of Chlum, Adam II von Sternberg (who was the supreme burgrave), and Matthew Leopold Popel Lobkowitz (who was the grand prior), arrived at the Bohemian Chancellery at 8:30 am. After preparing the meeting hall, members of the dissolved assembly of the three main Protestant estates gathered at 9:00 am, led by Count Thurn, who had been deprived of his post as castellan (burgrave) of Karl\u0161tejn Castle by the Emperor. The Protestant lords' agenda was to clarify whether the four regents present were responsible for persuading the Emperor to order the cessation of Protestant church construction on royal lands. According to the Count of Martinice himself:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBefore the regents gave any answer, they requested that the Protestants give them the opportunity to confer with their superior, Adam von Waldstein, who was not present. If they were given the opportunity, the Protestants were to receive an official answer to their grievance by the next Friday (the encounter took place on the eve of Ascension Day, and they all had to observe the holy day). The Protestant lords, however, demanded an immediate answer. Two regents, Adam II von Sternberg and Matthew Leopold Popel Lobkowitz, were declared innocent by the Protestant Estate holders, deemed to be too pious to have any responsibility in the preparation of the Emperor's letter. They were removed from the room; before leaving, Adam II von Sternberg made it clear that they \"did not advise anything that was contrary to the Letter of Majesty\". This left Count Vil\u00e9m Slavata of Chlum and Count Jaroslav Bo\u0159ita of Martinice (who had replaced Thurn as castellan), both known Catholic hard-liners, and Philip Fabricius, the secretary to the regents. They eventually acknowledged responsibility for the letter and, presuming they would only be arrested, welcomed any punishment the Protestants had planned.\nCount von Thurn turned to both Martinice and Slavata and said, \"You are enemies of us and of our religion, have desired to deprive us of our Letter of Majesty, have horribly plagued your Protestant subjects... and have tried to force them to adopt your religion against their wills or have had them expelled for this reason.\" Then to the crowd of Protestants, he continued, \"Were we to keep these men alive, then we would lose the Letter of Majesty and our religion... for there can be no justice to be gained from or by them\". Shortly thereafter, the two regents and their secretary were defenestrated, but they survived the fall from the third floor. Catholics maintained the men were saved by angels or by the intercession of the Virgin Mary, who caught them; later Protestant pamphleteers asserted that they survived due to falling onto a dung heap, a story unknown to contemporaries and probably coined in response to divine intervention claims. Philip Fabricius was later ennobled by the Emperor and granted the title \"Baron von Hohenfall\" (literally 'Baron of Highfall').\nAftermath.\nImmediately after the defenestration, the Protestant estates and Catholic Habsburgs started gathering allies for war. After the death of Matthias in 1619, Ferdinand II was elected Holy Roman Emperor. At the same time, the Bohemian estates deposed him as King of Bohemia and replaced him with Frederick V, Elector Palatine, a leading Calvinist and son-in-law of the Protestant James VI and I, King of Scotland, England and Ireland.\nBecause they had deposed a properly chosen king, who also happened to be emperor, the Protestants could not gather the international support they needed for war. Just two years after the defenestration, Ferdinand and the Catholics regained power in the Battle of White Mountain on November 8, 1620. This became known as the first battle in the Thirty Years' War.\nThere was plundering and pillaging in Prague for weeks following the battle. Several months later, twenty-seven nobles and citizens were tortured and executed in the Old Town Square. Twelve heads were impaled on iron hooks and hung from the Old Town Bridge Tower as a warning. This contributed to the resentment that gave rise to the Thirty Years' War.\nFurther defenestrations.\nMore events of defenestration have occurred in Prague during its history, but they are not usually called \"defenestrations of Prague\".\nSometimes, the name \"the fourth\" or \"the third defenestration of Prague\" is used, although it has no standard meaning. For example, it has been used to describe the death of Jan Masaryk, who was found below the bathroom window of the building of the Czechoslovak Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 10 March 1948. The official report listed the death as a suicide. However, it was widely believed he was murdered, either by the nascent communist government in which he served as a non-partisan foreign minister, or by the Soviet secret services. A Prague police report in 2004 concluded after forensic research that at least one other person was involved in Masaryk's death. This report was seemingly corroborated in 2006 when a Russian journalist said that his mother knew the Russian intelligence officer who defenestrated Masaryk. However, a more recent investigation opened in 2019 again called those findings into question, with new research claiming that Masaryk fell not from the bathroom window, but from the adjacent exterior ledge. That investigation was shelved in 2021, with investigators citing a continuing lack of sufficient evidence to make conclusive determinations regarding the events of Masaryk's death.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44399", "revid": "2731577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44399", "title": "Conrad II, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "Holy Roman Emperor from 1027 to 1039\nConrad II (, c.\u2009990 \u2013 4 June 1039), also known as Conrad the Elder and Conrad the Salic, was the emperor of the Holy Roman Empire from 1027 until his death in 1039. The first of a succession of four Salian emperors, who reigned for one century until 1125, Conrad ruled the kingdoms of Germany (from 1024), Italy (from 1026) and Burgundy (from 1033).\nThe son of Franconian count Henry of Speyer (also Henry of Worms) and Adelaide of Metz of the \"Matfriding dynasty\", that had ruled the Duchy of Lorraine from 959 until 972, Conrad inherited the titles of count of Speyer and Worms during childhood after his father had died around the year 990. He extended his influence beyond his inherited lands, as he came into favour of the princes of the kingdom. When the imperial dynastic line was left without a successor after Emperor Henry II's death in 1024, on 4 September an assembly of the imperial princes appointed the 34-year-old Conrad king (\"Rex romanorum\").\nConrad II adopted many aspects of his Ottonian predecessor Henry II regarding the role and organisation of the Church as well as general rulership practices, which in turn had been associated with Charlemagne. While the emperor was not anti-monastic, he immediately abandoned the favouritism that had been shown to men of the Church under Henry II. In Italy, he initially relied on the bishops (mostly of German origin) to maintain imperial power. Beginning with his second Italian expedition in 1036, he changed his strategy and managed to win the support of the \"valvassores\" (lesser nobles) and the military elite, who challenged the power of the bishops. His reign marked a high point of medieval imperial rule during a relatively peaceful period for the empire. Upon the death of the childless King Rudolph III of Burgundy in 1032, Conrad claimed dominion over the Kingdom of Burgundy, conquered it with German and Italian troops, and incorporated it into the empire. The three kingdoms (Germany, Italy and Burgundy) formed the basis of the empire as the \"royal triad\" (\"regna tria\").\nEarly life.\nFamily background.\nThe origins of the Salian dynasty can be traced back to Count Werner V of Worms, a Frankish nobleman from the Duchy of Franconia to the east of the Rhine. His son, Conrad the Red, succeeded him as Count in 941. King Otto I (the future Holy Roman Emperor) elevated him to Duke of Lorraine in 944. He subsequently married Liutgarde, one of Otto's daughters, in 947 and rose to become one of the king's closest allies. The relationship, however, deteriorated, when Otto refused to honour a peace treaty that Conrad, as Otto's representative, had negotiated with Berengar II of Italy. Conrad also resented the growing influence of Otto's brother Henry I of Bavaria, whom he regarded as a threat to his position. In 953 Conrad joined the king's son Liudolf in rebellion against Otto. The rebellion was crushed and Conrad was stripped of his ducal title. Conrad and Otto eventually reconciled. Conrad fought alongside Otto and fell in the decisive Battle of Lechfeld in 955 that put an end to the Hungarian invasions into Europe. Conrad was succeeded as Count of Worms in 956 by his son Otto of Worms, who was also the grandson of Otto I. In between 965 and 970, Otto of Worms' first son and Conrad II's father Henry of Speyer was born, of whom only very little is known. He died at the age of 20 between 985 and 990. Conrad II's mother was Adelaide of Metz. After Henry's death, Adelaide married a Frankish nobleman and the relationship with Conrad declined.\nIn 978 Emperor Otto II appointed his nephew Otto of Worms as Duke of Carinthia. He succeeded the rebellious Duke Henry I of Carinthia, who had been deposed after the War of the Three Henries. Upon receiving the ducal title, however, Otto lost his countship at Worms, which was given to Bishop Hildebald, emperor Otto II's imperial chancellor. When Otto II died suddenly in 983, his infant son Otto III succeeded him, with his mother Theophanu serving as regent. Theophanu sought to reconcile the imperial house with Henry I, restoring him as Duke of Carinthia in 985, with Otto of Worms allowed to regain his ancestral position as Count of Worms. However, Otto was allowed to style himself \"Duke of Worms\" and his original territory was expanded according to his rank. Otto of Worms loyally served the new Emperor and received the March of Verona in 955, as the actual Duchy of Carinthia was given to Henry IV of Bavaria. In 996, Otto III invested Otto of Worms' son Bruno as Pope Gregory V. When Emperor Otto III died in 1002, both Otto of Worms, Conrad's grandfather, and Henry IV became eligible for Kingship of Germany. In a compromise, Otto withdrew and in return received the Duchy of Carinthia from the newly elected king Henry IV, who ruled as \"Henry II of Germany\". As a result, Otto of Worms renounced his fiefs at Worms to Bishop Burchard of Worms, a long-time political rival.\nAfter the early death of his uncle Conrad I, Duke of Carinthia, Conrad's infant son, Conrad II, Duke of Carinthia the Younger, was named Count of Worms by Emperor Henry II while the Duchy of Carinthia passed to Adalbero of Eppenstein due to Conrad the Younger's infancy. Conrad the Younger was taken care of by his cousin Conrad II, Holy Roman Emperor the Elder.\nAdulthood.\nIn 1016 Conrad married the twice-widowed duchess Gisela of Swabia, daughter of Duke Herman II of Swabia who, in 1002, had unsuccessfully claimed the German throne upon Emperor Otto III's death, and had lost the election to Emperor Henry II. Gisela had first been married to Count Bruno I of Brunswick the same year. Following Bruno's death around 1010, Gisela married Ernest I of the House of Babenberg. Through this marriage, Ernest I inherited the Duchy of Swabia upon the death of Gisela's brother Duke Herman III of Swabia in 1012. The marriage produced two sons: Ernest II and Herman. After the death of Ernest I in 1015, Emperor Henry II named Ernest II as Duke of Swabia. As Gisela's new husband, Conrad hoped to serve as regent for his minor stepson in the administration of the duchy, seeing it as an opportunity to increase his own rank and subsequently make a claim for his own duchy. Emperor Henry II blocked this attempt by placing the guardianship of Ernest II, and regency over Swabia, in the hands of Archbishop Poppo of Trier in 1016. This action further strained the already rough relationship between the imperial House of Otto and the Salian family.\nConrad II's hopes to obtain his own duchy failed, but the marriage to Gisela brought him wealth. Her mother, Gerberga of Burgundy, was the daughter of reigning Burgundian king Conrad and granddaughter of the late Frankish king Louis IV. Gisela also claimed descent from Charlemagne through both her mother and father. The marriage was opposed by many because of the familial relationship shared by Gisela and Conrad. Both were descendants of King Henry I \u2013 Conrad in the fifth generation and Gisela in the fourth. According to canon law, marriage was forbidden among relatives from the first to the seventh generation. Though Conrad's marriage differed little from the usual practice of the time, strict canonists frowned upon the marriage and Emperor Henry II relied on this violation of canon law when he forced Conrad into temporary exile. During this exile, Gisela bore Conrad a son, the future emperor Henry III, on 28 October 1017. Conrad and Emperor Henry II eventually reconciled and he returned to Germany.\nReign as king.\nRoyal election.\nEmperor Henry II died childless in 1024, bringing an end to the Ottonian dynasty that had ruled Germany since 919. Without a clear successor to the German throne, Henry's widow Cunigunde of Luxembourg ruled as regent while the German dukes gathered to elect a new king. Cunigunde was assisted by her brothers Bishop Dietrich I of Metz and Duke Henry V of Bavaria. Archbishop Aribo of Mainz, the primate of Germany, also assisted Cunigunde.\nOn 4 September 1024, the German princes gathered at Kamba, a historical name for an area on the east banks of the Rhine opposite the modern German town of Oppenheim. Now the location of \"Kamba\" is marked with a small equestrian statue of Conrad II. The chronicler and Conrad's chaplain, Wipo of Burgundy, attended the meeting and documented the event. Archbishop Aribo presided over the assembly. Conrad presented himself as a candidate for election, as did his younger cousin Conrad. Both were descendants of Emperor Otto I by their common grandfather Otto of Worms, son of Liutgarde, one of Otto's daughters. Although further members of the Ottonian dynasty existed, none were seriously considered eligible. The Duchy of Saxony adopted a neutral strategy while the Duchy of Lorraine favoured the younger Conrad. A majority of the assembled princes favoured the elder Conrad, as the father of a seven-year-old son implied a more stable dynastic future for the kingdom. As president of the assembly, Archbishop Aribo cast the first vote and supported the elder Conrad. He was joined by the other clerics in support of him. The secular dukes then cast their votes for the elder Conrad as well. Archbishop Pilgrim of Cologne, Duke Gothelo I of Lower Lorraine and Duke Frederick II of Upper Lorraine did not support him.\nConrad was crowned king of Germany by Archbishop Aribo in Mainz Cathedral on 8 September 1024 at the age of 34. To mark his election, Conrad commissioned the construction of Speyer Cathedral, near his ancestral home of Worms. Construction began in 1030. Archbishop Aribo, as archbishop of Mainz, was already the chancellor of Germany. Conrad wanted to reward the archbishop for his electoral support, so he made Aribo chancellor of Italy as well, making Aribo the second most powerful man in the Holy Roman Empire as the imperial chancellor.\nAribo refused to crown Conrad's wife Gisela as queen as their marriage violated canon law. Conrad refused to accept Archbishop Aribo's position. Archbishop Pilgrim of Cologne saw the situation as an opportunity to restore his relationship with the king, after refusing to support Conrad's election, and he crowned Gisela queen on 21 September 1024. The political reorientation of Pilgrim also weakened the opposition towards the new king.\nEarly reign.\nConrad inherited a kingdom troubled by problems. The dukes of Saxony and Lorraine and his cousin Conrad of Carinthia opposed his rule. In order to strengthen his position, Conrad and Gisela embarked on a royal tour. At Augsburg Conrad received the support of Bishop Bruno and at Strasbourg he acquired the support of Bishop Werner. Both men were brothers of former emperor Henry II and Conrad appointed them to high office at his court. After visiting Cologne Conrad stopped at Aachen, where he, as a successor of the empire's founder Charlemagne, announced that he would continue the tradition of claiming East Francia. The princes of the Duchy of Lorraine rejected his claim, though. Conrad then moved north to Saxony, visiting abbesses Adelaide I of Quedlinburg and Sophia I of Gandersheim, daughters of Emperor Otto II. They supported Conrad, which helped to rally the Saxon nobility behind him. During Christmas at Minden, the Saxon nobles, led by Duke Bernard II, officially recognized him as sovereign. He in turn had vowed to respect and honour the ancient Saxon customs and laws. Conrad and Gisela would remain in Saxony until March 1025, when they moved on to the Duchy of Swabia, celebrating Easter at Augsburg and then proceeded on to the Duchy of Bavaria, spending the feast of Pentecost at Regensburg. The royal couple finally visited Z\u00fcrich, where after ten months they ended their tour. Conrad then entered Burgundy in order to renew the royal claim, that, in 1016, Emperor Henry II had forced the childless Burgundian King Rudolph III to name him as his heir.\nConrad needed to address the longstanding \"Gandersheim Conflict\", as he had assumed the German throne. The decade-old unsettled dispute on who controlled Gandersheim Abbey and its estates dated back to the reign of Emperor Otto III. Both the Archbishop of Mainz and the Bishop of Hildesheim claimed authority over the Abbey, including the right to invest and anoint the abbey's nuns. Though Otto III had once eased tensions among the warring parties by declaring that both bishops would be entitled to anoint the Abbess and her sisters, the conflict still lingered. Archbishop Aribo of Mainz, the new Primate of Germany, counted on Conrad, who was indebted to Aribo for his support during the royal election. In January 1027, the king summoned a synod at Frankfurt to end the dispute, but a conclusion could not be reached. He called another synod in September 1028, which also failed. Only a third synod in 1030 solved the conflict when Bishop Gotthard of Hildesheim renounced his claims in favour of Aribo.\nDuring his royal tour at Augsburg, Conrad and his younger cousin Conrad the Younger engaged in an argument, that, although not entirely clear, was related to the younger Conrad's demands of yet-unpaid compensation that Conrad II had promised him for withdrawing from the 1024 election. The lack of conflict between them after September 1027 suggests that they reconciled by then.\nUnrest in Italy.\nIn Bavaria, Conrad came into contact with members of the Italian ruling elite for the first time. In June 1025, bishops from Northern Italy, led by Archbishop Aribert of Milan, crossed the Alps in order to pay homage to Conrad. In exchange for certain administrative privileges, Aribert agreed to crown Conrad King. However, the situation in Italy had become increasingly unstable after the death of Henry II. Amidst occasional riots, many Italian aristocrats demanded the secession of the Kingdom of Italy from the Holy Roman Empire. The local aristocrats and merchants increasingly considered the idea of Frankish ultramontan protection against Saracen and Byzantine threats to be obsolete. The Italian throne was now viewed as vacant and not Conrad's as a matter of right. The Lombard cities wanted to elect a king from the ranks of their own magnates, and when this motion failed, they tried to invite a prince from Aquitaine or other French realms. They offered the Italian crown to the Capetian king Robert II of France and his son Hugh Magnus. After the offer was rejected, they approached Duke William V of Aquitaine, who, initially intrigued by the offer, rejected it as well.\nWhen the news of Henry's death spread, the citizens of Pavia revolted and destroyed the local imperial palace of the Ostrogothic king Theodoric the Great, built during the 5th century. Though Pavia was no longer the seat of imperial administration in Italy since the Ottonian dynasty, the palace had been perceived as a symbol of imperial authority in Italy and its mere presence within the city walls had been deemed intolerable. Pavia had\u2014thanks to its strategic location on the trade routes from Italy to Burgundy and France\u2014become an important commercial centre. The local merchants and aristocrats demanded the greatest possible autonomy from imperial control. Schutz notes that Pavia disliked the financial burden they had to bear whenever the monarchs came to the citadel. The bishops protested the separatist movement though, as they fared better under imperial protection than under local princes.\nIn the wake of the ecclesiastical mission, a party of noblemen from Pavia travelled north to meet Conrad and asked for severance from the Empire. The emissaries justified the actions of their fellow citizens by claiming that Pavia had always been loyal to the Italian king, as long as the king was alive and present, and that the revolt had taken place when the Italian throne was vacant. Conrad rejected the argument, that just as a ship remains devoted to its captain after his death, the Empire remains imperial property after the death of an emperor. The kingdom of Italy, according to Conrad, belonged to the empire as a matter of legal right. In his \"Constitutio de feudis\" (\"Edict on the Benefices of the Italian Kingdom\") of 1038 he would determine his regulations of the feudal contracts in Italy. Conrad also declared that the Ostrogothic palace was property of the Empire and therefore the king had the right to punish those responsible for its destruction. The Pavian embassy returned to Italy in opposition to Salian rule.\nIn February 1026, Conrad assembled a large army of armoured knights for an expedition into Italy, including troops commanded by both Archbishop Aribo of Mainz and Archbishop Pilgrim of Cologne. Conrad's army moved south and a contingent besieged Pavia and blocked all trade in the area, as he continued his campaign. By March 1026, Conrad arrived in Milan and was crowned with the Iron Crown of the Lombards by Archbishop Aribert of Milan as King of the Lombards. From Milan, Conrad travelled to Vercelli, where he celebrated Easter with the aged Bishop Leo of Vercelli, who had been a chief advisor to the late Emperor Otto III. When Leo died a few days later, Archbishop Aribert became the chief supporter of the Salian dynasty in Italy. With Conrad's assistance, Aribert rose to the highest-ranking religious office in Italy and oversaw the expansion of the Basilica of Sant'Ambrogio in Milan. In June 1026, Conrad led his army to Ravenna, but quartering his soldiers among the Ravennese population caused tensions in the city. Conrad then marched north to mitigate the risk the summer heat might pose to his army. In autumn Conrad left his summer camp in the Po Valley and marched to the Burgundian border. Conrad then celebrated Christmas at Ivrea. By the end of winter, the Italian aristocrats voluntarily ended their opposition to Conrad's reign. Pavia, however, remained in revolt until early 1027 when Abbot Odilo of Cluny brokered a peace deal between the city and Conrad.\nReign as emperor.\nImperial coronation.\nOn 26 March 1027, Pope John XIX crowned Conrad and his wife Gisela as emperor and empress, respectively, in Old Saint Peter's Basilica in Rome. The event lasted seven days and was attended by Conrad's son and heir Henry; Cnut the Great, King of England, Denmark and Norway; Rudolph III of Burgundy and around 70 senior clerics, including the Archbishops of Cologne, Mainz, Trier, Magdeburg, Salzburg, Milan and Ravenna. Rudolph of Burgundy's attendance suggested surprisingly good relations between Burgundy and the Holy Roman Empire. During the festivities, a power struggle between the archbishops of Milan and Ravenna ensued and was settled in favour of Milan. Subsequently, Conrad left Rome and toured south to receive homage from the Southern Italian principalities of Capua and Salerno and the Duchy of Benevento.\nAfter his coronation, Conrad issued decrees reorganising the monasteries and dioceses of Italy, with the explicit objective of bringing the Patriarchate of Venice under imperial control (see the \"Schism of the Three Chapters\"). On 6 April 1027, at a synod held in the Lateran Basilica with Pope John XIX, the emperor addressed the matter by declaring the Patriarchate of Aquileia superior to the Patriarchate of Grado, an ally of the Byzantine Empire. The Aquileian Poppo had been a loyal supporter of Emperor Henry II, who had appointed him patriarch in 1020. Conrad's action placed the patriarchate at Grado under Poppo's authority, securing Poppo's loyalty by making him the Emperor's top official in northern Italy. The synod also limited the political autonomy of Venice. In so doing, Conrad broke with the policies of his predecessors and revoked Venice's privileged trading status.\nIn May 1027 Conrad returned to Germany in order to attend the funeral of Duke Henry V of Bavaria at Regensburg. Conrad asserted his right to appoint the new Duke of Bavaria. He made the unprecedented decision of choosing his 10-year-old son Henry, ignoring several suitable candidates who held valid claims to the fief.\nThe young prince assumed Bavarian rule on 24 June 1027. Following Henry's appointment, Conrad held court at Regensburg and decreed that all imperial property in the duchy must be documented. This required the various counts and bishops to report all imperial property in their domains, castles and abbeys. Even the dowager empress Cunigunde of Luxembourg was required to report to Conrad, who even claimed that Cunegonde's \"wittum\" (money and property she had inherited from her deceased husband Emperor Henry II) belonged to him. These dubious claims to property and the excessive promotion of imperial authority over ducal and clerical affairs throughout Bavaria caused, unsurprisingly, new tension between him and the German aristocracy.\nUprising in Swabia.\nIn 1025, Duke Ernest II of Swabia, Conrad's stepson from his marriage to Gisela of Swabia, rebelled against his stepfather when he was elected king of Germany. By 1026, Conrad had defeated the resistance and Ernest submitted to his reign. Due to the intervention of his mother Gisela, Ernest was allowed to accompany Conrad on his expedition to Italy in 1026. During the expedition, the rebellion led by Conrad of Carinthia and Count Welf II of Swabia continued. Conrad had named Bishop Bruno of Augsburg regent of Germany while he marched south to Italy. When Bruno was defeated by the rebels, Conrad sent Ernest back to Germany in September 1026 to end the revolt. When Ernest returned, however, he joined the rebels.\nIn 1027 Conrad returned to Germany after his imperial coronation and held court at Augsburg, calling upon the rebels to surrender. Ernest, trusting in the number and fidelity of his vassals, rejected the peace offer and appealed to his Swabian counts to join him in the rebellion. According to Wipo of Burgundy, the counts refused, stating that while they had sworn loyalty to Ernest, they would not rebel against their Emperor. Without the support of the Swabian counts, Ernest, Conrad of Carinthia and Count Welf surrendered to Conrad at Worms on 9 September 1027, ending the rebellion. Conrad stripped Ernest of his ducal title and imprisoned him at Giebichenstein Castle in Saxony. Gisela supported Conrad against her son but did not want Ernest to be entirely humiliated. As a result of his mother's intervention, Conrad allowed Ernest to retain his title while imprisoned, with Gisela serving as regent over the duchy.\nIn 1028, after Conrad's son Henry was crowned in Aachen as King of Germany, Gisela again intervened on Ernest's behalf. Conrad pardoned Ernest and released him from prison in 1028, but Gisela retained regency over Swabia. Ernest served as duke in name only. On Easter 1030, Conrad offered to restore to Ernest his full powers as Duke of Swabia if he would crack down on the Emperor's enemies there. Ernest's refusal, especially against his friend Count Werner of Kyburg, resulted in his final downfall. Conrad stripped his stepson of his title, declared him a public enemy, and had him excommunicated. Even his mother Gisela did not come to his rescue. Within a few months, both Ernest and Werner, who had retreated to Falkenstein Castle, south of modern Schramberg in the Black Forest, were killed in a battle against a contingent of the Bishop of Constance. The fall of Ernest greatly weakened the sovereignty of Swabia. Conrad appointed Ernest's younger brother Herman as a new Swabian prince. As Herman was still an infant, the Bishop of Constance was assigned his regent. Eight years later in 1038, Herman died and Conrad installed his own son Henry as duke, securing imperial control over the duchy.\nConflict with Adalbero.\nConrad had to enforce his royal prerogatives in the Duchy of Carinthia and the Duchy of Swabia. Duke Adalbero of Carinthia had been appointed as duke in 1012 under Emperor Henry II and remained loyal to imperial authority, supporting Conrad's election as German king in 1024. At a synod in Frankfurt in September 1027, Conrad attempted to resolve the decades-long \"Gandersheim Conflict\". Adalbero accompanied the Emperor and acted as his sword-bearer during the proceeding, indicating Conrad's trust in him. From 1028 on, Adalbero governed his duchy as an independent state.\nIn particular, he attempted to conduct peaceful relations with King Stephen I of the Hungary. Under Emperor Henry II, who was the brother-in-law to Stephen, relations between the Empire and Hungary had been friendly. Upon Henry's death in 1024, Stephen I adopted a more aggressive policy, prompting border raids into the Empire from Hungary. The raids particularly affected Adalbero's domain of Carinthia, which shared a long, eastern border with Hungary.\nConrad summoned Adalbero to court at Bamberg on 18 May 1035, to answer an indictment of treason for his actions regarding Hungary. In the presence of the German dukes, Conrad demanded that Adalbero be stripped of all his titles and lands. The dukes demurred and demanded that Conrad's son Henry, Germany's co-king and Conrad's designated successor, join the assembly before a decision was made. Henry refused to depose Adalbero, citing an earlier agreement with Adelbero to be his ally in negotiating a settlement between him and his father. Conrad resorted to exhortations, pleas and threats to convince Henry to support Adalbero's deposition. Henry's support was soon followed by that of the other dukes. Conrad then ordered Adalbero to be removed as Duke and sentenced him and his son to exile. After attacking Conrad's allies in Carinthia, Adalbero fled to his mother's estates in Ebersberg in the Duchy of Bavaria, where he remained until his death in 1039. The ducal seat of Carinthia remained unoccupied until 2 February 1035, when Conrad named his cousin Conrad the Younger as the new duke. With the appointment, the three southern German duchies of Swabia, Bavaria and Carinthia were all under the control of Emperor Conrad through his family members (his stepson Herman in Swabia, his son Henry in Bavaria, and his cousin Conrad in Carinthia).\nControl of the southern duchies allowed Conrad to continue the process begun under the Ottonian dynasty, centralizing the Emperor's authority over the Empire at the expense of the regional dukes. Conrad broke with Ottonian tradition, however, in favouring a more strict means of controlling rebellious vassals. Whereas the Ottonians followed a policy of informal public submission and subsequent reconciliation, Conrad used treason trials to declare rebels as \"public enemies\" to legitimize his subsequent harsh treatment, as he had done with Ernest II of Swabia and Adalbero. The nobles saw the use of these treason trials not as mere power shifts in favour of the Emperor, but as a cruel breach of German tradition.\nPolicy towards the Church.\nConrad continued the Ottonian dynasty's imperial church system\u2014a policy of using the German Church as a vehicle for imperial control. Beginning in the 950s, the Ottonians had favoured Church officials over secular nobles for appointment to the Empire's most important offices. Claiming \"divine right\" to rule the Empire, the Ottonians increasingly viewed themselves as protectors of the church and thus demanded loyalty from the Church officials. In return, the various bishoprics and abbeys of the Empire were granted extensive landholdings and secular authority, providing immunity from the jurisdiction of the secular nobles. As such, the Church officials reported exclusively to the Emperor, acting as his personal vassals. As the Emperor's vassals, the Church officials were subject to the provision of two services: the \"servitium regis\" (royal service) and \"servitium militum\" (military service). Under royal service, the bishops and abbots were required to provide hospitality and accommodations to the Emperor and his court when he arrived. It also required the Church officials to act as quasi-bureaucracy for the Empire. Under military service, the Church was required to supply soldiers for the Emperor's army or to act as diplomats at his direction. Conrad energetically continued this tradition.\nIn his biography of Conrad, the chronicler Wipo of Burgundy stated the promotion of the Church was of little value to the Emperor. Conrad and the other members of the Salian dynasty had little interest in the founding of new monasteries. Through their hundred-year dynasty, the Salians only founded one: Limburg Abbey which was converted from a fortress to a monastery in 1025. The Ottonians established at least eight in their hundred-year reign. Additionally, the Ottonians were active in the establishment of Church affairs, but Conrad was uninterested, only calling five synods during his reign and usually only to restore peace. Conrad's decisions on Church policy were often left to his wife Gisela of Swabia. When Archbishop Aribo of Mainz, Primate of Germany, died in 1031, Conrad considered both Abbot Bardo of Hersfeld Abbey and the renowned theologian Wazo of Li\u00e8ge, then serving as the dean of the cathedral chapter for the Bishop of Liege. Though Conrad favoured Wazo to lead the German Church as Archbishop and Primate, Gisela convinced him to appoint Bardo instead.\nRelations with Poland.\nWar with Mieszko Lambert.\nDuke Boles\u0142aw I of Poland of the Piast dynasty repeatedly clashed with Emperor Henry II during the German\u2013Polish Wars of 1002 to 1018. In January 1018, Henry II and Boles\u0142aw I signed the peace treaty of Bautzen, that settled the permanent coexistence of the Empire and Poland as Boles\u0142aw recognized Henry II as his nominal feudal lord. In return, Henry II generously invested Boles\u0142aw with territories on the Empire's eastern border. In order to reinforce his dynastic bonds with the German nobility, Boles\u0142aw, a widower, married Oda of Meissen, daughter of the Saxon margrave Eckard I of Meissen. The Empire and Poland enjoyed peace for the remainder of Henry's reign. However, Boles\u0142aw then seized the opportunity presented by Henry's death in 1024 and the subsequent interregnum to consolidate his own power, crowning himself King on Easter, 25 April 1025. Boles\u0142aw was thus the first Polish king, as his predecessors only held the ducal title of the political entity, called Civitas Schinesghe at the time, that had only a few decades ago revealed itself to the world and the Holy See in Rome. Boles\u0142aw died within two months of his coronation, most likely due to an illness. His son, Mieszko II Lambert, succeeded him as King, crowned on Christmas, 1025. Upon assuming the Polish throne, Mieszko expelled his older half-brother Bezprym and his younger brother Otto Boles\u0142awowic. Otto went west to seek Conrad II's protection.\nConrad considered the assumption of the title \"king\" by Mieszko an act of war and a disregard of his imperial authority, but had to address domestic issues before dealing with Mieszko. In 1026 Conrad II marched into Italy to consolidate imperial authority south of the Alps and to claim the imperial crown from the Pope. In his absence, Duke Ernest II of Swabia, Conrad the Younger and Duke Frederick II of Upper Lorraine rebelled against his authority.\nThe rebels sought the support of Mieszko, which the Polish king granted, promising to take military action against Conrad. Conrad returned to Germany in mid-1027, putting an end to the rebellion before Mieszko could deploy his forces. In preparation for his own invasion of Poland, Conrad developed a closer relationship with King Cnut of England and Denmark (whose kingdom lay beyond the Empire's northern border). Cnut accompanied Conrad at his imperial coronation in 1027, and Conrad granted Cnut authority over the March of Schleswig, the land bridge between Denmark and Germany.\nFearing the possibility of a joint German-Danish attack, in 1028 Mieszko took the initiative and invaded Lusatia in the eastern Empire and occupied the territories of the Lutician Federation, where West Slavic Polabian tribes had settled and represented the majority of the population since the 10th century after centuries of steady immigration. Slavs had long been the targets of imperial military campaigns, particularly for the punishment and subjugation of pagan tribes. Emperor Otto I's lieutenants, Herman Billung and Gero, harassed Slavic settlers beginning in the 940s. As part of the Slavic revolt of 983, the Lutici rebelled against the Empire. In the ensuing war (983\u2013995), the Lutici succeeded in reclaiming their independence and gained control of the Billung March and Northern March from the Empire. Though Emperor Otto III allied with Duke Boles\u0142aw I of Poland to reintegrate them into the Empire, Otto III's death ended the friendly relationship between Poland and the Empire. Instead, Boles\u0142aw competed with Otto III's successor, Emperor Henry II, for dominion over the Lutici, causing Henry II to ally the Empire with the Lutici against Poland. Under the Peace of Bautzen in 1018, all three parties remained in uneasy peace, with Poland allowed to retain the Margraviate of Meissen. Of the eastern marches, the Empire only kept the March of Lusatia. Mieszko's 1028 invasion ended the peace. The Lutici sent ambassadors to seek Conrad's protection against Mieszko, which Conrad granted and renewed the German-Lutician alliance.\nConrad, seeking to relieve pressure on the Lutici, counter-invaded Poland in 1029 and besieged Bautzen in the Margraviate of Meissen. However, faced with a potential invasion by Hungary and the failure of the Lutici to provide their promised contingent of troops, Conrad retreated. In 1030, Poland secured an alliance with Hungary, with Stephen I invading Bavaria while Mieszko invaded Saxony. Conrad responded by allying with Yaroslav the Wise, Grand Prince of Kiev, who captured Red Ruthenia, on Poland's eastern border. In 1031, Conrad concluded a peace treaty with Hungary by ceding the lands between the rivers Lajta and Fischa to Hungarian control. Freed from the threat of Hungarian attack, the Emperor was able to focus his attention on Poland. Marching on Mieszko in autumn 1031, Conrad again besieged Bautzen. Mieszko was crushed by the Holy Roman and Kievan invaders and his exiled brother Bezprym's rebellion. He surrendered to Conrad in the fall of 1031. The Treaty of Merseburg provided that Mieszko return the Margraviate of Meissen and the March of Lusatia to the Empire.\nTreaty of Merseburg.\nSoon after Mieszko had concluded peace with the Empire, he was deposed by Bezprym, who had been in exile in the Kievan Rus' since 1025. Bezprym, with Conrad's approval, had persuaded the Kievan Grand Prince Yaroslav I the Wise to invade Poland and install Bezprym as sovereign. Mieszko fled to Bohemia where he was imprisoned and castrated by Duke Old\u0159ich in retribution for Mieszko's father Boles\u0142aw's blinding of Duke Boleslaus III, Old\u0159ich's brother, thirty years earlier. Shortly after taking power, Bezprym sent the Polish regalia to Conrad, officially renouncing the title \"king\" in favour of the traditional title \"duke\" and accepting the overlordship of the Empire over Poland. The royal regalia were delivered by Mieszko II's wife, Richeza of Lotharingia.\nBezprym's reign, however, was short. His extreme cruelty caused his half-brother Otto Boles\u0142awowic to conspire against him. Bezprym's own men murdered him in the spring of 1032, which created a power vacuum in Poland. Conrad responded by holding a diet at Merseburg in 1033 to address the situation. Conrad's wife, Empress Gisela of Swabia, interceded on Mieszko's behalf and requested he be freed from imprisonment in Bohemia and allowed to regain the Polish throne. Under the terms of the Treaty of Merseburg, Conrad divided Poland among Mieszko, Otto and Detric, another half-brother. Mieszko was allowed to retain the title of Duke and nominal authority over all of Poland. Now that the Empire had a strong central leader, the treaty significantly increased the Empire's influence over Poland.\nThe regulation was short-lived as in 1033 Otto was killed by one of his own men, and Mieszko II took over his domains. Shortly after, Mieszko expelled Detric and reunited the whole country. Though Mieszko regained his territory, he still was opposed by the nobility and his own subjects. Mieszko did not adopt Bezprym's renunciation of the Polish crown and continued to style himself as King. Mieszko II died soon after in 1034, and upon his death, a Pagan reaction in Poland erupted. Subsequently, his wife Richeza and son Casimir I fled to the Empire.\nRelations with Eastern Europe.\nBohemia.\nThe Duchy of Bohemia was incorporated into the Holy Roman Empire in 1004 during the German\u2013Polish Wars, that lasted from 1002 to 1018. Emperor Henry II installed Jarom\u00edr as Duke of Bohemia and guaranteed protection against Polish aggression. Jarom\u00edr ruled only a small territory, however, as Poland had occupied the traditional Czech territories of Moravia, Silesia, Lesser Poland and Lusatia. In 1012, Jarom\u00edr was deposed by his brother Old\u0159ich, who assumed the Bohemian throne for himself. Following the resumption of hostilities between the Empire and Poland in 1028, Old\u0159ich went on the offensive against Poland, reconquering Moravia by 1029, which helped to stabilize his duchy. The war ended in 1031 when the Polish king Mieszko II surrendered to Conrad. During the following civil war, Mieszko was forced to flee Poland for Bohemia, where Old\u0159ich had him imprisoned and castrated in revenge for the torture Mieszko's father, Boles\u0142aw I of Poland, inflicted upon Duke Boleslaus III, Old\u0159ich's brother, thirty years before.\nPoland did not stabilize in the wake of Mieszko's exile, forcing Conrad to convene an assembly in July 1033 to issue the Treaty of Merseburg which restored Mieszko to the Polish throne. Conrad summoned Old\u0159ich to appear at the assembly, but Old\u0159ich refused. His absence raised the ire of the Emperor; Conrad, busy with securing his succession to the Burgundian throne, charged his son Duke Henry of Bavaria with punishing the recalcitrant Bohemian. At age 17, Henry's march on Bohemia was his first independent military command. The expedition was a complete success, as Henry deposed Old\u0159ich and restored his brother Jarom\u00edr to the Bohemian throne. Old\u0159ich's son Bretislaus I was appointed as Count of Moravia. Old\u0159ich himself was imprisoned in Bavaria, but in 1034 was pardoned and allowed to return to Bohemia. Old\u0159ich deposed and blinded Jarom\u00edr, reclaimed the Bohemian throne, and exiled his son Bretislaus. While the reason for the conflict between father and son has been lost, it is assumed Bretislaus had supported Jarom\u00edr over his father. However, Old\u0159ich died suddenly on 9 November 1034, allowing Bretislaus to return from exile. Though Jarom\u00edr was offered the throne, he declined in favour of his nephew. Bretislaus was then confirmed as the new Duke of Bohemia by Conrad II.\nHungary.\nWith emperor Otto III's approval, Stephen was crowned as the first Christian king of Hungary on Christmas Day, 1000. Otto III's successor, Emperor Henry II, was Stephen's brother-in-law by Stephen's marriage to Henry's sister Gisela, furthering the friendly relationship between the Empire and Hungary. Under Conrad II, however, relations quickly turned hostile as Conrad pursued a more aggressive policy regarding eastern Europe. Conrad II expelled the Venetian doge Otto Orseolo, the husband of Stephen's sister Grimelda of Hungary from Venice in 1026. Conrad also persuaded the Bavarians to accept his own infant son, Henry, as their duke in 1027, although Stephen's son, Emeric of Hungary, had a legitimate claim to the Duchy of Bavaria through his mother.\nEmperor Conrad planned a marriage alliance with the Byzantine Empire and dispatched one of his advisors, Bishop Werner of Strasbourg, to Constantinople. The bishop presented himself as a pilgrim, but Stephen, who had been informed of his actual purpose, refused to let him enter the country in the autumn of 1027. Conrad's biographer Wipo of Burgundy recorded that the Bavarians incited skirmishes along the common Imperial-Hungarian border in 1029, causing a rapid deterioration in relations between the two countries. In 1030, open conflict erupted. Conrad launched an invasion into Hungary but was forced to retreat when the Hungarians successfully used scorched earth tactics. Conrad departed to address the problem with his stepson Ernest II, the deposed Duke of Swabia, leaving matters in Hungary to his son Henry. Henry settled the conflict by 1031 by bestowing titles to eastern Bavarian lands between the Lajta and Fischa rivers to the Hungarian nobility. Hungary and the Empire remained at peace from 1031 to Henry's own reign as Emperor in 1040.\nConquest of Burgundy.\nIn 1016 King Rudolph III of Burgundy, ruler of the Kingdom of Burgundy, was left without a male heir, and so Henry II seized the opportunity and forced Rudolph to name him as successor. Henry II, the son of Rudolph's sister Gisela of Burgundy, was his nephew and closest living male relative. However, Henry predeceased Rudolph in 1024. Soon, Henry's successor Conrad II claimed to have acquired Henry's rights to the Burgundian succession, which Rudolph disputed. Count Odo II of Blois, who had strong family ties with Rudolph, also claimed the succession. Conrad II met Rudolph III in August 1027 near Basel to settle the dispute. Henry II's widowed wife, Empress Cunigunde of Luxembourg, mediated between the two parties. An agreement was reached that allowed Conrad II to succeed to the Burgundian throne upon Rudolph's death under the same conditions as Henry II. In return, Rudolph was allowed to retain independent rule over his kingdom.\nRudolph died on 6 September 1032, while Conrad was on campaign against Duke Mieszko II of Poland. Upon Mieszko's surrender, Conrad marched his army to Burgundy during the winter of 1032/1033. Conrad's rival to the Burgundian throne, Count Odo II of Blois had already invaded the kingdom to secure his rule and controlled large sections of the kingdom's western territories. On 2 February 1033, Conrad arrived at Vaud, where he held an assembly at the Abbey of Payerne and was crowned King of Burgundy. \nInitially, Conrad made little progress against Odo and had to withdraw to Z\u00fcrich in March. In April 1033 he negotiated a treaty of alliance with Henry I of France, which was completed at the end of May in a personal interview at Deville on the Meuse. Both monarchs had Odo for an enemy, since he had supported the claims of Henry I's younger brother to the French crown. Conrad might therefore have been given a free hand by his ally to invade Odo's French fiefs. In two large-scale military summer campaigns in 1033 and 1034, Conrad defeated Odo. On 1 August 1034, Conrad officially incorporated Burgundy into the Holy Roman Empire at a ceremony held in the Cathedral of Geneva.\nThough Burgundy had been brought under full imperial control, the kingdom was allowed a remarkable degree of autonomy. Conrad rarely intervened in its affairs following his coronation, returning only in 1038 to announce his son Henry as the kingdom's future ruler. Crucially, the conquest of Burgundy augmented the influence and dignity of the Emperor to the benefit of the Empire. With Burgundy secured, Conrad controlled the western Alpine passes into Italy and could easily block foreign invasions.\nPolitics.\nConrad formally confirmed the popular legal traditions of Saxony and issued new constitutions for Lombardy. In 1028 at Aachen, he had his son Henry elected and anointed king of Germany. Henry married Gunhilda of Denmark, daughter of King Cnut the Great of England, Denmark and Norway by Emma of Normandy. This was an arrangement that Conrad had made many years prior when he gave Canute parts of northern Germany to administer. Henry, who would later become Emperor Henry III, became his father's chief counselor.\nWhen King Rudolph III of Burgundy died on 2 February 1032, Conrad claimed the kingship on the basis of an inheritance that Henry II had extorted from Rudolph in 1006, after Henry invaded Burgundy to enforce his claim in 1016. Despite some opposition, the Burgundian and Proven\u00e7al nobles paid homage to Conrad in Z\u00fcrich in 1034. This Kingdom of Burgundy, later known as the Kingdom of Arles from the 12th century, corresponded to most of the southeastern quarter of modern France and included western Switzerland, the Franche-Comt\u00e9 and Dauphin\u00e9. It did not include the smaller Duchy of Burgundy to the north, ruled by a cadet branch of the Capetian King of France. (Most of the former Kingdom of Burgundy/Arles was incorporated into France piecemeal over the next centuries, but \"King of Burgundy\" remained one of the Holy Roman Emperor's subsidiary titles until the dissolution of the Empire in 1806.)\nConrad upheld the rights of the \"valvassores\" (knights and burghers of the cities) of Italy against Archbishop Aribert of Milan and the local nobles. The nobles, as vassal lords, and the bishop had conspired to rescind rights from the burghers. Conrad restored order with skilful diplomacy and luck.\nLate life.\nSecuring the imperial succession.\nOn 14 January 1040, Conrad II's heir Henry issued a charter, in which he announced his official designation as \"Rex romanorum\" (\"King of the Romans\"), thus effectively elevating the traditional Frankish kingship to Imperial authority. This was the exclusive method for claiming the office of Holy Roman Emperor.\nSecond Italian expedition.\nIn 1038, Prince Guaimar IV of Salerno requested that Conrad adjudicate in a dispute over Capua with its Prince Pandulf, whom Conrad had released from imprisonment in 1024, immediately after his coronation. Hearing that Michael IV the Paphlagonian of the Byzantine Empire had received the same request, Conrad went to Southern Italy, to Salerno and Aversa. He appointed Richer, from Germany, as abbot of Monte Cassino, as abbot Theobald was imprisoned by Pandulf. At Troia, he ordered Pandulf to restore stolen property to Monte Cassino. Pandulf sent his wife and son to ask for peace, offering of gold and two of his children as hostages. The Emperor accepted Pandulf's offer, but the hostages escaped as Pandulf hid in his outlying castle of Sant'Agata de' Goti. Conrad besieged and conquered Capua and bestowed the place and the title of \"Prince\" on Guaimar. He also recognized Aversa as a county of Salerno under Rainulf Drengot, the Norman adventurer. Pandulf, meanwhile, fled to Constantinople. Conrad thus left the \"Mezzogiorno\" firmly in Guaimar's hands and loyal, for once, to the Holy Roman Empire.\nDeath.\nOn the return to Germany, a severe epidemic decimated the ranks of Conrad's troops; Conrad's daughter-in-law and stepson also died. Conrad himself returned home safely and held court on important occasions in Solothurn, Strasbourg and Goslar. His son Henry was invested with the duchies of Swabia and Carinthia.\nA year later in 1039 Conrad fell ill and died of gout in Utrecht. His heart and bowels are buried at the Cathedral of Saint Martin, Utrecht. His body was transferred to Speyer via Cologne, Mainz and Worms, where the funeral procession made several stops. His body is buried at Speyer Cathedral, a cathedral which he himself founded and contains the resting place of all Salian emperors. During a major excavation in 1900 his sarcophagus was relocated from his original resting place in front of the altar to the crypt, where it is still visible today.\nA biography of Conrad II in chronicle form, \"Gesta Chuonradi II imperatoris\", was written by his chaplain Wipo of Burgundy, and presented to Henry III in 1046, not long after he was crowned.\nFamily and children.\nConrad married Gisela of Swabia in 1016, the daughter of Duke Herman II of Swabia. They had three children:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44400", "revid": "37946956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44400", "title": "RV Triton", "text": "Research vessel launched in 2000\nThe research vessel Triton is a trimaran vessel owned by Gardline Marine Sciences Limited and a former prototype British warship demonstrator for the UK's Defence Evaluation and Research Agency (later QinetiQ). She was built as a technology demonstrator ship for the Royal Navy's Future Surface Combatant, and has been used to both prove the viability of the hull-form and as a trials platform for other QinetiQ innovations. The ship was used by the Australian Border Force's Marine Unit, and was for a time moored in the River Fal near the King Harry chain ferry. Up until July 2019 she was moored on the River Yare, Great Yarmouth in Norfolk, England.\nConstruction.\nIn August 1998, the UK Ministry of Defence (MoD) awarded a contract to Vosper Thornycroft to construct the trimaran, at a cost of \u00a313.5m. RV \"Triton\" was launched at Woolston in May 2000 and delivered in August 2000. \"Triton\" then began a two-year risk reduction trials programme for the UK MoD and the US Department of Defense.\nThe vessel's three parallel hulls are reflected in her name which refers to the maritime god Triton who carried the three-pronged spear, the trident. The outriggers are thinner and much shorter than the dominant central hull.\nOperational history.\nDERA and QinetiQ.\n\"Triton\" was designed as a demonstrator to prove that the trimaran concept would work successfully in a large warship. Following her launch in 2000, the ship began an extensive series of trials in 2001, which covered general ship handling, performance, sea-keeping behaviour, but also areas more specific to its design for which the Royal Navy had no experience. For example, a series of docking manoeuvres were undertaken by the pilot boats of HMNB Portsmouth to determine the problems of docking a large trimaran, and the ship underwent underway replenishment alongside and the tanker to ascertain the characteristics of a trimaran and a monohull replenishing at the same time. \"Triton\" also undertook the first helicopter take off and landing on a trimaran.\nGardline Marine Sciences.\nIn January 2005, \"Triton\" was sold to Gardline Marine Sciences, a UK company based in Great Yarmouth, Norfolk. \"Triton\" was used for hydrographic survey work for the civil hydrography programme (CHP) on behalf of the Maritime and Coastguard Agency (MCA). The vessel was fitted with a sensor suite which includes the Kongsberg Simrad EM1002 multibeam echo-sounder, a GPS attitude/heading system, surface navigation and ultra-short baseline sub-surface acoustic tracking system, Gardline Voyager5 integrated survey system and Caris post-processing system. The vessel was enhanced by Gardline by installing a bowthrust unit, additional accommodation and survey equipment facilities. In 2009, two new MTU engines were fitted; MTU 16v 4000 M40B. Output each.\nAustralian Customs.\nIn December 2006, Gardline contracted \"Triton\" to the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service to patrol Australia's northern waters as one of the service's fleet of patrol vessels. Australian Customs Vessel \"Triton\" has been fitted with two .50 calibre heavy machine guns and carries up to 28 armed customs officers. The vessel is also equipped with two high-speed rigid hull inflatable boats (RHIBs). The ship arrived from the UK in mid-January 2007 and started operations immediately. Austere accommodation is provided for 100 embarked persons in addition to conventional accommodation for 45.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44401", "revid": "50663682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44401", "title": "Brown dwarf", "text": "Type of substellar object more massive than a planet\nBrown dwarfs are substellar objects that have more mass than the biggest gas giant planets, but less than the least massive main-sequence stars. Their mass is approximately 13 to 80 times that of Jupiter (MJ)\u2014not big enough to sustain nuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium in their cores, but massive enough to emit some light and heat from the fusion of deuterium, 2H, an isotope of hydrogen with a neutron as well as a proton, that can undergo fusion at lower temperatures. The most massive ones (&gt;\u00a065\u00a0MJ) can fuse lithium (7Li).\nAstronomers classify self-luminous objects by spectral type, a distinction intimately tied to the surface temperature, and brown dwarfs occupy types M\u00a0(2100\u20133500\u00a0K), L\u00a0(1300\u20132100\u00a0K), T\u00a0(600\u20131300\u00a0K), and Y\u00a0(&lt; 600\u00a0K). As brown dwarfs do not undergo stable hydrogen fusion, they cool down over time, progressively passing through later spectral types as they age.\nThe \"brown\" in brown dwarf was meant to name a color between red and black. To the naked eye, most brown dwarfs would appear to be magenta with others in different colors depending on their temperature. Brown dwarfs may be fully convective, with no layers or chemical differentiation by depth.\nThough their existence was initially theorized in the 1960s, it was not until 1994 that the first unambiguous brown dwarfs were discovered. As brown dwarfs have relatively low surface temperatures, they are not very bright at visible wavelengths, emitting most of their light in the infrared. However, with the advent of more capable infrared detecting devices, thousands of brown dwarfs have been identified. The nearest known brown dwarfs are located in the Luhman 16 system, a binary of L- and T-type brown dwarfs about from the Sun. Luhman 16 is the third closest system to the Sun after Alpha Centauri and Barnard's Star.\nHistory.\nEarly theorizing.\nIn the 1960s Shiv Kumar theorized the existence of objects now called \"brown dwarfs\"; they were originally called \"black dwarfs\",\na classification for dark substellar objects floating freely in space that were not massive enough to sustain hydrogen fusion. However:\n (a)\u00a0the term \"black dwarf\" was already in use to refer to a cold white dwarf \n (b)\u00a0red dwarfs fuse hydrogen \n (c)\u00a0these objects may be luminous at visible wavelengths early in their lives.\nBecause of this, alternative names for these objects were proposed, including planetar and substar. In 1975 Jill Tarter, as part of her PhD thesis at University of California at Berkeley was the first to suggest that the term to describe these objects should be \"brown dwarf\", using brown as a color \"somewhere between red and black\", suggesting that the dwarfs appeared dim, dark, and dull, even though not exactly brown.\nThe term \"black dwarf\" continues to be used to refer to a white dwarf that has cooled to the point that it no longer emits significant amounts of light. However, the time required for even the lowest-mass white dwarf to cool to this temperature is calculated to be longer than the current age of the universe; hence such objects are expected to not yet exist.\nEarly theories concerning the nature of the lowest-mass stars and the hydrogen-burning limit suggested that a population I object with a mass less than 0.07\u00a0solar masses (M\u2609) or a population II object less than 0.09\u00a0M\u2609 would never go through normal stellar evolution and would become a completely degenerate star.\nThe resulting brown dwarf star is sometimes called a failed star.\nThe first self-consistent calculation of the hydrogen-burning minimum mass confirmed a value between 0.07\u20130.08\u00a0solar masses for population\u00a0I objects.\nDeuterium fusion.\nThe discovery of deuterium burning down to 0.013\u00a0M\u2609 () and the impact of dust formation in the cool outer atmospheres of brown dwarfs in the late 1980s brought these theories into question. However, such objects were hard to find because they emit almost no visible light. Their strongest emissions are in the infrared (IR) spectrum, and ground-based IR detectors were too imprecise at that time to readily identify any brown dwarfs.\nSince then, numerous searches by various methods have sought these objects. These methods included multi-color imaging surveys around field stars, imaging surveys for faint companions of main-sequence dwarfs and white dwarfs, surveys of young star clusters, and radial velocity monitoring for close companions.\nGD\u00a0165B and class L.\nFor many years, efforts to discover brown dwarfs were fruitless. In 1988, however, a faint companion to the white dwarf star GD 165 was found in an infrared search of white dwarfs. The spectrum of the companion GD\u00a0165B was very red and enigmatic, showing none of the features expected of a low-mass red dwarf. It became clear that GD 165B would need to be classified as a much cooler object than the latest M dwarfs then known. GD 165B remained unique for almost a decade until the advent of the Two Micron All-Sky Survey (2MASS) in 1997, which discovered many objects with similar colors and spectral features.\nToday, GD\u00a0165B is recognized as the prototype of a class of objects now called \"L dwarfs\".\nAlthough the discovery of the coolest dwarf was highly significant at the time, it was debated whether GD\u00a0165B would be classified as a brown dwarf or simply a very-low-mass star, because observationally it is very difficult to distinguish between the two.\nSoon after the discovery of GD\u00a0165B, other brown-dwarf candidates were reported. Most failed to live up to their candidacy, however, because the absence of lithium showed them to be stellar objects. True stars burn their lithium within a little over 100\u00a0Myr, whereas brown dwarfs (which can, confusingly, have temperatures and luminosities similar to true stars) will not. Hence, the detection of lithium in the atmosphere of an object older than 100\u00a0Myr ensures that it is a brown dwarf.\nGliese 229B and class T.\nThe first class \"T\" brown dwarf was discovered in 1994 by Caltech astronomers Shrinivas Kulkarni, Tadashi Nakajima, Keith Matthews and Rebecca Oppenheimer, and Johns Hopkins scientists Samuel T. Durrance and David Golimowski. It was confirmed in 1995 as a substellar companion to Gliese 229. Gliese 229b is one of the first two instances of clear evidence for a brown dwarf, along with Teide 1. Confirmed in 1995, both were identified by the presence of the 670.8\u00a0nm lithium line. The latter was found to have a temperature and luminosity well below the stellar range.\nIts near-infrared spectrum clearly exhibited a methane absorption band at 2\u00a0micrometres, a feature that had previously only been observed in the atmospheres of giant planets and that of Saturn's moon Titan. Methane absorption is not expected at any temperature of a main-sequence star. This discovery helped to establish yet another spectral class even cooler than L\u00a0dwarfs, known as \"T\u00a0dwarfs\", for which Gliese\u00a0229b is the prototype.\nTeide\u00a01 and class M.\nThe first confirmed class \"M\" brown dwarf was discovered by Spanish astrophysicists Rafael Rebolo (head of the team), Mar\u00eda Rosa Zapatero-Osorio, and Eduardo L. Mart\u00edn in 1994. This object, found in the Pleiades open cluster, received the name Teide 1. The discovery article was submitted to \"Nature\" in May 1995, and published on 14\u00a0September 1995. \"Nature\" highlighted \"Brown dwarfs discovered, official\" on the front page of that issue.\nTeide 1 was discovered in images collected by the IAC team on 6\u00a0January 1994 using the 80\u00a0cm telescope (IAC\u00a080) at Teide Observatory, and its spectrum was first recorded in December 1994 using the 4.2\u00a0m William Herschel Telescope at Roque de los Muchachos Observatory (La Palma). The distance, chemical composition, and age of Teide\u00a01 could be established because of its membership in the young Pleiades star cluster. Using the most advanced stellar and substellar evolution models at that moment, the team estimated for Teide\u00a01 a mass of 55 \u00b1 15\u00a0MJ, which is below the stellar-mass limit. The object became a reference in subsequent young brown dwarf related works.\nIn theory, a brown dwarf below 65\u00a0MJ is unable to burn lithium by thermonuclear fusion at any time during its evolution. This fact is one of the lithium test principles used to judge the substellar nature of low-luminosity and low-surface-temperature astronomical bodies.\nHigh-quality spectral data acquired by the Keck\u00a01 telescope in November 1995 showed that Teide\u00a01 still had the initial lithium abundance of the original molecular cloud from which Pleiades stars formed, proving the lack of thermonuclear fusion in its core. These observations fully confirmed that Teide\u00a01 is a brown dwarf, as well as the efficiency of the spectroscopic lithium test.\nFor some time, Teide\u00a01 was the smallest known object outside the Solar System that had been identified by direct observation. Since then, over 1,800\u00a0brown dwarfs have been identified, even some very close to Earth, like Epsilon Indi\u00a0Ba and Bb, a pair of brown dwarfs gravitationally bound to a Sun-like star 12\u00a0light-years from the Sun, and Luhman 16, a binary system of brown dwarfs at 6.5\u00a0light-years from the Sun.\nTheory.\nHertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram\nSpectral type\nO\nB\nA\nF\nG\nK\nM\nL\nT\nBrown dwarfs\nWhite dwarfs\nRed dwarfs\nSubdwarfs\nMain sequence&lt;br&gt;(\"dwarfs\")\nSubgiants\nGiants\nRed giants\nBlue giants\nBright giants\nSupergiants\nRed supergiant\nHypergiants\nabsolutemagni-tude(MV)\nThe standard mechanism for star birth is through the gravitational collapse of a cold interstellar cloud of gas and dust. As the cloud contracts, it heats due to the Kelvin\u2013Helmholtz mechanism. Early in the process the contracting gas quickly radiates away much of the energy, allowing the collapse to continue. Eventually, the central region becomes sufficiently dense to trap radiation. Consequently, the central temperature and density of the collapsed cloud increase dramatically with time, slowing the contraction, until the conditions are hot and dense enough for thermonuclear reactions to occur in the core of the protostar. For a typical star, gas and radiation pressure generated by the thermonuclear fusion reactions within its core will support it against any further gravitational contraction. Hydrostatic equilibrium is reached, and the star will spend most of its lifetime fusing hydrogen into helium as a main-sequence star.\nIf, however, the initial mass of the protostar is less than about 0.08\u00a0M\u2609, normal hydrogen thermonuclear fusion reactions will not ignite in the core. Gravitational contraction does not heat the small protostar very effectively, and before the temperature in the core can increase enough to trigger fusion, the density reaches the point where electrons become closely packed enough to create quantum electron degeneracy pressure. According to the brown dwarf interior models, typical conditions in the core for density, temperature and pressure are expected to be the following:\nThis means that the protostar is not massive or dense enough ever to reach the conditions needed to sustain hydrogen fusion. The infalling matter is prevented, by electron degeneracy pressure, from reaching the densities and pressures needed.\nFurther gravitational contraction is prevented and the result is a brown dwarf that simply cools off by radiating away its internal thermal energy. Note that, in principle, it is possible for a brown dwarf to slowly accrete mass above the hydrogen burning limit without initiating hydrogen fusion. This could happen via mass transfer in a binary brown dwarf system.\nHigh-mass brown dwarfs versus low-mass stars.\nLithium is generally present in brown dwarfs and not in low-mass stars. Stars, which reach the high temperature necessary for fusing hydrogen, rapidly deplete their lithium. Fusion of lithium-7 and a proton occurs, producing two helium-4 nuclei. The temperature necessary for this reaction is just below that necessary for hydrogen fusion. Convection in low-mass stars ensures that lithium in the whole volume of the star is eventually depleted. Therefore, the presence of the lithium spectral line in a candidate brown dwarf is a strong indicator that it is indeed a substellar object.\nLithium test.\nBrown dwarfs can be divided into two groups; those that have enough mass to fuse lithium, and those that do not. This is known as the lithium test.\nHeavier stars, like the Sun, can also retain lithium in their outer layers, which never get hot enough to fuse lithium, and whose convective layer does not mix with the core where the lithium would be rapidly depleted. Those larger stars are easily distinguishable from brown dwarfs by their size and luminosity.\nConversely, brown dwarfs at the high end of their mass range can be hot enough to deplete their lithium when they are young. Dwarfs of mass greater than 65\u00a0MJ can burn their lithium by the time they are half a billion years old.\nAtmospheric methane.\nUnlike stars, older brown dwarfs are sometimes cool enough that, over very long periods of time, their atmospheres can gather observable quantities of methane, which cannot form in hotter objects. Dwarfs confirmed in this fashion include Gliese 229B.\nIron, silicate and sulfide clouds.\nMain-sequence stars cool, but eventually reach a minimum bolometric luminosity that they can sustain through steady fusion. This luminosity varies from star to star, but is generally at least 0.01% that of the Sun. Brown dwarfs cool and darken steadily over their lifetimes; sufficiently old brown dwarfs will be too faint to be detectable.\nClouds are used to explain the weakening of the iron hydride (FeH) spectral line in late L-dwarfs. Iron clouds deplete FeH in the upper atmosphere, and the cloud layer blocks the view to lower layers still containing FeH. The later strengthening of this chemical compound at cooler temperatures of mid- to late T-dwarfs is explained by disturbed clouds that allows a telescope to look into the deeper layers of the atmosphere that still contains FeH. Young L/T-dwarfs (L2-T4) show high variability, which could be explained with clouds, hot spots, magnetically driven aurorae or thermochemical instabilities. The clouds of these brown dwarfs are explained as either iron clouds with varying thickness or a lower thick iron cloud layer and an upper silicate cloud layer. This upper silicate cloud layer can consist out of quartz, enstatite, corundum and/or fosterite. It is however not clear if silicate clouds are always necessary for young objects. Silicate absorption can be directly observed in the mid-infrared at 8 to 12 \u03bcm. Observations with Spitzer IRS have shown that silicate absorption is common, but not ubiquitous, for L2-L8 dwarfs. Additionally, MIRI has observed silicate absorption in the planetary-mass companion VHS 1256b.\nIron rain as part of atmospheric convection processes is possible only in brown dwarfs, and not in small stars. The spectroscopy research into iron rain is still ongoing, but not all brown dwarfs will always have this atmospheric anomaly. In 2013, a heterogeneous iron-containing atmosphere was imaged around the B component in the nearby Luhman 16 system.\nFor late T-type brown dwarfs only a few variable searches were carried out. Thin cloud layers are predicted to form in late T-dwarfs from chromium and potassium chloride, as well as several sulfides. These sulfides are manganese sulfide, sodium sulfide and zinc sulfide. The variable T7 dwarf 2M0050\u20133322 is explained to have a top layer of potassium chloride clouds, a mid layer of sodium sulfide clouds and a lower layer of manganese sulfide clouds. Patchy clouds of the top two cloud layers could explain why the methane and water vapor bands are variable.\nAt the lowest temperatures of the Y-dwarf WISE 0855-0714 patchy cloud layers of sulfide and water ice clouds could cover 50% of the surface.\nLow-mass brown dwarfs versus high-mass planets.\nLike stars, brown dwarfs form independently, but, unlike stars, they lack sufficient mass to \"ignite\" hydrogen fusion. Like all stars, they can occur singly or in close proximity to other stars. Some orbit stars and can, like planets, have eccentric orbits.\nSize and fuel-burning ambiguities.\nBrown dwarfs are all roughly the same radius as Jupiter. At the high end of their mass range (60\u201390\u00a0MJ), the volume of a brown dwarf is governed primarily by electron-degeneracy pressure, as it is in white dwarfs; at the low end of the range (10\u00a0MJ), their volume is governed primarily by Coulomb pressure, as it is in planets. The net result is that the radii of brown dwarfs vary by only 10\u201315% over the range of possible masses. Moreover, the mass\u2013radius relationship shows no change from about one Saturn mass to the onset of hydrogen burning (), suggesting that from this perspective brown dwarfs are simply high-mass Jovian planets. This can make distinguishing them from planets difficult.\nIn addition, many brown dwarfs undergo no fusion; even those at the high end of the mass range (over 60\u00a0MJ) cool quickly enough that after 10\u00a0million years they no longer undergo fusion.\nHeat spectrum.\nX-ray and infrared spectra are telltale signs of brown dwarfs. Some emit X-rays; and all \"warm\" dwarfs continue to glow tellingly in the red and infrared spectra until they cool to planet-like temperatures (under ).\nGas giants have some of the characteristics of brown dwarfs. Like the Sun, Jupiter and Saturn are both made primarily of hydrogen and helium. Saturn is nearly as large as Jupiter, despite having only 30% the mass. Three of the giant planets in the Solar System (Jupiter, Saturn, and Neptune) emit much more (up to about twice) heat than they receive from the Sun. All four giant planets have their own \"planetary\" systems, in the form of extensive moon systems.\nCurrent IAU standard.\nCurrently, the International Astronomical Union considers an object above 13\u00a0MJ (the limiting mass for thermonuclear fusion of deuterium) to be a brown dwarf, whereas an object under that mass (and orbiting a star or stellar remnant) is considered a planet. The minimum mass required to trigger sustained hydrogen burning (about 80\u00a0MJ) forms the upper limit of the definition.\nIt is also debated whether brown dwarfs would be better defined by their formation process rather than by theoretical mass limits based on nuclear fusion reactions. Under this interpretation brown dwarfs are those objects that represent the lowest-mass products of the star formation process, while planets are objects formed in an accretion disk surrounding a star. The coolest free-floating objects discovered, such as WISE 0855, as well as the lowest-mass young objects known, like PSO J318.5\u221222, are thought to have masses below 13\u00a0MJ, and as a result are sometimes referred to as planetary-mass objects due to the ambiguity of whether they should be regarded as rogue planets or brown dwarfs. There are planetary-mass objects known to orbit brown dwarfs, such as 2M1207b, 2MASS J044144b and Oph 98 B.\nThe 13-Jupiter-mass cutoff is a rule of thumb rather than a quantity with precise physical significance. Larger objects will burn most of their deuterium and smaller ones will burn only a little, and the 13\u2011Jupiter-mass value is somewhere in between. The amount of deuterium burnt also depends to some extent on the composition of the object, specifically on the amount of helium and deuterium present and on the fraction of heavier elements, which determines the atmospheric opacity and thus the radiative cooling rate.\nAs of 2011 the Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia included objects up to 25 Jupiter masses, saying, \"The fact that there is no special feature around 13\u00a0MJup in the observed mass spectrum reinforces the choice to forget this mass limit\". As of 2016, this limit was increased to 60 Jupiter masses, based on a study of mass\u2013density relationships.\nThe Exoplanet Data Explorer includes objects up to 24 Jupiter masses with the advisory: \"The 13 Jupiter-mass distinction by the IAU Working Group is physically unmotivated for planets with rocky cores, and observationally problematic due to the sin i ambiguity.\" The NASA Exoplanet Archive includes objects with a mass (or minimum mass) equal to or less than 30 Jupiter masses.\nSub-brown dwarf.\nObjects below 13\u00a0MJ, called sub-brown dwarfs or planetary-mass brown dwarfs, form in the same manner as stars and brown dwarfs (i.e. through the collapse of a gas cloud) but have a mass below the limiting mass for thermonuclear fusion of deuterium.\nSome researchers call them free-floating planets, whereas others call them planetary-mass brown dwarfs.\nRole of other physical properties in the mass estimate.\nWhile spectroscopic features can help to distinguish between low-mass stars and brown dwarfs, it is often necessary to estimate the mass to come to a conclusion. The theory behind the mass estimate is that brown dwarfs with a similar mass form in a similar way and are hot when they form. Some have spectral types that are similar to low-mass stars, such as 2M1101AB. As they cool down the brown dwarfs should retain a range of luminosities depending on the mass. Without the age and luminosity, a mass estimate is difficult; for example, an L-type brown dwarf could be an old brown dwarf with a high mass (possibly a low-mass star) or a young brown dwarf with a very low mass. For Y dwarfs this is less of a problem, as they remain low-mass objects near the sub-brown dwarf limit, even for relatively high age estimates. For L and T dwarfs it is still useful to have an accurate age estimate. The luminosity is here the less concerning property, as this can be estimated from the spectral energy distribution. The age estimate can be done in two ways. Either the brown dwarf is young and still has spectral features that are associated with youth, or the brown dwarf co-moves with a star or stellar group (star cluster or association), where age estimates are easier to obtain. A very young brown dwarf that was further studied with this method is 2M1207 and the companion 2M1207b. Based on the location, proper motion and spectral signature, this object was determined to belong to the ~8-million-year-old TW Hydrae association, and the mass of the secondary was determined to be 8 \u00b1 2 MJ, below the deuterium burning limit. An example of a very old age obtained by the co-movement method is the brown dwarf + white dwarf binary COCONUTS-1, with the white dwarf estimated to be billion years old. In this case the mass was not estimated with the derived age, but the co-movement provided an accurate distance estimate, using Gaia parallax. Using this measurement the authors estimated the radius, which was then used to estimate the mass for the brown dwarf as MJ.\nObservations.\nClassification of brown dwarfs.\nSpectral class M.\nThese are brown dwarfs with a spectral class of M5.5 or later; they are also called late-M dwarfs. All brown dwarfs with spectral type M are young objects, such as Teide 1, which is the first M-type brown dwarf discovered, and LP 944-20, the closest M-type brown dwarf.\nSpectral class L.\nThe defining characteristic of spectral class M, the coolest type in the long-standing classical stellar sequence, is an optical spectrum dominated by absorption bands of titanium(II) oxide (TiO) and vanadium(II) oxide (VO) molecules. However, GD 165B, the cool companion to the white dwarf GD 165, had none of the hallmark TiO features of M dwarfs. The subsequent identification of many objects like GD 165B ultimately led to the definition of a new spectral class, the L dwarfs, defined in the red optical region of the spectrum not by metal-oxide absorption bands (TiO, VO), but by metal hydride emission bands (FeH, CrH, MgH, CaH) and prominent atomic lines of alkali metals (Na, K, Rb, Cs). As of 2013[ [update]], over 900 L\u00a0dwarfs had been identified, most by wide-field surveys: the Two Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS), the Deep Near Infrared Survey of the Southern Sky (DENIS), and the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS). This spectral class also contains the coolest main-sequence stars (&gt;\u00a080\u00a0\"M\"J), which have spectral classes L2 to L6.\nSpectral class T.\nAs GD 165B is the prototype of the L dwarfs, Gliese 229B is the prototype of a second new spectral class, the T dwarfs. T\u00a0dwarfs are pinkish-magenta. Whereas near-infrared (NIR) spectra of L dwarfs show strong absorption bands of H2O and carbon monoxide (CO), the NIR spectrum of Gliese 229B is dominated by absorption bands from methane (CH4), a feature which in the Solar System is found only in the giant planets and Titan. CH4, H2O, and molecular hydrogen (H2) collision-induced absorption (CIA) give Gliese 229B blue near-infrared colors. Its steeply sloped red optical spectrum also lacks the FeH and CrH bands that characterize L dwarfs and instead is influenced by exceptionally broad absorption features from the alkali metals Na and K. These differences led J. Davy Kirkpatrick to propose the T spectral class for objects exhibiting H- and K-band CH4 absorption. As of 2013[ [update]], 355 T\u00a0dwarfs were known. NIR classification schemes for T dwarfs have recently been developed by Adam Burgasser and Tom Geballe. Theory suggests that L dwarfs are a mixture of very-low-mass stars and sub-stellar objects (brown dwarfs), whereas the T dwarf class is composed entirely of brown dwarfs. Because of the absorption of sodium and potassium in the green part of the spectrum of T dwarfs, the actual appearance of T dwarfs to human visual perception is estimated to be not brown, but magenta. Early observations limited how distant T-dwarfs could be observed. T-class brown dwarfs, such as WISE 0316+4307, have been detected more than 100 light-years from the Sun. Observations with JWST have detected T-dwarfs such as UNCOVER-BD-1 up to 4500 parsec distant from the Sun.\nSpectral class Y.\nIn 2009, the coolest-known brown dwarfs had estimated effective temperatures between , and have been assigned the spectral class T9. Three examples are the brown dwarfs CFBDS J005910.90\u2013011401.3, ULAS J133553.45+113005.2 and ULAS J003402.77\u2212005206.7. The spectra of these objects have absorption peaks around 1.55 micrometres. Delorme et al. have suggested that this feature is due to absorption from ammonia and that this should be taken as indicating the T\u2013Y transition, making these objects of type Y0. However, the feature is difficult to distinguish from absorption by water and methane, and other authors have stated that the assignment of class Y0 is premature.\nThe first James Webb Space Telescope spectral energy distribution of a Y-dwarf was able to observe several bands of molecules in the atmosphere of the Y0-dwarf WISE 0359\u22125401. The observations covered spectroscopy from 1 to 12 \u03bcm and photometry at 15, 18 and 21 \u03bcm. The molecules water (H2O), methane (CH4), carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO2) and ammonia (NH3) were detected in WISE 0359\u22125401. Many of these features have been observed before in this Y-dwarf and warmer T-dwarfs by other observatories, but JWST was able to observe them in a single spectrum. Methane is the main reservoir of carbon in the atmosphere of WISE 0359\u22125401, but there is still enough carbon left to form detectable carbon monoxide (at 4.5\u20135.0 \u03bcm) and carbon dioxide (at 4.2\u20134.35 \u03bcm) in the Y-dwarf. Ammonia was difficult to detect before JWST, as it blends in with the absorption feature of water in the near-infrared, as well at 5.5\u20137.1 \u03bcm. At longer wavelengths of 8.5\u201312 \u03bcm the spectrum of WISE 0359\u22125401 is dominated by the absorption of ammonia. At 3 \u03bcm there is an additional newly detected ammonia feature.\nProposed spectral class H.\nIn 2025, astronomers Kevin Luhman and Catarina Alves de Oliveira proposed a new spectral class H (H from hydrocarbon). Using data from the James Webb Space Telescope, they identified many brown dwarfs in the star-forming region IC 348, that have very low masses (many under the deuterium burning limit) and have an absorption line at 3.4 \u03bcm corresponding to an as-of-yet unidentified aliphatic hydrocarbon. Such absorption line would define the H-class.\nRole of vertical mixing.\nIn the hydrogen-dominated atmosphere of brown dwarfs a chemical equilibrium between carbon monoxide and methane exists. Carbon monoxide reacts with hydrogen molecules and forms methane and hydroxyl in this reaction. The hydroxyl radical might later react with hydrogen and form water molecules. In the other direction of the reaction, methane reacts with hydroxyl and forms carbon monoxide and hydrogen. The chemical reaction is tilted towards carbon monoxide at higher temperatures (L-dwarfs) and lower pressure. At lower temperatures (T-dwarfs) and higher pressure the reaction is tilted towards methane, and methane predominates at the T/Y-boundary. However, vertical mixing of the atmosphere can cause methane to sink into lower layers of the atmosphere and carbon monoxide to rise from these lower and hotter layers. The carbon monoxide is slow to react back into methane because of an energy barrier that prevents the breakdown of the C-O bonds. This forces the observable atmosphere of a brown dwarf to be in a chemical disequilibrium. The L/T transition is mainly defined with the transition from a carbon-monoxide-dominated atmosphere in L-dwarfs to a methane-dominated atmosphere in T-dwarfs. The amount of vertical mixing can therefore push the L/T-transition to lower or higher temperatures. This becomes important for objects with modest surface gravity and extended atmospheres, such as giant exoplanets. This pushes the L/T transition to lower temperatures for giant exoplanets. For brown dwarfs this transition occurs at around 1200 K. The exoplanet HR 8799c, on the other hand, does not show any methane, while having a temperature of 1100K.\nThe transition between T- and Y-dwarfs is often defined as 500 K because of the lack of spectral observations of these cold and faint objects. Future observations with JWST and the ELTs might improve the sample of Y-dwarfs with observed spectra. Y-dwarfs are dominated by deep spectral features of methane, water vapor and possibly absorption features of ammonia and water ice. Vertical mixing, clouds, metallicity, photochemistry, lightning, impact shocks and metallic catalysts might influence the temperature at which the L/T and T/Y transition occurs.\nSecondary features.\nYoung brown dwarfs have low surface gravities because they have larger radii and lower masses than the field stars of similar spectral type. These sources are noted by a letter \"beta\" (\u03b2) for intermediate surface gravity or \"gamma\" (\u03b3) for low surface gravity. Indicators of low surface gravity include weak CaH, K I and Na I lines, as well as a strong VO line. \"Alpha\" (\u03b1) denotes normal surface gravity and is usually dropped. Sometimes an extremely low surface gravity is denoted by a delta (\u03b4). The suffix \"pec\" stands for \"peculiar\"; this suffix is still used for other features that are unusual, and summarizes different properties, indicating low surface gravity, subdwarfs and unresolved binaries. The prefix sd stands for subdwarf and only includes cool subdwarfs. This prefix indicates a low metallicity and kinematic properties that are more similar to halo stars than to disk stars. Subdwarfs appear bluer than disk objects. The red suffix describes objects with red color, but an older age. This is not interpreted as low surface gravity, but as a high dust content. The blue suffix describes objects with blue near-infrared colors that cannot be explained with low metallicity. Some are explained as L+T binaries, others are not binaries, such as 2MASS J11263991\u22125003550 and are explained with thin and/or large-grained clouds.\nSpectral and atmospheric properties of brown dwarfs.\nThe majority of flux emitted by L and T dwarfs is in the 1- to 2.5-micrometre near-infrared range. Low and decreasing temperatures through the late-M, -L, and -T dwarf sequence result in a rich near-infrared spectrum containing a wide variety of features, from relatively narrow lines of neutral atomic species to broad molecular bands, all of which have different dependencies on temperature, gravity, and metallicity. Furthermore, these low temperature conditions favor condensation out of the gas state and the formation of grains.\nTypical atmospheres of known brown dwarfs range in temperature from 2200 down to . Compared to stars, which warm themselves with steady internal fusion, brown dwarfs cool quickly over time; more massive dwarfs cool more slowly than less massive ones. There is some evidence that the cooling of brown dwarfs slows down at the transition between spectral classes L and T (about 1000 K).\nObservations of known brown dwarf candidates have revealed a pattern of brightening and dimming of infrared emissions that suggests relatively cool, opaque cloud patterns obscuring a hot interior that is stirred by extreme winds. The weather on such bodies is thought to be extremely strong, comparable to but far exceeding Jupiter's famous storms.\nOn January 8, 2013, astronomers using NASA's Hubble and Spitzer space telescopes probed the stormy atmosphere of a brown dwarf named 2MASS J22282889\u20134310262, creating the most detailed \"weather map\" of a brown dwarf thus far. It shows wind-driven, planet-sized clouds. The new research is a stepping stone toward a better understanding not only brown dwarfs, but also of the atmospheres of planets beyond the Solar System.\nIn April 2020 scientists reported measuring wind speeds of (up to 1,450 miles per hour) on the nearby brown dwarf 2MASS J10475385+2124234. To calculate the measurements, scientists compared the rotational movement of atmospheric features, as ascertained by brightness changes, against the electromagnetic rotation generated by the brown dwarf's interior. The results confirmed previous predictions that brown dwarfs would have high winds. Scientists are hopeful that this comparison method can be used to explore the atmospheric dynamics of other brown dwarfs and extrasolar planets.\nObservational techniques.\nCoronagraphs have recently been used to detect faint objects orbiting bright visible stars, including Gliese 229B.\nSensitive telescopes equipped with charge-coupled devices (CCDs) have been used to search distant star clusters for faint objects, including Teide 1.\nWide-field searches have identified individual faint objects, such as Kelu-1 (30 light-years away).\nBrown dwarfs are often discovered in surveys to discover exoplanets. Methods of detecting exoplanets work for brown dwarfs as well, although brown dwarfs are much easier to detect.\nBrown dwarfs can be powerful emitters of radio emission due to their strong magnetic fields. Observing programs at the Arecibo Observatory and the Very Large Array have detected over a dozen such objects, which are also called ultracool dwarfs because they share common magnetic properties with other objects in this class. The detection of radio emission from brown dwarfs permits their magnetic field strengths to be measured directly.\nBrown dwarfs X-ray sources.\nX-ray flares detected from brown dwarfs since 1999 suggest changing magnetic fields within them, similar to those in very-low-mass stars. Although they do not fuse hydrogen into helium in their cores like stars, energy from the fusion of deuterium and gravitational contraction keep their interiors warm and generate strong magnetic fields. The interior of a brown dwarf is in a rapidly boiling, or convective state. When combined with the rapid rotation that most brown dwarfs exhibit, convection sets up conditions for the development of a strong, tangled magnetic field near the surface. The magnetic fields that generated the flare observed by Chandra from LP 944-20 has its origin in the turbulent magnetized plasma beneath the brown dwarf's \"surface\".\nUsing NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory, scientists have detected X-rays from a low-mass brown dwarf in a multiple star system. This is the first time that a brown dwarf this close to its parent star(s) (Sun-like stars TWA 5A) has been resolved in X-rays. \"Our Chandra data show that the X-rays originate from the brown dwarf's coronal plasma which is some 3 million degrees Celsius\", said Yohko Tsuboi of Chuo University in Tokyo. \"This brown dwarf is as bright as the Sun today in X-ray light, while it is fifty times less massive than the Sun\", said Tsuboi. \"This observation, thus, raises the possibility that even massive planets might emit X-rays by themselves during their youth!\"\nBrown dwarfs as radio sources.\nThe first brown dwarf that was discovered to emit radio signals was LP 944-20, which was observed since it is also a source of X-ray emission, and both types of emission are signatures of coronae. Approximately 5\u201310% of brown dwarfs appear to have strong magnetic fields and emit radio waves, and there may be as many as 40 magnetic brown dwarfs within 25 pc of the Sun based on Monte Carlo modeling and their average spatial density. The power of the radio emissions of brown dwarfs is roughly constant despite variations in their temperatures. Brown dwarfs may maintain magnetic fields of up to 6 kG in strength. Astronomers have estimated brown dwarf magnetospheres to span an altitude of approximately 107 m given properties of their radio emissions. It is unknown whether the radio emissions from brown dwarfs more closely resemble those from planets or stars. Some brown dwarfs emit regular radio pulses, which are sometimes interpreted as radio emission beamed from the poles but may also be beamed from active regions. The regular, periodic reversal of radio wave orientation may indicate that brown dwarf magnetic fields periodically reverse polarity. These reversals may be the result of a brown dwarf magnetic activity cycle, similar to the solar cycle.\nThe first brown dwarf of spectral class M found to emit radio waves was LP 944-20, detected in 2001. The first brown dwarf of spectral class L found to emit radio waves was 2MASS J0036159+182110, detected in 2008. The first brown dwarf of spectral class T found to emit radio waves was 2MASS J10475385+2124234. This last discovery was significant since it revealed that brown dwarfs with temperatures similar to exoplanets could host strong &gt;1.7 kG magnetic fields. Although a sensitive search for radio emission from Y dwarfs was conducted at the Arecibo Observatory in 2010, no emission was detected.\nRecent developments.\nEstimates of brown dwarf populations in the solar neighbourhood suggest that there may be as many as six stars for every brown dwarf. A more recent estimate from 2017 using the young massive star cluster RCW 38 concluded that the Milky Way galaxy contains between 25 and 100 billion brown dwarfs. (Compare these numbers to the estimates of the number of stars in the Milky Way; 100 to 400 billion.)\nIn a study published in Aug 2017 NASA's Spitzer Space Telescope monitored infrared brightness variations in brown dwarfs caused by cloud cover of variable thickness. The observations revealed large-scale waves propagating in the atmospheres of brown dwarfs (similarly to the atmosphere of Neptune and other Solar System giant planets). These atmospheric waves modulate the thickness of the clouds and propagate with different velocities (probably due to differential rotation).\nIn August 2020, astronomers discovered 95 brown dwarfs near the Sun through the project Backyard Worlds: Planet 9.\nIn 2024 the James Webb Space Telescope provided the most detailed weather report yet on two brown dwarfs, revealing \"stormy\" conditions. These brown dwarfs, part of a binary star system named Luhman 16 discovered in 2013, are only 6.5 light-years away from Earth and are the closest brown dwarfs to the Sun. Researchers discovered that they have turbulent clouds, likely made of silicate grains, with temperatures ranging from to . This indicates that hot sand is being blown by winds on the brown dwarfs. Additionally, absorption signatures of carbon monoxide, methane, and water vapor were detected.\nBinary brown dwarfs.\nBrown dwarf\u2013brown dwarf binaries.\nBrown dwarfs binaries of type M, L, and T are less common with a lower mass of the primary. L-dwarfs have a binary fraction of about % and the binary fraction for late T, early Y-dwarfs (T5-Y0) is about .\nBrown dwarf binaries have a higher companion-to-host ratio formula_4 for lower mass binaries. Binaries with a M-type star as a primary have for example a broad distribution of \"q\" with a preference of \"q\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a00.4. Brown dwarfs on the other hand show a strong preference for \"q\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a00.7. The separation is decreasing with mass: M-type stars have a separation peaking at 3\u201330 astronomical units (au), M-L-type brown dwarfs have a projected separation peaking at 5\u20138 au and T5\u2013Y0 objects have a projected separation that follows a lognormal distribution with a peak separation of about 2.9\u00a0au.\nAn example is the closest brown dwarf binary Luhman 16 AB with a primary L7.5 dwarf and a separation of 3.5\u00a0au and \"q\"\u00a0=\u00a00.85. The separation is on the lower end of the expected separation for M-L-type brown dwarfs, but the mass ratio is typical.\nIt is not known if the same trend continues with Y-dwarfs, because their sample size is so small. The Y+Y dwarf binaries should have a high mass ratio q and a low separation, reaching scales of less than one au. In 2023, the Y+Y dwarf WISE J0336-0143 was confirmed as a binary with JWST, with a mass ratio of q=0.62\u00b10.05 and a separation of 0.97 astronomical units. The researchers point out that the sample size of low-mass binary brown dwarfs is too small to determine if WISE J0336-0143 is a typical representative of low-mass binaries or a peculiar system.\nObservations of the orbit of binary systems containing brown dwarfs can be used to measure the mass of the brown dwarf. In the case of 2MASSW J0746425+2000321, the secondary weighs 6% of the solar mass. This measurement is called a dynamical mass. The brown dwarf system closest to the Solar System is the binary Luhman 16. It was attempted to search for planets around this system with a similar method, but none were found.\nUnusual brown dwarf binaries.\nThe wide binary system 2M1101AB was the first binary with a separation greater than . The discovery of the system gave definitive insights to the formation of brown dwarfs. It was previously thought that wide binary brown dwarfs are not formed or at least are disrupted at ages of 1\u201310 Myr. The existence of this system is also inconsistent with the ejection hypothesis. The ejection hypothesis was a proposed hypothesis in which brown dwarfs form in a multiple system, but are ejected before they gain enough mass to burn hydrogen.\nMore recently the wide binary W2150AB was discovered. It has a similar mass ratio and binding energy as 2M1101AB, but a greater age and is located in a different region of the galaxy. While 2M1101AB is in a closely crowded region, the binary W2150AB is in a sparsely-separated field. It must have survived any dynamical interactions in its natal star cluster. The binary belongs also to a few L+T binaries that can be easily resolved by ground-based observatories. The other two are SDSS J1416+13AB and Luhman 16.\nThere are other interesting binary systems such as the eclipsing binary brown dwarf system 2MASS J05352184\u20130546085. Photometric studies of this system have revealed that the less massive brown dwarf in the system is hotter than its higher-mass companion.\nBrown dwarfs around stars.\nBrown dwarfs and massive planets in a close orbit (less than 5 au) around stars are rare and this is sometimes described as the brown dwarf desert. Less than 1% of stars with the mass of the sun have a brown dwarf within 3\u20135 au.\nAn example for a star\u2013brown dwarf binary is the first discovered T-dwarf Gliese 229 B, which orbits around the main-sequence star Gliese 229 A, a red dwarf. Brown dwarfs orbiting subgiants are also known, such as TOI-1994b which orbits its star every 4.03 days.\nThere is also disagreement if some low-mass brown dwarfs should be considered planets. The NASA Exoplanet archive includes brown dwarfs with a minimum mass less or equal to 30 Jupiter masses as planets as long as there are other criteria fulfilled (e.g. orbiting a star). The Working Group on Extrasolar Planets (WGESP) of the IAU on the other hand only considers planets with a mass below 13 Jupiter masses.\nWhite dwarf\u2013brown dwarf binaries.\nBrown dwarfs around white dwarfs are quite rare. GD 165 B, the prototype of the L dwarfs, is one such system. Such systems can be useful in determining the age of the system and the mass of the brown dwarf. Other white dwarf-brown dwarf binaries are COCONUTS-1 AB (7\u00a0billion years old), and LSPM J0055+5948 AB (10\u00a0billion years old), SDSS J22255+0016 AB (2\u00a0billion years old) WD 0806\u2212661 AB (1.5\u20132.7\u00a0billion years old).\nSystems with close, tidally locked brown dwarfs orbiting around white dwarfs belong to the post common envelope binaries or PCEBs. Only eight confirmed PCEBs containing a white dwarf with a brown dwarf companion are known, including WD 0137-349 AB. In the past history of these close white dwarf\u2013brown dwarf binaries, the brown dwarf is engulfed by the star in the red giant phase. Brown dwarfs with a mass lower than 20 Jupiter masses would evaporate during the engulfment. The dearth of brown dwarfs orbiting close to white dwarfs can be compared with similar observations of brown dwarfs around main-sequence stars, described as the brown-dwarf desert. The PCEB might evolve into a cataclysmic variable star (CV*) with the brown dwarf as the donor. Simulations have shown that highly evolved CV* are mostly associated with substellar donors (up to 80%). A type of CV*, called WZ Sge-type dwarf nova often show donors with a mass near the borderline of low-mass stars and brown dwarfs. The binary BW Sculptoris is such a dwarf nova with a brown dwarf donor. This brown dwarf likely formed when a donor star lost enough mass to become a brown dwarf. The mass loss comes with a loss of the orbital period until it reaches a minimum of 70\u201380 minutes at which the period increases again. This gives this evolutionary stage the name period bouncer. There could also exist brown dwarfs that merged with white dwarfs. The nova CK Vulpeculae might be a result of such a white dwarf\u2013brown dwarf merger.\nFormation and evolution.\nThe earliest stage of brown dwarf formation is called proto- or pre-brown dwarf. Proto-brown dwarfs are low-mass equivalents of protostars (class 0/I objects). Additionally Very Low Luminosity Objects (VeLLOs) that have Lint \u22640.1-0.2 L\u2609 are often proto-brown dwarfs. They are found in nearby star-forming clouds. Around 67 promising proto-brown dwarfs and 26 pre-brown dwarfs are known as of 2024. As of 2017 there is only one known proto-brown dwarf that is connected with a large Herbig\u2013Haro object. This is the brown dwarf Mayrit 1701117, which is surrounded by a pseudo-disk and a Keplerian disk. Mayrit 1701117 launches the 0.7-light-year-long jet HH 1165, mostly seen in ionized sulfur.\nBrown dwarfs form similarly to stars and are surrounded by protoplanetary disks, such as Cha 110913\u2212773444. Disks around brown dwarfs have been found to have many of the same features as disks around stars; therefore, it is expected that there will be accretion-formed planets around brown dwarfs. Given the small mass of brown dwarf disks, most planets will be terrestrial planets rather than gas giants. If a giant planet orbits a brown dwarf across our line of sight, then, because they have approximately the same diameter, this would give a large signal for detection by transit. The accretion zone for planets around a brown dwarf is very close to the brown dwarf itself, so tidal forces would have a strong effect.\nIn 2020, the closest brown dwarf with an associated primordial disk (class II disk)\u2014WISEA J120037.79-784508.3 (W1200-7845)\u2014was discovered by the Disk Detective project when classification volunteers noted its infrared excess. It was vetted and analyzed by the science team who found that W1200-7845 had a 99.8% probability of being a member of the \u03b5 Chamaeleontis (\u03b5 Cha) young moving group association. Its parallax (using Gaia DR2 data) puts it at a distance of 102 parsecs (or 333 lightyears) from Earth\u2014which is within the local Solar neighborhood.\nA paper from 2021 studied circumstellar discs around brown dwarfs in stellar associations that are a few million years old and 140 to 200 parsecs away. The researchers found that these disks are not massive enough to form planets in the future. There is evidence in these disks that might indicate that planet formation begins at earlier stages and that planets are already present in these disks. The evidence for disk evolution includes a decreasing disk mass over time, dust grain growth and dust settling. Two brown dwarf disks were also found in absorption and at least 4 disks are photoevaporating from external UV-ratiation in the Orion Nebula. Such objects are also called proplyds. Proplyd 181\u2212247, which is a brown dwarf or low-mass star, is surrounded by a disk with a radius of 30 astronomical units and the disk has a mass of 6.2\u00b11.0 MJ. Disks around brown dwarfs usually have a radius smaller than 40 astronomical units, but three disks in the more distant Taurus molecular cloud have a radius larger than 70 au and were resolved with ALMA. These larger disks are able to form rocky planets with a mass &gt;1 M\ud83d\udf28. There are also brown dwarfs with disks in associations older than a few million years, which might be evidence that disks around brown dwarfs need more time to dissipate. Especially old disks (&gt;20 Myrs) are sometimes called Peter Pan disks. Currently 2MASS J02265658-5327032 is the only known brown dwarf that has a Peter Pan disk.\nThe brown dwarf Cha 110913\u2212773444, located 500 light-years away in the constellation Chamaeleon, may be in the process of forming a miniature planetary system. Astronomers from Pennsylvania State University have detected what they believe to be a disk of gas and dust similar to the one hypothesized to have formed the Solar System. Cha 110913\u2212773444 is the smallest brown dwarf found to date (8\u00a0MJ), and if it formed a planetary system, it would be the smallest-known object to have one.\nPlanets around brown dwarfs.\nAccording to the IAU working definition (from August 2018) an exoplanet can orbit a brown dwarf. It requires a mass below 13 MJ and a mass ratio of \"M\"/\"M\"central&lt;2/(25+\u221a{621}), or roughly 1/25. This means that an object with a mass up to 3.2\u00a0MJ around a brown dwarf with a mass of 80\u00a0MJ is considered a planet. It also means that an object with a mass up to 0.52\u00a0MJ around a brown dwarf with a mass of 13\u00a0MJ is considered a planet.\nThe super-Jupiter planetary-mass objects 2M1207b, 2MASS J044144 and Oph 98 B that are orbiting brown dwarfs at large orbital distances may have formed by cloud collapse rather than accretion and so may be sub-brown dwarfs rather than planets, which is inferred from relatively large masses and large orbits. The first discovery of a low-mass companion orbiting a brown dwarf (ChaH\u03b18) at a small orbital distance using the radial velocity technique paved the way for the detection of planets around brown dwarfs on orbits of a few AU or smaller. However, with a mass ratio between the companion and primary in ChaH\u03b18 of about 0.3, this system rather resembles a binary star. Then, in 2008, the first planetary-mass companion in a relatively small orbit (MOA-2007-BLG-192Lb) was discovered orbiting a brown dwarf.\nPlanets around brown dwarfs are likely to be carbon planets depleted of water.\nA 2017 study, based upon observations with Spitzer estimates that 175 brown dwarfs need to be monitored in order to guarantee (95%) at least one detection of a below earth-sized planet via the transiting method. JWST could potentially detect smaller planets. The orbits of planets and moons in the solar system often align with the orientation of the host star/planet they orbit. Assuming the orbit of a planet is aligned with the rotational axis of a brown dwarf or planetary-mass object, the geometric transit probability of an object similar to Io can be calculated with the formula cos(79.5\u00b0)/cos(inclination). The inclination was estimated for several brown dwarfs and planetary-mass objects. SIMP 0136 for example has an estimated inclination of 80\u00b0\u00b112. Assuming the lower bound of i\u226568\u00b0 for SIMP 0136, this results in a transit probability of \u226548.6% for close-in planets. It is however not known how common close-in planets are around brown dwarfs and they might be more common for lower-mass objects, as disk sizes seem to decrease with mass.\nStrong evidence of a circumbinary planet in a polar orbit around 2M1510 was presented in 2025. The discovery was made with the Very Large Telescope.\nHabitability.\nHabitability for hypothetical planets orbiting brown dwarfs has been studied. Computer models suggesting conditions for these bodies to have habitable planets are very stringent, the habitable zone being narrow, close (T dwarf 0.005\u00a0au) and decreasing with time, due to the cooling of the brown dwarf (they fuse for at most 10 million years). The orbits there would have to be of extremely low eccentricity (on the order of ) to avoid strong tidal forces that would trigger a runaway greenhouse effect on the planets, rendering them uninhabitable. There would also be no moons.\nSuperlative brown dwarfs.\nIn 1984, it was postulated by some astronomers that the Sun may be orbited by an undetected brown dwarf (sometimes referred to as Nemesis) that could interact with the Oort cloud just as passing stars can. However, this hypothesis has fallen out of favor.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44403", "revid": "49829305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44403", "title": "Shakers", "text": "Christian monastic denomination\nThe United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing, more commonly known as the Shakers, are a millenarian restorationist Christian sect founded c.\u20091747 in England and then organized in the United States in the 1780s. They were initially known as \"Shaking Quakers\" because of their ecstatic behavior during worship services.\nEspousing egalitarian ideals, the Shakers practice a celibate and communal utopian lifestyle, pacifism, uniform charismatic worship, and their model of equality of the sexes, which they institutionalized in their society in the 1780s. They are also known for their simple living, architecture, technological innovation, music, and furniture. Women took on spiritual leadership roles alongside men, including founding leaders such as Jane Wardley, Ann Lee, and Lucy Wright. The Shakers emigrated from England and settled in British North America, with an initial settlement at Watervliet, New York (present-day Colonie), in 1774.\nDuring the mid-19th century, an Era of Manifestations resulted in a period of dances, gift drawings, and gift songs inspired by spiritual revelations. At its peak in the mid-19th century, there were 2,000\u20134,000 Shaker believers living in 18 major communities and numerous smaller, often short-lived communities. External and internal societal changes in the mid- and late 19th century resulted in the thinning of the Shaker community as members left or died with few converts to the faith to replace them.\nBy 1920, there were only 12 Shaker communities remaining in the United States. As of 2019[ [update]], there is only one active Shaker village: Sabbathday Lake Shaker Village, in Maine. Consequently, many of the other Shaker settlements are now museums. As of August\u00a02025[ [update]], there are three members.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe Shakers were one of a few religious groups which were formed during the 18th century in the northwest of England; originating out of the Wardley Society. James and Jane Wardley and others broke off from the Quakers in 1747 at a time when the Quakers were weaning themselves away from frenetic spiritual expression. The Wardleys formed the Wardley Society, which was also known as the \"Shaking Quakers\".\nFuture leader Ann Lee and her parents were early members of the sect. This group of \"charismatic\" Christians became the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing (USBCSA). Their beliefs were based upon spiritualism and included the notion that they received messages from the Holy Spirit which were expressed during religious revivals. They also experienced what they interpreted as messages from God during silent meditations and became known as \"Shaking Quakers\" because of the ecstatic nature of their worship services. They believed in the renunciation of sinful acts and that the end of the world was near.\nMeetings were first held in Bolton, England, where the articulate preacher, Jane Wardley, urged her followers to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Repent. For the kingdom of God is at hand. The new heaven and new earth prophesied of old is about to come. The marriage of the Lamb, the first resurrection, the new Jerusalem descended from above, these are even now at the door. And when Christ appears again, and the true church rises in full and transcendent glory, then all anti-Christian denominations\u2014the priests, the Church, the pope\u2014will be swept away.\nOther meetings were then held in Manchester, Meretown (also spelled Mayortown), Chester and other places near Manchester. As their numbers grew, members began to be persecuted, mobbed, and stoned; Lee was imprisoned in Manchester. The members looked to women for leadership, believing that the second coming of Christ would be through a woman. In 1770, Ann Lee was revealed in \"manifestation of Divine light\" to be the second coming of Christ and was called Mother Ann.\nMother Ann Lee.\nAnn Lee joined the Shakers by 1758, then became the leader of the small community. \"Mother Ann\", as her followers later called her, claimed numerous revelations regarding the fall of Adam and Eve and its relationship to sexual intercourse. A powerful preacher, she called her followers to confess their sins, give up all their worldly goods, and take up the cross of celibacy and forsake marriage, as part of the renunciation of all \"lustful gratifications\".\nShe said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I saw in vision the Lord Jesus in his kingdom and glory. He revealed to me the depth of man's loss, what it was, and the way of redemption therefrom. Then I was able to bear an open testimony against the sin that is the root of all evil; and I felt the power of God flow into my soul like a fountain of living water. From that day I have been able to take up a full cross against all the doleful works of the flesh.\nHaving supposedly received a revelation, on May 19, 1774, Ann Lee and eight of her followers sailed from Liverpool for colonial America. Ann and her husband Abraham Stanley, brother William Lee, niece Nancy Lee, James Whittaker, father and son John Hocknell and Richard Hocknell, James Shephard, and Mary Partington traveled to colonial America and landed in New York City. Abraham Stanley abandoned Ann Lee shortly thereafter and remarried. The remaining Shakers settled in Watervliet, New York, in 1776. Mother Ann's hope for the Shakers in America was represented in a vision: \"I saw a large tree, every leaf of which shone with such brightness as made it appear like a burning torch, representing the Church of Christ, which will yet be established in this land.\" Unable to swear an Oath of Allegiance, as it was against their faith, the members were imprisoned for about six months. Since they were only imprisoned because of their faith, this raised sympathy of citizens and thus helped to spread their religious beliefs. Mother Ann, revealed as the \"second coming\" of Christ, traveled throughout the eastern states, preaching her gospel views.\nJoseph Meacham and communalism.\nAfter Ann Lee and James Whittaker died, Joseph Meacham (1742\u20131796) became the leader of the Shakers in 1787, establishing its New Lebanon headquarters. He had been a New Light Baptist minister in Enfield, Connecticut, and was reputed to have, second only to Mother Ann, the spiritual gift of revelation.\nJoseph Meacham brought Lucy Wright (1760\u20131821) into the ministry to serve with him and together they developed the Shaker form of communal living (religious communism). By 1793 property had been made a \"consecrated whole\" in each Shaker community.\nShakers developed written covenants in the 1790s. Those who signed the covenant had to confess their sins, consecrate their property and their labor to the society, and live as celibates. If they were married before joining the society, their marriages ended when they joined. A few less-committed believers lived in \"noncommunal orders\" as Shaker sympathizers who preferred to remain with their families. The Shakers never forbade marriage for such individuals, but considered it less perfect than the celibate state.\nIn the 5 years between 1787 and 1792, the Shakers gathered into eight more communities in addition to the Watervliet and New Lebanon villages: Hancock, Harvard, Shirley, and Tyringham Shaker Villages in Massachusetts; Enfield Shaker Village in Connecticut; Canterbury and Enfield in New Hampshire; and Sabbathday Lake and Alfred Shaker Village in Maine.\nLucy Wright and westward expansion.\nAfter Joseph Meacham died, Lucy Wright continued Ann Lee's missionary tradition. Shaker missionaries proselytized at revivals, not only in New England and New York but also farther west. Missionaries such as Issachar Bates and Benjamin Seth Youngs (older brother of Isaac Newton Youngs) gathered hundreds of proselytes into the faith.\nOn April 12 of 1805, Benjamin Youngs and two companions held the first ceremony west of the Allegheny Mountains. It was held at the cabin of James Beedle, East of Lebanon, Ohio. In 2019, the cabin was relocated, by the Warren County Historical Society, to its current site next to Harmon Museum in Lebanon, Ohio, the \"1795 Beedle Log Cabin\".&lt;ref name=\"wchsmuseum/about\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nMother Lucy Wright introduced new hymns and dances to make sermons more lively. She also helped write Benjamin S. Youngs' book \"The Testimony of Christ's Second Appearing\" (1808).\nShaker missionaries entered Kentucky and Ohio after the Cane Ridge, Kentucky revival of 1801\u20131803, which was an outgrowth of the Logan County, Kentucky, Revival of 1800. From 1805 to 1807, they founded Shaker societies at Union Village, Ohio; South Union, Logan County, Kentucky; and Pleasant Hill, Kentucky (in Mercer County, Kentucky). In 1806, a Shaker village, named Watervliet, after the New York town that was the site of the first Shaker settlement, was established in what is today Kettering, Ohio, surviving until 1900 when its remaining adherents joined the Union Village Shaker settlement. In 1824, the Whitewater Shaker Settlement was established in southwestern Ohio. The westernmost Shaker community was located at West Union (called Busro because it was on Busseron Creek) on the Wabash River a few miles north of Vincennes in Knox County, Indiana.\nEra of Manifestations.\nThe Shaker movement was at its height between 1820 and 1860. It was at this time that the sect had the most members, and the period was considered its \"golden age\". It had expanded from New England to the Midwestern states of Indiana and Ohio and Southern state of Kentucky. It was during this period that it became known for its furniture design and craftsmanship. In the late 1830s a spiritual revivalism, the Era of Manifestations was born. It was also known as the \"period of Mother's work\", for the spiritual revelations that were passed from the late Mother Ann Lee.\nThe expression of \"spirit gifts\" or messages were realized in \"gift drawings\" made by Hannah Cohoon, Polly Reed, Polly Collins, and other Shaker sisters. A number of those drawings remain as important artifacts of Shaker folk art.\nIsaac N. Youngs, the scribe and historian for the New Lebanon, New York, Church Family of Shakers, preserved a great deal of information on the era of manifestations, which Shakers referred to as Mother Ann's Work, in his Domestic Journal, his diary, Sketches of Visions, and his history, A Concise View of the Church of God.\nIn addition, Shakers preserved thousands of spirit communications still extant in collections now held by the Berkshire Athenaeum, Fruitlands Museums Library, Hamilton College Library, Hancock Shaker Village, Library of Congress, New York Public Library, New York State Library, the Shaker Library at Sabbathday Lake Shaker Village, Shaker Museum | Mount Lebanon, Western Reserve Historical Society, Williams College Archives, Winterthur Museum Library, and other repositories.\nAmerican Civil War period.\nAs pacifists, the Shakers did not believe that it was acceptable to kill or harm others, even in time of war. During the American Civil War, both Union and Confederate soldiers found their way to the Shaker communities. Shakers tended to sympathize with the Union but they did feed and care for both Union and Confederate soldiers. President Lincoln exempted Shaker males from military service, and they became some of the first conscientious objectors in American history.\nThe end of the Civil War brought large changes to the Shaker communities. One of the most important changes was the postwar economy and its growing mechanization, which produced goods much cheaper than the Shakers' traditional methods.\n20th century to the present.\nBy the early 20th century, the once numerous Shaker communities were failing and closing. Shaker artisans could not compete with modern factories, and so many chose to renounce their faith and leave so they could earn a living. By mid-century, new federal laws were passed denying control of adoption to religious groups, rendering it impossible for children to join the group. Today, in the 21st century, the Shaker community that still exists\u2014The Sabbathday Lake Shaker Community\u2014denies that Shakerism was a failed utopian experiment.\nTheir message, surviving over two centuries in the United States, reads in part as follows:\nShakerism is not, as many would claim, an anachronism; nor can it be dismissed as the final sad flowering of 19th century liberal utopian fervor. Shakerism has a message for this present age\u2013a message as valid today as when it was first expressed. It teaches above all else that God is Love and that our most solemn duty is to show forth that God who is love in the World.\nIn 1957, the elders and eldresses of Canterbury Shaker Village elected to permanently close the \"covenant\" for new Shaker membership in light of there being only a handful of surviving members. The village dissolved by 1992, leaving only Sabbathday Lake open.\nOn January 2, 2017, Sister Frances Carr died aged 89 at the Sabbathday community, leaving only two remaining Shakers: Brother Arnold Hadd, age 58, and Sister June Carpenter, 77. A profile of the Shaker community at Sabbathday Lake, published in \"The New York Times\" in September 2024, described Brother Arnold, aged 67 and Sister June, aged 86, preparing to celebrate the 250th anniversary of Ann Lee's arrival in New York. Brother Arnold said: \"We've survived 250 years. We are looking forward as much as our ancestors did to the next \u2014 whatever that involves. All we have to do is be ready.\"\nThe Spring/Summer 2019 issue of the Shaker newsletter \"The Clarion\" also makes reference to a Brother Andrew. These remaining Shakers hope that sincere newcomers will join them.\nThe Shakers at Sabbathday Lake \"stressed the autonomy of each local community\", declaring that even though the Shaker covenant remains closed (technically preventing new Shakers from joining), they are willing to accept them nonetheless. This Sabbathday Lake Shaker Community receives around two enquiries every week.\nLeadership.\nFour Shakers led the society from 1772 until 1821.\nAfter 1821, there was no one single leader, but rather a small nucleus of Ministry elders and eldresses with authority over all the Shaker villages, each with their own teams of elders and eldresses who were subordinate to the Ministry.\nThe Shaker Ministry continued to build the society after Lucy Wright died in 1821:\nSubsequent members of the Shaker Ministry included:\nTheology.\nDualism.\nShaker theology is based on the idea of the dualism of God as male and female: \"So God created him; male and female he created them\" (Genesis 1:27). This passage was interpreted as showing the dual nature of the Creator.\nFirst and second coming.\nShakers believed that Jesus, born of a woman, the son of a Jewish carpenter, was the male manifestation of Christ and the first Christian Church; and that Mother Ann, daughter of an English blacksmith, was the female manifestation of Christ and the second Christian Church (which the Shakers believed themselves to be). She was seen as the Bride made ready for the Bridegroom, and in her, the promises of the Second Coming were fulfilled.\nNature of God.\nBecause of the adoptionist view of Christ becoming divine only during his baptism and the dualist idea that God was to be expressed in male and female genders, Shakers are sometimes viewed as being nontrinitarian. However, modern-day Shakers profess the divinity of Christ and claim that Shaker dualism is because \"God has no sex in our human understanding of the term; yet being pure spirit He may best be thought of by man with his limited power of comprehension as having the attributes of both maleness and femaleness\". The Trinity is not viewed as being false. Instead, Shakers argue that the Trinity has been misinterpreted for being completely masculine. Ann Lee's embodiment of Christ thus completed the Trinity by fulfilling the female aspect of God.\nEthics.\nAdam's sin was understood to be sex, which was considered to be an act of impurity. Therefore, marriage was abolished within the body of the Believers in the Second Appearance, which was patterned after the Kingdom of God, in which there would be no marriage or giving in marriage. The four highest Shaker virtues were virgin purity, communalism, confession of sin \u2013 without which one could not become a Believer \u2013 and separation from the world.\nAnn Lee's doctrine was simple: confession of sins was the door to the spiritual regeneration, and absolute celibacy was the rule of life. Shakers were known to be so chaste that men and women avoided even small instances of physical contact such as shaking hands, going up and down stairs, or assisting with heavy loads.\nEquality.\nEnshrined in Shaker doctrine is a belief in racial equality and gender equality.\nCelibacy and children.\nShakers were celibate; procreation was forbidden after they joined the society (except for women who were already pregnant at admission). Children were added to their communities through indenture, adoption, or conversion. Occasionally a foundling was anonymously left on a Shaker doorstep. They welcomed all, often taking in orphans and the homeless. For children, Shaker life was structured, safe and predictable, with no shortage of adults who cared about their young charges.\nWhen Shaker youths, girls and boys, reached the age of 21, they were permitted to choose whether to leave or fully convert to the Shaker faith. Unwilling to remain celibate, many chose to leave; today there are thousands of descendants of Shaker-raised seceders.\nGender roles.\nShaker religion valued women and men equally in religious leadership. The church was hierarchical, and at each level women and men shared authority. This was reflective of the Shaker belief that God was both female and male. They believed men and women were equal in the sight of God, and should be treated equally on Earth, too. Thus two Elders and two Eldresses formed the Ministry at the top of the administrative structure. Two lower-ranking Elders and two Eldresses led each family, women overseeing women and men overseeing men. This allowed the continuation of church leadership when there was a shortage of men.\nIn their labor, Shakers followed traditional gender work-related roles. To prevent gender mixing and thus preserve chastity, Shaker homes and workrooms were segregated into men and women's areas. Women worked indoors spinning, weaving, cooking, sewing, cleaning, washing, and making or packaging goods for sale. In good weather, groups of Shaker women were outdoors, gardening and gathering wild herbs for sale or home consumption. Men worked in the fields doing farm work and in their shops at crafts and trades.\nWorship.\nShakers worshipped in meetinghouses painted white and unadorned; pulpits and decorations were eschewed as worldly things. In meeting, they marched, sang, danced, and sometimes turned, twitched, jerked, or shouted. The earliest Shaker worship services were unstructured, loud, chaotic and emotional. However, Shakers later developed precisely choreographed dances and orderly marches accompanied by symbolic gestures. Many outsiders disapproved of or mocked Shakers' mode of worship without understanding the symbolism of their movements or the content of their songs.\nShaker communities.\nThe Shakers built more than twenty communities in the United States. Women and men shared leadership of the Shaker communities. Women preached and received revelations as the Spirit fell upon them. Thriving on the religious enthusiasm of the first and second Great Awakenings, the Shakers declared their messianic, communitarian message with significant response. One early convert observed: \"The wisdom of their instructions, the purity of their doctrine, their Christ-like deportment, and the simplicity of their manners, all appeared truly apostolical.\" The Shakers represent a small but important Utopian response to the gospel. Preaching in their communities knew no boundaries of gender, social class, or education.\nEconomics.\nThe communality of the Believers was an economic success, and their cleanliness, honesty and frugality received the highest praise. All Shaker villages ran farms, using the latest scientific methods in agriculture. They raised most of their own food, so farming, and preserving the produce required to feed them through the winter, had to be priorities. Their livestock were fat and healthy, and their barns were commended for convenience and efficiency.\nWhen not doing farm work, Shaker brethren pursued a variety of trades and hand crafts, many documented by Isaac N. Youngs. When not doing housework, Shaker sisters did likewise, spinning, weaving, sewing, and making sale goods\u2014baskets, brushes, bonnets, brooms, fancy goods, and homespun fabric that was known for high quality, but were more famous for their medicinal herbs, garden seeds of the Shaker Seed Company, apple sauce, and knitted garments (Canterbury). Some communities, especially those in New England, produced maple syrup for sale as well.\nShakers ran a variety of businesses to support their communities; many Shaker villages had their own tanneries. The Shaker goal in their labor was perfection. Ann Lee's followers preserved her admonitions about work:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Good spirits will not live where there is dirt.\nDo your work as though you had a thousand years to live and as if you were to die tomorrow.\nPut your hands to work, and your heart to God.\nMother Ann also cautioned them against getting into debt.\nShaker craftsmen were known for a style of Shaker furniture that was plain in style, durable, and functional. Shaker chairs were usually mass-produced because a great number of them were needed to seat all the Shakers in a community.\nAround the time of the American Civil War, the Shakers at Mount Lebanon, New York, increased their production and marketing of Shaker chairs. They were so successful that several furniture companies produced their own versions of \"Shaker\" chairs. Because of the quality of their craftsmanship, original Shaker furniture is costly. Shakers won respect and admiration for their productive farms and orderly communities. Their industry brought about many inventions like Babbitt metal, the rotary harrow, the circular saw, the clothespin, the Shaker peg, the flat broom, the wheel-driven washing machine, a machine for setting teeth in textile cards, a threshing machine, metal pens, a new type of fire engine, a machine for matching boards, numerous innovations in waterworks, planing machinery, a hernia truss, silk reeling machinery, small looms for weaving palm leaf, machines for processing broom corn, ball-and-socket tilters for chair legs, and a number of other useful inventions. Even prolific Shaker inventors like Tabitha Babbit did not patent their inventions before or after putting them into practice, which has complicated subsequent efforts by 20th century historians to assign priority.\nShakers were the first large producers of medicinal herbs in the United States, and pioneers in the sale of seeds in paper packets. Brethren grew the crops, but sisters picked, sorted, and packaged their products for sale, so those industries were built on a foundation of women's labor in the Shaker partnership between the sexes.\nThe Shakers believed in the value of hard work and kept comfortably busy. Mother Ann said: \"Labor to make the way of God your own; let it be your inheritance, your treasure, your occupation, your daily calling\".\nArchitecture and furnishings.\nThe Shakers' dedication to hard work and perfection has resulted in a unique range of architecture, furniture and handicraft styles. They designed their furniture with care, believing that making something well was in itself an act of prayer. Before the late 18th century, they rarely fashioned items with elaborate details or extra decoration, but only made things for their intended uses. The ladder-back chair was a popular piece of furniture. Shaker craftsmen made most things out of pine or other inexpensive woods and hence their furniture was light in color and weight.\nThe earliest Shaker buildings (late 18th \u2013 early 19th century) in the northeast were timber or stone buildings built in a plain but elegant New England colonial style. Early 19th-century Shaker interiors are characterized by an austerity and simplicity. For example, they had a \"peg rail\", a continuous wooden device like a pelmet with hooks running all along it near the lintel level. They used the pegs to hang up clothes, hats, and very light furniture pieces such as chairs when not in use. The simple architecture of their homes, meeting houses, and barns has had a lasting influence on American architecture and design. There is a collection of furniture and utensils at Hancock Shaker Village outside of Pittsfield, Massachusetts, that is famous for its elegance and practicality.\nAt the end of the 19th century, however, Shakers adopted some aspects of Victorian decor, such as ornate carved furniture, patterned linoleum, and cabbage-rose wallpaper. Examples are on display in the Hancock Shaker Village Trustees' Office, a formerly spare, plain building \"improved\" with ornate additions such as fish-scale siding, bay windows, porches, and a tower.\nCulture.\nArtifacts.\nBy the middle of the 20th century, as the Shaker communities themselves were disappearing, some American collectors whose visual tastes were formed by the stark aspects of the modernist movement found themselves drawn to the spare artifacts of Shaker culture, in which \"form follows function\" was also clearly expressed. Kaare Klint, an architect and furniture designer, used styles from Shaker furniture in his work.\nOther artifacts of Shaker culture are their spirit drawings, dances, and songs, which are important genres of Shaker folk art. Doris Humphrey, an innovator in technique, choreography, and theory of dance movement, made a full theatrical art with her dance entitled Dance of The Chosen, which depicted Shaker religious fervor.\nThe largest collection of Shaker artifacts is the Robert and Virginia Jones Shaker collection at Harmon Museum, in Lebanon, Ohio.\nMusic.\nThe Shakers composed thousands of songs, and also created many dances; both were an important part of the Shaker worship services. In Shaker society, a spiritual \"gift\" could also be a musical revelation, and they considered it important to record musical inspirations as they occurred.\nScribes, many of whom had no formal musical training, used a form of music notation called the letteral system. This method used letters of the alphabet, often not positioned on a staff, along with a simple notation of conventional rhythmic values, and has a curious, and coincidental, similarity to some ancient Greek music notation.\nMany of the lyrics to Shaker tunes consist of syllables and words from unknown tongues, the musical equivalent of glossolalia. It has been surmised that many of them were imitated from the sounds of Native American languages, as well as from the songs of African slaves, especially in the southernmost of the Shaker communities, but in fact the melodic material is derived from European scales and modes.\nMost early Shaker music is monodic, that is to say, composed of a single melodic line with no harmonization. The tunes and scales recall the folksongs of the British Isles, but since the music was written down and carefully preserved, it is \"art\" music of a special kind rather than folklore. Many melodies are of extraordinary grace and beauty, and the Shaker song repertoire, though still relatively little known, is an important part of the American cultural heritage and of world religious music in general.\nShakers' earliest hymns were shared by word of mouth and letters circulated among their villages. Many Believers wrote out the lyrics in their own manuscript hymnals. In 1813, they published \"Millennial Praises,\" a hymnal containing only lyrics.\nAfter the Civil War, the Shakers published hymnbooks with both lyrics and music in conventional four-part harmonies. These works are less strikingly original than the earlier, monodic repertoire. The songs, hymns, and anthems were sung by the Shakers usually at the beginning of their Sunday worship. Their last hymnbook was published in 1908 at Canterbury, New Hampshire.\nThe surviving Shakers sing songs drawn from both the earlier repertoire and the four part songbooks. They perform all of these unaccompanied, in single-line unison singing. The many recent, harmonized arrangements of older Shaker songs for choirs and instrumental groups mark a departure from traditional Shaker practice.\n\"Simple Gifts\" was composed in 1848 by Elder Joseph Brackett, on or about the time he moved to the Shaker community at Alfred, Maine. English poet and songwriter Sydney Carter used the song as the basis for a hymn in 1963 \"Lord of the Dance\", also referenced as \"I Am the Dance\".\nSome scholars, such as Daniel W. Patterson and Roger Lee Hall, have compiled books of Shaker songs, and groups have been formed to sing the songs and perform the dances.\nThe most extensive recordings of the Shakers singing their own music were made between 1960 and 1980 and released on a 2-CD set with illustrated booklet, \"Let Zion Move: Music of the Shakers\". Other recordings are available of Shaker songs, both documentation of singing by the Shakers themselves, as well as songs recorded by other groups (see external links). Two widely distributed commercial recordings by The Boston Camerata, \"Simple Gifts\" (1995) and \"The Golden Harvest\" (2000), were recorded at the Shaker community of Sabbathday Lake, Maine, with active cooperation from the surviving Shakers, whose singing can be heard at several points on both recordings.\nAaron Copland's 1944 ballet score \"Appalachian Spring\", written for Martha Graham, uses the Shaker tune \"Simple Gifts\" as the basis of its finale. Given to Graham with the working title \"Ballet for Martha\", it was named by her for the scenario she had in mind, though Copland often said he was thinking of neither Appalachia nor a spring while he wrote it. Shakers did, in fact, worship on Holy Mount in the Appalachians.\n\"Laboring Songs,\" a piece composed by Dan Welcher in 1997 for large wind ensemble, is based upon traditional shaker tunes including \"Turn to the Right\" and \"Come Life, Shaker Life\".\nWorks inspired by Shaker culture.\nFor a Shaker Seminar held in Massachusetts in 1981, composer Roger Lee Hall wrote a pageant of original Shaker poetry and music titled, \"The Humble Heart\", featuring singing and dancing by \"The New English Song and Daunce Companie\".\nShaker lifestyle and tradition is celebrated in Arlene Hutton's play \"As It Is in Heaven\", which is a re-creation of a decisive time in the history of the Shakers. The play is written by Arlene Hutton, the pen name of actor/director Beth Lincks. Born in Louisiana and raised in Florida, Lincks was inspired to write the play after visiting the Pleasant Hills Shaker village in Harrodsburg, Kentucky, a restored community that the Shakers occupied for more than a century, before abandoning it in 1927 because of the inability of the sect to attract new converts.\nIn the early 1960s, American folklorist Robin Evanchuk, after trips to Shaker communities including Sabbathday Lake, created a stage reproduction of a Shaker worship service. It included both the a cappella songs and also the dance-like movements traditionally used in the Shaker worship service. It was performed by the Westwind Dance Ensemble of Los Angeles, the AMAN Folk Ensemble of Los Angeles, and her own dance group, The Liberty Assembly. Performances by the AMAN Folk Ensemble continued until at least 1989, when the Shaker service was included in a concert tour of the AMAN Folk Ensemble that included concerts in the American mid-west, east, and New York City.\nRobert Newton Peck's 1972 book, \"A Day No Pigs Would Die\", depicts a family that lives by the \"Book of Shaker\". They are clearly not traditional Shakers, however, as they live in a family unit separate from others, strive for individual success, and have children.\nNovelist John Fowles wrote in 1985 \"A Maggot\", a postmodern historical novel culminating in the birth of Ann Lee, and describing early Shakers in England.\nJanice Holt Giles depicted a Shaker Community in her novel \"The Believers\".\nIn 2004 the Finnish choreographer Tero Saarinen and Boston Camerata music director Joel Cohen created a live performance work with dance and music entitled \"Borrowed Light\". While all the music is Shaker song performed in a largely traditional manner, the dance intermingles only certain elements of Shaker practice and belief with Saarinen's original choreographic ideas, and with distinctive costumes and lighting. \"Borrowed Light\" has been given over 60 performances since 2004 in eight countries, recently (early 2008) in Australia and New Zealand, and most recently (2011) in France, Germany, Finland, the Netherlands, and Belgium. In addition to Doris Humphrey, Martha Graham and Tero Saarinen cited above, choreographers Twyla Tharp (\"Sweet Fields\", 1996) and Martha Clarke (\"Angel Reapers\", 2011) also set movement to Shaker hymns. Playwright Alfred Uhry collaborated with Martha Clarke on \"Angel Reapers\" and used Shaker texts as source material. The music of \"Angel Reapers\" was successfully and uniquely arranged by Music Director Arthur Solari.\nIn 2009, Toronto-based, American-born poet Damian Rogers released her first volume of poetry, \"Paper Radio\". The lifestyle and philosophy of the Shakers and their matriarch Ann Lee are recurring themes in her work.\nEducation.\nNew Lebanon, New York, Shakers began keeping school in 1815. Certified as a public school by the state of New York beginning in 1817, the teachers operated on the Lancasterian system, which was considered advanced for its time. Boys attended class during the winter and the girls in the summer. The first Shaker schools taught reading, spelling, oration, arithmetic and manners, but later diversified their coursework to include music, algebra, astronomy, and agricultural chemistry.\nNon-Shaker parents respected the Shakers' schooling so much that they often took advantage of schools that the Shaker villages provided, sending their children there for an education. State inspectors and other outsiders visited the schools and made favorable comments on teachers and students.\nModern-day Shakers.\nTurnover was high; the group reached maximum size of about 5,000 full members in 1840, and 6,000 believers at the peak of the Shaker movement. The Shaker communities continued to lose members, partly through attrition, since believers did not give birth to children, and also due to economics; products hand-made by Shakers could not compete with mass-produced products and individuals moved to the cities for better livelihoods. There were only 12 Shaker communities left by 1920.\nIn 1957, after \"months of prayer\", Eldresses Gertrude, Emma, and Ida, leaders of the United Society of Believers in Canterbury Shaker Village, voted to close the Shaker Covenant, the document which all new members need to sign to become members of the Shakers in Canterbury Shaker Village.\nIn 1988, speaking about the three men and women in their 20s and 30s who had become Shakers and were living in the Sabbathday Lake Shaker Village, Eldress Bertha Lindsay of the other community, the Canterbury Shaker Village, disputed their membership in the society: \"To become a Shaker you have to sign a legal document taking the necessary vows and that document, the official covenant, is locked up in our safe. Membership is closed forever.\"\nHowever, Shaker covenants lack a \"sunset clause\" and today's Shakers of Sabbathday Lake Shaker Village welcome sincere new converts to Shakerism into the society:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If someone wants to become a Shaker, and the Shakers assent, the would-be member can move into the dwelling house. If the novices, as they are called, stay a week, they sign an articles [\"sic\"] of agreement, which protects the colony from being sued for lost wages. After a year, the Shakers will take a vote whether to allow the novice in, but it takes another four years to be granted full Shaker status in sharing in the colony's finances and administrative and worship decisions.\nOn January 2, 2017, Sister Frances Carr died aged 89 at the Sabbathday community, leaving only two remaining Shakers: Brother Arnold Hadd, age 58, and Sister June Carpenter, 77. In the Spring/Summer 2019 issue of the Shaker newsletter \"The Clarion\", the current membership was given as Brother Arnold, Sister June, and Brother Andrew. These remaining Shakers still hope that sincere newcomers will join them. In September 2024, the \"New York Times\" published an article about the last two remaining members of the community. In August 2025, NPR reported that Sister April Baxter has joined the community, but is not yet a full member.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "44405", "revid": "1272226674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44405", "title": "Kabala", "text": "Kabala may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44406", "revid": "43840816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44406", "title": "Zoroaster", "text": "Iranian prophet and spiritual founder of Zoroastrianism\nZarathushtra Spitama, more commonly known as Zoroaster or Zarathustra, was an Iranian religious reformer who challenged the tenets of the contemporary Ancient Iranian religion, becoming the spiritual founder of Zoroastrianism. In the oldest Zoroastrian scriptures, the Gathas, which he is traditionally believed to have authored, he is described as a preacher and a poet-prophet. Some have claimed, with much scholarly controversy, to find his influence in Heraclitus, Plato, Pythagoras, and, perhaps less controversially, in the Abrahamic religions, including Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, particularly through concepts of cosmic dualism and personal morality.\nHe spoke an Eastern Iranian language, named Avestan by scholars after the corpus of Zoroastrian religious texts written in that language. Based on this, it is tentative to place his homeland somewhere in the eastern regions of Greater Iran (perhaps in modern-day Afghanistan or Tajikistan), but his exact birthplace is uncertain. His life is traditionally dated to sometime around the 7th and 6th centuries BC; though most scholars, using linguistic and socio-cultural evidence, suggest a dating to somewhere in the second millennium BC.\nZoroastrianism eventually became Iran's most prominent religion from around the 6th century BC, enjoying official sanction during the time of the Sassanid Empire, until the 7th century AD, when the religion itself began to decline following the Arab-Muslim conquest of Iran. Zoroaster is credited with authorship of the Gathas as well as the , a series of hymns composed in Old Avestan that cover the core of Zoroastrian thinking. Little is known about Zoroaster; most of his life is known only from these scant texts. By modern standards of historiography, no evidence can place him into a fixed period and the historicization surrounding him may be a part of a trend from before the 10th century AD that historicizes legends and myths.\nHis name likely means \"he who manages camels,\" though its etymology has multiple interpretations, and the Greek form \"Zoroaster\" stems from later transliterations. According to Zoroastrian tradition, Zoroaster was trained as a priest from a young age and, around age 30, experienced a divine revelation introducing him to Ahura Mazda, the Wise Lord, and the dualism of truth (\"asha\") versus deception (\"druj\"). He is said to have gained royal patronage under King Vishtaspa, spread his teachings, and founded a community, marrying three times and having six children. Zoroastrian texts portray his philosophy as emphasizing free will, ethical responsibility, and aligning with \"asha\" through good thoughts, words, and deeds.\nName and etymology.\nZoroaster's name in his native language, Avestan, was probably . His translated name, \"Zoroaster\", derives from a later (5th century BC) Greek transcription, (), as used in Xanthus's (Fragment 32) and in Plato's \"First Alcibiades\" (122a1). This form appears subsequently in the Latin , and, in later Greek orthographies, as . The Greek form of the name appears to be based on a phonetic transliteration or semantic substitution of Avestan with the Greek (literally 'undiluted') and the BMAC substrate with .\nIn Avestan, is generally accepted to derive from an Old Iranian . The element half of the name () is thought to be the Indo-Iranian root for 'camel', with the entire name meaning 'he who can manage camels'. Reconstructions from later Iranian languages\u2014particularly from the Middle Persian (300 BC) , which is the form that the name took in the 9th- to 12th-century Zoroastrian texts\u2014suggest that might be a zero-grade form of . Subject then to whether derives from or from , several interpretations have been proposed.\nIf is the original form, it may mean 'with old/aging camels', related to Avestic (\"cf.\" Pashto and Ossetian , 'old'; Middle Persian , 'old'):\nThe interpretation of the () in the Avestan was for a time itself subjected to heated debate because the is an irregular development: as a rule, (a first element that ends in a dental consonant) should have Avestan or as a development from it. Why this is not so for has not yet been determined. Notwithstanding the phonetic irregularity, that Avestan with its was linguistically an actual form is shown by later attestations reflecting the same basis. All present-day Iranian-language variants of his name derive from the Middle Iranian variants of , which, in turn, all reflect Avestan's fricative .\nIn Middle Persian, the name is , in Parthian , in Manichaean Middle Persian , in Early New Persian , and in modern (New Persian), the name is .\nThe name is attested in Classical Armenian sources as (often with the variant ). The most important of these testimonies were provided by the Armenian authors Eznik of Kolb, Elishe, and Movses Khorenatsi. The spelling was formed through an older form which started with , a fact which the German Iranologist Friedrich Carl Andreas (1846\u20131930) used as evidence for a Middle Persian spoken form . Based on this assumption, Andreas even went so far to form conclusions from this also for the Avestan form of the name. However, the modern Iranologist R\u00fcdiger Schmitt rejects Andreas's assumption, and states that the older form which started with was just influenced by Armenian ('wrong, unjust, idle'), which therefore means that \"the name must have been reinterpreted in an anti-Zoroastrian sense by the Armenian Christians\". Furthermore, Schmitt adds: \"it cannot be excluded, that the (Parthian or) Middle Persian form, which the Armenians took over ( or the like), was merely metathesized to pre-Arm. \".\nDate.\nThere is no consensus on the dating of Zoroaster. The Avesta gives no direct information about it, while historical sources are conflicting. Some scholars base their date reconstruction on the Proto-Indo-Iranian language and Proto-Indo-Iranian religion, while others use internal evidence. While many scholars today consider a date around 1000 BC to be the most likely, others still consider a range of dates between 1500 and 500 BC to be possible.\nClassical scholarship.\nClassical scholarship in the 6th to 4th century BC believed he existed 6,000 years before Xerxes I's invasion of Greece in 480 BC (Xanthus, Eudoxus, Aristotle, Hermippus), which is a possible misunderstanding of the Zoroastrian four cycles of 3,000 years (i.e. 12,000 years). This belief is recorded by Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, and variant readings could place it 600 years before Xerxes I, somewhere before 1000 BC. However, Diogenes also mentions Hermodorus's belief that Zoroaster lived 5,000 years before the Trojan War, which would mean he lived around 6200 BC. The 10th-century Suda provides a date of 500 years before the Trojan War. Pliny the Elder cited Eudoxus which placed his death 6,000 years before Plato, c.\u20096300 BC. Other pseudo-historical constructions are those of Aristoxenus who recorded Zaratas the Chaldeaean to have taught Pythagoras in Babylon, or lived at the time of mythological Ninus and Semiramis. According to Pliny the Elder, there were two Zoroasters. The first lived thousands of years ago, while the second accompanied Xerxes I in the invasion of Greece in 480 BC. Some scholars propose that the chronological calculation for Zoroaster was developed by Persian magi in the 4th century BC, and as the early Greeks learned about him from the Achaemenids, this indicates they did not regard him as a contemporary of Cyrus the Great, but as a remote figure.\nZoroastrian and Muslim scholarship.\nSome later pseudo-historical and Zoroastrian sources (the , which references a date \"258 years before Alexander\") place Zoroaster in the 6th century BC, which coincided with the accounts by Ammianus Marcellinus from the 4th century AD. The traditional Zoroastrian date originates in the period immediately following Alexander the Great's conquest of the Achaemenid Empire in 330 BC. The Seleucid rulers who gained power following Alexander's death instituted an \"Age of Alexander\" as the new calendrical epoch. This did not appeal to the Zoroastrian priesthood who then attempted to establish an \"Age of Zoroaster\". To do so, they needed to establish when Zoroaster had lived, which they accomplished by (erroneously, according to Mary Boyce some even identified Cyrus with Vishtaspa) counting back the length of successive generations, until they concluded that Zoroaster must have lived \"258 years before Alexander\". This estimate then re-appeared in the 9th- to 12th-century Arabic and Pahlavi texts of Zoroastrian tradition, like the 10th century Al-Masudi who cited a prophecy from a lost Avestan book in which Zoroaster foretold the Empire's destruction in 300 years, but the religion would last for 1,000 years.\nIn Zoroastrian scriptures, King Yima (Jam) and the legendary Pishdadian dynasty preceded the time when Zoroaster proclaimed his teachings.\nModern scholarship.\nIn modern scholarship, two main approaches can be distinguished: a late dating to the 7th and 6th centuries BC, based on the indigenous Zoroastrian tradition, and an early dating, which places his life more generally in the 15th to 9th centuries BC.\nLate date.\nSome scholars propose a period between 7th and 6th century BC, for example, c.\u2009650\u2013600 BC or 559\u2013522 BC. The latest possible date is the mid 6th century BC, at the time of Achaemenid Empire's Darius I, or his predecessor Cyrus the Great. This date gains credence mainly from attempts to connect figures in Zoroastrian texts to historical personages; thus some have postulated that the mythical Vishtaspa who appears in an account of Zoroaster's life was Darius I's father, also named Vishtaspa (or Hystaspes in Greek). However, if this was true, it seems unlikely that the Avesta would not mention that Vishtaspa's son became the ruler of the Persian Empire, or that this key fact about Darius's father would not be mentioned in the Behistun Inscription. It is also possible that Darius I's father was named in honor of the Zoroastrian patron, indicating possible Zoroastrian faith by Arsames.\nEarly date.\nScholars such as Mary Boyce (who dated Zoroaster to somewhere between 1700 and 1000 BC) used linguistic and socio-cultural evidence to place Zoroaster between 1500 and 1000 BC (or 1200 and 900 BC). The basis of this theory is primarily proposed on linguistic similarities between the Old Avestan language of the Zoroastrian Gathas and the Sanskrit of the Rigveda (c.\u20091700\u20131100 BC), a collection of early Vedic hymns. Both texts are considered to have a common archaic Indo-Iranian origin. The Gathas portray an ancient Stone-Bronze Age bipartite society of warrior-herdsmen and priests (compared to Bronze tripartite society; some conjecture that it depicts the Yaz culture), and that it is thus implausible that the Gathas and Rigveda could have been composed more than a few centuries apart. These scholars suggest that Zoroaster lived in an isolated tribe or composed the Gathas before the 1200\u20131000 BC migration by the Iranians from the steppe to the Iranian Plateau. The shortfall of the argument is the vague comparison, and the archaic language of Gathas does not necessarily indicate time difference.\nIt has been suggested by Silk Road Seattle, using its own interpretations of Victor H. Mair's writings on the topic that Zoroaster could have been born in the 2nd millennium BC.\nAlmut Hintze, the British Library, and the European Research Council have dated Zoroaster to roughly 3,500 years ago, in the 2nd millennium BC.\nPlace.\nThe birthplace of Zoroaster is also unknown, and the language of the Gathas is not similar to the proposed north-western and north-eastern regional dialects of Persia. It is also suggested that he was born in one of the two areas and later lived in the other area.\n 9 and 17 cite the Ditya River in Airyanem Va\u0113jah (Middle Persian ) as Zoroaster's home and the scene of his first appearance. The Avesta (both Old and Younger portions) does not mention the Achaemenids or of any West Iranian tribes such as the Medes, Persians, or even the Parthians. The refers to some Iranian peoples that are unknown in the Greek and Achaemenid sources about the 6th and 5th century BC Eastern Iran. The contain 17 regional names, most of which are located in north-eastern and eastern Iran.\nHowever, in 59.18, the , or supreme head of the Zoroastrian priesthood, is said to reside in 'Ragha' (Badakhshan). In the 9th- to 12th-century Middle Persian texts of Zoroastrian tradition, 'Ragha' and many other places appear as locations in Western Iran. While the land of Media does not figure at all in the Avesta (the westernmost location noted in the scripture is Arachosia), the , or \"Primordial Creation\", (20.32 and 24.15) puts Ragha in Media (medieval Rai). However, in Avestan, Ragha is simply a toponym meaning 'plain, hillside.'\nApart from these indications in Middle Persian sources that are open to interpretations, there are a number of other sources. The Greek and Latin sources are divided on the birthplace of Zoroaster. Among the Greek accounts, Ctesias located him in Bactria, Diodorus Siculus placed him among Ariaspai (in Sistan), Cephalion and Justin suggests east of greater Iran, whereas Pliny and Origen suggest west of Iran as his birthplace. Moreover, there is the suggestion that there has been more than one Zoroaster.\nOn the other hand, in post-Islamic sources Shahrastani (1086\u20131153), an Iranian writer originally from Shahrist\u0101n, in present-day Turkmenistan, proposed that Zoroaster's father was from Atropatene (also in Medea) and his mother was from Rey. Coming from a reputed scholar of religion, this was a serious blow to the various regions which all claimed that Zoroaster originated from their homelands, some of which had then decided that Zoroaster must have then been buried in their regions or composed his Gathas there or preached there. Arabic sources of the same period and the same region of historical Persia also consider Azerbaijan as the birthplace of Zarathustra.\nBy the late 20th century, most scholars had settled on an origin in eastern Greater Iran. Gnoli proposed Sistan, Baluchistan (though in a much wider scope than the present-day province) as the homeland of Zoroastrianism; Frye voted for Bactria and Chorasmia; Khlopin suggests the Tedzen Delta in present-day Turkmenistan. Sarianidi considered the Bactria\u2013Margiana Archaeological Complex region as \"the native land of the Zoroastrians and, probably, of Zoroaster himself.\" Boyce includes the steppes to the west from the Volga. The medieval \"from Media\" hypothesis is no longer taken seriously, and Zaehner has even suggested that this was a Magi-mediated issue to garner legitimacy, but this has been likewise rejected by Gershevitch and others.\nThe 2005 \"Encyclopedia Iranica\" article on the history of Zoroastrianism summarizes the issue with \"while there is general agreement that he did not live in western Iran, attempts to locate him in specific regions of eastern Iran, including Central Asia, remain tentative\".\nLife.\nZoroaster is recorded as the son of Pourushaspa of the Spitama family, and Dugd\u014dw, while his great-grandfather was Ha\u0113\u010dataspa. All the names appear appropriate to the nomadic tradition. His father's name means 'possessing gray horses' (with the word meaning 'horse'), while his mother's means 'milkmaid'. According to the tradition, he had four brothers, two older and two younger, whose names are given in much later Pahlavi work.\nZoroaster's training for priesthood probably started very early around seven years of age. He became a priest probably around the age of 15, and according to Gathas, gaining knowledge from other teachers and personal experience from traveling when he left his parents at age 20. By the age of 30, Zoroaster experienced a revelation during a spring festival; on the river bank he saw a shining being, who revealed himself as (Good Purpose) and taught him about (Wise Lord) and five other radiant figures. Zoroaster soon became aware of the existence of two primal spirits, the second being (Destructive Spirit), with opposing concepts of (order) and (deception). Thus he decided to spend his life teaching people to seek . He received further revelations and saw a vision of the seven , and his teachings were collected in the and the .\nEventually, at the age of about 42, Zoroaster received the patronage of queen Hutaosa and a ruler named Vishtaspa, an early adherent of Zoroastrianism (possibly from Bactria according to the Shahnameh).\nAccording to the tradition, he lived for many years after Vishtaspa's conversion, managed to establish a faithful community, and married three times. His first two wives bore him three sons, Isat V\u00e2stra, Urvatat Nara, and Hvare Chithra, and three daughters, Freni, Thriti, and Pouruchista. His third wife, Hv\u014dvi, was childless. Zoroaster died when he was 77 years and 40 days old. There are conflicting traditions on Zoroaster's manner of death. The most common is that he was murdered by a (priest of the old religion) named Br\u0101dr\u0113s, while performing at an altar. The , and the epic , ascribe his death to a Turanian soldier named Baraturish, potentially a spin on the same figure, while other traditions combine both accounts or hold that he died of old age.\nCypress of Kashmar.\nThe Cypress of Kashmar is a mythical cypress tree of legendary beauty and gargantuan dimensions. It is said to have sprung from a branch brought by Zoroaster from Paradise and to have stood in today's Kashmar in northeastern Iran and to have been planted by Zoroaster in honor of the conversion of King Vishtaspa to Zoroastrianism. According to the Iranian physicist and historian Zakariya al-Qazwini, King Vishtaspa had been a patron of Zoroaster who planted the tree himself. In his ('The Wonders of Creatures and the Marvels of Creation'), he further describes how the Al-Mutawakkil in 247 AH (861 AD) caused the mighty cypress to be felled, and then transported it across Iran, to be used for beams in his new palace at Samarra. Before, he wanted the tree to be reconstructed before his eyes. This was done in spite of protests by the Iranians, who offered a very great sum of money to save the tree. Al-Mutawakkil never saw the cypress, because he was murdered by a Turkic soldier (possibly in the employ of his son) on the night when it arrived on the banks of the Tigris.\nInfluences.\nIn Christianity.\nAthanasius Kircher identified Zoroaster with Ham. The French figurist Jesuit missionary to China Joachim Bouvet thought that Zoroaster, the Chinese cultural hero Fuxi and Hermes Trismegistus were actually the Biblical patriarch Enoch.\nIn Islam.\nThe \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Iranica\" claims that the stories of Zoroaster's life were attributed to him by quoting stories from Christianity and Judaism, but the most quotations were from Islam after the entry of Muslims into Persia, as it was a means for the Zoroastrian clergy to strengthen their religion.\nThe orientalist Arthur Christensen in his book \"\"Iran During The Sassanid Era\"\", mentioned that the sources dating back to the era of the Sasanian state in ancient Persian that refer to the Zoroastrian doctrine do not match the sources that appeared after the collapse of the state, such as the Pahlavi source and others. The reason is that because of the fall of the Sasanian state, the Zoroastrian clerics tried to save their religion from extinction through modifying it to resemble the religion of Muslims to retain followers in the Zoroastrian religion.\nGherardo Gnoli comments that the Islamic conquest of Persia caused a huge impact on the Zoroastrian doctrine:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After the Islamic conquest of Persia and the migration of many Zoroastrians to India and after being exposed to Islamic and Christian propaganda, the Zoroastrians, especially the Parsis in India, went so far as to deny dualism and consider themselves completely monotheists. After several transformations and developments, one of the distinctive features of the Zoroastrian religion gradually faded away and almost disappeared from modern Zoroastrianism\nManeckji Nusserwanji Dhalla described the doctrine of the Gayomarthians sect as another attempt to mitigate the dualism that has always been the essence of Zoroastrianism. This was due to the Prophet Muhammad\u2019s emphasis on monotheism and the Muslims\u2019 mockery of the doctrine of worshipping two gods, which made the Zoroastrians view dualism as a defect, so they added monotheism, which led to the Zoroastrians\u2019 division into sects and he mentions examples of the Zoroastrian attempt to establish a monotheistic belief by diminishing the importance of Ahriman, including that Ahura Mazda and Ahriman were created from time, or that Ahura Mazda himself allowed the existence of evil, or that Ahriman was a corrupt angel who rebelled against Ahura Mazda. Then he mentions the name of a Persian book from the 15th century in which it is written that the Magi (Zoroastrians) believe that Allah and Iblis are brothers.\nThis provides an explanation of why a number of parallels have been drawn between Zoroastrian teachings and Islam. Such parallels include the evident similarities between Amesha Spenta and the archangel Gabriel, praying five times a day, covering one's head during prayer, and the mention of Thamud and Iram of the Pillars in the Quran. \nThe Sabians, who believed in free will coincident with Zoroastrians, are also mentioned in the Quran 22:17.\nMuslim scholastic views.\nLike the Greeks of classical antiquity, Islamic tradition understands Zoroaster to be the founding prophet of the Magians (via Aramaic, Arabic , collective ). The 11th-century Cordoban Ibn Hazm (Zahiri school) contends that the designation \"[follower] of the Scripture [of God]\" cannot apply in light of the Zoroastrian assertion that their books were destroyed by Alexander. Citing the authority of the 8th-century al-Kalbi, the 9th- and 10th-century Sunni historian al-Tabari (I, 648) reports that Zaradusht bin Isfiman (an Arabic adaptation of \"Zarathushtra Spitama\") was an inhabitant of Israel and a servant of one of the disciples of the prophet Jeremiah. According to this tale, Zaradusht defrauded his master, who cursed him, causing him to become leprous (cf. Elisha's servant Gehazi in Jewish scripture). According to Ibn Kathir, Zoroaster came into conflict with Jeremiah which resulted in angry Jeremiah cast a curse upon Zoroaster, causing him to suffer Leprosy, and exiling him. Zoroaster later moved to a place of modern-day Azerbaijan which ruled by Bashtaasib (Vishtaspa), governor of Nebuchadnezzar, and spread his teaching of Zoroastrianism there. Bashtaasib then followed his teaching, forces the inhabitants of Persia to convert to Zoroastrianism and killed those who refused.\nIbn Kathir has quoted the original narrative was borrowed from Tabari's record of the \"History of Jerusalem\". He also mentioned that Zoroastrian was synonymous with Majus.\nSibt ibn al-Jawzi instead stated that some older narration said that Zoroaster was a former disciple of Uzair.\nAl-Tabari (I, 681\u2013683) recounts that Zaradusht accompanied a Jewish prophet to Bishtasb/Vishtaspa. Upon their arrival, Zaradusht translated the sage's Hebrew teachings for the king and so convinced him to convert (Tabari also notes that they had previously been ) to the Magian religion.\nThe 12th-century heresiographer al-Shahrastani describes the Majusiya into three sects, the (an otherwise undocumented sect that \u2013 per Sharastani \u2013 seems to have had a stronger doctrine of Ahriman's \"non-reality\"), the and the , among which Al-Shahrastani asserts that only the last of the three were properly followers of Zoroaster. As regards the recognition of a prophet, Zoroaster has said: \"They ask you as to how should they recognize a prophet and believe him to be true in what he says; tell them what he knows the others do not, and he shall tell you even what lies hidden in your nature; he shall be able to tell you whatever you ask him and he shall perform such things which others cannot perform.\" (Namah Shat Vakhshur Zartust, .5\u20137. 50\u201354)\nAhmadiyya view.\nThe Ahmadiyya Community views Zoroaster as a Prophet and describe the expressions of the all-good Ahura Mazda and evil Ahriman as merely referring to the coexistence of forces of good and evil enabling humans to exercise free will.\nIn Manichaeism.\nManichaeism considered Zoroaster to be a figure in a line of prophets of which Mani (216\u2013276) was the culmination. Zoroaster's ethical dualism is\u2014to an extent\u2014incorporated in Manichaeism's doctrine which, unlike Mani's thoughts, viewed the world as being locked in an epic battle between opposing forces of good and evil. Manicheanism also incorporated other elements of Zoroastrian tradition, particularly the names of supernatural beings; however, many of these other Zoroastrian elements are either not part of Zoroaster's own teachings or are used quite differently from how they are used in Zoroastrianism.\nIn the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith.\nZoroaster appears in the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith as a \"Manifestation of God\", one of a line of prophets who have progressively revealed the Word of God to a gradually maturing humanity. Zoroaster thus shares an exalted station with Abraham, Moses, Krishna, Jesus, Muhammad, the B\u00e1b, and the founder of the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith, Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h. Shoghi Effendi, the head of the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith in the first half of the 20th century, saw Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h as the fulfillment of a post-Sassanid Zoroastrian prophecy that saw a return of Sassanid emperor Bahram; Effendi also stated that Zoroaster lived roughly 1000 years before Jesus.\nPhilosophy.\nIn the , Zoroaster sees the human condition as the mental struggle between and . The cardinal concept of \u2014which is highly nuanced and difficult to translate\u2014is at the foundation of all Zoroastrian doctrine, including that of (who is ), creation (that is ), existence (that is ), and as the condition for free will.\nThe purpose of humankind, like that of all other creation, is to sustain and align itself to . For humankind, this occurs through active ethical participation in life, ritual, and the exercise of constructive/good thoughts, words, and deeds.\nElements of Zoroastrian philosophy entered the West through their influence on Judaism and Platonism and have been identified as one of the key early events in the development of philosophy. Among the classic Greek philosophers, Heraclitus is often referred to as inspired by Zoroaster's thinking.\nIn 2005, the Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy ranked Zoroaster as first in the chronology of philosophers. Zoroaster's impact lingers today due in part to the system of religious ethics he founded called . The word is Avestan and is translated as 'Worship of Wisdom/Mazda' in English. The encyclopedia Natural History (Pliny) claims that Zoroastrians later educated the Greeks who, starting with Pythagoras, used a similar term, philosophy, or \"love of wisdom\" to describe the search for ultimate truth.\nZoroaster emphasized the freedom of the individual to choose right or wrong and individual responsibility for one's deeds. This personal choice to accept and shun is one's own decision and not a dictate of . For Zoroaster, by thinking good thoughts, saying good words, and doing good deeds (e.g. assisting the needy, doing good works, or conducting good rituals) one increases in the world and in themselves, celebrating the divine order, and coming a step closer on the everlasting road to . Thus, mankind are not the slaves or servants of , but can make a personal choice to be co-workers, thereby perfecting the world as saoshyants (\"world-perfecters\") and eventually achieving the status of an (\"master of \").\nIconography.\nAlthough a few recent depictions of Zoroaster show him performing some deed of legend, in general the portrayals merely present him in white vestments (which are also worn by present-day Zoroastrian priests). He often is seen holding a collection of unbound rods or twigs, known as a (Avestan; Middle Persian ), which is generally considered to be another symbol of priesthood, or with a book in hand, which may be interpreted to be the Avesta. Alternatively, he appears with a mace, the \u2014usually stylized as a steel rod crowned by a bull's head\u2014that priests carry in their installation ceremony. In other depictions he appears with a raised hand and thoughtfully lifted finger, as if to make a point. Alternatively, this could be an Islamic influence, drawing parallels between both religions' conception of the oneness of God.\nZoroaster is rarely depicted as looking directly at the viewer; instead, he appears to be looking slightly upwards, as if beseeching. Zoroaster is almost always depicted with a beard along with other factors bearing similarities to 19th-century portraits of Jesus.\nMany modern depictions of Zoroaster derive from a Sassanid-era rock-face carving at Taq-e Bostan. In this depiction, a figure is seen to preside over the coronation of either Ardashir I or II. The figure is standing on a lotus, with a in hand and with a gloriole around his head. Until the 1920s, this figure was commonly thought to be a depiction of Zoroaster, but in recent years is more commonly interpreted to be a depiction of Mithra.\nWestern references to Zoroaster and Zoroastrianism.\nIn classical antiquity.\nThe Greeks\u2014in the Hellenistic sense of the term\u2014had an understanding of Zoroaster as expressed by Plutarch, Diogenes Laertius, and Agathias that saw him, at the core, to be the \"prophet and founder of the religion of the Iranian peoples,\" Beck notes that \"the rest was mostly fantasy\". Zoroaster was set in the ancient past, six to seven millennia before the Common Era, and was described as a king of Bactria or a Babylonian (or teacher of Babylonians), and with a biography typical of a Neopythagorean sage, i.e. having a mission preceded by ascetic withdrawal and enlightenment. However, at first mentioned in the context of dualism, in Moralia, Plutarch presents Zoroaster as \"Zaratras,\" not realizing the two to be the same, and he is described as a \"teacher of Pythagoras\".\nZoroaster has also been described as a sorcerer-astrologer\u00a0\u2013 the creator of both magic and astrology. Deriving from that image, and reinforcing it, was a \"mass of literature\" attributed to him and that circulated the Mediterranean world from the 3rd century BC to the end of antiquity and beyond.\nThe language of that literature was predominantly Greek, though at one stage or another various parts of it passed through Aramaic, Syriac, Coptic, or Latin. Its ethos and cultural matrix was likewise Hellenistic, and \"the ascription of literature to sources beyond that political, cultural and temporal framework represents a bid for authority and a fount of legitimizing \"alien wisdom\". Zoroaster and the magi did not compose it, but their names sanctioned it.\" The attributions to \"exotic\" names (not restricted to magians) conferred an \"authority of a remote and revelatory wisdom.\"\nAmong the named works attributed to \"Zoroaster\" is a treatise \"On Nature\" (), which appears to have originally constituted four volumes (i.e. papyrus rolls). The framework is a retelling of Plato's Myth of Er, with Zoroaster taking the place of the original hero. While Porphyry imagined Pythagoras listening to Zoroaster's discourse, \"On Nature\" has the Sun in middle position, which was how it was understood in the 3rd century. In contrast, Plato's 4th-century BC version had the Sun in second place above the Moon. Colotes accused Plato of plagiarizing Zoroaster, and Heraclides Ponticus wrote a text titled \"Zoroaster\" based on his perception of \"Zoroastrian\" philosophy, in order to express his disagreement with Plato on natural philosophy. With respect to substance and content in \"On Nature\" only two facts are known: that it was crammed with astrological speculations, and that Necessity (\"Anank\u00e9\") was mentioned by name and that she was in the air.\nPliny the Elder names Zoroaster as the inventor of magic (\"Natural History\" 30.2.3). \"However, a principle of the division of labor appears to have spared Zoroaster most of the responsibility for introducing the dark arts to the Greek and Roman worlds.\" That \"dubious honor\" went to the \"fabulous magus, Ostanes, to whom most of the pseudepigraphic magical literature was attributed.\" Although Pliny calls him the inventor of magic, the Roman does not provide a \"magician's persona\" for him. Moreover, the little \"magical\" teaching that is ascribed to Zoroaster is actually very late, with the very earliest example being from the 14th century.\nAssociation with astrology according to Roger Beck, were based on his Babylonian origin, and Zoroaster's Greek name was identified at first with star-worshiping (, 'star sacrificer\") and, with the , even as the 'living' star. Later, an even more elaborate mythoetymology evolved: Zoroaster died by the living () flux () of fire from the star () which he himself had invoked, and even, that the stars killed him in revenge for having been restrained by him.\nThe alternate Greek name for Zoroaster was Zaratras or Zaratas/Zaradas/Zaratos. Pythagoreans considered the mathematicians to have studied with Zoroaster in Babylonia. Lydus, in \"On the Months\", attributes the creation of the seven-day week to \"the Babylonians in the circle of Zoroaster and Hystaspes,\" and who did so because there were seven planets. Lucian of Samosata, in \"Mennipus\" 6, reports deciding to journey to Babylon \"to ask one of the magi, Zoroaster's disciples and successors,\" for their opinion.\nWhile the division along the lines of Zoroaster/astrology and Ostanes/magic is an \"oversimplification, the descriptions do at least indicate what the works are not\"; they were not expressions of Zoroastrian doctrine, they were not even expressions of what the Greeks and Romans \"imagined the doctrines of Zoroastrianism to have been\". The assembled fragments do not even show noticeable commonality of outlook and teaching among the several authors who wrote under each name.\nAlmost all Zoroastrian pseudepigrapha is now lost, and of the attested texts\u2014with only one exception\u2014only fragments have survived. Pliny's 2nd- or 3rd-century attribution of \"two million lines\" to Zoroaster suggest that (even if exaggeration and duplicates are taken into consideration) a formidable pseudepigraphic corpus once existed at the Library of Alexandria. This corpus can safely be assumed to be pseudepigrapha because no one before Pliny refers to literature by \"Zoroaster\", and on the authority of the 2nd-century Galen of Pergamon and from a 6th-century commentator on Aristotle it is known that the acquisition policies of well-endowed royal libraries created a market for fabricating manuscripts of famous and ancient authors.\nThe exception to the fragmentary evidence (i.e. reiteration of passages in works of other authors) is a complete Coptic tractate titled (after the first-person narrator) discovered in the Nag Hammadi library in 1945. A three-line cryptogram in the colophones following the 131-page treatise identify the work as \"words of truth of Zostrianos. God of Truth []. Words of Zoroaster.\" Invoking a \"God of Truth\" might seem Zoroastrian, but there is otherwise \"nothing noticeably Zoroastrian\" about the text and \"in content, style, ethos and intention, its affinities are entirely with the congeners among the Gnostic tractates.\"\nAnother work circulating under the name of \"Zoroaster\" was the (or ), and which ran to five volumes (i.e. papyrus rolls). The title and fragments suggest that it was an astrological handbook, \"albeit a very varied one, for the making of predictions.\" A third text attributed to Zoroaster is \"On Virtue of Stones\" (), of which nothing is known other than its extent (one volume) and that pseudo-Zoroaster 'sang' it (from which Cumont and Bidez conclude that it was in verse). Numerous other fragments preserved in the works of other authors are attributed to \"Zoroaster\", but the titles of those books are not mentioned.\nThese pseudepigraphic texts aside, some authors did draw on a few genuinely Zoroastrian ideas. The \"Oracles of Hystaspes\", by \"Hystaspes\", another prominent magian pseudo-author, is a set of prophecies distinguished from other Zoroastrian pseudepigrapha in that it draws on real Zoroastrian sources. Some allusions are more difficult to assess: in the same text that attributes the invention of magic to Zoroaster, Pliny states that Zoroaster laughed on the day of his birth, although in an earlier place, Pliny had sworn in the name of Hercules that no child had ever done so before the 40th day from his birth. This notion of Zoroaster's laughter also appears in the 9th\u2013 to 11th-century texts of genuine Zoroastrian tradition, and for a time it was assumed that the origin of those myths lay with indigenous sources. Pliny also records that Zoroaster's head had pulsated so strongly that it repelled the hand when laid upon it, a presage of his future wisdom. The Iranians were however just as familiar with the Greek writers, and the provenance of other descriptions are clear. For instance, Plutarch's description of its dualistic theologies reads thus: \"Others call the better of these a god and his rival a daemon, as, for example, Zoroaster the Magus, who lived, so they record, five thousand years before the siege of Troy. He used to call the one Horomazes and the other Areimanius\".\nIn the modern era.\nAn early reference to Zoroaster in English literature occur in the writings of the physician-philosopher Sir Thomas Browne who asserted in his \"Religio Medici\" (1643):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I believe, besides Zoroaster, there were divers that writ before Moses, who notwithstanding have suffered the common fate of time.\u2014\u200a\nIn E. T. A. Hoffmann's novel \"Klein Zaches, genannt Zinnober\" (1819), the mage Prosper Alpanus states that Professor Zoroaster was his teacher.\nIn \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\" (1885), considered to be his seminal work, the philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche gives to the central character the native Iranian name \"Zarathustra\". Nietzsche explained the choice of the name in his autobiographical work \"Ecce Homo\": \"Zarathustra was the first to see in the struggle of good and evil the true driving-wheel in the machinery of things [...] Zarathustra \"created\" the disastrous error that is morality: thus he must also be the first to \"acknowledge\" the mistake.\" Though the naming of Zarathustra is an acknowledgement of the lineage of moralism, Nietzsche advocates atheism and moral nihilism, directly contradicting the philosophy of Zoroaster, and makes subversive allusions to Zoroastrianism. Despite Nietzsche's iconoclasm, some admirers of pre-Islamic Persian culture see his use of the name \"Zarathustra\" as a mark of uncritical respect towards the historical figure.\nNotable influence on modern Western culture.\nA sculpture of Zoroaster by Edward Clark Potter, representing ancient Persian judicial wisdom and dating to 1896, towers over the Appellate Division Courthouse of New York State at East 25th Street and Madison Avenue in Manhattan. A sculpture of Zoroaster is included among other prominent religious figures in a procession representing major faith traditions on the south side of Rockefeller Memorial Chapel at the University of Chicago. It features figures from Abraham to the Reformation, illustrating a historical continuum of religious thought that includes the likes of Zoroaster, Moses, Plato and others.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44407", "revid": "86857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44407", "title": "Zarathushtra", "text": ""}
{"id": "44408", "revid": "1255732131", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44408", "title": "Microphone array", "text": "Group of microphones operating in tandem\nA microphone array is any number of microphones operating in tandem. There are many applications:\nTypically, an array is made up of omnidirectional microphones, directional microphones, or a mix of omnidirectional and directional microphones distributed about the perimeter of a space, linked to a computer that records and interprets the results into a coherent form. Arrays may also be formed using numbers of very closely spaced microphones. Given a fixed physical relationship in space between the different individual microphone transducer array elements, simultaneous DSP (digital signal processor) processing of the signals from each of the individual microphone array elements can create one or more \"virtual\" microphones. Different algorithms permit the creation of virtual microphones with extremely complex virtual polar patterns and even the possibility to steer the individual lobes of the virtual microphones patterns so as to home-in-on, or to reject, particular sources of sound. The application of these algorithms can produce varying levels of accuracy when calculating source level and location, and as such, care should be taken when deciding how the individual lobes of the virtual microphones are derived.\nIn case the array consists of omnidirectional microphones they accept sound from all directions, so electrical signals of the microphones contain the information about the sounds coming from all directions. Joint processing of these sounds allows selecting the sound signal coming from the given direction. \nAn array of 1020 microphones, the largest in the world until August 21, 2014, was built by researchers at the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.\nCurrently the largest microphone array in the world was constructed by DLR, the German Aerospace Center, in 2024. Their array consists of 7200 microphones with an aperture of 8 m x 6 m.\nSoundfield microphone.\nThe soundfield microphone system is a well-established example of the use of a microphone array in professional sound recording.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44409", "revid": "5862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44409", "title": "Large Microphones Array", "text": ""}
{"id": "44410", "revid": "17794675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44410", "title": "Conjunctivitis", "text": "Inflammation of the eye\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nConjunctivitis, also known as pink eye, is inflammation of the conjunctiva, the thin and clear layer that covers the white surface of the eye and the inner eyelid. It makes the eye appear pink or reddish. Pain, burning, scratchiness, or itchiness may occur. The affected eye may have increased tears or be stuck shut in the morning. Swelling of the sclera may also occur. Itching is more common in cases that are due to allergies. Conjunctivitis can affect one or both eyes.\nThe most common infectious causes in adults are viral, whereas in children bacterial causes predominate. The viral infection may occur along with other symptoms of a common cold. Both viral and bacterial cases are easily spread among people. Allergies to pollen or animal hair are also a common cause. Diagnosis is often based on signs and symptoms. Occasionally a sample of the discharge is sent for culture.\nPrevention is partly by handwashing. Treatment depends on the underlying cause. In the majority of viral cases there is no specific treatment. Most cases that are due to a bacterial infection also resolve without treatment; however antibiotics can shorten the illness. People who wear contact lenses and those whose infection is caused by gonorrhea or chlamydia should be treated. Allergic cases can be treated with antihistamines or mast cell inhibitor drops.\nBetween three and six million people get acute conjunctivitis each year in the United States. Typically they get better in one or two weeks. If visual loss, significant pain, sensitivity to light or signs of herpes occur, or if symptoms do not improve after a week, further diagnosis and treatment may be required. Conjunctivitis in a newborn, known as neonatal conjunctivitis, may also require specific treatment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nRed eye, swelling of the conjunctiva, and watering of the eyes are symptoms common to all forms of conjunctivitis. However, the pupils should be normally reactive, and the visual acuity should be normal.\nConjunctivitis is identified by inflammation of the conjunctiva, manifested by irritation and redness. Examination using a slit lamp (biomicroscope) may improve diagnostic accuracy. Examination of the palpebral conjunctiva, which overlies the inner aspects of the eyelids, is usually more diagnostic than examination of the bulbal conjunctiva, which overlies the sclera.\nViral.\nApproximately 80% of cases of conjunctivitis in adults and less than 20% in children are due to viruses, with 65% to 90% of these cases being attributed to adenoviruses.\nViral conjunctivitis is often associated with an infection of the upper respiratory tract, a common cold, or a sore throat. Other associated signs may include pre-auricular lymph node swelling and contact with another person with a red eye. Eye pain may be present if the cornea is also involved. Its symptoms include excessive watering and itching. The discharge in viral conjunctivitis is usually (but not always) watery. The infection usually begins in one eye but may spread easily to the other eye.\nViral conjunctivitis manifests as a fine, diffuse pinkness of the conjunctiva which may be mistaken for iritis, but corroborative signs on microscopy, particularly numerous lymphoid follicles on the tarsal conjunctiva, and sometimes a punctate keratitis are seen.\nAllergic.\nAllergic conjunctivitis is inflammation of the conjunctiva due to allergy. The specific allergens may differ among patients. Symptoms result from the release of histamine and other active substances by mast cells, and consist of redness (mainly due to vasodilation of the peripheral small blood vessels), swelling of the conjunctiva, itching, and increased production of tears.\nBacterial.\nBacteria are responsible for approximately 70% of conjunctivitis in children and less than 20% of cases in adults. Common bacteria responsible for bacterial conjunctivitis are \"Staphylococcus\" including Staph aureus, \"Streptococcus\" such as strep pneumoniae, \"Haemophilus\" species and Moraxella catarrhalis. Less commonly, \"Chlamydia\" spp. and Niesseria species (Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Neisseria meningitidis) may be the cause. Infection with \"Escherichia coli\" may also cause conjunctivitis, particularly in the neonatal subtype ophthalmia neonatorum. Bacterial conjunctivitis usually causes a rapid onset of conjunctival redness, swelling of the eyelid, and a sticky discharge. Typically, symptoms develop first in one eye, but may spread to the other eye within 2\u20135 days. Conjunctivitis due to common pus-producing bacteria causes marked grittiness or irritation and a stringy, opaque, greyish or yellowish discharge that may cause the lids to stick together, especially after sleep. Severe crusting of the infected eye and the surrounding skin may also occur. The gritty or scratchy feeling is sometimes localized enough that patients may insist that they have a foreign body in the eye.\nBacteria such as \"Chlamydia trachomatis\" or \"Moraxella\" spp. can cause a nonexudative but persistent conjunctivitis without much redness. Bacterial conjunctivitis may cause the production of membranes or pseudomembranes that cover the conjunctiva. Pseudomembranes consist of a combination of inflammatory cells and exudates and adhere loosely to the conjunctiva, while true membranes are more tightly adherent and cannot be easily peeled away. Cases of bacterial conjunctivitis that involve the production of membranes or pseudomembranes are associated with \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\", \u03b2-hemolytic streptococci, and \"Corynebacterium diphtheriae\". \"C. diphtheriae\" causes membrane formation in the conjunctiva of unimmunized children.\nChemical.\nChemical eye injury may result when an acidic or alkaline substance gets in the eye. Alkali burns are typically worse than acidic burns. Mild burns produce conjunctivitis, while more severe burns may cause the cornea to turn white. Litmus paper may be used to test for chemical causes. When a chemical cause has been confirmed, the eye or eyes should be flushed until the pH is in the range 6\u20138. Anaesthetic eye drops can be used to decrease the pain.\nIrritant or toxic conjunctivitis is primarily marked by redness. If due to a chemical splash, it is often present in only the lower conjunctival sac. With some chemicals, above all with caustic alkalis such as sodium hydroxide, necrosis of the conjunctiva marked by a deceptively white eye due to vascular closure may occur, followed by sloughing off of the dead epithelium. A slit lamp examination is likely to show evidence of anterior uveitis.\nBiomarkers.\nOmics technologies have been used to identify biomarkers that inform on the emergence and progression of conjunctivitis. For example, in chronic inflammatory cicatrizing conjunctivitis, active oxylipins, lysophospholipids, fatty acids, and endocannabinoids alterations, from which potential biomarkers linked to inflammatory processes were identified.\nOther.\nInclusion conjunctivitis of the newborn is a conjunctivitis that may be caused by the bacterium \"Chlamydia trachomatis\", and may lead to acute, purulent conjunctivitis. However, it is usually self-healing.\nCauses.\nViruses are the most common cause of infectious conjunctivitis. Bacterial infections, allergies, other irritants, and dryness are also common causes. Both bacterial and viral infections are contagious, passing from person to person or spread through contaminated objects or water. Contact with contaminated fingers is a common cause of conjunctivitis. Bacteria may also reach the conjunctiva from the edges of the eyelids and surrounding skin, from the nasopharynx, from infected eye drops or contact lenses, from the genitals, or from the bloodstream. Infection by human adenovirus accounts for 65% to 90% of cases of viral conjunctivitis.\nViral.\nAdenoviruses are the most common cause of viral conjunctivitis (adenoviral keratoconjunctivitis). Herpetic keratoconjunctivitis, caused by herpes simplex viruses, can be serious and requires treatment with aciclovir. Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis is a highly contagious disease caused by one of two enteroviruses, enterovirus 70 and coxsackievirus A24. These were first identified in an outbreak in Ghana in 1969 and have spread worldwide since then, causing several epidemics.\nBacterial.\nThe most common causes of acute bacterial conjunctivitis are \"Staphylococcus aureus\", \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\", and \"Haemophilus influenzae\". Though very rare, hyperacute cases are usually caused by \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\" or \"Neisseria meningitidis\". Chronic cases of bacterial conjunctivitis are those lasting longer than 3 weeks and are typically caused by \"S. aureus\", \"Moraxella lacunata\", or Gram-negative enteric flora.\nAllergic.\nConjunctivitis may also be caused by allergens such as pollen, perfumes, cosmetics, smoke, dust mites, Balsam of Peru, or eye drops. The most frequent cause of conjunctivitis is allergic conjunctivitis, and it affects 15% to 40% of the population. Allergic conjunctivitis accounts for 15% of eye related primary care consultations; most including seasonal exposures in the spring and summer or perpetual conditions.\nDiagnosis.\nCultures are not often taken or needed, as most cases resolve either with time or typical antibiotics. If bacterial conjunctivitis is suspected, but no response to topical antibiotics is seen, swabs for bacterial culture should be taken and tested. Viral culture may be appropriate in epidemic case clusters.\nA patch test is used to identify the causative allergen in allergic conjunctivitis.\nAlthough conjunctival scrapes for cytology can be useful in detecting chlamydial and fungal infections, allergies, and dysplasia, they are rarely done because of the cost and the general dearth of laboratory staff experienced in handling ocular specimens. Conjunctival incisional biopsy is occasionally done when granulomatous diseases (\"e.g.\", sarcoidosis) or dysplasia are suspected.\nClassification.\nConjunctivitis may be classified either by cause or by extent of the inflamed area.\nCauses.\nNeonatal conjunctivitis is often grouped separately from bacterial conjunctivitis because it is caused by different bacteria than the more common cases of bacterial conjunctivitis.\nBy extent of involvement.\nBlepharoconjunctivitis is the dual combination of conjunctivitis with blepharitis (inflammation of the eyelids).\nKeratoconjunctivitis is the combination of conjunctivitis and keratitis (corneal inflammation).\nBlepharokeratoconjunctivitis is the combination of conjunctivitis with blepharitis and keratitis. It is clinically defined by changes of the lid margin, meibomian gland dysfunction, redness of the eye, conjunctival chemosis, and corneal inflammation.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nSome more serious conditions can present with a red eye, such as infectious keratitis, angle-closure glaucoma, or iritis. These conditions require the urgent attention of an ophthalmologist. Signs of such conditions include decreased vision, significantly increased sensitivity to light, inability to keep the eye open, a pupil that does not respond to light, or a severe headache with nausea. Fluctuating blurring is common, due to tearing and mucoid discharge. Mild photophobia is common. However, if any of these symptoms is prominent, considering other diseases such as glaucoma, uveitis, keratitis, and even meningitis or carotico-cavernous fistula is important.\nA more comprehensive differential diagnosis for the red or painful eye includes:\nPrevention.\nThe most effective prevention is good hygiene, especially avoiding rubbing the eyes with infected hands. Vaccination against some of the causative pathogens, such as \"Haemophilus influenzae\", pneumococcus, and \"Neisseria meningitidis\" is also effective.\nPovidone-iodine eye solution has been found to prevent neonatal conjunctivitis. It is becoming more commonly used globally because of its low cost.\nManagement.\nConjunctivitis resolves in 65% of cases without treatment, within 2\u20135 days. The prescription of antibiotics is not necessary in most cases.\nViral.\nViral conjunctivitis usually resolves on its own and does not require any specific treatment. Antihistamines (e.g., diphenhydramine) or mast cell stabilizers (e.g., cromolyn) may be used to help with the symptoms. Povidone-iodine has been suggested as a treatment, but as of 2008, evidence to support it was poor.\nAllergic.\nFor allergic conjunctivitis, cool water poured over the face with the head inclined downward constricts capillaries, and artificial tears sometimes relieve discomfort in mild cases. In more severe cases, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications and antihistamines may be prescribed. Persistent allergic conjunctivitis may also require topical steroid drops.\nBacterial.\nBacterial conjunctivitis usually resolves without treatment. Topical antibiotics may be needed only if no improvement is observed after 3 days. No serious effects were noted either with or without treatment. Because antibiotics speed healing in bacterial conjunctivitis, their use may be considered. Antibiotics are also recommended for those who wear contact lenses, are immunocompromised, have disease which is thought to be due to chlamydia or gonorrhea, have a fair bit of pain, or have copious discharge. Gonorrheal or chlamydial infections require both oral and topical antibiotics.\nThe choice of antibiotic varies based on the strain or suspected strain of bacteria causing the infection. Fluoroquinolones, sodium sulfacetamide, or trimethoprim/polymyxin may be used, typically for 7\u201310 days. Cases of meningococcal conjunctivitis can also be treated with systemic penicillin, as long as the strain is sensitive to penicillin.\nWhen investigated as a treatment, povidone-iodine ophthalmic solution has also been observed to have some effectiveness against bacterial and chlamydial conjunctivitis, with a possible role suggested in locations where topical antibiotics are unavailable or costly.\nChemical.\nConjunctivitis due to chemicals is treated via irrigation with Ringer's lactate or saline solution. Chemical injuries, particularly alkali burns, are medical emergencies, as they can lead to severe scarring and intraocular damage. People with chemically induced conjunctivitis should not touch their eyes to avoid spreading the chemical.\nEpidemiology.\nConjunctivitis is the most common eye disease. Rates of disease are related to the underlying cause, which varies by age as well as the time of year. Acute conjunctivitis is most frequently found in infants, school-age children, and the elderly. The most common cause of infectious conjunctivitis is viral conjunctivitis.\nIt is estimated that acute conjunctivitis affects 6 million people annually in the United States.\nSome seasonal trends have been observed for the occurrence of different forms of conjunctivitis. In the Northern Hemisphere, the occurrence of bacterial conjunctivitis peaks from December to April, viral conjunctivitis peaks in the summer months, and allergic conjunctivitis is more prevalent throughout the spring and summer.\nHistory.\nAn adenovirus was first isolated by Rowe et al. in 1953. Two years later, Jawetz et al. published on epidemic keratoconjunctivitis. \"Madras eye\" is a colloquial term that has been used in India for the disease.\nOutbreak in Pakistan.\nIn September 2023, a significant outbreak of conjunctivitis occurred in Pakistan. The outbreak began in Karachi and quickly spread to Lahore, Rawalpindi, and Islamabad. By the end of the month, over 86,133 cases had been reported in Punjab alone. The rapid spread of the disease led to the temporary closure of schools in the region. This event marked one of the largest outbreaks of Pink Eye in the country's recent history.\nSociety and culture.\nConjunctivitis imposes economic and social burdens. The cost of treating bacterial conjunctivitis in the United States was estimated to be $377 million to $857 million per year. Approximately 1% of all primary care office visits in the United States are related to conjunctivitis. Approximately 70% of all people with acute conjunctivitis present to primary care and urgent care.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44411", "revid": "8005368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44411", "title": "Pink eye", "text": ""}
{"id": "44412", "revid": "47937478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44412", "title": "Sedimentary rock", "text": "Rock formed by the deposition and cementation of particles\nSedimentary rocks are types of rock formed by the cementation of sediments\u2014i.e. particles made of minerals (geological detritus) or organic matter (biological detritus)\u2014that have been accumulated or deposited at Earth's surface. Sedimentation is any process that causes these particles to settle in place. Geological detritus originates from weathering and erosion of existing rocks, or from the solidification of molten lava blobs erupted by volcanoes. The geological detritus is transported to the place of deposition by water, wind, ice or mass movement, which are called agents of denudation. Biological detritus is formed by bodies and parts (mainly shells) of dead aquatic organisms, as well as their fecal mass, suspended in water and slowly piling up on the floor of water bodies (marine snow). Sedimentation may also occur when dissolved minerals precipitate from water solution.\nThe sedimentary rock cover of the continents of the Earth's crust is extensive (73% of the Earth's current land surface), but sedimentary rock is estimated to be only 8% of the volume of the crust. Sedimentary rocks are only a thin veneer over a crust consisting mainly of igneous and metamorphic rocks. Sedimentary rocks are deposited in layers as strata, forming a structure called bedding. Sedimentary rocks are often deposited in large structures called sedimentary basins. Sedimentary rocks have also been found on Mars.\nThe study of sedimentary rocks and rock strata provides information about the subsurface that is useful for civil engineering, for example in the construction of roads, houses, tunnels, canals or other structures. Sedimentary rocks are also important sources of natural resources including coal, fossil fuels, drinking water and ores.\nThe study of the sequence of sedimentary rock strata is the main source for an understanding of the Earth's history, including palaeogeography, paleoclimatology and the history of life. The scientific discipline that studies the properties and origin of sedimentary rocks is called sedimentology. Sedimentology is part of both geology and physical geography and overlaps partly with other disciplines in the Earth sciences, such as pedology, geomorphology, geochemistry and structural geology.\nClassification based on origin.\nSedimentary rocks can be subdivided into four groups based on the processes responsible for their formation: clastic sedimentary rocks, biochemical (biogenic) sedimentary rocks, chemical sedimentary rocks, and a fourth category for \"other\" sedimentary rocks formed by impacts, volcanism, and other minor processes.\nClastic sedimentary rocks.\nClastic sedimentary rocks are composed of rock fragments (\"clasts\") that have been cemented together. The clasts are commonly individual grains of quartz, feldspar, clay minerals, or mica. However, any type of mineral may be present. Clasts may also be \"lithic fragments\" composed of more than one mineral.\nClastic sedimentary rocks are subdivided according to the dominant particle size. Most geologists use the Udden-Wentworth grain size scale and divide unconsolidated sediment into three fractions: gravel (&gt;2\u00a0mm diameter), sand (0.06 to 2\u00a0mm diameter), and mud (60 \u03bcm diameter). Mud is further divided into silt (60 to 4\u00a0\u03bcm diameter) and clay (4 \u03bcm diameter). The classification of clastic sedimentary rocks parallels this scheme; conglomerates and breccias are made mostly of gravel, sandstones are made mostly of sand, and mudrocks are made mostly of mud. This tripartite subdivision is mirrored by the broad categories of rudites, arenites, and lutites, respectively, in older literature.\nThe subdivision of these three broad categories is based on differences in clast shape (conglomerates and breccias), composition (sandstones), or grain size or texture (mudrocks).\nConglomerates and breccias.\nBreccias are dominantly composed of angular gravel in a groundmass (matrix), while conglomerates are dominantly composed rounded gravel.\nSandstones.\nSandstone classification schemes vary widely, but most geologists have adopted the Dott scheme, which uses the relative abundance of quartz, feldspar, and lithic framework grains and the abundance of a muddy matrix between the larger grains.\n\"Composition of framework grains\"\nThe relative abundance of sand-sized framework grains determines the first word in a sandstone name. Naming depends on the dominance of the three most abundant components quartz, feldspar, or the lithic fragments that originated from other rocks. All other minerals are considered accessories and not used in the naming of the rock, regardless of abundance.\n* Quartz sandstones have &gt;90% quartz grains\n* Feldspathic sandstones have &lt;90% quartz grains and more feldspar grains than lithic grains\n* Lithic sandstones have &lt;90% quartz grains and more lithic grains than feldspar grains\n\"Abundance of muddy matrix material between sand grains\"\nWhen sand-sized particles are deposited, the space between the grains either remains open or is filled with mud (silt and/or clay sized particle).\n* \"Clean\" sandstones with open pore space (that may later be filled with matrix material) are called arenites.\n* Muddy sandstones with abundant (&gt;10%) muddy matrix are called wackes.\nSix sandstone names are possible using the descriptors for grain composition (quartz-, feldspathic-, and lithic-) and the amount of matrix (wacke or arenite). For example, a quartz arenite would be composed of mostly (&gt;90%) quartz grains and have little or no clayey matrix between the grains, a lithic wacke would have abundant lithic grains and abundant muddy matrix, etc.\nAlthough the Dott classification scheme is widely used by sedimentologists, common names like greywacke, arkose, and quartz sandstone are still widely used by non-specialists and in popular literature.\nMudrocks.\nMudrocks are sedimentary rocks composed of at least 50% silt- and clay-sized particles. These relatively fine-grained particles are commonly transported by turbulent flow in water or air, and deposited as the flow calms and the particles settle out of suspension.\nMost authors presently use the term \"mudrock\" to refer to all rocks composed dominantly of mud. Mudrocks can be divided into siltstones, composed dominantly of silt-sized particles; mudstones with subequal mixture of silt- and clay-sized particles; and claystones, composed mostly of clay-sized particles. Most authors use \"shale\" as a term for a fissile mudrock (regardless of grain size) although some older literature uses the term \"shale\" as a synonym for mudrock.\nBiochemical sedimentary rocks.\nBiochemical sedimentary rocks are created when organisms use materials dissolved in air or water to build their tissue. Examples include:\nChemical sedimentary rocks.\nChemical sedimentary rock forms when mineral constituents in solution become supersaturated and inorganically precipitate. Common chemical sedimentary rocks include oolitic limestone and rocks composed of evaporite minerals, such as halite (rock salt), sylvite, baryte and gypsum.\nOther sedimentary rocks.\nThis fourth miscellaneous category includes volcanic tuff and volcanic breccias formed by deposition and later cementation of lava fragments erupted by volcanoes, and impact breccias formed after impact events.\nClassification based on composition.\nAlternatively, sedimentary rocks can be subdivided into compositional groups based on their mineralogy:\nDeposition and transformation.\nSediment transport and deposition.\nSedimentary rocks are formed when sediment is deposited out of air, ice, wind, gravity, or water flows carrying the particles in suspension. This sediment is often formed when weathering and erosion break down a rock into loose material in a source area. The material is then transported from the source area to the deposition area. The type of sediment transported depends on the geology of the hinterland (the source area of the sediment). However, some sedimentary rocks, such as evaporites, are composed of material that form at the place of deposition. The nature of a sedimentary rock, therefore, not only depends on the sediment supply, but also on the sedimentary depositional environment in which it formed.\nTransformation (Diagenesis).\nAs sediments accumulate in a depositional environment, older sediments are buried by younger sediments, and they undergo diagenesis. Diagenesis includes all the chemical, physical, and biological changes, exclusive of surface weathering, undergone by a sediment after its initial deposition. This includes compaction and lithification of the sediments. Early stages of diagenesis, described as \"eogenesis\", take place at shallow depths (a\u00a0few tens of meters) and is characterized by bioturbation and mineralogical changes in the sediments, with only slight compaction. The red hematite that gives red bed sandstones their color is likely formed during eogenesis. Some biochemical processes, like the activity of bacteria, can affect minerals in a rock and are therefore seen as part of diagenesis. Another example of sedimentary diagenesis is the dolomitzation of rocks such as limestone.\nDeeper burial is accompanied by \"mesogenesis\", during which most of the compaction and lithification takes place. Compaction takes place as the sediments come under increasing overburden (lithostatic) pressure from overlying sediments. Sediment grains move into more compact arrangements, grains of ductile minerals (such as mica) are deformed, and pore space is reduced. Sediments are typically saturated with groundwater or seawater when originally deposited, and as pore space is reduced, much of these connate fluids are expelled. In addition to this physical compaction, chemical compaction may take place via pressure solution. Points of contact between grains are under the greatest strain, and the strained mineral is more soluble than the rest of the grain. As a result, the contact points are dissolved away, allowing the grains to come into closer contact. The increased pressure and temperature stimulate further chemical reactions, such as the reactions by which organic material becomes lignite or coal.\nLithification follows closely on compaction, as increased temperatures at depth hasten the precipitation of cement that binds the grains together. Pressure solution contributes to this process of cementation, as the mineral dissolved from strained contact points is redeposited in the unstrained pore spaces. This further reduces porosity and makes the rock more compact and competent.\nUnroofing of buried sedimentary rock is accompanied by \"telogenesis\", the third and final stage of diagenesis. As erosion reduces the depth of burial, renewed exposure to meteoric water produces additional changes to the sedimentary rock, such as leaching of some of the cement to produce secondary porosity.\nAt sufficiently high temperature and pressure, the realm of diagenesis makes way for metamorphism, the process that forms metamorphic rock.\nProperties.\nColor.\nThe color of a sedimentary rock is often mostly determined by iron, an element with two major oxides: iron(II) oxide and iron(III) oxide. Iron(II) oxide (FeO) only forms under low oxygen (anoxic) circumstances and gives the rock a grey or greenish colour. Iron(III) oxide (Fe2O3) in a richer oxygen environment is often found in the form of the mineral hematite and gives the rock a reddish to brownish colour. In arid continental climates rocks are in direct contact with the atmosphere, and oxidation is an important process, giving the rock a red or orange colour. Thick sequences of red sedimentary rocks formed in arid climates are called red beds. However, a red colour does not necessarily mean the rock formed in a continental environment or arid climate.\nThe presence of organic material can colour a rock black or grey. Organic material is formed from dead organisms, mostly plants. Normally, such material eventually decays by oxidation or bacterial activity. Under anoxic circumstances, however, organic material cannot decay and leaves a dark sediment, rich in organic material. This can, for example, occur at the bottom of deep seas and lakes. There is little water mixing in such environments; as a result, oxygen from surface water is not brought down, and the deposited sediment is normally a fine dark clay. Dark rocks, rich in organic material, are therefore often shales.\nTexture.\nThe size, form and orientation of clasts (the original pieces of rock) in a sediment is called its texture. The texture is a small-scale property of a rock, but determines many of its large-scale properties, such as the density, porosity or permeability.\nThe 3D orientation of the clasts is called the fabric of the rock. The size and form of clasts can be used to determine the velocity and direction of current in the sedimentary environment that moved the clasts from their origin; fine, calcareous mud only settles in quiet water while gravel and larger clasts are moved only by rapidly moving water. The grain size of a rock is usually expressed with the Wentworth scale, though alternative scales are sometimes used. The grain size can be expressed as a diameter or a volume, and is always an average value, since a rock is composed of clasts with different sizes. The statistical distribution of grain sizes is different for different rock types and is described in a property called the sorting of the rock. When all clasts are more or less of the same size, the rock is called 'well-sorted', and when there is a large spread in grain size, the rock is called 'poorly sorted'.\nThe form of the clasts can reflect the origin of the rock. For example, coquina, a rock composed of clasts of broken shells, can only form in energetic water. The form of a clast can be described by using four parameters:\nChemical sedimentary rocks have a non-clastic texture, consisting entirely of crystals. To describe such a texture, only the average size of the crystals and the fabric are necessary.\nMineralogy.\nMost sedimentary rocks contain either quartz (siliciclastic rocks) or calcite (carbonate rocks). In contrast to igneous and metamorphic rocks, a sedimentary rock usually contains very few different major minerals. However, the origin of the minerals in a sedimentary rock is often more complex than in an igneous rock. Minerals in a sedimentary rock may have been present in the original sediments or may formed by precipitation during diagenesis. In the second case, a mineral precipitate may have grown over an older generation of cement. A complex diagenetic history can be established by optical mineralogy, using a petrographic microscope.\nCarbonate rocks predominantly consist of carbonate minerals such as calcite, aragonite or dolomite. Both the cement and the clasts (including fossils and ooids) of a carbonate sedimentary rock usually consist of carbonate minerals. The mineralogy of a clastic rock is determined by the material supplied by the source area, the manner of its transport to the place of deposition and the stability of that particular mineral.\nThe resistance of rock-forming minerals to weathering is expressed by the Goldich dissolution series. In this series, quartz is the most stable, followed by feldspar, micas, and finally other less stable minerals that are only present when little weathering has occurred. The amount of weathering depends mainly on the distance to the source area, the local climate and the time it took for the sediment to be transported to the point where it is deposited. In most sedimentary rocks, mica, feldspar and less stable minerals have been weathered to clay minerals like kaolinite, illite or smectite.\nFossils.\nAmong the three major types of rock, fossils are most commonly found in sedimentary rock. Unlike most igneous and metamorphic rocks, sedimentary rocks form at temperatures and pressures that do not destroy fossil remnants. Often these fossils may only be visible under magnification.\nDead organisms in nature are usually quickly removed by scavengers, bacteria, rotting and erosion, but under exceptional circumstances, these natural processes are unable to take place, leading to fossilisation. The chance of fossilisation is higher when the sedimentation rate is high (so that a carcass is quickly buried), in anoxic environments (where little bacterial activity occurs) or when the organism had a particularly hard skeleton. Larger, well-preserved fossils are relatively rare.\nFossils can be both the direct remains or imprints of organisms and their skeletons. Most commonly preserved are the harder parts of organisms such as bones, shells, and the woody tissue of plants. Soft tissue has a much smaller chance of being fossilized, and the preservation of soft tissue of animals older than 40 million years is very rare. Imprints of organisms made while they were still alive are called trace fossils, examples of which are burrows, footprints, etc.\nAs a part of a sedimentary rock, fossils undergo the same diagenetic processes as does the host rock. For example, a shell consisting of calcite can dissolve while a cement of silica then fills the cavity. In the same way, precipitating minerals can fill cavities formerly occupied by blood vessels, vascular tissue or other soft tissues. This preserves the form of the organism but changes the chemical composition, a process called permineralization. The most common minerals involved in permineralization are various forms of amorphous silica (chalcedony, flint, chert), carbonates (especially calcite), and pyrite.\nAt high pressure and temperature, the organic material of a dead organism undergoes chemical reactions in which volatiles such as water and carbon dioxide are expulsed. The fossil, in the end, consists of a thin layer of pure carbon or its mineralized form, graphite. This form of fossilisation is called carbonisation. It is particularly important for plant fossils. The same process is responsible for the formation of fossil fuels like lignite or coal.\nPrimary sedimentary structures.\nStructures in sedimentary rocks can be divided into \"primary\" structures (formed during deposition) and \"secondary\" structures (formed after deposition). Unlike textures, structures are always large-scale features that can easily be studied in the field. Sedimentary structures can indicate something about the sedimentary environment or can serve to tell which side originally faced up where tectonics have tilted or overturned sedimentary layers.\nSedimentary rocks are laid down in layers called beds or strata. A bed is defined as a layer of rock that has a uniform lithology and texture. Beds form by the deposition of layers of sediment on top of each other. The sequence of beds that characterizes sedimentary rocks is called bedding. Single beds can be a couple of centimetres to several meters thick. Finer, less pronounced layers are called laminae, and the structure a lamina forms in a rock is called lamination. Laminae are usually less than a few centimetres thick. Though bedding and lamination are often originally horizontal in nature, this is not always the case. In some environments, beds are deposited at a (usually small) angle. Sometimes multiple sets of layers with different orientations exist in the same rock, a structure called cross-bedding. Cross-bedding is characteristic of deposition by a flowing medium (wind or water).\nThe opposite of cross-bedding is parallel lamination, where all sedimentary layering is parallel. Differences in laminations are generally caused by cyclic changes in the sediment supply, caused, for example, by seasonal changes in rainfall, temperature or biochemical activity. Laminae that represent seasonal changes (similar to tree rings) are called varves. Any sedimentary rock composed of millimeter or finer scale layers can be named with the general term \"laminite\". When sedimentary rocks have no lamination at all, their structural character is called massive bedding.\nGraded bedding is a structure where beds with a smaller grain size occur on top of beds with larger grains. This structure forms when fast flowing water stops flowing. Larger, heavier clasts in suspension settle first, then smaller clasts. Although graded bedding can form in many different environments, it is a characteristic of turbidity currents.\nThe surface of a particular bed, called the bedform, can also be indicative of a particular sedimentary environment. Examples of bed forms include dunes and ripple marks. Sole markings, such as tool marks and flute casts, are grooves eroded on a surface that are preserved by renewed sedimentation. These are often elongated structures and can be used to establish the direction of the flow during deposition.\nRipple marks also form in flowing water. There can be symmetric or asymmetric. Asymmetric ripples form in environments where the current is in one direction, such as rivers. The longer flank of such ripples is on the upstream side of the current. Symmetric wave ripples occur in environments where currents reverse directions, such as tidal flats.\nMudcracks are a bed form caused by the dehydration of sediment that occasionally comes above the water surface. Such structures are commonly found at tidal flats or point bars along rivers.\nSecondary sedimentary structures.\nSecondary sedimentary structures are those which formed after deposition. Such structures form by chemical, physical and biological processes within the sediment. They can be indicators of circumstances after deposition. Some can be used as way up criteria.\nOrganic materials in a sediment can leave more traces than just fossils. Preserved tracks and burrows are examples of trace fossils (also called ichnofossils). Such traces are relatively rare. Most trace fossils are burrows of molluscs or arthropods. This burrowing is called bioturbation by sedimentologists. It can be a valuable indicator of the biological and ecological environment that existed after the sediment was deposited. On the other hand, the burrowing activity of organisms can destroy other (primary) structures in the sediment, making a reconstruction more difficult.\nSecondary structures can also form by diagenesis or the formation of a soil (pedogenesis) when a sediment is exposed above the water level. An example of a diagenetic structure common in carbonate rocks is a stylolite. Stylolites are irregular planes where material was dissolved into the pore fluids in the rock. This can result in the precipitation of a certain chemical species producing colouring and staining of the rock, or the formation of concretions. Concretions are roughly concentric bodies with a different composition from the host rock. Their formation can be the result of localized precipitation due to small differences in composition or porosity of the host rock, such as around fossils, inside burrows or around plant roots. In carbonate rocks such as limestone or chalk, chert or flint concretions are common, while terrestrial sandstones sometimes contain iron concretions. Calcite concretions in clay containing angular cavities or cracks are called septarian concretions.\nAfter deposition, physical processes can deform the sediment, producing a third class of secondary structures. Density contrasts between different sedimentary layers, such as between sand and clay, can result in flame structures or load casts, formed by inverted diapirism. While the clastic bed is still fluid, diapirism can cause a denser upper layer to sink into a lower layer. Sometimes, density contrasts occur or are enhanced when one of the lithologies dehydrates. Clay can be easily compressed as a result of dehydration, while sand retains the same volume and becomes relatively less dense. On the other hand, when the pore fluid pressure in a sand layer surpasses a critical point, the sand can break through overlying clay layers and flow through, forming discordant bodies of sedimentary rock called sedimentary dykes. The same process can form mud volcanoes on the surface where they broke through upper layers.\nSedimentary dykes can also be formed in a cold climate where the soil is permanently frozen during a large part of the year. Frost weathering can form cracks in the soil that fill with rubble from above. Such structures can be used as climate indicators as well as way up structures.\nDensity contrasts can also cause small-scale faulting, even while sedimentation progresses (synchronous-sedimentary faulting). Such faulting can also occur when large masses of non-lithified sediment are deposited on a slope, such as at the front side of a delta or the continental slope. Instabilities in such sediments can result in the deposited material to slump, producing fissures and folding. The resulting structures in the rock are syn-sedimentary folds and faults, which can be difficult to distinguish from folds and faults formed by tectonic forces acting on lithified rocks.\nDepositional environments.\nThe setting in which a sedimentary rock forms is called the depositional environment. Every environment has a characteristic combination of geologic processes, and circumstances. The type of sediment that is deposited is not only dependent on the sediment that is transported to a place (provenance), but also on the environment itself.\nA marine environment means that the rock was formed in a sea or ocean. Often, a distinction is made between deep and shallow marine environments. Deep marine usually refers to environments more than 200\u00a0m below the water surface (including the abyssal plain). Shallow marine environments exist adjacent to coastlines and can extend to the boundaries of the continental shelf. The water movements in such environments have a generally higher energy than that in deep environments, as wave activity diminishes with depth. This means that coarser sediment particles can be transported and the deposited sediment can be coarser than in deeper environments. When the sediment is transported from the continent, an alternation of sand, clay and silt is deposited. When the continent is far away, the amount of such sediment deposited may be small, and biochemical processes dominate the type of rock that forms. Especially in warm climates, shallow marine environments far offshore mainly see deposition of carbonate rocks. The shallow, warm water is an ideal habitat for many small organisms that build carbonate skeletons. When these organisms die, their skeletons sink to the bottom, forming a thick layer of calcareous mud that may lithify into limestone. Warm shallow marine environments also are ideal environments for coral reefs, where the sediment consists mainly of the calcareous skeletons of larger organisms.\nIn deep marine environments, the water current working the sea bottom is small. Only fine particles can be transported to such places. Typically sediments depositing on the ocean floor are fine clay or small skeletons of micro-organisms. At 4\u00a0km depth, the solubility of carbonates increases dramatically (the depth zone where this happens is called the lysocline). Calcareous sediment that sinks below the lysocline dissolves; as a result, no limestone can be formed below this depth. Skeletons of micro-organisms formed of silica (such as radiolarians) are not as soluble and are still deposited. An example of a rock formed of silica skeletons is radiolarite. When the bottom of the sea has a small inclination, for example, at the continental slopes, the sedimentary cover can become unstable, causing turbidity currents. Turbidity currents are sudden disturbances of the normally quiet deep marine environment and can cause the near-instantaneous deposition of large amounts of sediment, such as sand and silt. The rock sequence formed by a turbidity current is called a turbidite.\nThe coast is an environment dominated by wave action. At a beach, dominantly denser sediment such as sand or gravel, often mingled with shell fragments, is deposited, while the silt and clay sized material is kept in mechanical suspension. Tidal flats and shoals are places that sometimes dry because of the tide. They are often cross-cut by gullies, where the current is strong and the grain size of the deposited sediment is larger. Where rivers enter the body of water, either on a sea or lake coast, deltas can form. These are large accumulations of sediment transported from the continent to places in front of the mouth of the river. Deltas are dominantly composed of clastic (rather than chemical) sediment.\nA continental sedimentary environment is an environment in the interior of a continent. Examples of continental environments are lagoons, lakes, swamps, floodplains and alluvial fans. In the quiet water of swamps, lakes and lagoons, fine sediment is deposited, mingled with organic material from dead plants and animals. In rivers, the energy of the water is much greater and can transport heavier clastic material. Besides transport by water, sediment can be transported by wind or glaciers. Sediment transported by wind is called aeolian and is almost always very well sorted, while sediment transported by a glacier is called glacial till and is characterized by very poor sorting.\nAeolian deposits can be quite striking. The depositional environment of the Touchet Formation, located in the Northwestern United States, had intervening periods of aridity which resulted in a series of rhythmite layers. Erosional cracks were later infilled with layers of soil material, especially from aeolian processes. The infilled sections formed vertical inclusions in the horizontally deposited layers, and thus provided evidence of the sequence of events during deposition of the forty-one layers of the formation.\nSedimentary facies.\nThe kind of rock formed in a particular depositional environment is called its sedimentary facies. Sedimentary environments usually exist alongside each other in certain natural successions. A beach, where sand and gravel is deposited, is usually bounded by a deeper marine environment a little offshore, where finer sediments are deposited at the same time. Behind the beach, there can be dunes (where the dominant deposition is well sorted sand) or a lagoon (where fine clay and organic material is deposited). Every sedimentary environment has its own characteristic deposits. When sedimentary strata accumulate through time, the environment can shift, forming a change in facies in the subsurface at one location. On the other hand, when a rock layer with a certain age is followed laterally, the lithology (the type of rock) and facies eventually change.\nFacies can be distinguished in a number of ways: the most common are by the lithology (for example: limestone, siltstone or sandstone) or by fossil content. Coral, for example, only lives in warm and shallow marine environments and fossils of coral are thus typical for shallow marine facies. Facies determined by lithology are called lithofacies; facies determined by fossils are biofacies.\nSedimentary environments can shift their geographical positions through time. Coastlines can shift in the direction of the sea when the sea level drops (regression), when the surface rises (transgression) due to tectonic forces in the Earth's crust or when a river forms a large delta. In the subsurface, such geographic shifts of sedimentary environments of the past are recorded in shifts in sedimentary facies. This means that sedimentary facies can change either parallel or perpendicular to an imaginary layer of rock with a fixed age, a phenomenon described by Walther's Law.\nThe situation in which coastlines move in the direction of the continent is called transgression. In the case of transgression, deeper marine facies are deposited over shallower facies, a succession called onlap. Regression is the situation in which a coastline moves in the direction of the sea. With regression, shallower facies are deposited on top of deeper facies, a situation called offlap.\nThe facies of all rocks of a certain age can be plotted on a map to give an overview of the palaeogeography. A sequence of maps for different ages can give an insight in the development of the regional geography.\nSedimentary basins.\nPlaces where large-scale sedimentation takes place are called sedimentary basins. The amount of sediment that can be deposited in a basin depends on the depth of the basin, the so-called \"accommodation space\". The depth, shape and size of a basin depend on tectonics, movements within the Earth's lithosphere. Where the lithosphere moves upward (tectonic uplift), land eventually rises above sea level and the area becomes a source for new sediment as erosion removes material. Where the lithosphere moves downward (tectonic subsidence), a basin forms and sediments are deposited.\nA type of basin formed by the moving apart of two pieces of a continent is called a rift basin. Rift basins are elongated, narrow and deep basins. Due to divergent movement, the lithosphere is stretched and thinned, so that the hot asthenosphere rises and heats the overlying rift basin. Apart from continental sediments, rift basins normally also have part of their infill consisting of volcanic deposits. When the basin grows due to continued stretching of the lithosphere, the rift grows and the sea can enter, forming marine deposits.\nWhen a piece of lithosphere that was heated and stretched cools again, its density rises, causing isostatic subsidence. If this subsidence continues long enough, the basin is called a sag basin. Examples of sag basins are the regions along passive continental margins, but sag basins can also be found in the interior of continents. In sag basins, the extra weight of the newly deposited sediments is enough to keep the subsidence going in a vicious circle. The total thickness of the sedimentary infill in a sag basin can thus exceed 10\u00a0km.\nA third type of basin exists along convergent plate boundaries \u2013 places where one tectonic plate moves under another into the asthenosphere. The subducting plate bends and forms a fore-arc basin in front of the overriding plate \u2013 an elongated, deep asymmetric basin. Fore-arc basins are filled with deep marine deposits and thick sequences of turbidites. Such infill is called flysch. When the convergent movement of the two plates results in continental collision, the basin becomes shallower and develops into a foreland basin. At the same time, tectonic uplift forms a mountain belt in the overriding plate, from which large amounts of material are eroded and transported to the basin. Such erosional material of a growing mountain chain is called molasse and has either a shallow marine or a continental facies.\nAt the same time, the growing weight of the mountain belt can cause isostatic subsidence in the area of the overriding plate on the other side to the mountain belt. The basin type resulting from this subsidence is called a back-arc basin and is usually filled by shallow marine deposits and molasse.\nInfluence of astronomical cycles.\nIn many cases facies changes and other lithological features in sequences of sedimentary rock have a cyclic nature. This cyclic nature was caused by cyclic changes in sediment supply and the sedimentary environment. Most of these cyclic changes are caused by astronomic cycles. Short astronomic cycles can be the difference between the tides or the spring tide every two weeks. On a larger time-scale, cyclic changes in climate and sea level are caused by Milankovitch cycles: cyclic changes in the orientation and/or position of the Earth's rotational axis and orbit around the Sun. There are a number of Milankovitch cycles known, lasting between 10,000 and 200,000 years.\nRelatively small changes in the orientation of the Earth's axis or length of the seasons can be a major influence on the Earth's climate. An example are the ice ages of the past 2.6 million years (the Quaternary period), which are assumed to have been caused by astronomic cycles. Climate change can influence the global sea level (and thus the amount of accommodation space in sedimentary basins) and sediment supply from a certain region. Eventually, small changes in astronomic parameters can cause large changes in sedimentary environment and sedimentation.\nSedimentation rates.\nThe rate at which sediment is deposited differs depending on the location. A channel in a tidal flat can see the deposition of a few metres of sediment in one day, while on the deep ocean floor each year only a few millimetres of sediment accumulate. A distinction can be made between normal sedimentation and sedimentation caused by catastrophic processes. The latter category includes all kinds of sudden exceptional processes like mass movements, rock slides or flooding. Catastrophic processes can see the sudden deposition of a large amount of sediment at once. In some sedimentary environments, most of the total column of sedimentary rock was formed by catastrophic processes, even though the environment is usually a quiet place. Other sedimentary environments are dominated by normal, ongoing sedimentation.\nIn many cases, sedimentation occurs slowly. In a desert, for example, the wind deposits siliciclastic material (sand or silt) in some spots, or catastrophic flooding of a wadi may cause sudden deposits of large quantities of detrital material, but in most places eolian erosion dominates. The amount of sedimentary rock that forms is not only dependent on the amount of supplied material, but also on how well the material consolidates. Erosion removes most deposited sediment shortly after deposition.\nStratigraphy.\nSedimentary rock are laid down in layers called beds or strata, each layer is horizontally laid down over the older ones and new layers are above older layers as stated in the principle of superposition. There are usually some gaps in the sequence called unconformities which represent periods where no new sediments were laid down, or when earlier sedimentary layers were raised above sea level and eroded away.\nUnconformities can be classified based on the orientation of the strata on either sides of the unconformity:\nSedimentary rocks contain important information about the history of the Earth. They contain fossils, the preserved remains of ancient plants and animals. Coal is considered a type of sedimentary rock. The composition of sediments provides us with clues as to the original rock. Differences between successive layers indicate changes to the environment over time. Sedimentary rocks can contain fossils because, unlike most igneous and metamorphic rocks, they form at temperatures and pressures that do not destroy fossil remains.\nProvenance.\nProvenance is the reconstruction of the origin of sediments. All rock exposed at Earth's surface is subjected to physical or chemical weathering and broken down into finer grained sediment. All three types of rocks (igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks) can be the source of sedimentary detritus. The purpose of sedimentary provenance studies is to reconstruct and interpret the history of sediment from the initial parent rocks at a source area to final detritus at a burial place.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44415", "revid": "21238044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44415", "title": "Five good emperors", "text": ""}
{"id": "44417", "revid": "6829965", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44417", "title": "Senate", "text": "Upper house of a bicameral legislature\nA senate is a deliberative assembly, often the upper house or chamber of a bicameral legislature. The name comes from the ancient Roman Senate (Latin: \"Senatus\"), so-called as an assembly of the senior (Latin: \"senex\" meaning \"the elder\" or \"old man\") and therefore considered wiser and more experienced members of the society or ruling class. However the Roman Senate was not the ancestor or predecessor of modern parliamentarism in any sense, because the Roman senate was not a de jure legislative body.\nMany countries have an assembly named a \"senate\", composed of \"senators\" who may be elected, appointed, have inherited the title, or gained membership by other methods, depending on the country. Modern senates typically serve to provide a chamber of \"sober second thought\" to consider legislation passed by a lower house, whose members are usually elected. Most senates have asymmetrical duties and powers compared with their respective lower house meaning they have special duties, for example to fill important political positions or to pass special laws. Conversely many senates have limited powers in changing or stopping bills under consideration and efforts to stall or veto a bill may be bypassed by the lower house or another branch of government.\nOverview.\nThe modern word \"senate\" is derived from the Latin word \"sen\u0101tus\" (senate), which comes from \"senex\", 'elder man'. A member or legislator of a senate is called senator. The Latin word \"senator\" was adopted into English with no change in spelling. Its meaning is derived from a very ancient form of social organization, in which advisory or decision-making powers are reserved for the eldest men. For the same reason, the word \"senate\" is correctly used when referring to any powerful authority characteristically composed by the eldest members of a community, as a deliberative body of a faculty in an institution of higher learning is often called a senate. This form of adaptation was used to show the power of those in body and for the decision-making process to be thorough, which could take a long period of time. The original senate was the Roman Senate, which lasted until at least CE 603, although various efforts to revive it were made in Medieval Rome. In the Eastern Roman Empire, the Byzantine Senate continued until the Fourth Crusade, circa 1202\u20131204. The female form senatrix also existed. \nModern democratic states with bicameral parliamentary systems are sometimes equipped with a senate, often distinguished from an ordinary parallel lower house, known variously as the \"House of Representatives\", \"House of Commons\", \"Chamber of Deputies\", \"National Assembly\", \"Legislative Assembly\", or \"House of Assembly\", by electoral rules. This may include minimum age required for voters and candidates, one house employing a proportional voting system and the other being elected on a majoritarian or plurality basis, and an electoral basis or \"collegium\". Typically, the senate is referred to as the upper house and has a smaller membership than the lower house. In some federal states senates also exist at the subnational level. In the United States, most states and territories have senates, with the exception of Nebraska, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands (whose legislatures are unicameral bodies called the \"Legislature\" but whose members refer to themselves as \"senators\") and the District of Columbia (whose unicameral legislature is called the Council). There is also the US Senate at the federal level. Similarly in Argentina, in addition to the Senate at federal level, eight of the country's provinces, Buenos Aires, Catamarca, Corrientes, Entre R\u00edos, Mendoza, Salta, San Luis (since 1987) and Santa Fe, have bicameral legislatures with a Senate. C\u00f3rdoba and Tucum\u00e1n changed to unicameral systems in 2001 and 2003 respectively.\nIn Australia and Canada, only the upper house of the federal parliament is known as the Senate. All Australian states other than Queensland have an upper house known as a Legislative council. Several Canadian provinces also once had a Legislative Council, but these have all been abolished, the last being Quebec's Legislative council in 1968.\nIn Germany, the last senate of a state parliament, the Bavarian Senate, was abolished in 2000.\nSenate membership can be determined either through elections or appointments. For example, elections are held every three years for half the membership of the Senate of the Philippines, the term of a senator being six years. In contrast, members of the Canadian Senate are appointed by the Governor General upon the recommendation of the Prime Minister of Canada, holding the office until they resign, are removed, or retire at the mandatory age of 75.\nAlternative meanings.\nThe terms \"senate\" and \"senator\", however, do not necessarily refer to a second chamber of a legislature:\nDefunct and unestablished senates.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44418", "revid": "49291118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44418", "title": "Deliberative assembly", "text": "Organization that uses parliamentary procedure to make decisions\nA deliberative assembly is a meeting of members who use parliamentary procedure. \nEtymology.\nIn a speech to the electorate at Bristol in 1774, Edmund Burke described the British Parliament as a \"deliberative assembly\", and the expression became the basic term for a body of persons meeting to discuss and determine common action. Merriam-Webster's definition excludes legislatures.\nCharacteristics.\n\"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\" by Henry Martyn Robert describes the following characteristics of a deliberative assembly:\nTypes.\n\"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\" identifies several types of deliberative assemblies.\nMass meeting.\nA large \"meeting\", which is an unorganized group meeting open to all individuals in a sector of the population who are interested in deliberating about a subject proposed by the meeting's sponsors. Examples include meetings to discuss common political concerns or community interests, or meetings to form a new society.\nLocal assembly of an organized society.\nA \"local assembly of an organized society\", which is a membership meeting of a local chapter or branch of a membership organization. Examples include local chapter meetings of organizations like the Sierra Club.\nConvention.\nA \"convention\", which is a meeting of delegates who represent constituent units of a population. Conventions are not permanently established bodies, and delegates are normally elected for only one term. A convention may be held by an organized society, where each local assembly is represented by a delegate.\nLegislative body.\nA \"legislative body\", which is a legally established public lawmaking body. It consists of representatives chosen by the electorate. Examples include national legislatures such as parliaments, and local government councils such as state legislatures, regional assemblies and city councils.\nBoard.\nA \"board\", which is an administrative, managerial, or quasi-judicial body. A board derives its power from an outside authority that defines the scope of its operations. Examples include an organized society's or company's board of directors and government agency boards like a board of education.\nRights of members.\nA member of a deliberative assembly has the right to attend meetings and make and second motions, speak in the debate, and vote. Organizations may have different classes of members (such as regular members, active members, associate members, and honorary members), but the rights of each class of membership must be defined (such as whether a \"member\" in a class has the right to vote). There may also be ex officio members or persons who are members under some other office or position they hold. Ex officio members have the same rights as other members.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44419", "revid": "63518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44419", "title": "Robert's Rules of Order", "text": "Book on parliamentary procedure by Henry Martyn Robert\nRobert's Rules of Order, often simply referred to as Robert's Rules, is a manual of parliamentary procedure by U.S. Army officer Henry Martyn Robert (1837\u20131923). \"The object of Rules of Order is to assist an assembly to accomplish the work for which it was designed [...] Where there is no law [...] there is the least of real liberty.\" The term \"Robert's Rules of Order\" is also used more generically to refer to any of the more recent editions, by various editors and authors, based on any of Robert's original editions, and the term is used more generically in the United States to refer to parliamentary procedure. It was written primarily to help guide voluntary associations in their operations of governance.\nRobert's manual was first published in 1876 as an adaptation of the rules and practice of the United States Congress to suit the needs of non-legislative societies. \"Robert's Rules\" is the most widely used manual of parliamentary procedure in the United States. It governs the meetings of a diverse range of organizations\u2014including church groups, county commissions, homeowners' associations, nonprofit associations, professional societies, school boards, trade unions, and college fraternities and sororities\u2014that have adopted it as their parliamentary authority. Robert published four editions of the manual before his death in 1923, the last being the thoroughly revised and expanded Fourth Edition published as Robert's Rules of Order Revised in May 1915.\nHistory.\nA U.S. Army officer, Henry Martyn Robert (1837\u20131923), saw a need for a standard of parliamentary procedure while living in San Francisco. He found San Francisco in the mid-to-late 19th century to be a chaotic place where meetings of any kind tended to be tumultuous, with little consistency of procedure and with people of many nationalities and traditions thrown together.\nThe first edition of the book, whose full title was \"\", was published in February 1876 by the then-Major Robert, with the short title \"Robert's Rules of Order\" placed on its cover.\nThe procedures prescribed by the book were loosely modeled after those used in the United States House of Representatives, with such adaptations as Robert saw fit for use in ordinary societies. Although he was in the military, the rules in his book were not based on military rules. The author's interest in parliamentary procedure began in 1863 when he was chosen to preside over a church meeting and, although he accepted the task, he felt that he did not have the necessary knowledge of proper procedure.\nIn his later work as an active member of several organizations, Robert discovered that members from different areas of the country had very different views regarding what the proper parliamentary rules were, and these conflicting views hampered the organizations in their work. He eventually became convinced of the need for a new manual on the subject, one which would enable many organizations to adopt the same set of rules.\nHenry M. Robert himself published four editions of the manual before his death in 1923, the last being the thoroughly revised and expanded Fourth Edition published as \"\" in May 1915. By this time Robert had long been retired from the Army with the rank of brigadier general. The revisions were based on the feedback from hundreds of letters that Robert had received through the years. In addition, to explain the rules in \"Robert's Rules of Order Revised\" (abbreviated ROR), Robert published an introductory book for beginners titled \"Parliamentary Practice: An Introduction to Parliamentary Law\" in 1921 and a full book of explanations titled \"Parliamentary Law\" in 1923.\nSpecial rules.\nIn those cases in which the bylaws or other governing documents of an organization refer to \"Robert's Rules of Order\", certain rules in the book may be subordinate to other specified rules, including any conflicting provisions in applicable law, the corporate charter, the constitution or bylaws, and special rules of order.\nEven if an organization has adopted \"Robert's Rules of Order\", it can still adopt its own rules which supersede any rules in this book. The only limitations might come from the rules in a parent organization or from national, state, or local law. An example of a rule that organizations sometimes adopt is one that allows the use of proxy voting. Such a rule is not allowed unless the organization specifically provides for it in its bylaws.\nConcise editions.\nSince the copyrights for several of the original editions (1915 or earlier) have expired, numerous other books and manuals have been published incorporating \"Robert's Rules of Order\" as part of their titles, with some of them based on those earlier editions (see List of books with Robert's Rules in the title). Some examples are\nHenry M. Robert III, grandson of the original author and Trustee for the Robert's Rules Association, had acknowledged that \"there has been controversy among parliamentarians concerning the length of \"Robert's Rules\" in its various editions and the complexity of the rules it describes.\" As a result, a supplemental book was developed.\nIn 2005, a shorter reference guide, \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised In Brief\" (abbreviated RONRIB), was published by the same authorship team and publisher as the Tenth Edition of \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\" (RONR) and was made to be in accord with that edition of RONR. A third edition of this shorter guide was published in 2020 to conform with the current Twelfth Edition of \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\".\nThe \"In Brief\" book is the only concise guide for \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\" authorized by the Roberts Rules Association, and is intended as an introductory book for those unfamiliar with parliamentary procedure. The authors say, \"In only thirty minutes, the average reader can learn the bare essentials, and with about ninety minutes' reading can cover all the basics.\" It is meant to be an introductory supplement to the current edition of \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\" and is not suitable for adoption as a parliamentary authority in itself.\nComprehensive editions.\nThrough a family trust, and later through the Robert's Rules Association (which is made up of descendants of Henry M. Robert), several subsequent editions of \"Robert's Rules of Order\" have been published, including another major revision of the work. The Seventh Edition, published in February 1970 on the 94th anniversary of the publication of the First Edition, was the first under the title \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\" (RONR). The subsequent editions were based on additional feedback from users, including feedback received by electronic means in recent years. These later editions included material from Robert's \"Parliamentary Practice\" and \"Parliamentary Law\".\nThe current edition of the series became effective on September 1, 2020, under the title \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\", Twelfth Edition. This edition states that it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;supersedes all previous editions and is intended automatically to become the parliamentary authority in organizations whose bylaws prescribe \"Robert's Rules of Order\", \"Robert's Rules of Order Revised\", \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\", or \"the current edition of\" any of these titles, or the like, without specifying a particular edition.\nThe authorship team of the current Twelfth Edition consists of a grandson of General Robert, an attorney, a lobbyist and legislative analyst, a mathematics professor, and a copy editor, all of them being experienced parliamentarians.\nMore than six million copies have been printed (which is a total of all editions).\nThe following table lists the official versions of the body of work known as \"Robert's Rules of Order\" developed by Henry M. Robert and maintained by his successors.\nPurpose.\nGenerally, \"Robert's Rules of Order\" is a guide for conducting meetings and making decisions as a group. The purpose of the book is \"to enable assemblies of any size, with due regard for every member's opinion, to arrive at the general will on the maximum number of questions of varying complexity in a minimum amount of time and under all kinds of internal climate ranging from total harmony to hardened or impassioned division of opinion\".\nThe book is designed for use in ordinary societies rather than legislative assemblies, and it is the most commonly adopted parliamentary authority among societies in the United States. It is also recognized as \"the most widely used reference for meeting procedure and business rules in the English-speaking world\".\nThe book states that it is \"a codification of the present-day general parliamentary law\". \"General parliamentary law\" refers to the common rules and customs for conducting business in organizations and assemblies. It does not refer to statutory legal requirements nor to common-law precedent derived from court judgments. In other words, the book is about procedures for meetings and not about what is \"legal\" (i.e. it is not a law book).\nAs a reference, it is designed to answer, as nearly as possible, any question of parliamentary procedure that may arise. The Twelfth Edition contains 633 pages of text, and all of its original content was included because it \"has at some time come up as a question of procedure somewhere\". The completeness of the book was made so that organizations would not have to write extensive rules for themselves. In addition, members of different organizations could refer to the same book of rules.\nHenry M. Robert III responded to the simplification by saying the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In an effort to make parliamentary procedure more widely accessible, known, and employed, the approach of \"simplification\" unfortunately resurrects the very problem that Robert's Rules first emerged to solve. When there are large gaps in the rules, one or more of three major problems occur: much time is spent in debating what the rules are or should be, the chair unilaterally imposes a result, or the majority imposes a result that frequently disregards the rights of the minority.\nWhen virtually everyone agrees, an assembly may be able to get by without resort to elaborate rules. When there is serious division, however, it is in human nature that each side will attempt to construe any ambiguity in the rules in such a way as to foster its substantive objectives. The ideal is that the rules applicable to a contentious subject are so clear that the contending sides cannot plausibly differently interpret them to their own advantage. Only then does parliamentary law fully play its role as the neutral arbiter that channels disputes into productive debate over substance, instead of time-wasting and manipulative maneuvering over procedure.\nContents of current (12th) edition.\nThe contents of the current (12th) edition of \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\" (RONR), published in 2020, include details on the types of groups that use the book, the ways that decisions could be made, and the various situations in which decisions are made.\nBasics.\nThe Introduction in the book provides a history of parliamentary procedure and includes the background and history of Robert's Rules of Order. Rules in the book are based on the rights of the majority, of the minority (especially a strong minority that is greater than one third), of individual members, of absentees, and of all these together. Some fundamental principles upon which the book is based include: one question at a time; one person, one vote; and a vote being limited to members present.\nA group that uses the book is called a deliberative assembly. The types of deliberative assemblies are a mass meeting, a local assembly of an organized society (local club or local branch), a convention, a legislative body, and a board. An organization may have rules which could include a corporate charter, a constitution or bylaws, rules of order (special rules of order and parliamentary authority), standing rules, and customs. To conduct business, groups have meetings or sessions that may be separated by more than or be within a quarterly time interval. The types of meetings are a regular meeting, a special meeting, an adjourned meeting, an annual meeting, an executive session, a public session, and electronic meetings.\nA member of a deliberative assembly has the right to attend meetings, make motions, speak in debate, and vote. The process of making a decision is done through a motion, which is a proposal to do something. The formal steps in handling a motion are the making of a motion, having a second, stating the motion, having debate on the motion, putting the motion to a vote, and announcing the results of the vote. Action could be taken informally without going through these steps by using unanimous consent. When making a choice, the basic principle of decision is majority vote. In situations when more than majority vote is required, the requirement could include a two-thirds vote, previous notice, or a vote of a majority of the entire membership.\nMotions.\nThe book provides details about main motions including the motion to ratify. In addition, the book lists other motions and provides details (including explanations, forms, and examples) on these motions which include:\nDetails for each motion include its purpose, when it could be made, if it is debatable, if it is amendable, the vote required for adoption, and if it could be reconsidered. The \"order of precedence\", or rank, of the motions is also described in detail.\nVarious topics.\nThe second half of the book covers various topics in detail. Brief summaries of these topics are as follows:\nDepending on the situation, motions could be renewed, or made again. On the other hand, members should not use legitimate motions for dilatory and improper purposes to waste time.\nA quorum, or minimum number of members, is required to be present at a meeting in order to validly conduct business. The business that is to come up in a meeting could be listed in an order of business or an agenda.\nEach member could get a chance to speak through assignment of the floor and debate. Debate may be limited in the number of speeches and time and should be respectful to others at all times. Voting takes place to decide the course of action and it could be done in a multitude of ways, such as voice vote, standing vote, and ballot vote.\nOfficers in an organization could be elected through the process of nominations and elections. Each organization decides for itself which officers to have, but the minimum officers in a deliberative assembly are a presiding officer (usually \"president\" or \"chairman\") and a secretary. The secretary keeps the minutes, or the official records of the proceedings, for each meeting. As part of their duties, the officers may have reports to give, such as a financial report given by the treasurer. In addition, an organization may have a board to handle business on behalf of the organization. Officers and boards only have such authority and powers that are given to them in the governing documents of the organization. There may also be committees that are formed to assist the organization. The boards and committees may have reports to give as well.\nPeople may gather in mass meetings for a specific purpose or cause. One such purpose of the mass meetings could be for the intent of organizing a permanent society.\nEach organization has its basic rules contained in its bylaws. The bylaws could describe the name of the organization and its purpose, the requirements to be a member or an officer, how meetings are scheduled, if there are boards or committees (or both), its parliamentary authority, and how to amend the bylaws.\nRepresentatives from constituent groups may gather as delegates in conventions to conduct business on behalf of the organization. Conventions may consist of several meetings and may last for several days or more on an annual basis or other such infrequent interval.\nIf members do not act according to the organization's rules, they could be subject to disciplinary procedures. Such action could range from censure to the extreme of expulsion from the organization. Officers could be disciplined by removal from office.\nCharts, tables, and lists.\nThe tinted pages (pages marked by a gray band along the outer edge) in the rear of the book contain the following charts, tables, and lists: (1) \"Chart for Determining When Each Subsidiary or Privileged Motion Is In Order\", (2) \"Table of Rules Relating to Motions\", (3) \"Sample Forms Used in Making Motions\", (4) and (5) \"Motions and Parliamentary Steps\", (6) \"Motions Which Require a Two-Thirds Vote\", (7) \"Motions Whose Reconsideration Is Prohibited Or Limited\", and (8) \"Table of Rules for Counting Election Ballots\".\nAdditional information related to current edition.\nIn addition to containing a summary of basic points from the current (12th) edition of \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\" (RONR), the following contents are unique to the current (3rd) edition of \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised In Brief\" (RONRIB): an example of an agenda, additional sample dialogues, frequently asked questions, an example of a call of a meeting, an example of a memorandum listing the order of business, and the following tables: (A) \"Handling Motions as chair\", (B) \"When Chair Stands and Sits\", (C) \"Conducting a Meeting as chair\", (D) \"Table of Rules Relating to Motions\", and (E) \"Words to Use as a Member\".\nThe Robert's Rules Association has also made the Eleventh Edition available in CD-ROM format (designed for installation on Windows PCs) through American Legal Publishing. The CD contains the current editions of \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\" and \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised In Brief\" as well as a \"Timekeeper's Guide\", \"Teller's Report\", \"Sample Rules for Electronic Meetings\", various forms, and resources for \"Ballot Voting and Understanding Secondary Amendments\".\nFor the first time, an e-book version of the current Twelfth Edition was released by the Robert's Rules Association. Any copy of \"Robert's Rules of Order\" that is downloaded online is likely an older edition (1915 or earlier) that is available in the public domain.\nTranslations of any edition of Robert's Rules of Order into other languages have not been published by the Robert's Rules Association. Any translated copy of Robert's Rules of Order done by a third party may not accurately reflect the correct meaning in the target language.\nChanges between editions.\nThe following table lists some of the changes that were made between the editions of Robert's Rules of Order. The numbered pages may not correspond to the total number of pages in the edition due to additional material in the preface, introduction, and other miscellaneous pages that were not included in the numbering system.\nGenerally, a fuller list and more details of the changes are found in the preface of each edition. A detailed list of changes for the current (12th) edition is provided on the website maintained by the Robert's Rules Association. All the changes were a result of questions and comments received from users.\nRule explanations.\nStarting in the period between the Tenth Edition and the Eleventh Edition, the authors released official interpretations of rules in the book onto the website maintained by the Robert's Rules Association. The interpretations from that period were later incorporated into the Eleventh Edition.\nIn addition, the authors addressed common misunderstandings of the rules coming from frequently asked questions. Some of the misunderstandings involve: when the president can vote, whether ex-officio members can vote, the definition of majority, how abstentions affect the vote, a \"friendly amendment\", \"calling the question\", \"tabling\" a motion, getting items on the agenda, and the contents of minutes. While these misunderstandings are of the rules in the current edition of \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\", the organization may be governed by other rules which supersede these \"default\" rules.\nThe official interpretations and addressed common misunderstandings were a result of questions posted in the Question &amp; Answer Forum at The Robert's Rules Association website. This forum is actively moderated by members of the authorship team.\nLaw-making bodies.\nGenerally, \"Robert's Rules of Order\" is designed for ordinary societies. However, law-making bodies at the local level (such as a city council or a county commission) function similarly to boards of societies. The book has found application to such bodies. Such bodies are also subject to open meeting laws (Sunshine laws) and other applicable laws, all of which supersede any conflicting provisions in the book.\nOn the other hand, legislative bodies at the state or national level have their own well-defined set of rules (such as \"Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure\"). However, a survey found that four state legislative chambers in the United States still use \"Robert's Rules of Order\".\nCorporations.\n\"Robert's Rules of Order\" is based on each member of a group having equal weight as expressed by vote. This book has found application in the corporate world, such as in shareholder meetings and in board of director meetings. However, the rules have to be modified to account for when some individuals within the group have more power than others.\nParliamentarians.\nA parliamentarian is an expert on parliamentary procedure. To be effective consultants for the organizations they work for, parliamentarians are expected to be knowledgeable on \"Robert's Rules of Order\".\nThe National Association of Parliamentarians (NAP) is the largest non-profit association of parliamentarians in the world. This organization bases its opinions and instruction upon \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\" (12th ed.). Membership in this organization requires passing an exam which is based on the first half of the concise guide, \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised In Brief\" (3rd ed.).\nThe American Institute of Parliamentarians is another non-profit association of parliamentarians. This organization stresses proficiency and familiarity with a variety of parliamentary authorities, although it states on its website that \"\"Robert's Rules of Order\" is the most frequently used parliamentary authority\". The website also states that it \"is the premier manual on parliamentary authority\" and \"a 'must-have' text for every parliamentarian\".\nYouth organizations.\nYouth organizations, such as Business Professionals of America (BPA), Family, Career and Community Leaders of America (FCCLA), Future Business Leaders of America-Phi Beta Lambda (FBLA-PBL), HOSA-Future Health Professionals, the National FFA Organization, SkillsUSA, and the Technology Student Association (TSA), sponsor parliamentary procedure competitions (such as Parli Pro) as part of their programs for their student members. These competitions are based on \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\". The National Association of Parliamentarians have partnered with some of these organizations.\n\"Robert's Rules of Order\" are used in Congressional Debate (also referred to as Student Congress), an event put on by the National Speech and Debate Association (NSDA).\n\"Robert's Rules of Order\" is also used during American Legion and American Legion Auxiliary Boys/Girls State programs and in Model United Nations conferences. While the chair of each committee in a Model United Nations conference may sometimes deviate from the written rules for educational purposes, the format of the rules in the specific committees is mostly based on \"Robert's Rules of Order\". Another program in which \"Robert's Rules of Order\" may be used is Model Congress, although the rules in these programs may more closely resemble those in the legislative assemblies that the programs simulate.\n\"Robert's Rules of Order\" are also used during National Association of College and University Residence Halls (NACURH) Residence Hall Association meetings, regional conferences, and national conferences.\nAlternative rules for organizations.\nOther parliamentary authorities.\nParliamentarians have estimated that about 85 to 95 percent of organizations in the United States use \"Robert's Rules of Order\". The remaining percentage of organizations use other books on meeting procedures. Notable examples of such books on parliamentary authority include \"Demeter's Manual of Parliamentary Law and Procedure\", and \"Riddick's Rules of Procedure\". These books along with \"Robert's Rules of Order\" share the general idea of rule of the majority with respect for the minority. A difference may be a \"simplification\" of the rules. Less popular choices include Atwood's \"Rules for Meetings\" and \"Democratic Rules of Order\".\nConsensus decision-making.\nIn modern parliamentary procedure, the usual practice is having a proposal first, then discussion on this proposal with any modifications to it, and finally a vote on it, with majority vote deciding the issue if there are any disagreements. An alternative to this process is consensus decision-making. In this alternative, discussion of potential proposals is held first, followed by the framing of a proposal, and then modifying it until the group reaches a consensus, when there is no longer any disagreement.\nAs a response to this alternative, the authors of \"Robert's Rules of Order\" stated their belief in using debate and majority vote as part of the process in making decisions for the group.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44420", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44420", "title": "Rules of order", "text": ""}
{"id": "44421", "revid": "6278275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44421", "title": "Legislature", "text": "Deliberative assembly that makes laws\nA legislature (, ) is a deliberative assembly that holds the legal authority to make law and exercise political oversight within a political entity such as a state, nation, or city. Legislatures are among the principal institutions of state, typically contrasted with the executive and judicial institutions. They may exist at different levels of governance\u2014national, subnational (state, provincial, or regional), local, or supranational\u2014such as the European Parliament.\nIn most political systems, the laws enacted by legislatures are referred to as primary legislation. Legislatures may also perform oversight, budgetary, and representative functions. Members of a legislature, called legislators, may be elected, indirectly chosen, or appointed, and legislatures may be unicameral, bicameral, or multicameral, depending on their constitutional design.\nThere are several types of legislatures, reflecting the different constitutional principles of power on which states are organized. These types illustrate how legislatures differ not only in structure and function, but also in their constitutional relationship to other state institutions and in the theories of sovereignty and power that underpin them. The most common types are parliaments, which operate under the fusion of powers between the executive and the legislature; congresses, which function under the separation of powers between independent branches of government\u2014in these systems, the legislature is institutionally separate from the other branches and has limited means to influence their operations; and supreme state organs of power, found in communist states, which operated under the doctrine of unified power, centralizing executive, legislative, judicial and all other state powers in a supreme state organ of power, with subordinate organs carrying out delegated functions within a constitutionally defined division of labour among state organs.\nTypes of legislatures.\nThere exist different types of legislatures. In liberal democratic systems, there exist two: parliaments and congress legislatures. Unlike parliament, there are no commonly agreed-upon terms for legislatures in non-parliamentary liberal democracies. Parliaments exist in states that practice the fusion of powers, while congresses exist in states that practice the separation of powers. There also exist other types of legislatures, such as the supreme state organs of power (SSOP) in communist states, which function within the bounds of unified power. Types of legislatures are defined by, as shown, the political power system they operate in. These power principles say something about the relationship between the legislature and other state institutions. For example, that the United Kingdom has a Parliament means that it practices fusion of powers, while Mexico's Congress of the Union informs that Mexico practices the separation of powers. According to scholar Amie Kreppel, the most important distinguishing feature between a type of legislature is the relationship between the legislature and the executive.\nParliament.\nIn liberal democratic states that practice parliamentary democracy, the government in the form of the prime minister and the cabinet is elected by the legislature. The members of the government are elected from within the membership of parliament. Additionally, although an institutionally distinct organ, the government is accountable to parliament. Meaning that, theoretically, the legislature can remove the government as it sees fit, regardless of electoral outcomes. However, the removal of a government by the legislature can lead to early elections and result in both losing power in the coming election. Therefore, the relationship between the legislature and government in a parliamentary democracy is characterised by mutual dependence.\nCongress.\nThe boundaries between government branches are clearly demarcated in separation of powers systems. In contrast to parliamentary systems, in separation of powers systems, the head of state and head of government are merged into an executive branch in the office of president. Also, to clarify the institutional boundary even further, the president and the congressional legislature are elected in separate elections. For these reasons, the ability of congress to remove the executive is limited. It can instigate, as in the United States, an impeachment of the executive, but that is considered to be a move only taken in the utmost extreme circumstances.\nSupreme state organ of power.\nCommunist states established SSOPs, and formally speaking, these organs are the most powerful state institutions in the respective country. Since it's a holder of the unified powers of the state, the SSOP is constrained only by the limits it has itself set by constitutional and legal documents it has adopted. For example, in China, according to Chinese legal scholar Zhou Fang, \"[t]he powers of the National People's Congress as the [SSOP] are boundless, its authority extends to the entire territory of the country, and, if necessary, it can intervene in any matter which it finds it requisite to do so.\" More specifically, according to Chinese legal scholars Xu Chongde and Niu Wenzhan, \"[t]he other central State organs are created by [China's SSOP] and execute the laws and resolutions made by [China's SSOP].\"\nAccording to scholar Georg Brunner, this indicates that communist constitutions codify the state's unlimited political powers, and indirectly, those of the ruling communist party. He believes this is proof that the liberal democratic conception of the rule of law is irreconcilable with communist state constitutions because they rest on opposing relationships between law and politics. Under the liberal democratic rule of law conception, political processes are constrained by legal norms supervised by an independent judiciary and are viewed as universal and non-ideological. That means that holders of political power are bound by law, and that law takes precedence over politics. By contrast, communist constitutions codify the primacy of politics over judicial authority, as judicial power is also considered a form of political power. That means that communist states formally subjugate judicial power to the political power of the SSOP (the supreme judicial organ is inferior and accountable to the SSOP). Marxist\u2013Leninists hold that legislation, not judicial rulings, is the sole source of valid law. As a result, Marxism\u2013Leninism rejects the separation of powers, but supports the demarcation of state responsibilities in accordance with the principle of the division of labour. Other state organs derive their powers from, and are subordinated to, the SSOP.\nTerminology.\nThe name used to refer to a legislative body varies by country. \nCommon names include:\nBy names:\nBy languages:\nThough the specific roles for each legislature differ by location, they all aim to serve the same purpose of appointing officials to represent their citizens to determine appropriate legislation for the country.\nHistory.\nAmong the earliest recognised formal legislatures was the Athenian \"Ecclesia.\" In the Middle Ages, European monarchs would host assemblies of the nobility, which would later develop into predecessors of modern legislatures. These were often named the Estates. The oldest surviving legislature is the Icelandic Althing, founded in 930 CE.\nFunctions.\nDemocratic legislatures have six major functions: representation, deliberation, legislation, authorizing expenditure, making governments, and oversight.\nRepresentation.\nThere exist five ways that representation can be achieved in a legislature:\nDeliberation.\nOne of the major functions of a legislature is to discuss and debate issues of major importance to society. This activity can take place in two forms. In debating legislatures, such as the Parliament of the United Kingdom, the floor of the legislature frequently sees lively debate. In contrast, in committee-based legislatures like the United States Congress, deliberation takes place in closed committees.\nLegislation.\nWhile legislatures have nominally the sole power to create laws, the substantive extent of this power depends on details of the political system. In Westminster-style legislatures the executive (composed of the cabinet) can essentially pass any laws it wants, as it usually has a majority of legislators behind it, kept in check by the party whip, while committee-based legislatures in continental Europe and those in presidential systems of the Americas have more independence in drafting and amending bills. According to the median voter theorem laws aligned with the opinion of median voters increase political responsiveness.\nAuthorizing expenditure.\nThe origins of the power of the purse which legislatures ordinarily have in passing or denying government budgets goes back to the European assemblies of nobility which the monarchs would have to consult before raising taxes. For this power to be actually effective, the legislature should be able to amend the budget, have an effective committee system, enough time for consideration, as well as access to relevant background information.\nOversight.\nThere are several ways in which the legislature can hold the executive branch (the administration or government) accountable. This can be done through hearings, questioning, interpellations, votes of confidence, the formation of committees. Parliaments are usually ensured with upholding the rule of law, verifying that public funds are used accountably and efficiently as well as make government processes transparent and actions so that they can be debated by the public and its representatives.\nAgora notes that parliamentary systems or political parties in which political leaders can influence or decide which members receive top jobs can lead to passivity amongst members of the party and less challenging of leadership. Agora notes that this phenomenon is acute if the election of a member is dependent on the support of political leadership.\nFunction in authoritarian regimes.\nIn contrast to democratic systems, legislatures under authoritarianism are used to ensure the stability of the power structure by co-opting potential competing interests within the elites, which they achieve by:\nInternal organization.\nEach chamber of the legislature consists of a number of legislators who use some form of parliamentary procedure to debate political issues and vote on proposed legislation. There must be a certain number of legislators present to carry out these activities; this is called a quorum.\nSome of the responsibilities of a legislature, such as giving first consideration to newly proposed legislation, are usually delegated to committees made up of a few of the members of the chamber(s).\nThe members of a legislature usually represent different political parties; the members from each party generally meet as a caucus to organize their internal affairs.\nRelation to other branches of government.\nLegislatures vary widely in the amount of political power they wield, compared to other political players such as judiciaries, militaries, and executives. In 2009, political scientists M. Steven Fish and Matthew Kroenig constructed a Parliamentary powers index in an attempt to quantify the different degrees of power among national legislatures. The German Bundestag, the Italian Parliament, and the Mongolian State Great Khural tied for most powerful, while Myanmar's House of Representatives and Somalia's Transitional Federal Assembly (since replaced by the Federal Parliament of Somalia) tied for least powerful.\nSome political systems follows the principle of legislative supremacy, which holds that the legislature is the supreme branch of government and cannot be bound by other institutions, such as the judicial branch or a written constitution. Such a system renders the legislature more powerful.\nIn parliamentary and semi-presidential systems of government, the executive is responsible to the legislature, which may remove it with a vote of no confidence. On the other hand, according to the separation of powers doctrine, the legislature in a presidential system is considered an independent and coequal branch of government along with both the judiciary and the executive. Nevertheless, many presidential systems provide for the impeachment of the executive for criminal or unconstitutional behaviour.\nLegislatures will sometimes delegate their legislative power to administrative or executive agencies.\nMembers.\nLegislatures are made up of individual members, known as legislators, who vote on proposed laws. A legislature usually contains a fixed number of legislators; because legislatures usually meet in a specific room filled with seats for the legislators, this is often described as the number of \"seats\" it contains. For example, a legislature that has 100 \"seats\" has 100 members. By extension, an electoral district that elects a single legislator can also be described as a \"seat\", as, for example, in the phrases \"safe seat\" and \"marginal seat\".\nAfter election, the members may be protected by parliamentary immunity or parliamentary privilege, either for all actions the duration of their entire term, or for just those related to their legislative duties.\nChambers.\nA legislature may debate and vote upon bills as a single unit, or it may be composed of multiple separate assemblies, called by various names including \"legislative chambers\", \"debate chambers\", and \"houses\", which debate and vote separately and have distinct powers. A legislature which operates as a single unit is unicameral, one divided into two chambers is bicameral, and one divided into three chambers is tricameral.\nIn bicameral legislatures, one chamber is usually considered the upper house, while the other is considered the lower house. The two types are not rigidly different, but members of upper houses tend to be indirectly elected or appointed rather than directly elected, tend to be allocated by administrative divisions rather than by population, and tend to have longer terms than members of the lower house. In some systems, particularly parliamentary systems, the upper house has less power and tends to have a more advisory role, but in others, particularly federal presidential systems, the upper house has equal or even greater power. \nIn federations, the upper house typically represents the federation's component states. This is also the case with the supranational legislature of the European Union. The upper house may either contain the delegates of state governments\u00a0\u2013 as in the European Union and in Germany and, before 1913, in the United States\u00a0\u2013 or be elected according to a formula that grants equal representation to states with smaller populations, as is the case in Australia and the United States since 1913.\nTricameral legislatures are rare; the Massachusetts Governor's Council still exists, but the most recent national example existed in the waning years of White-minority rule in South Africa. Tetracameral legislatures no longer exist, but they were previously used in Scandinavia. The only legislature with a number of chambers bigger than four was the Federal Assembly of Yugoslavia; initially established as a Pentacameral body in 1963, it was turned into a hexacameral body in 1967.\nSize.\nLegislatures vary widely in their size. Among national legislatures, China's National People's Congress is the largest with 2,980 members, while Vatican City's Pontifical Commission is the smallest with 7. Neither legislature is democratically elected: The Pontifical Commission members are appointed by the Pope and the National People's Congress is indirectly elected within the context of a one-party state.\nLegislature size is a trade off between efficiency and representation; the smaller the legislature, the more efficiently it can operate, but the larger the legislature, the better it can represent the political diversity of its constituents. Comparative analysis of national legislatures has found that size of a country's lower house tends to be proportional to the cube root of its population; that is, the size of the lower house tends to increase along with population, but much more slowly.\nReferences.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBook chapters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournal entries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44422", "revid": "50998021", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44422", "title": "Adjara", "text": "Region of Georgia\nAdjara (Georgian: \"Ach\u2019ara\" ) or Achara, officially known as the Autonomous Republic of Adjara (Georgian: \"Ach\u2019aris Avt\u2019onomiuri Resp\u2019ublik\u2019a\" ), is a political-administrative region of Georgia. It is in the country's southwestern corner, on the coast of the Black Sea, near the foot of the Lesser Caucasus Mountains, north of Turkey. It is an important tourist destination and includes Georgia's second most populous city of Batumi as its capital. About 401,100 people live on its .\nAdjara is home to the Adjarians, a regional subgroup of Georgians. The name can be spelled in a number of ways: \"Ajara\", \"Ajaria\", \"Adjaria\", \"Adzharia\", \"Atchara\" and \"Achara\". Under the Soviet Union, Adjara was part of the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic as the Adjarian ASSR. The autonomous status of Adjara is guaranteed under article 6 of the Treaty of Kars.\nHistory.\nAdjara was a part of Georgian polities, Colchis and Caucasian Iberia, since ancient times. Colonized by Greeks in the 5th century BC, the region fell under Rome in the 2nd century BC. It became part of the kingdom of Lazica before being incorporated into the Kingdom of Abkhazia in the 8th century AD, the latter led unification of Georgian monarchy in the 11th century.\nAdjaria was occupied by several empires: the First Persian Empire (500 BC), Seljuks (11th century), Mongols (13th century), and Timurids (14th century).\nOttoman period.\nThe Ottomans conquered the area in 1614. Although, the Ottoman millet system allowed its subjects extensive self-governance and religious freedom, many Adjarians gradually chose to convert to Islam during the 200 years of Ottoman presence. Despite this, the population never abandoned its native Georgian tongue and avoided demographic influence from the Ottomans. The nobility converted to Islam first. Adjarians were fully Islamized by the end of the eighteenth century.\nRussian Empire.\nThe Ottomans were forced to cede Adjara to the expanding Russian Empire in 1878 under the Treaty of Berlin. The Berlin Treaty allowed Adjarians to leave for Turkey, keeping a provision of Section 6, article 21 of the Treaty of San Stefano. Many Adjarians emigrated to Turkey. While the Russian authorities supported the Russian Orthodox Church's missionary efforts, they also tried to win the loyalty of Adjarians by building mosques and madrassas and supporting the local Muslim clergy. As a result, many Adjarians emigrants, called Muhacir, came back to Adjara. Within Russian imperial administrative division, Adjara was called Batumi okrug, comprising Kutaisi Governorate. After Adjara was ceded to the Russian Empire in 1878 under the Treaty of Berlin, Adjarians, who were Muslims, were allowed to leave for Turkey. This was followed by an influx of Christians from Kakheti, resulting in a change of the religious landscape.\nGeorgian Democratic Republic.\nIn 1918, Georgia regained its independence as a democratic republic and Adjara became part of it. However, in April 1918, the Ottoman Empire invaded Georgia and captured Batumi. The operation was conducted on 13\u201314 April 1918, with the 37th Division entering Batumi under the command of Colonel K\u00e2z\u0131m Karabekir.\nOn 4 June 1918, the Treaty of Batum was signed, under which Georgia was forced to cede Adjara to the Ottoman Empire. However, due to the Ottoman defeat in the First World War and the Treaty of Mudros, the Ottomans soon withdrew the territory. The British warship ) troops in entered Batumi in 1918, and Adjara was temporarily placed under the British Military Governor James Cooke-Collis, who established the Council for the Administration of Batoum and its Region to administer the region in December 1918. The British withdrew in 1920 and Adjara rejoined the Democratic Republic of Georgia. The British administration ceded the region to the Democratic Republic of Georgia on July 20, 1920. It was granted autonomy under the Georgian constitution adopted in February 1921 when the Red Army invaded Georgia. Turkey reinvaded Adjara in March 1921, although Georgians defeated Turks in the Battle of Batumi and Ankara's government ceded the territory to Georgia under Article VI of Treaty of Kars on the condition that autonomy be provided for the Muslim population, while Turkish commodities were guaranteed free transit through the port of Batumi. The Soviets established in 1921 the Adjarian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic within the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic in accord with this clause, thus Adjara remained part of Georgia. The autonomous republic was the only autonomous unit in the USSR based solely on religion. However, Stalin's definition of what constituted a nation was based on language. Without their own language, Adjars did not develop a strong sense of national identity, separate from Georgian. Moreover, the Soviet atheist ideology dampened religious practice. In the 1920s, the Ajars rebelled against the Soviet anti-Islamic activities, as well as against the collectivization reforms. The armed uprising began in the mountainous regions of Adjara in April 1929. Soviet troops were deployed in response and swiftly quelled the revolt.\nIndependent Georgia.\nAfter Georgian independence, Aslan Abashidze became the chairman of Adjaria's parliament, the Adjarian Supreme Soviet. Abashidze was initially appointed by the first Georgian president Zviad Gamsakhurdia in 1991. However, he later took advantage of the civil war in the country and turned Adjara into the personal fiefdom, although it remained relatively prosperous enclave in an otherwise rather chaotic country. During the 1991\u20131992 Georgian coup d'\u00e9tat which ousted Gamsakhurdia from power, Abashidze declared a state of emergency in Adjara, closing its borders and shutting down the Adjarian Supreme Soviet. In response to pressure from the Adjarian opposition led by Republican Party of Georgia, Georgia's new leader Eduard Shevardnadze met Aslan Abashidze in Batumi and persuaded him to resume the Supreme Soviet sessions in May 1992. However, the opposition failed to oust Abashidze. While Shevardnadze could easily sway certain members of the Adjarian Supreme Soviet against Abashidze, he did not do so. Being brought to power through the coup launched by the militia leaders Jaba Ioseliani and Tengiz Kitovani, Shevardnadze saw Abashidze as a useful counterweight against these warlords.\nFurther exploiting the instability, at this time brought by the War in Abkhazia, Abashidze moved to further consolidate his power. During the summer of 1992, Abashidze appointed a seven-member Presidium of the Adjarian Supreme Soviet, made up of his supporters, and ruled by decree through this body. The Supreme Soviet, on the other hand, practically ceased to convene. Abashidze unilaterally took power without formal agreement and started to withhold tax revenue and capture Adjara's considerable wealth. However, he managed to prevent various paramilitary groups from entering Adjara's territory, and preserved peace through authoritarianism, which brought him considerable popularity.\nAfter the end of Georgia's civil war, Abashidze reached agreement with the Georgian president Eduard Shevardnadze to stay in power. Shevardnadze, who had yet to cement his power in Georgia, ignored Abashidze's authoritarian rule and even appreciated that it brought stability to the region. The central government in Tbilisi had very little say in what went on in Adjara. Elections in Adjara were not free and fair, Abashidze controlled the media and captured customs revenue for his personal enrichment. Abashidze instituted border control with the rest of Georgia and created armed paramilitaries. However, he asserted that Adjara wasn't separatist. Adjara is the only autonomous region in the Southern Caucasus which has not been involved in the secessionist conflict with the central government since the dissolution of the Soviet Union. While Adjarians, a subgroup of ethnic Georgians, adopted Islam during the centuries of Ottoman imperial rule over Adjara, which differentiated them from the rest of Georgian subethnicities who adhere to Orthodox Christianity, Adjarians at the same time retained many cultural similarities with Christian Georgians and never developed a separate \"Adjarian identity\", remaining accepted within the definition of Georgian nation. This provided insufficient base for a strong nationalist or excessively regionalist movement in Adjara. Moreover, a considerable power and resources allowed Abashidze to politically and financially establish a national political role throughout whole Georgia, and the Union for the Revival took part in the nationwide Georgian elections.\nAbashidze's regime survived on receiving funds from the customs control in Sarpi at Georgia\u2013Turkey border, contraband of cigarettes and allegedly also weapons and narcotics, an oil refinery in Batumi and selling of ships stationed in Adjara without Georgian government's approval. Even though Shevardnadze often complained about Abashidze's aggressive autonomous strategy, they had good relationships and supported each other when they needed public support. Initially Abashidze's Democratic Union for Revival and Shevardnadze's Union of Citizens of Georgia worked together in Georgian Parliament and Adjarian Supreme Council following new elections in 1995\u20131996. However, a series of disputes with UCG in 1997 concerning limits of Abashidze's power in Adjara and defections of his party deputies to UCG led Abashidze to view the UCG and especially its 'reformists' faction with suspicions and he withdrew into opposition, establishing a powerful anti-CUG bloc which took part in the 1999 Georgian parliamentary election and garnered around 25 per cent of the vote.\nIn 2000, by withdrawing his candidacy from the presidential elections in Georgia, Abashidze managed to get Shevardnadze to change Georgian constitution to increase Adjara's status. From 1997 to 2001, Abashidze passed several amendments to Adjara's constitution to strengthen his power. He established the post of a directly elected Head of the Autonomous Republic of Adjara with powers to control any movement of military on Adjara's territory, and was elected on this position in November 2001 while being the only candidate.\nThe situation changed following the Rose Revolution of 2003 when Shevardnadze was deposed in favor of the reformist opposition leader Mikheil Saakashvili. Adjaran leader Aslan Abashidze, being in strong opposition to the Rose Revolution, declared a state of emergency immediately after Eduard Shevardnadze's ousting on 23 November 2003. He intensified a crackdown on opposition, with dozens being injured as a result of clashes between protesters and police in the southern Adjaran village of Gonio in January 2004. Soon after his inauguration as president in January 2004, Saakashvili took aim at Abashidze with strong anticorruption reforms. In the wake of Abashidze's visit to Moscow, the Russian Foreign Ministry issued a statement on January 20 backing Abashidze's policy and condemning his opposition as \"extremist forces\". In spring 2004, a major crisis in Adjara erupted as the central government sought to reimpose its authority on the region. It led to several encounters between Abashidze's paramilitaries and the Georgian army. However, Saakashvili's ultimate and mass protests in Batumi against Abashidze's autocratic rule forced the Adjaran leader to resign in May 2004. Facing charges of embezzlement and murder, Abashidze destroyed the bridges between Adjara and the rest of Georgia to delay the advance of Georgian troops in Batumi and then fled to Moscow. Even Abashidze's former ally, Haji Mahmud Kamashidze, sided with Saakashvili. Saakashvili wanted Adjara to keep a significant autonomy. A new law was therefore introduced to redefine the terms of Adjara's autonomy. Levan Varshalomidze succeeded Abashidze as the chairman of the government.\nIn July 2007, the seat of the Georgian Constitutional Court was moved from Tbilisi to Batumi. In November 2007 Russia ended its two-century military presence in the region by withdrawing from the 12th Military Base (the former 145th Motor Rifle Division) in Batumi.\nTurkey still has noticeable economic and religious influence in Adjara, making some Georgians wary of the Turkish presence. In the early 2020s, Turkish influence was again supplanted by the Russians, who returned to the region in large numbers, also causing anxiety among some locals.\nLaw and government.\nThe status of the Adjaran Autonomous Republic is defined by Georgia's law on Adjara and the region's new constitution, adopted following the ousting of Aslan Abashidze. The local legislative body is the Supreme Council. The head of the region's government\u2014the Council of Ministers of Adjara\u2014is nominated by the President of Georgia who also has powers to dissolve the assembly and government and to overrule local authorities on issues where the constitution of Georgia is contravened. Tornike Rizhvadze was head of the Adjaran government until 2025. In April 2025 the Supreme Council approved Sulkhan Tamazashvili as head of the Adjaran government.\nOn 24 October 1997, Adjara became a full member of the Assembly of European Regions (AER).\nAdministrative divisions.\nAdjara is subdivided into six administrative units:\nGeography.\nAdjara is on the southeastern coast of the Black Sea and extends into the wooded foothills and mountains of the Lesser Caucasus. It has borders with the region of Guria to the north, Samtskhe-Javakheti to the east and Turkey to the south. Most of Adjara's territory either consists of hills or mountains. The highest mountains rise more than above sea level. Around 60% of Adjara is covered by forests. Many parts of the Meskheti Range (the west-facing slopes) are covered by temperate rain forests.\nAdjara is traversed by the northeasterly line of equal latitude and longitude.\nClimate.\nAdjara is well known for its humid climate (especially along the coastal regions) and prolonged rainy weather, although there is plentiful sunshine during the spring and summer months. Adjara receives the highest amounts of precipitation both in Georgia and in the Caucasus. It is also one of the wettest temperate regions in the Northern Hemisphere. No region along Adjara's coast receives less than of precipitation per year. The west-facing (windward) slopes of the Meskheti Range receive upwards of of precipitation per year. The coastal lowlands receive most of the precipitation in the form of rain (due to the area's subtropical climate). September and October are usually the wettest months. Batumi's average monthly rainfall for the month of September is . The interior parts of Adjara are considerably drier than the coastal mountains and lowlands. Winter usually brings significant snowfall to the higher regions of Adjara, where snowfall often reaches several meters. Average summer temperatures are between in the lowland areas and between in the highlands. The highest areas of Adjara have lower temperatures. Average winter temperatures are between along the coast while the interior areas and mountains average around . Some of the highest mountains of Adjara have average winter temperatures of .\nEconomy.\nAdjara has good land for growing tea, citrus fruits and tobacco. Mountainous and forested, the region has a subtropical climate, and there are many health resorts. Tobacco, tea, citrus fruits, and avocados are leading crops; livestock raising is also important. Industries include tea packing, tobacco processing, fruit and fish canning, oil refining, and shipbuilding.\nThe regional capital, Batumi, is an important gateway for the shipment of goods heading into Georgia, Azerbaijan and landlocked Armenia. The port of Batumi is used for the shipment of oil from Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan. Its oil refinery handles Caspian oil from Azerbaijan which arrives by pipeline to Supsa port and is transported from there to Batumi by rail. The Adjaran capital is a center for shipbuilding and manufacturing.\nAdjara is the main center of Georgia's coastal tourism industry, having displaced the northwestern province of Abkhazia since that region's \"de facto\" secession from Georgia in 1993.\nAccording to 2021 data, the gross domestic product of the Autonomous Republic of Adjara was 4.86 billion GEL (9.3% of Georgia\u2019s GDP).\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2014 census, the population of Adjara is 333,953.\nEthnic groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Adjarians (Ajars) are an ethnographic group of the Georgian people who speak a group of local dialects known collectively as Adjarian. The written language is Georgian. Adjarians have been known as \"Muslim Georgians\". They were officially referred as such until the 1926 Soviet census which listed them as \"Ajars\" and counted 71,000 of them. Later, they were simply classified under a broader category of Georgians as no official Soviet census asked about religion. In independent Georgia, censuses do not include an \"Adjarian\" category, nor do they distinguish between ethnic Georgian Muslims and other Muslims, such as Azerbaijanis.\nEthnic minorities include Laz, Russians, Armenians, Pontic Greeks, and Abkhaz.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChristianity spread to Adjara in the first century. Andrew the Apostle, who is believed to be a missionary of the Mother of God to Georgia and founder of the Georgian Orthodox Church, entered Georgia from Adjara region and first preached Christianity there.\nAfter Adjara was ceded to the Russian Empire in 1878 under the Treaty of Berlin, those Adjarians who were Muslim were allowed to leave for Turkey. While the Russian authorities supported the Russian Orthodox Church's missionary efforts, they also tried to win the loyalty of Adjarians by building mosques and madrassas and supporting the local Muslim clergy. As a result, many Adjarians emigrants, called Muhacir, came back to Adjara.\nAlthough Adjara's political and religious autonomy was guaranteed by the 1921 Treaty of Kars, the Soviet atheist ideology dampened religious practice in the region. After Adjara was ceded to the Russian Empire in 1878 under the Treaty of Berlin, Adjarians, who were Muslims, were allowed to leave for Turkey. This was followed by an influx of Christians from Kakheti, resulting in a change of the religious landscape.\nThe collapse of the Soviet Union and the re-establishment of Georgia's independence first led to an Islamic revival. However, later Christianity has experienced a strong growth in Adjara, especially among the young. Nevertheless, there still remain Sunni Muslim communities in Adjara, mainly in the Khulo district. The Turkish Directorate of Religious Affairs is active in Adjara. According to Ghia Nodia, many Adjarians are Muslims but they consider themselves ethnic Georgians. According to the 2014 census, 54.5% of Adjara's population is Orthodox Christian, while 39.8% is Muslim, the rest includes atheists, adherents of the Armenian Apostolic Church and others. In the main city, Batumi, out of 152,839 inhabitants, 68.7% is Eastern Orthodox Christian, and they primarily adhere to the national Georgian Orthodox Church. Muslims make up 25.3% of population, while there are also Catholic, Armenian Apostolic, Jehovah's Witness, Seventh-day Adventist, and Jewish communities. In the second largest Kobuleti Municipality, 65.1% of the population in Orthodox Christian, while 28.8% is Muslim. Muslims make up majorities mostly in the mountainous districts, they make up 94.6% of the population in Khulo Municipality, 74.4% in Shuakhevi Municipality, 62.1% in Keda Municipality and 56.3% Khelvachauri Municipality.\nTraditional public festivals.\nSelimoba.\nSelimoba is held in the village of Bako, Khulo Municipality on June 3 and commemorates the life of Selim Khimshiashvili. A concert with the participation of local amateur groups of a folk handicraft products exhibition is held during the festival. It is supported by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports of Adjara.\nShuamtoba.\nShuamtoba (\"inter-mountain festival\") is a traditional festival, which is held on the summer mountain pastures of two municipalities (Khulo and Shuakhevi), during the first weekend of every August. Horse racing, a folk handicraft exhibition and a concert involving folk ensembles are held as well.\nMachakhloba.\nMachakhloba is a Machakhela gorge festivity, held in the second half of September. It is a traditional holiday celebrated in Machakhela gorge, Khelvachauri Municipality. The festival begins at the Machakhela rifle monument (at the point of convergence of the rivers Machakhelistskali and Chorokhi), continues in the village Machakhlispiri and ends in the village Zeda Chkhutuneti.\nKolkhoba.\nKolkhoba is an ancient Laz festival. It is held at the end of August or at the beginning of September in Sarpi village, Khelvachauri District. The story of the Argonauts is performed on stage during the festival.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44423", "revid": "814226123", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44423", "title": "Eusocial", "text": ""}
{"id": "44424", "revid": "22245365", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44424", "title": "Metamorphic rock", "text": "Rock that was subjected to heat and pressure\nMetamorphic rocks arise from the transformation of existing rock to new types of rock in a process called metamorphism. The original rock (protolith) is subjected to temperatures greater than and, often, elevated pressure of or more, causing profound physical or chemical changes. During this process, the rock remains mostly in the solid state, but gradually recrystallizes to a new texture or mineral composition. The protolith may be an igneous, sedimentary, or existing metamorphic rock.\nMetamorphic rocks make up a large part of the Earth's crust and form 12% of the Earth's land surface. They are classified by their protolith, their chemical and mineral makeup, and their texture. They may be formed simply by being deeply buried beneath the Earth's surface, where they are subject to high temperatures and the great pressure of the rock layers above. They can also form from tectonic processes such as continental collisions, which cause horizontal pressure, friction, and distortion. Metamorphic rock can be formed locally when rock is heated by the intrusion of hot molten rock called magma from the Earth's interior. The study of metamorphic rocks (now exposed at the Earth's surface following erosion and uplift) provides information about the temperatures and pressures that occur at great depths within the Earth's crust.\nSome examples of metamorphic rocks are gneiss, slate, marble, schist, and quartzite. Slate and quartzite tiles are used in building construction. Marble is also prized for building construction and as a medium for sculpture. On the other hand, schist bedrock can pose a challenge for civil engineering because of its pronounced planes of weakness.\nOrigin.\nMetamorphic rocks form one of the three great divisions of rock types. They are distinguished from igneous rocks, which form from molten magma, and sedimentary rocks, which form from sediments eroded from existing rock or precipitated chemically from bodies of water.\nMetamorphic rocks are formed when existing rock is transformed physically or chemically at elevated temperature, without actually melting to any great degree. The importance of heating in the formation of metamorphic rock was first noted by the pioneering Scottish naturalist, James Hutton, who is often described as the father of modern geology. Hutton wrote in 1795 that some rock beds of the Scottish Highlands had originally been sedimentary rock but had been transformed by great heat.\nHutton also speculated that pressure was important in metamorphism. This hypothesis was tested by his friend, James Hall, who sealed chalk into a makeshift pressure vessel constructed from a cannon barrel and heated it in an iron foundry furnace. Hall found that this produced a material strongly resembling marble, rather than the usual quicklime produced by heating of chalk in the open air. French geologists subsequently added metasomatism, the circulation of fluids through buried rock, to the list of processes that help bring about metamorphism. However, metamorphism can take place without metasomatism (\"isochemical metamorphism\") or at depths of just a few hundred meters where pressures are relatively low (for example, in \"contact metamorphism\").\nMineralogical changes.\nMetasomatism can change the bulk composition of a rock. Hot fluids circulating through pore space in the rock can dissolve existing minerals and precipitate new minerals. Dissolved substances are transported out of the rock by the fluids while new substances are brought in by fresh fluids. This can obviously change the mineral makeup of the rock.\nHowever, changes in the mineral composition can take place even when the bulk composition of the rock does not change. This is possible because all minerals are stable only within certain limits of temperature, pressure, and chemical environment. For example, at atmospheric pressure, the mineral kyanite transforms to andalusite at a temperature of about . Andalusite, in turn, transforms to sillimanite when the temperature reaches about . All three have the identical composition, . Likewise, forsterite is stable over a broad range of pressure and temperature in marble, but is converted to pyroxene at elevated pressure and temperature in more silicate-rich rock containing plagioclase, with which the forsterite reacts chemically.\nMany complex high-temperature reactions may take place between minerals without them melting, and each mineral assemblage produced indicates the temperatures and pressures at the time of metamorphism. These reactions are possible because of rapid diffusion of atoms at elevated temperature. Pore fluid between mineral grains can be an important medium through which atoms are exchanged.\nTextural changes.\nThe change in the particle size of the rock during the process of metamorphism is called recrystallization. For instance, the small calcite crystals in the sedimentary rock limestone and chalk change into larger crystals in the metamorphic rock marble. In metamorphosed sandstone, recrystallization of the original quartz sand grains results in very compact quartzite, also known as metaquartzite, in which the often larger quartz crystals are interlocked. Both high temperatures and pressures contribute to recrystallization. High temperatures allow the atoms and ions in solid crystals to migrate, thus reorganizing the crystals, while high pressures cause solution of the crystals within the rock at their point of contact.\nDescription.\nMetamorphic rocks are characterized by their distinctive mineral composition and texture.\nMetamorphic minerals.\nBecause every mineral is stable only within certain limits, the presence of certain minerals in metamorphic rocks indicates the approximate temperatures and pressures at which the rock underwent metamorphism. These minerals are known as index minerals. Examples include sillimanite, kyanite, staurolite, andalusite, and some garnet.\nOther minerals, such as olivines, pyroxenes, hornblende, micas, feldspars, and quartz, may be found in metamorphic rocks but are not necessarily the result of the process of metamorphism. These minerals can also form during the crystallization of igneous rocks. They are stable at high temperatures and pressures and may remain chemically unchanged during the metamorphic process.\nTexture.\nMetamorphic rocks are typically more coarsely crystalline than the protolith from which they formed. Atoms in the interior of a crystal are surrounded by a stable arrangement of neighboring atoms. This is partially missing at the surface of the crystal, producing a \"surface energy\" that makes the surface thermodynamically unstable. Recrystallization to coarser crystals reduces the surface area and so minimizes the surface energy.\nAlthough grain coarsening is a common result of metamorphism, rock that is intensely deformed may eliminate strain energy by recrystallizing as a fine-grained rock called \"mylonite\". Certain kinds of rock, such as those rich in quartz, carbonate minerals, or olivine, are particularly prone to form mylonites, while feldspar and garnet are resistant to mylonitization.\nFoliation.\nMany kinds of metamorphic rocks show a distinctive layering called \"foliation\" (derived from the Latin word \"folia\", meaning \"leaves\"). Foliation develops when a rock is being shortened along one axis during recrystallization. This causes crystals of platy minerals, such as mica and chlorite, to become rotated such that their short axes are parallel to the direction of shortening. This results in a banded, or foliated, rock, with the bands showing the colors of the minerals that formed them. Foliated rock often develops planes of cleavage. Slate is an example of a foliated metamorphic rock, originating from shale, and it typically shows well-developed cleavage that allows slate to be split into thin plates.\nThe type of foliation that develops depends on the metamorphic grade. For instance, starting with a mudstone, the following sequence develops with increasing temperature: The mudstone is first converted to slate, which is a very fine-grained, foliated metamorphic rock, characteristic of very low grade metamorphism. Slate in turn is converted to phyllite, which is fine-grained and found in areas of low grade metamorphism. Schist is medium to coarse-grained and found in areas of medium grade metamorphism. High-grade metamorphism transforms the rock to gneiss, which is coarse to very coarse-grained.\nRocks that were subjected to uniform pressure from all sides, or those that lack minerals with distinctive growth habits, will not be foliated. Marble lacks platy minerals and is generally not foliated, which allows its use as a material for sculpture and architecture.\nClassification.\nMetamorphic rocks are one of the three great divisions of all rock types, and so there is a great variety of metamorphic rock types. In general, if the protolith of a metamorphic rock can be determined, the rock is described by adding the prefix \"meta-\" to the protolith rock name. For example, if the protolith is known to be basalt, the rock will be described as a metabasalt. Likewise, a metamorphic rock whose protolith is known to be a conglomerate will be described as a metaconglomerate. For a metamorphic rock to be classified in this manner, the protolith should be identifiable from the characteristics of the metamorphic rock itself, and not inferred from other information.\nUnder the British Geological Survey's classification system, if all that can be determined about the protolith is its general type, such as sedimentary or volcanic, the classification is based on the mineral mode (the volume percentages of different minerals in the rock). Metasedimentary rocks are divided into carbonate-rich rock (metacarbonates or calcsilicate-rocks) or carbonate-poor rocks, and the latter are further classified by the relative abundance of mica in their composition. This ranges from low-mica psammite through semipelite to high-mica pelite. Psammites composed mostly of quartz are classified as quartzite. Metaigneous rocks are classified similarly to igneous rocks, by silica content, from meta-ultramafic-rock (which is very low in silica) to metafelsic-rock (with a high silica content).\nWhere the mineral mode cannot be determined, as is often the case when rock is first examined in the field, then classification must be based on texture. The textural types are:\nA hornfels is a granofels that is known to result from contact metamorphism. A slate is a fine-grained metamorphic rock that easily splits into thin plates but shows no obvious compositional layering. The term is used only when very little else is known about the rock that would allow a more definite classification. Textural classifications may be prefixed to indicate a sedimentary protolith (\"para-\", such as paraschist) or igneous protolith (\"ortho-\", such as orthogneiss). When nothing is known about the protolith, the textural name is used without a prefix. For example, a schist is a rock with schistose texture whose protolith is uncertain.\nSpecial classifications exist for metamorphic rocks with a volcaniclastic protolith or formed along a fault or through hydrothermal circulation. A few special names are used for rocks of unknown protolith but known modal composition, such as marble, eclogite, or amphibolite. Special names may also be applied more generally to rocks dominated by a single mineral, or with a distinctive composition or mode or origin. Special names still in wide use include amphibolite, greenschist, phyllite, marble, serpentinite, eclogite, migmatite, skarn, granulite, mylonite, and slate.\nThe basic classification can be supplemented by terms describing mineral content or texture. For example, a metabasalt showing weak schistosity might be described as a gneissic metabasalt, and a pelite containing abundant staurolite might be described as a staurolite pelite.\nMetamorphic facies.\nA metamorphic facies is a set of distinctive assemblages of minerals that are found in metamorphic rock that formed under a specific combination of pressure and temperature. The particular assemblage is somewhat dependent on the composition of that protolith, so that (for example) the amphibolite facies of a marble will not be identical with the amphibolite facies of a pelite. However, the facies are defined such that metamorphic rock with as broad a range of compositions as is practical can be assigned to a particular facies. The present definition of metamorphic facies is largely based on the work of the Finnish geologist, Pentti Eskola, with refinements based on subsequent experimental work. Eskola drew upon the zonal schemes, based on index minerals, that were pioneered by the British geologist, George Barrow.\nThe metamorphic facies is not usually considered when classifying metamorphic rock based on protolith, mineral mode, or texture. However, a few metamorphic facies produce rock of such distinctive character that the facies name is used for the rock when more precise classification is not possible. The chief examples are amphibolite and eclogite. The British Geological Survey strongly discourages the use of \"granulite\" as a classification for rock metamorphosed to the granulite facies. Instead, such rock will often be classified as a granofels. However, this approach is not universally accepted.\nOccurrence.\nMetamorphic rocks make up a large part of the Earth's crust and form 12% of the Earth's land surface. The lower continental crust is mostly metamafic rock and pelite which have reached the granulite facies. The middle continental crust is dominated by metamorphic rock that has reached the amphibolite facies. Within the upper crust, which is the only part of the Earth's crust geologists can directly sample, metamorphic rock forms only from processes that can occur at shallow depth. These are \"contact (thermal) metamorphism\", \"dynamic (cataclastic) metamorphism\", \"hydrothermal metamorphism\", and \"impact metamorphism\". These processes are relatively local in occurrence and usually reach only the low-pressure facies, such as the hornfels and sanidinite facies. Most metamorphic rock is formed by \"regional metamorphism\" in the middle and lower crust, where the rock reaches the higher-pressure metamorphic facies. This rock is found at the surface only where extensive uplift and erosion has exhumed rock that was formerly much deeper in the crust.\nOrogenic belts.\nMetamorphic rock is extensively exposed in orogenic belts produced by the collision of tectonic plates at convergent boundaries. Here formerly deeply buried rock has been brought to the surface by uplift and erosion. The metamorphic rock exposed in orogenic belts may have been metamorphosed simply by being at great depths below the Earth's surface, subjected to high temperatures and the great pressure caused by the immense weight of the rock layers above. This kind of regional metamorphism is known as \"burial metamorphism\". This tends to produce low-grade metamorphic rock. Much more common is metamorphic rock formed during the collision process itself. The collision of plates causes high temperatures, pressures and deformation in the rocks along these belts. Metamorphic rock formed in these settings tends to shown well-developed schistosity.\nMetamorphic rock of orogenic belts shows a variety of metamorphic facies. Where subduction is taking place, the basalt of the subducting slab is metamorphosed to high-pressure metamorphic facies. It initially undergoes low-grade metamorphism to metabasalt of the zeolite and prehnite-pumpellyite facies, but as the basalt subducts to greater depths, it is metamorphosed to the blueschist facies and then the eclogite facies. Metamorphism to the eclogite facies releases a great deal of water vapor from the rock, which drives volcanism in the overlying volcanic arc. Eclogite is also significantly denser than blueschist, which drives further subduction of the slab deep into the Earth's mantle. Metabasalt and blueschist may be preserved in blueschist metamorphic belts formed by collisions between continents. They may also be preserved by obduction onto the overriding plate as part of ophiolites. Eclogites are occasionally found at sites of continental collision, where the subducted rock is rapidly brought back to the surface, before it can be converted to the granulite facies in the hot upper mantle. Many samples of eclogite are xenoliths brought to the surface by volcanic activity.\nMany orogenic belts contain higher-temperature, lower-pressure metamorphic belts. These may form through heating of the rock by ascending magmas of volcanic arcs, but on a regional scale. Deformation and crustal thickening in an orogenic belt may also produce these kinds of metamorphic rocks. These rocks reach the greenschist, amphibolite, or granulite facies and are the most common of metamorphic rocks produced by regional metamorphosis. The association of an outer high-pressure, low-temperature metamorphic zone with an inner zone of low-pressure, high-temperature metamorphic rocks is called a \"paired metamorphic belt\". The main islands of Japan show three distinct paired metamorphic belts, corresponding to different episodes of subduction.\nMetamorphic core complexes.\nMetamorphic rock is also exposed in metamorphic core complexes, which form in region of crustal extension. They are characterized by low-angle faulting that exposes domes of middle or lower crust metamorphic rock. These were first recognized and studied in the Basin and Range Province of southwestern North America, but are also found in southern Aegean Sea, in the D'Entrecasteaux Islands, and in other areas of extension.\nGranite-greenstone belts.\nContinental shields are regions of exposed ancient rock that make up the stable cores of continents. The rock exposed in the oldest regions of shields, which is of Archean age (over 2500 million years old), mostly belong to granite-greenstone belts. The greenstone belts contain metavolcanic and metasedimentary rock that has undergone a relatively mild grade of metamorphism, at temperatures of and pressures of . They can be divided into a lower group of metabasalts, including rare metakomatiites; a middle group of meta-intermediate-rock and meta-felsic-rock; and an upper group of metasedimentary rock.\nThe greenstone belts are surrounded by high-grade gneiss terrains showing highly deformed low-pressure, high-temperature (over ) metamorphism to the amphibolite or granulite facies. These form most of the exposed rock in Archean cratons.\nThe granite-greenstone belts are intruded by a distinctive group of granitic rocks called the tonalite-trondhjemite-granodiorite or TTG suite. These are the most voluminous rocks in the craton and may represent an important early phase in the formation of continental crust.\nMid-ocean ridges.\nMid-ocean ridges are where new oceanic crust is formed as tectonic plates move apart. Hydrothermal metamorphism is extensive here. This is characterized by metasomatism by hot fluids circulating through the rock. This produces metamorphic rock of the greenschist facies. The metamorphic rock, serpentinite, is particularly characteristic of these settings, and represents chemical transformation of olivine and pyroxene in ultramafic rock to serpentine group minerals.\nContact aureoles.\nContact metamorphism takes place when magma is injected into the surrounding solid rock (country rock). The changes that occur are greatest wherever the magma comes into contact with the rock because the temperatures are highest at this boundary and decrease with distance from it. Around the igneous rock that forms from the cooling magma is a metamorphosed zone called a \"contact aureole\". Aureoles may show all degrees of metamorphism from the contact area to unmetamorphosed (unchanged) country rock some distance away. The formation of important ore minerals may occur by the process of metasomatism at or near the contact zone. Contact aureoles around large plutons may be as much as several kilometers wide.\nThe term \"hornfels\" is often used by geologists to signify those fine grained, compact, non-foliated products of contact metamorphism. The contact aureole typically shows little deformation, and so hornfels is usually devoid of schistosity and forms a tough, equigranular rock. If the rock was originally banded or foliated (as, for example, a laminated sandstone or a foliated calc-schist) this character may not be obliterated, and a banded hornfels is the product. Contact metamorphism close to the surface produces distinctive low-pressure metamorphic minerals, such as spinel, andalusite, vesuvianite, or wollastonite.\nSimilar changes may be induced in shales by the burning of coal seams. This produces a rock type named \"clinker\".\nThere is also a tendency for metasomatism between the igneous magma and sedimentary country rock, whereby the chemicals in each are exchanged or introduced into the other. In that case, hybrid rocks called skarn arise.\nOther occurrences.\nDynamic (cataclastic) metamorphism takes place locally along faults. Here intense shearing of the rock typically forms mylonites.\nImpact metamorphism is unlike other forms of metamorphism in that it takes place during impact events by extraterrestrial bodies. It produces rare ultrahigh pressure metamorphic minerals, such as coesite and stishovite. Coesite is rarely found in eclogite brought to the surface in kimberlite pipes, but the presence of stishovite is unique to impact structures.\nUses.\nSlate tiles are used in construction, particularly as roof shingle.\nQuartzite is sufficiently hard and dense that it is difficult to quarry. However, some quartzite is used as dimension stone, often as slabs for flooring, walls, or stairsteps. About 6% of crushed stone, used mostly for road aggregate, is quartzite.\nMarble is also prized for building construction and as a medium for sculpture.\nHazards.\nSchistose bedrock can pose a challenge for civil engineering because of its pronounced planes of weakness. A hazard may exist even in undisturbed terrain. On August 17, 1959, a magnitude 7.2 earthquake destabilized a mountain slope near Hebgen Lake, Montana, composed of schist. This caused a massive landslide that killed 26 people camping in the area.\nMetamorphosed ultramafic rock contains serpentine group minerals, which includes varieties of asbestos that pose a hazard to human health.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44426", "revid": "12608568", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44426", "title": "National Security Act of 1947", "text": "United States law restructuring its armed forces\nThe National Security Act of 1947 (Pub.L. https://, 61 Stat. https://, enacted July 26, 1947) was a law enacting major restructuring of the United States government's military and intelligence agencies following World War II. The majority of the provisions of the act took effect on September 18, 1947, the day after the Senate confirmed James Forrestal as the first secretary of defense.\nThe act merged the Department of the Army (renamed from the Department of War), the Department of the Navy, and the newly established Department of the Air Force (DAF) into the National Military Establishment (NME). The act also created the position of the secretary of defense as the head of the NME. It established the United States Air Force under the DAF, which worked to separate the Army Air Forces into its own service. It also protected the Marine Corps as an independent service under the Department of the Navy. Aside from the unification of the three military departments, the act established the National Security Council and the Central Intelligence Agency, the latter of which is headed by the director of central intelligence. \nThe legislation was a result of efforts by Harry S. Truman beginning in 1944. President Truman proposed the legislation to Congress on February 26, 1947. The bill was introduced in the U.S. House of Representatives on February 28, 1947, and in the Senate on March 3, 1947. Senator Chan Gurney was the bill's sponsor. Senator Gurney, as chairman of the Senate Committee on Armed Services, led committee hearings for the bill from mid-March to early May. The bill passed in the Senate on July 9, 1947, and in the House on July 19, 1947. The Senate agreed to a related House resolution (80 H.Con.Res. 70) on July 16, 1947. The bill received bipartisan support and was passed in both chambers by voice vote. The National Security Act of 1947 was signed into law by President Truman on July 26, 1947, while aboard his VC-54C presidential aircraft \"Sacred Cow\".\nBackground.\nFrom 1921 to 1945, Congress considered approximately 50 bills to reorganize the armed forces. Mostly due to opposition by both the Department of the Navy and the War Department, all but one failed to reach the floor of the House, and even this one was defeated by a vote of 153 to 135 in 1932. However, by the end of World War II, several factors forced leaders to more seriously consider restructuring the military to improve unity.\nPearl Harbor.\nBy 1945, the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor had already been investigated several times, for example by the Roberts Commission, and would continue to be investigated through almost the end of the century. One of the findings that emerged was the probable role of intelligence failures linked to interservice bickering between Pearl Harbor's Army and Navy commanders, General Walter Short and Admiral Husband Kimmel. Though not a court martial, the Roberts Commission explicitly accused the two of dereliction of duty for not conferring to coordinate in light of the warnings.\nJoint operations in World War II.\nDuring World War II, interservice cooperation remained voluntary, requiring complex interchanges of liaisons for planning and operations. Additionally, the Army and Navy often competed for resources, for example industrial production and new recruits. Enabling operations under these conditions had required the creation of numerous joint agencies and interdepartmental committees.\nWorld War II had also given the US military two case studies of joint operations between Europe and the Pacific. In the Pacific, the Army and Navy had experienced constant friction from command and logistics problems. In Europe, the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), created based on the British Chiefs of Staff Committee, had smoothed over these coordination problems and became President Roosevelt's principal military advisors.\nThe JCS became a key source of advocacy for creating a single unified military department after the war. Following studies by the JCS Joint Strategic Survey Committee on ways to resolve joint roles and missions problems, George Marshall published a memo in support of postwar unification on November 2, 1942. Marshall's memo called for the following:\nThe rise of air power.\nDuring both world wars, but particularly World War II, aviation had become increasingly important. The aircraft carrier had overtaken the battleship as the Navy's premier surface combatant. Army airmen had called for an independent air service since 1919, and the Army's Air Corps had already been expanded into what bordered on a separate service. Finally, the advent of nuclear weapons delivered by bombers led some leaders, such as Curtis LeMay, to believe air power would inevitably become more decisive than ground warfare or sea power. The time seemed right to create an independent air force, but it would require congressional action.\nShrinking budgets.\nImmediately following the war, confronting the Soviets was a lower priority than ending wartime austerity, balancing the federal budget, and returning to peace. This situation would not change until the Soviet Union developed nuclear weapons in 1949, followed by the Korean War in 1950.\nIn this environment, forces were rapidly demobilized, and budgets were slashed. In Fiscal Year 1946, the military's total budget ceiling was approximately $42 billion. In fiscal year 1947, it was $14 billion. On V-J Day, the US military consisted of the Army's 91 Army divisions, 9 Marine Corps divisions, 1,166 combat ships in the Navy, and 213 combat groups in the Army Air Forces. By the end of demobilization on June 30, 1947, the Army had 10 divisions, the Marine Corps had 2 divisions, the Navy had 343 combat ships, and the Army Air Forces had 63 groups of which only 11 were fully operational.\nAs forces were reduced and budgets were cut, unification seemed like a promising way to save money by reducing duplication, and this would become a theme to which its proponents would repeatedly return. It also created a sense of urgency to quickly institutionalize lessons learned from World War II. However, the shrinking budgets also created a zero-sum game environment which encouraged interservice bickering by pitting Army and Navy advocates against each other.\nExecutive power.\nBefore World War II, congressional committees oversaw the Cabinet-level War Department and Navy Department, and while each department was separate from the other, both were able to obtain aircraft. During this time, the president had a level of authority over the departments. After the attack on Pearl Harbor, Congress passed the First War Powers Act, which authorized the sitting president \"to make such redistribution of functions among executive agencies as he may deem necessary\" provided that it is \"only in matters relating to the conduct of the present war\" and that these authorities will expire \"six months after the termination of the war.\" \nDuring World War II, then-chief of staff of the Army George Marshall brought the idea of unification of the armed services to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, but \"he was routinely rebuffed on the grounds that a substantive discussion of this option while the country was at war might undermine the war effort.\" On August 26, 1944, future president Harry S. Truman, who was a senator at the time, wrote that \"under such a set-up [of unification] another Pearl Harbor will not have to be feared\" in his article \"Our Armed Forces Must Be United\". Military problems apparent during World War II that turned attention to the need for unification were a lack of preparedness, a lack of attention to \"logistics in war,\" and a \"lack of coordination among the services.\" \nIn the years following the war, President Truman had been pushing for the unification of the armed services until the passing of the National Security Act of 1947, having research conducted on the topic since 1944 and having expressed his desire for Congress to act on the issue as early as April 6, 1946. He stated in a letter to Congress on June 15, 1946, that he \"consider[s] it vital that we have a unified force for our national defense.\" President Truman had worked closely with the Army and the Navy to establish a consensus, but the departments struggled to come to an agreement until 1947.\nDrafting legislation.\nHowever, even if everyone could admit that a military reorganization was necessary, they could not agree on how it should be done. The process of obtaining even tentative consensus would take nearly four years.\nThe Woodrum Committee.\nOn March 28, 1944, the House passed a resolution introduced by Rep. James W. Wadsworth (R-NY) to create a Select Committee On Postwar Military Policy, and this began the debate. The committee chair was Rep. Clifton A. Woodrum (D-VA), and the committee itself was made up of seven members of the Naval Affairs Committee, seven members of the Military Affairs Committee, and nine other members.\nThough the War Department considered asking for the hearings to be postponed to prevent an interservice fight that could hurt wartime unity, they decided not to when Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox told Secretary of War Henry Stimson that he also favored unification.\nThe hearings began on April 24, 1944. On the second day, Lieutenant General Joseph McNarney presented the War Department's plan for unification, which was essentially Marshall's plan as laid out in his memo.\nOn May 11, the commandant of the Marine Corps, Alexander Vandegrift, addressed the committee.\nThe hearings ended on May 19, 1944. Due to the increasingly apparent disagreements between the two departments, committee members and military leaders agreed that a fight between them would be bad for the war effort. In June, the committee reported the time was not right for legislation, but encouraged the two departments to continue to study unification.\nThe Richardson Committee.\nWhile the Woodrum Committee met, the JCS continued to study the problem by convening their own committee of two Army officers and two Navy officers. It was led by former Pacific Fleet commander Admiral James O. Richardson. The Richardson committee interviewed eighty commanders both at war and in Washington, almost all of flag rank, to get their thoughts on postwar reorganization.\nOn April 18, 1945, the Richardson Committee presented their findings and recommendations. They found that most Army officers and about half the Navy officers favored unification to a single service, but disagreed on the details. The committee's recommendations went even farther than McNarney's, calling not only for one civilian secretary overseeing the military and none overseeing the individual services, but also calling for a single uniformed \"Commander of all Forces.\"\nThe Eberstadt Report.\nOn June 19, 1945, the Department of the Navy began its own investigation. Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal requested an objective investigation of the postwar reorganization by his friend Ferdinand Eberstadt, the former chairman of the Army\u2013Navy Munitions Board and former vice chair of the War Production Board. By late September, Eberstadt had finished his report, and Forrestal forwarded it to the chairman of the Naval Affairs Committee, David Walsh. The 200-page report's key recommendations included the following:\n1945 Senate military affairs hearings.\nOn January 3, 1945, the first day of the 79th Congress, Rep. Jennings Randolph (D-WV) submitted unification bill H.R. 550 to the House Committee on Expenditures in the Executive Department. Two days later, Sen. Lister Hill (D-AL) introduced a similar bill, S. 84, in the Senate.\nFrom October 7 to December 17, 1945, the Senate Military Affairs Committee conducted hearings to consider unification bills. These included not only S. 84, but also S. 1482, introduced in the middle of the hearings by senators Edwin C. Johnson (D-CO) and Harley M. Kilgore (D-WV). However, the hearings mostly became a venue for the two departments, increasingly at odds, to give their official positions on different unification plans.\nThe War Department's Collins Plan.\nOn October 30, General J. Lawton Collins presented the War Department's plan. It combined features of recommendations made by the Richardson committee (other than Richardson's dissent) and Marshall's original plan from November 1942. Its key recommendations included the following:\nThe Department of the Navy's Hensel Plan.\nOn November 29, Assistant Secretary of the Navy H. Struve Hensel presented the Department of the Navy's plan. It was the recommendations of the Eberstadt Report, but left the question of an independent air force up to Congress.\nDebate.\nProponents of the Department of the Navy's plan came across as obstructionists due to the previous Woodrum Committee hearings having framed the debate entirely in terms of the War Department plan.\nProponents of the War Department's plan repeatedly emphasized the cost savings it would provide.\nTruman Intervenes.\nOn December 19, Truman let Congress know his own thoughts on unification. They mirrored the War Department plan in all respects.\nThe hearings concluded as Congress went into its Christmas recess with the two departments and their congressional allies at an impasse.\nNavy and Marine Corps Resistance.\nOver the course of the 1945 hearings, Navy and Marine Corps resistance to the War Department plan began to coalesce.\nSCOROR.\nIn October, on the advice of Admiral Radford, Forrestal created the Secretary's Committee on Research on Reorganization (SCOROR) to track unification developments and help manage the Navy's response. The same month, Forrestal asked Sen. David Walsh, the chairman of the Naval Affairs Committee, to hold hearings of his own so that the Navy would have a chance to properly present their counterargument to the War Department Proposal.\nFirst Marine Corps Board.\nAt the same time, the commandant directed the head of Marine Corps Schools, Merrill Twining, to create a Marine Corps Board to do the same for the Marine Corps.\nThe Thomas Plan.\nIn January 1946, Senator Elbert D. Thomas formed a subcommittee within the Senate Military Affairs Committee to draft unification legislation. The subcommittee included Vice Admiral Arthur Radford and Major General Lauris Norstad as advisors from the Department of the Navy and the War Department. On April 9, the subcommittee introduced the bill, S. 2044. Its key points were the following:\nJCS 1478.\nOn March 15 and 16, Army Air Corps Commanding General Carl Spaatz and Army Chief of Staff Dwight Eisenhower wrote two papers regarding unification JCS 1478/10 and 1478/11, that dealt with Army objectives for postwar unification. Marked \"TOP SECRET\", the two papers were blunt in their statement of their intent to marginalize the Marine Corps. The Eisenhower-Spaatz proposal's key points were the following:\nThe papers were forwarded to the chief of naval operations, Admiral Chester Nimitz, for his thoughts. There the papers came to the attention of Merritt Edson, the Marine Corps liaison to the chief of naval operations. Edson alerted the commandant of the Marine Corps and the members of the Marine Corps Board, most of whom, particularly Merrill Twining, believed that the only purpose of the papers' high classification was to conceal the Army's goals from Congress.\nNimitz replied on March 30th, and included responses by the commandant and by the head of Naval Aviation, both of whom were strongly against the proposals.\nLobbying and gag order.\nFollowing the bill's introduction, the Department of the Navy openly opposed it.\nIn a press conference on April 11, Truman said he had not authorized Navy officers to speak against unification, only to offer their honest opinions. He demanded that members of both the War Department and Department of the Navy \"get in line\" behind the official White House policy. When questioned about Army lobbying tactics, Truman claimed ignorance, but stated he was opposed to all congressional lobbying by the two departments.\nOn April 30th, the Senate Naval Affairs Committee began hearings to consider S. 2044.\nThe Bended Knee Speech.\nOn May 6, Commandant of the Marine Corps Alexander Vandegrift testified. His testimony noted that on multiple occasions there had been efforts to marginalize and disband the Marine Corps, all of which had been ended by congressional oversight. He noted Marine Corps successes such as the prediction of the course of the Pacific War by Pete Ellis, and a history of extreme frugality that did not characterize other services. Finally, he denounced the War Department plan as a transparent attempt to quietly marginalize and disband the Marine Corps by removing its congressional protection.\nDefeat.\nOn May 7, Clark Clifford, Truman's lead for unification legislation, told General Norstad and Assistant Secretary of War Stuart Symington that the Thomas Bill could not pass in its current form, and that the Naval Affairs Committee hearings were causing it to lose more support every day. He also admitted he had been swayed by some of the Navy's objections, especially regarding the role of the chief of staff. Clifford recommended that Truman meet with the secretaries of War and the Navy and their advisors to clarify points of agreement and disagreement and find a way forward.\nOn May 13, Truman held the meeting, and demanded that Patterson and Forrestal find a way to break the impasse by the end of the month due to the urgency of passing unification legislation. He also said that he had accepted the Navy's arguments against the chief of staff. Finally, he told his chief of staff, Admiral William Leahy, to silence criticism of unification by naval officers.\nOn May 31, Patterson and Forrestal reported to him that of the twelve points in S. 2044 they agreed on eight and disagreed on four. The points of agreement were as follows:\nThe remaining points of disagreement were the following:\nThe period of rival Military Affairs Committee and Naval Affairs Committee hearings came to an end for good on August 2, when Truman signed the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946. It combined the Military Affairs and Naval Affairs Committees into Armed Services Committees in the House and Senate, and would go into effect for the 80th United States Congress.\nAdditionally, in August, Thomas suggested to Truman that he use an executive order to execute some unification changes, for example by creating a Council of Common Defense led by Secretary of State James F. Byrnes. Thomas believed that forcing the military to operate under unification for several months might convince all involved, particularly Congress, that unification legislation was feasible.\nThe Patterson-Forrestal Compromise.\nOn November 7, 1946, Forrestal called a meeting at his home with Army and Navy representatives to attempt to find a way forward. The attendees included the two departments' primary negotiators Norstad and Radford, Assistant Secretary of War for Air Stuart Symington, and Forrestal's friend Admiral Forrest Sherman. The main outcome of the meeting was the replacement of Admiral Radford as the Navy's primary negotiator with Forrestal's friend Vice Admiral Forrest Sherman. According to Marine Corps Brigadier General Gerald Thomas, this was due to Patterson's suggestion since the Army found Radford difficult to work with.\nOn January 16, 1947, Norstad, Sherman, and Symington forwarded a letter to the White House with an outline of a joint Army-Navy agreement.\nSecond Marine Corps Board.\nVandegrift and the other Marines involved with unification believed they had been betrayed. Admiral Radford had been a close ally of the Marine Corps, and Admiral Sherman was not. There had been no Marine Corps input into the Patterson-Forrestal Compromise, and many Marines, Vandegrift included, believed Sherman had cut a deal with Norstad to preserve Navy aviation in exchange for abandoning demands for statutory protections of the Marine Corps.\nThe same month the Patterson-Forrestal Compromise went to the White House, Vandegrift appointed a second Marine Corps board to \"Conduct Research and Prepare Material in Connection with Pending Legislation\" led by Merritt Edson and Gerald C. Thomas. Other members formally appointed to the board in writing included Col Merrill Twining, Col Edward Dyer, LtCol Victor Krulak, LtCol Samuel Shaw, LtCol DeWolf Schatzel, LtCol James C. Murray, LtCol James Hittle, LtCol Edward Hurst, LtCol Robert Heinl, and Maj Jonas Platt.\nLegislative history.\nWhen Congress convened, it had preemptively restructured in favor of unification. Due to the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946, in the 80th Congress the Military and Naval Affairs Committees had been combined into unified Armed Services Committees in both the House and Senate.\nOn February 26, 1947, President Harry S. Truman sent a bill proposal to Congress detailing the creation of a \"National Defense Establishment\". Representative Clare E. Hoffman (R-MI) introduced the bill as H.R. 2319 to the House of Representatives on February 28, 1947; it was then referred to the Committee on Expenditures in the Executive Departments.\nSenator Chan Gurney (R-SD) introduced the bill to the Senate as S. 758 on March 3, 1947. Due to conflict over which committee the bill was to be referred to, as well as the focus the Senate had on the legislative budget at the time, the bill was not able to be introduced in the Senate sooner.\nCongressional hearings.\nOn March 18, 1947, then-Chairman Senator Gurney held congressional hearings in the Senate Committee on Armed Services on the bill that would become the National Security Act of 1947. The hearings were held in three parts: Part 1 hearings were held on March 18, March 20, March 25, March 26, and April 1\u20133, 1947; Part 2 hearings were held on April 8, April 9, April 15, April 18, April 22, April 24, and April 25, 1947; and Part 3 hearings were held on April 30, May 2, May 6, May 7, and May 9, 1947.\nThe witnesses at the hearings largely spoke in support of the bill, either overall or with adjustments. Major witnesses of the bill who spoke in support were United States Army chief of staff General Dwight D. Eisenhower, Secretary of the Navy James V. Forrestal, Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson, Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, Under Secretary of War Kenneth C. Royall, Representative Walter G. Andrews (R-NY), Senator Henry Cabot Lodge (R-MA), two colonels from the Reserve Officers Association of the United States, Director of Central Intelligence Hoyt S. Vandenberg, Director of the Bureau of the Budget James E. Webb, and president of General Electric Co. Charles E. Wilson. Assistant Secretary of the Navy W. John Kenney spoke in support but expressed concerns about appropriations, while United States Army Surgeon General Norman T. Kirk expressed concern about the role of medical services. Former senator Thomas C. Hart (R-CT) opposed the bill and proposed changes to the areas concerning the Navy and the Marine Corps. The president of the Marine Reserve Officers Association, Melvin J. Maas, stated that 95% of the Association opposes the bill and requests adjustments as it comes to the Marine Corps' role. The president of the Reserve Officers of the Naval Services (RONS), John P. Bracken, stated that the organization opposed the bill due to the lack of input they were allowed to give. Representatives from the National Guard Association opposed the bill as it stood and said that the role of the National Guard needed to be improved.\nOn April 24, Edson requested to retire in order to be permitted to present his personal views against the bill, but the Commandant denied his request.\nOn May 6, the second Marine Corps Board was dissolved.\nThe next day, at the invitation of a member of the committee, Merritt Edson testified in opposition to the bill. He was the only active duty military officer to do so.\nOn June 7, Edson submitted a second request to retire, and this one was accepted. On June 17, Edson testified before the committee again.\nExecutive Order 9877.\nFollowing the congressional hearings, on June 6, Truman published Executive Order 9877, which explicitly prescribed the functions of each of the military services.\nDebates.\nOn July 7, 1947, the National Security Act of 1947 was debated for the first time in the Senate, two days after the Senate Committee on Armed Services reported the bill to the Senate. On July 9, 1947, the Senate continued debates and, with an amendment to the title, passed the bill by a voice vote.\nOn July 15, 1947, having already been passed in the Senate, the National Security Act of 1947 was debated in the House of Representatives. The House introduced Resolution 80 H.Con.Res. 70 on the same day. The Senate agreed to the Resolution on July 16, 1947. The House debated and passed the National Security Act of 1947, along with 80 H.R. 4214, on July 19, 1947. The conference report 80 H. rp. 1051 was agreed to in the Senate on July 24, 1947, and was agreed to in the House on July 25, 1947. The recorded votes on the bill itself \"drew strong bipartisan support.\"\nSenate.\nDuring the July 7, 1947, and July 9, 1947, debates in the Senate, members of the Senate Committee on Armed Services spoke the most, with major proponents being senators Lodge (R-MA), Saltonstall (R-MA), Baldwin (R-CT), Morse (R-OR), Tydings (D-MD), Maybank (D-SC), and Hill (D-AL). Arguments in support of the bill included Senator Gurney's reasoning that there were \"personnel problems in the Army and Navy, including the Air Forces\" and that \"the unification bill is a sincere and earnest attempt to put into effect by legislation a security organization which is adequate, effective, modern \u2013 and yet economical.\"\nSenator Robertson (R-WY) was a staunch opponent of the bill, arguing that the bill would cost the country too much considering it would not be able to make the armed services any more efficient, and that the secretary of defense would have too much power.\nSenator Robertson offered three amendments during debates, all of which were defeated by voice vote. Senator McCarthy (R-WI) offered an amendment that stipulated that the \"existing status of Marine Corps and Naval Aviation not to be altered or diminished; their existing functions not to be transferred to other services\"; the Senate debated this amendment the most until it was defeated by a 52\u201319 roll call vote. The only amendment that passed (by voice vote) in the Senate was offered by Senator Taft (R-OH) in which the National Security Council was to only be focused on national security matters.\nHouse of Representatives.\nDuring the July 15, 1947, and July 19, 1947, debates in the House of Representatives, major proponents of the National Security Act of 1947 included representatives Wadsworth (R-NY), McCormack (D-MA), and Manasco (D-AL), who were all on the Expenditures Committee as high-ranking members, and the House Armed Services Committee Chairman Walter G. Andrews (R-NY).\nOpponents of the bill in the House included Representatives Cole (R-NY), Sheppard (D-CA), Rogers (R-MA), and Taber (R-NY). Representatives Cole, Sheppard, and Rogers argued that the Navy did not have enough protections under the bill, while Representative Taber argued against the budgetary aspect.\nMinor amendments were passed during debates in the House. Some of Representative Cole's amendments protecting the Navy and limiting the secretary of defense's powers were passed by voice vote (though others he offered were defeated). Representatives Judd (R-MN) and Brown (R-OH) were able to pass amendments by voice votes that required the director of central intelligence to be appointed by the president from civilian life and confirmed by the Senate, and Representative Judd passed an amendment allowing the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Atomic Energy Commission to conduct secret operations without the inspection of the director of central intelligence. Amendments offered by representatives MacKinnon (R-MN), Case (R-NJ), Mitchell (R-IN), Clason (R-MA), and Owens (R-IL) were defeated.\nEnactment.\nThe National Security Act of 1947 was signed into law by President Truman on July 26, 1947. The bill signing took place aboard Truman's VC-54C presidential aircraft \"Sacred Cow\", the first aircraft used for the role of Air Force One. The president was traveling to be at the bedside of his dying mother and delayed his departure until the bill was signed.\nThe majority of the provisions of the act took effect on September 18, 1947, the day after the Senate confirmed James Forrestal as the first secretary of defense. His power was initially limited and it was difficult for him to exercise the authority to make his office effective. This was later changed in the amendment to the act in 1949, creating what was to be the Department of Defense.\nProvisions.\nThe legislation's definition of covert action was vague, limiting oversight over the CIA's activities. It was only in the 1990s that Congress attempted to regulate covert action by prohibiting certain forms of it and enacting substantive and procedural rules for covert action.\nTitle I \u2013 Coordination for National Security.\nTitle I worked to establish the National Security Council, an advisory council to the president for matters relating to national security in the realm of \"domestic, foreign, and military policies\" with the intent of allowing for the military departments to communicate with more efficiency. It also established the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) under the National Security Council, led by the Director of Central Intelligence. The role of the director of central intelligence, and the CIA as a whole, is as an advisory unit to the National Security Council and as a coordinator of intelligence. Finally, Title I worked to establish the National Security Resources Board, an advisory board to the President on matters relating to \"the coordination of military, industrial, and civilian mobilization.\"\nTitle II \u2013 The National Military Establishment.\nOutlined the establishment of the National Military Establishment (NME), which consists of the Department of the Army, the Department of the Navy, and the Department of the Air Force (DAF) and is led by the secretary of defense.\nDesignated the Department of War to be renamed the Department of the Army, led by the secretary of the Army. \nEstablished the Department of the Navy and outlined it to consist of the United States Marine Corps, the United States Navy, and the United States Coast Guard. The role of the United States Marine Corps was further outlined.\nEstablished the DAF, led by the secretary of the Air Force, and allowed the secretary of defense to designate any and all functions that they deem fit to be under the DAF. \nCreated the United States Air Force as an agency of aviation offense and defense under the DAF, led by a chief of staff of the United States Air Force, who in turn is directed by the secretary of the Air Force. The chief of staff, United States Air Force, was designated as having equal authority as the chief of staff of the United States Army and the chief of naval operations.\nEstablished the War Council as an advisory council to the secretary of defense within the NME. The War Council consists of the secretary of defense, the secretaries of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, the chief of naval operations, and the chiefs of staff of the United States Army and the United States Air Force.\nTitle II established the Joint Chiefs of Staff within the NME as consisting \"of the Chief of Staff, United States Army; the Chief of Naval Operations; the Chief of Staff, United States Air Force; and the Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief, if there be one\" with the role of being \"the principal military advisers to the President and the Secretary of Defense.\" It also created a Joint Staff under the Joint Chiefs of Staff.\nCreated a Munitions Board within the NBE, which replaced the Joint Army and Navy Munitions Board, led by a chairman and consisted of under secretaries or assistant secretaries from the Department of the Army, the Department of the Navy, and the Department of the Air Force.\nEstablished a Research and Development Board within the NME, which replaces the Joint Research and Development Board, and that consists of a chairman with two representatives from each military department. The Research and Development Board acts as an advisory unit on matters relating to and the conducting of military research.\nTitle III \u2013 Miscellaneous.\nDesignated compensation for each of the positions created under the act, designate relative classification statuses, and specify the transfer of funds and resources.\nDefined \"function\" as including \"functions, powers, and duties\", and defines \"budget program\" as \"recommendations as to the apportionment, to the allocation and to the review of allotments of appropriated funds\".\nSpecified separability and established the timeline of when provisions of the act would be in effect.\nAmended the July 18, 1947, Presidential Succession Act to remove \"Secretary of the Navy\" and to replace \"Secretary of War\" with \"Secretary of Defense\".\nResults.\nThe act produced mixed results, and both sides of the unification fight would see their positions partly vindicated and partly tested over the next few years.\nCost savings.\nThe promised cost savings were fleeting and arguable. Even before the act was passed, the military's total budget ceiling had been cut by two thirds. The first year after the act, Truman cut the budget again by several billion dollars, however the defense budget had returned to its previous level by the next year. If the act saved money, it was obscured by an immediate return to high defense budgets following the Soviet development of nuclear weapons and the beginning of the Korean War.\nElimination of duplication.\nThe act was partially successful in eliminating duplication. One example was the combination of the Air Force's Air Transport Command and the Navy's Naval Air Transport Service into the Military Air Transport Service on June 1, 1948.\nJoint operations.\nAmong the services, the problems of joint operations remained bad. Rather than leading to streamlined joint operations, the Act preceded a heightened period of interservice rivalries and service parochialism. It included fights between the Army and Air Force over close air support, fights between the Air Force and Navy over development of carriers vs. development of strategic bombing capabilities, and additional attempts to marginalize the Marine Corps by both the Army and Navy. Following joint operations problems in the Iranian hostage rescue in 1980 and United States invasion of Grenada in 1983, Congress would pass a second vast reorganization in the Goldwater\u2013Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act in 1986.\nSecretary of Defense.\nAs the first secretary of defense over the National Military Establishment, Forrestal had to live with the watered-down secretary of defense powers he had fought for as the secretary of the Navy. He found it left him unable to control the military services. Forrestal spent the remainder of his tenure as secretary of defense working to have the act amended.\nPresident.\nTruman had succeeded in establishing a permanent and more centralized Department of Defense. General Douglas MacArthur pursued the Republican nomination for president even while still in uniform, and Truman would ultimately relieve MacArthur for insubordination during the Korean War in 1951. The relief of the highly popular general preceded a drop in Truman's approval rating to 22%. Though Truman ultimately decided not to run in the 1952 presidential election, had he run it would have been against Eisenhower, another highly popular Army general, who retired from active service only to accept the Republican nomination.\nArmy.\nThe new Air Force focused on strategic bombing and air superiority to the exclusion of almost all else, which left the Army dissatisfied with the attention paid to transportation and close air support of troops on the ground. Helicopters emerged as an Army alternative to absent support from the Air Force. By the end of 1952, the secretary of the Army and secretary of the Air Force had signed the Pace-Finletter memorandum of understanding that removed all weight limits on helicopters the Army could operate and allowed use of fixed-wing aircraft up to 5,000 lb. Army-owned helicopters proliferated during the Vietnam War. Finally, in 1983, with the establishment of the United States Army Aviation Branch to more effectively oversee the Army's numerous helicopters, the Army had effectively recreated the Army Air Forces.\nNavy.\nThe Department of the Navy had kept its aircraft and the Marine Corps had essentially saved itself, but the Navy almost immediately regretted unification. Following 1949 amendments that made the secretary of defense more than a powerless advisor, second secretary of defense Louis Johnson, an Army veteran, cancelled the aircraft carrier USS \"United States\" without consulting Congress. In an incident remembered as the Revolt of the Admirals, the secretary of the Navy resigned in protest, and naval officers began a lobbying war against a rival procurement program for the B-36 bomber.\nMarine Corps.\nWithin the Marine Corps, the fight to amend the Act was memorialized as one of the Marine Corps' finest hours, primarily by former members of the Marine Corps Board.\nIn September 1962, Robert Heinl wrote an account of the unification battle for Proceedings, and the Pentagon blocked its publication. Five days later, a Senate subcommittee began hearings regarding the Pentagon muzzling freedom of expression, and Strom Thurmond used the censorship of Heinl's article as evidence. When the Pentagon allowed the article's publication in October, it focused the media's attention on many of the negative statements about the Marine Corps made by Truman, Eisenhower, and others.\nIn 1984, Victor Krulak published an account of it in the book First to Fight, which has remained on the Commandant's Professional Reading List since it was first published.\nAmendments.\nOn August 10, 1949, the act was amended. The amendments' key changes included the following:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44428", "revid": "34748519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44428", "title": "Chondrus crispus", "text": "Species of edible alga\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;Chondrus crispus\u2014commonly called Irish moss or carrageenan moss (Irish \"carraig\u00edn\", \"little rock\")\u2014is a species of red algae which grows abundantly along the rocky parts of the Atlantic coasts of Europe and North America. In its fresh condition it is soft and cartilaginous, varying in color from a greenish-yellow, through red, to a dark purple or purplish-brown. The principal constituent is a mucilaginous body, made of the polysaccharide carrageenan, which constitutes 55% of its dry weight. The organism also consists of nearly 10% dry weight protein and about 15% dry weight mineral matter, and is rich in iodine and sulfur. When softened in water it has a sea-like odour. Because of the abundant cell wall polysaccharides, it will form a jelly when boiled, containing from 20 to 100 times its weight of water.\nDescription.\n\"Chondrus crispus\" is a relatively small sea alga, reaching up to a little more than in length. It grows from a discoid holdfast and branches four or five times in a dichotomous, fan-like manner. The morphology is highly variable, especially the broadness of the thalli. The branches are 2\u201315\u00a0mm broad and firm in texture, and the color ranges from bright green towards the surface of the water, to deep red at greater depths. The gametophytes (see below) often show a blue iridescence at the tip of the fronds and fertile sporophytes show a spotty pattern. \"Mastocarpus stellatus\" (Stackhouse) Guiry is a similar species which can be readily distinguished by its strongly channelled and often somewhat twisted thalli.\nIrish moss undergoes an alternation of generation lifecycle common in many species of algae. The two distinct stages are the sexual haploid gametophyte stage and the asexual diploid sporophyte stage. In addition, a third stage \u2013 the carposporophyte \u2013 is formed on the female gametophyte after fertilization. The male and female gametophytes produce gametes which fuse to form a diploid carposporophyte, which forms carpospores, which develops into the sporophyte. The sporophyte then undergoes meiosis to produce haploid tetraspores (which can be male or female) that develop into gametophytes. The three stages (male, female, and sporophyte) are difficult to distinguish when they are not fertile; however, the gametophytes often show a blue iridescence.\nDistribution.\n\"Chondrus crispus\" is commonly found along the shores of Ireland and the coast of Europe including Iceland, the Faroe Islands, western Baltic Sea to southern Spain. It is found on the Atlantic coasts of Canada and recorded from California in the United States to Japan. However, any distribution outside the Northern Atlantic needs to be verified.\nThere are also other species of the same genus in the Pacific Ocean, for example, \"C. ocellatus\" Holmes, \"C. nipponicus\" Yendo, \"C. yendoi\" Yamada \"et\" Mikami, \"C. pinnulatus\" (Harvey) Okamura and \"C. armatus\" (Harvey) Yamada \"et\" Mikami.\nEcology.\n\"Chondrus crispus\" is found growing on rock from the middle intertidal zone into the subtidal zone, all the way to the ocean floor. It is able to survive with minimal sunlight.\n\"C. crispus\" is susceptible to infection from the oomycete \"Pythium porphyrae\".\nUses.\n\"C. crispus\" is traditionally used fresh as a thickening agent in carrageen pudding, a milk-based dish eaten in Scotland and Ireland.\nLikewise, it is an industrial source of carrageenan commonly used as a thickener and stabilizer in milk products, such as ice cream and processed foods. In Europe, it is indicated as E407 or E407a. It may also be used as a thickener in calico printing and paper marbling, and for fining beer. Irish moss is frequently used with \"Mastocarpus stellatus\" (\"Gigartina mamillosa\"), \"Chondracanthus acicularis \" (\"G. acicularis\"), and other seaweeds, which are all commonly found growing together. Carrageenan may be extracted from tropical seaweeds of the genera \"Kappaphycus\" and \"Eucheuma\".\nScientific interest.\n\"C. crispus\", compared to most other seaweeds, is well-investigated scientifically. It has been used as a model species to study photosynthesis, carrageenan biosynthesis, and stress responses. The nuclear genome was sequenced in 2013. The genome size is 105 Mbp and is coding for 9,606 genes. It is characterised by relatively few genes with very few introns. The genes are clustered together, with normally short distances between genes and then large distances between groups of genes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
