{"id": "45596", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45596", "title": "Thomas E. Dewey", "text": "American politician (1902\u20131971)\nThomas Edmund Dewey (March 24, 1902 \u2013 March 16, 1971) was an American lawyer and politician who served as the 47th governor of New York from 1943 to 1954. He was the Republican Party's nominee for president of the United States in 1944 and 1948, losing the former election to Franklin D. Roosevelt and the latter election to Harry S. Truman in a major upset. \nAs a New York City prosecutor and District Attorney in the 1930s and early 1940s, Dewey was relentless in his effort to curb the power of the American Mafia and of organized crime in general. Most famously, he successfully prosecuted Mafia boss Charles \"Lucky\" Luciano on charges of forced prostitution in 1936. Luciano was given a 30- to 50-year prison sentence. He also prosecuted and convicted Waxey Gordon, another prominent New York City gangster and bootlegger, on charges of tax evasion. Dewey almost succeeded in apprehending mobster Dutch Schultz as well, but Schultz was murdered in 1935, in a hit ordered by the Commission.\nA progressive conservative, Dewey led the moderate faction of the Republican Party during the 1940s, and 1950s, in opposition to the more conservative Ohio Senator Robert A. Taft. Dewey was an advocate for the professional and business community of the Northeastern United States, which would later be called the Eastern Establishment. This group consisted of internationalists who were in favor of the United Nations, the New Deal reforms enacted during the administration of Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt, and the fight against communism and the Soviet Union during the Cold War.\nDewey served as the 47th governor of New York from 1943 to 1954. In 1944, he was the Republican Party's nominee for the presidency, but lost the election to incumbent Franklin D. Roosevelt in the closest of Roosevelt's four presidential elections. Dewey won the Republican presidential nomination again in 1948; defeating Harold Stassen on his left and Robert A. Taft on his right. However, he lost to President Harry S. Truman in one of the greatest upsets in presidential election history. Dewey played a large role in winning the Republican presidential nomination for Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1952, helping Eisenhower win the presidential election that year. He also played a large part in the choice of Richard Nixon as the Republican vice-presidential nominee in 1952 and 1956. He was the first major party nominee to have been born in the 20th century.\nFollowing his political retirement, Dewey served from 1955 to 1971 as a corporate lawyer and senior partner in his law firm Dewey Ballantine in New York City. In March 1971, while on a golfing vacation in Miami, Florida, he died from a heart attack. Following a public memorial ceremony at St. James' Episcopal Church in New York City, Dewey was buried in the town cemetery of Pawling, New York.\nDewey once described his career in public life as that of \"a political engineer\u2026a conservative facing up to the political facts of life.\"\nEarly life and family.\nDewey was born and raised in Owosso, Michigan, where his father, George Martin Dewey, owned, edited, and published the local newspaper, the \"Owosso Times\". His mother, Annie (Thomas), whom he called \"Mater\", bequeathed her son \"a healthy respect for common sense and the average man or woman who possessed it\". She also left \"a headstrong assertiveness that many took for conceit, a set of small-town values never entirely erased by exposure to the sophisticated East, and a sense of proportion that moderated triumph and eased defeat\". One journalist noted that as a boy \"he did show leadership and ambition above the average; by the time he was thirteen, he had a crew of nine other youngsters working for him\" selling newspapers and magazines in Owosso. In his senior year in high school he was the president of his class and the chief editor of the school yearbook. His senior caption in the yearbook stated \"First in the council hall to steer the state, and ever foremost in a tongue debate\", and a biographer wrote that \"the bent of his mind, from his earliest days, was towards debate\". He received his B.A. degree from the University of Michigan in 1923, and his LL.B. degree from Columbia Law School in 1925.\nWhile at the University of Michigan, Dewey joined Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia, a national fraternity for men of music, and was a member of the Men's Glee Club. While growing up in Owosso he was a member of the choir at Christ Episcopal Church. He had a deep, baritone voice, and in 1923 he finished in third place in the National Singing Contest. He briefly considered a career as a professional singer but decided against it after a temporary throat ailment convinced him that such a career would be risky. He then decided to pursue a career as a lawyer. He also wrote for \"The Michigan Daily,\" the university's student newspaper.\nOn June 16, 1928, Dewey married Frances Eileen Hutt, whom he met in Chicago in 1923 during a summer singing course at Percy Rector Stephens. A native of Sherman, Texas, who was raised in Sherman and in Sapulpa, Oklahoma, she was valedictorian of her 1920 high school class. Hutt was a singer and stage actress; after their marriage she dropped her acting career. They had two sons, Thomas E. Dewey Jr. and John Martin Dewey.\nAlthough Dewey served as a prosecutor and District Attorney in New York City for many years, his home from 1939 until his death was a large farm, called \"Dapplemere\", near the town of Pawling some north of New York City. According to biographer Richard Norton Smith, Dewey \"loved Dapplemere as [he did] no other place\", and Dewey was once quoted as saying that \"I work like a horse five days and five nights a week for the privilege of getting to the country on the weekend.\" In 1945, Dewey told a reporter that \"my farm is my roots\u00a0... the heart of this nation is the rural small town\". Dapplemere was part of a tight-knit rural community called Quaker Hill, which was known as a haven for the prominent and well-to-do. Among Dewey's neighbors on Quaker Hill were reporter and radio broadcaster Lowell Thomas, the Reverend Norman Vincent Peale, and CBS News journalist Edward R. Murrow.\nDuring his twelve years as governor, Dewey also kept a New York City residence and office in the Roosevelt Hotel. Dewey was an active, lifelong member of the Episcopal Church.\nDewey was a lifelong Republican, and in the 1920s and 1930s, he was a party worker in New York City, eventually rising to become Chair of The New York Young Republican Club in 1931. When asked in 1946 why he was a Republican, Dewey replied, \"I believe that the Republican Party is the best instrument for bringing sound government into the hands of competent men and by this means preserving our liberties ... But there is another reason why I am a Republican. I was born one.\"\nProsecutor.\nFederal prosecutor.\nDewey first served as a federal prosecutor, then started a private practice on Wall Street. He left his practice for an appointment as special prosecutor to look into corruption in New York City with the title of Chief Assistant U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York. It was in this role that he first achieved headlines in the early 1930s when he prosecuted bootlegger Waxey Gordon.\nDewey had used his recall of details of crimes to trip up witnesses as a federal prosecutor; as a state prosecutor, he used telephone taps (which were legal at the time per \"Olmstead v. United States\", 1928) to gather evidence, with the goal of bringing down entire criminal organizations. On that account, Dewey successfully lobbied for an overhaul in New York's criminal procedure law, which at that time required separate trials for each count of an indictment. Dewey's thoroughness and attention to detail became legendary; for one case he and his staff sifted \"through 100,000 telephone slips to convict a Prohibition-era bootlegger.\"\nSpecial prosecutor.\nIn 1935, Dewey was appointed special prosecutor in New York County (Manhattan) by Governor Herbert H. Lehman. A \"runaway grand jury\" had publicly complained that William C. Dodge, the District Attorney, was not aggressively pursuing the mob and political corruption. Lehman, to avoid charges of partisanship, asked four Republicans to serve as special prosecutor. All four refused and recommended Dewey.\nDewey recruited a staff of over 60 assistants, investigators, process servers, stenographers, and clerks. New York Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia assigned a hand-picked squad of 63 police officers to Dewey's office. Dewey's targets were organized racketeering: the large-scale criminal enterprises, especially extortion, the numbers racket, and prostitution. One writer stated that \"Dewey\u00a0... put on a very impressive show. All the paraphernalia, the hideouts and tapped telephones and so on, became famous. What he appealed to most was the great American love of \"results.\" People were much more interested in his ends than in his means. Another key to all this may be expressed in a single word: honesty. Dewey was honest.\"\nOne of his biggest prizes was gangster Dutch Schultz, whom he had battled as both a federal and state prosecutor. Schultz's first trial ended in a deadlock; prior to his second trial, Schultz had the venue moved to Malone, New York, then moved there and garnered the sympathy of the townspeople through charitable acts so that when it came time for his trial, the jury found him not guilty, liking him too much to convict him.\nDewey and La Guardia threatened Schultz with instant arrest and further charges. Schultz now proposed to murder Dewey, who would be killed while he made his daily morning call to his office from a pay phone near his home. However, New York crime boss Lucky Luciano and the \"Mafia Commission\" decided that Dewey's murder would provoke an all-out crackdown. Instead they had Schultz killed. Schultz was shot to death in the restroom of a bar in Newark.\nDewey's legal team turned their attention to Lucky Luciano. Assistant DA Eunice Carter oversaw investigations into prostitution racketeering. She raided 80 houses of prostitution in the New York City area and arrested hundreds of prostitutes and madams. Carter had developed trust with many of these women, and through her coaching, many of the arrested prostitutes \u2013 some of whom told of being beaten and abused by Mafia thugs \u2013 were willing to testify to avoid prison time. Three implicated Luciano as controller of organized prostitution in the New York/New Jersey area \u2013 one of the largest prostitution rings in American history. Carter's investigation was the first to link Luciano to a crime. Dewey prosecuted the case, and in the greatest victory of his legal career, he won the conviction of Luciano for the prostitution racket, with a sentence of 30 to 50 years on June 18, 1936.\nIn January 1937, Dewey successfully prosecuted Tootsie Herbert, the leader of New York's poultry racket, for embezzlement. Following his conviction, New York's poultry \"marketplace returned to normal, and New York consumers saved $5\u00a0million in 1938 alone\". That same month, Dewey, his staff, and New York City police made a series of raids that led to the arrest of 65 of New York's leading operators in various rackets, including the bakery racket, numbers racket, and restaurant racket. \"The New York Times\" ran an editorial praising Dewey for breaking up the \"shadow government\" of New York's racketeers, and \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\" wrote \"If you don't think Dewey is Public Hero No. 1, listen to the applause he gets every time he is shown in a newsreel.\"\nManhattan District Attorney.\nIn 1937, Dewey was elected New York County District Attorney (Manhattan), defeating the Democratic nominee after Dodge decided not to run for re-election. Dewey was such a popular candidate for District Attorney that \"election officials in Brooklyn posted large signs at polling places reading 'Dewey Isn't Running in This County'.\"\nAs District Attorney, Dewey successfully prosecuted and convicted Richard Whitney, former president of the New York Stock Exchange, for embezzlement. Whitney was given a five-year prison sentence. Dewey also successfully prosecuted Tammany Hall political boss James Joseph Hines on thirteen counts of racketeering. Following the favorable national publicity he received after his conviction of Hines, a May 1939 Gallup poll showed Dewey as the frontrunner for the 1940 Republican presidential nomination, and gave him a lead of 58% to 42% over President Franklin D. Roosevelt in a potential 1940 presidential campaign. In 1939, Dewey also tried and convicted American Nazi leader Fritz Julius Kuhn for embezzlement, crippling Kuhn's organization and limiting its ability to support Nazi Germany in World War II.\nDuring his four years as District Attorney, Dewey and his staff compiled a 94 percent conviction rate of defendants brought to trial, created new bureaus for Fraud, Rackets, and Juvenile Detention, and led an investigation into tenement houses with inadequate fire safety features that reduced \"their number from 13,000 to 3,500\" in a single year. When he left the District Attorney's office in 1942 to run for governor, Dewey said that \"It has been learned in high places that clean government can also be good politics...I don't like Republican thieves any more than Democratic ones.\"\nBy the late 1930s Dewey's successful efforts against organized crime\u2014and especially his conviction of Lucky Luciano\u2014had turned him into a national celebrity. His nickname, the \"Gangbuster\", was used for the popular 1930s \"Gang Busters\" radio series based on his fight against the mob. Hollywood film studios made several movies inspired by his exploits; \"Marked Woman\" starred Humphrey Bogart as a Dewey-like DA and Bette Davis as a \"party girl\" whose testimony helps convict the mob boss. A popular story from the time, possibly apocryphal, featured a young girl who told her father that she wanted to sue God to stop a prolonged spell of rain. When her father replied \"you can't sue God and win\", the girl said \"I can if Dewey is my lawyer.\"\nGovernor of New York.\nIn 1984, journalists Neal Peirce and Jerry Hagstrom summarized Dewey's governorship by saying, \"for sheer administrative talent, it is difficult to think of a twentieth-century governor who has excelled Thomas E. Dewey\u00a0... hundreds of thousands of New York youngsters owe Dewey thanks for his leadership in creating a state university\u00a0... a vigorous health-department program virtually eradicated tuberculosis in New York, highway building was pushed forward, and the state's mental hygiene program was thoroughly reorganized.\" Dewey also created a powerful political organization that allowed him to dominate New York state politics and influence national politics.\nElections.\nIn 1938 Edwin Jaeckle, the New York Republican Party Chairman, selected Dewey to run for Governor of New York against the Democratic incumbent, Herbert H. Lehman. Dewey was only 36 years of age. He based his campaign on his record as a famous prosecutor of organized-crime figures in New York City. Although he was defeated, Dewey's surprisingly strong showing against the popular Lehman (he lost by only 1.4%) brought him national political attention and made him a front runner for the 1940 Republican presidential nomination.\nJaeckle was one of Dewey's top advisors and mentors for the remainder of his political career.\nIn 1942, Dewey ran for governor again and won with a large plurality over Democrat John J. Bennett Jr., the outgoing state attorney general. Bennett was not endorsed by the American Labor Party, whose candidate, Dean Alfange, drew almost 10 percent of the ballots cast. The ALP endorsed for re-election incumbent lieutenant governor Charles Poletti, who lost narrowly to Dewey's running mate Thomas W. Wallace.\nIn 1946, Dewey was re-elected by the greatest margin in state history to that point, almost 700,000 votes.\nIn 1950, he was elected to a third term by 572,000 votes. He had originally declared his intent to forgo re-election in 1950, but had been persuaded by other Republicans to run for a third term in hopes of boosting the Republican Party in New York ahead of the 1952 presidential election.\nPolicies.\nRemembered as \"an odd mix, a pay-as-you-go liberal and a compassionate conservative\" and usually regarded as an honest and highly effective governor, Dewey doubled state aid to education, increased salaries for state employees and still reduced the state's debt by over $100\u00a0million. He referred to his program as \"pay-as-you-go liberalism \u00a0... government can be progressive and solvent at the same time.\" Additionally he put through the Ives-Quinn Act of 1945, the first state law in the country that prohibited racial discrimination in employment. As governor, Dewey signed legislation that created the State University of New York. Shortly after becoming governor in 1943, Dewey learned that some state workers and teachers were being paid only $900 a year, leading him to give \"hefty raises, some as high as 150%\" to state workers and teachers.\nDewey played a leading role in securing support and funding for the New York State Thruway, which was eventually named in his honor. Dewey also streamlined and consolidated many state agencies to make them more efficient. During the Second World War construction in New York was limited, which allowed Dewey to create a $623\u00a0million budget surplus, which he placed into his \"Postwar Reconstruction Fund.\" The fund would eventually create 14,000 new beds in the state's mental health system, provide public housing for 30,000 families, allow for the reforestation of 34\u00a0million trees, create a water pollution program, provide slum clearance, and pay for a \"model veterans' program.\" His governorship was also \"friendlier by far than his [Democratic] predecessors to the private sector\", as Dewey created a state Department of Commerce to \"lure new businesses and tourists to the Empire State, ease the shift from wartime boom, and steer small businessmen, in particular, through the maze of federal regulation and restriction.\" Between 1945 and 1948, 135,000 new businesses were started in New York.\nDewey supported the decision of the New York legislature to end state funding for child care centers, which were established during the war. The child care centers allowed mothers to participate in wartime industries. The state was forced to provide funding for local communities that could not obtain money under the Lanham Act. Although working mothers, helped by various civic and social groups, fought to retain funding, federal support for child care facilities was considered temporary and ended on March 1, 1946. New York state aid to child care ended on January 1, 1948. When protesters asked Dewey to keep the child care centers open, he called them \"Communists\".\nHe strongly supported the death penalty. During his twelve years as governor, more than ninety people were electrocuted under New York authority. Among these were several of the mob-affiliated hitmen belonging to the murder-for-hire group Murder, Inc., which was headed up by major mob leaders Louis \"Lepke\" Buchalter and Albert Anastasia. Buchalter himself went to the chair in 1944.\nDewey was a believer in conservatism reaching out to all classes in society, expressing his belief to Winston Churchill in 1946 that \"Somehow the conservative forces must relearn how to establish close relationships . . . among all the classes of people\" and arguing that more would have to be done \"if we are going to keep trade union leaders from pushing us steadily into socialism and its inevitable . . . loss of personal liberty.\"\nAccording to one study\nDewey was a fiscal conservative but believed that Republicans should not attempt to repeal the New Deal; rather, they should advance competing social welfare programs that emphasized individual freedom and economic incentives instead of the Democrats' tendency towards centralization and collectivism.\nA Dewey biographer said of Dewey that \"No doubt he was a conservative\", but \"he was also realistic.\" A Republican Party campaign advertisement from 1944 described Dewey as \"far from the Left-wingers of the New Deal as he is from the standpat reactionaries.\"\nDewey was a Zionist. In October 1945, he spoke at a rally in Madison Square Garden, calling for the lifting of British restrictions on Jewish immigration to Mandatory Palestine.\nPresidential campaigns.\n1940.\nDewey sought the 1940 Republican presidential nomination. He was considered the early favorite for the nomination, but his support ebbed in the late spring of 1940 as Nazi Germany invaded its neighbors, and Americans feared being drawn into another European war.\nSome Republican leaders considered Dewey to be too young (at 38, just three years above the minimum age required by the US Constitution) and too inexperienced to lead the nation in wartime. Furthermore, Dewey's non-interventionist stance became problematic when Germany quickly conquered France and seemed poised to invade Britain. As a result, at the 1940 Republican National Convention many delegates switched from Dewey to dark horse candidate Wendell Willkie, who was a decade older and supported aid to the Allies fighting Germany. Dewey led on the first ballot, but was well below the vote total he needed to win. He steadily lost strength to Willkie in succeeding ballots, and Willkie was unexpectedly nominated on the convention's sixth ballot despite having no previous political experience and having only joined the Republican Party a year prior. Willkie ultimately lost in a landslide to Franklin D. Roosevelt in the general election.\n1944.\nDewey's foreign-policy position evolved during the 1940s; by 1944 he was considered an internationalist and a supporter of projects such as the United Nations. It was in 1940 that Dewey first clashed with Robert A. Taft. Taft\u2014who maintained his non-interventionist views and economic conservatism to his death\u2014became Dewey's great rival for control of the Republican Party in the 1940s and early 1950s. Dewey became the leader of moderate Republicans, who were based in the Eastern states, while Taft became the leader of conservative Republicans who dominated most of the Midwest.\nDewey was the frontrunner for the 1944 Republican nomination. In April 1944 he won the key Wisconsin primary, where he defeated Wendell Willkie and former Minnesota governor Harold Stassen. Willkie's poor showing in Wisconsin forced him to quit the race and he died later that year. At the 1944 Republican Convention, Dewey's chief rivals\u2014Stassen and Ohio governor John W. Bricker\u2014both withdrew and Dewey was nominated almost unanimously. Dewey then made Bricker (who was supported by Taft) his running mate. This made Dewey the first presidential candidate to be born in the 20th century. As of 2021, he was also the youngest Republican presidential nominee.\nIn the general election campaign, Dewey crusaded against the alleged inefficiencies, corruption and Communist influences in incumbent president Roosevelt's New Deal programs, but mostly avoided military and foreign policy debates. Dewey had considered including the conspiracy theory that Roosevelt knew about the attack on Pearl Harbor beforehand and allowed it to happen and to say: \"...and instead of being re-elected he should be impeached.\" The allegation would have suggested the then-secret fact that the U.S. had broken the Purple code still in use by the Japanese military. Dewey eventually yielded to Army Chief of Staff George C. Marshall's urging not to touch this topic. Marshall informed Harry Hopkins of his action in late October that year; Hopkins then told the president. Roosevelt reasoned that \"Dewey would not, for political purposes, give secret and vital information to the enemy\".\nDuring the campaign, in a first, Roosevelt provided Dewey with information on the war efforts, such as the breaking of Japanese naval code. This was the first time that an opposition presidential candidate was given briefings by the incumbent presidential administration.\nDewey lost the election on November 7, 1944, to President Roosevelt. He had polled 45.9% of the popular vote compared to Roosevelt's 53.4%, a stronger showing against FDR than any previous Republican opponent. In the Electoral College, Roosevelt defeated Dewey by a margin of 432 to 99.\n1948.\nDewey was the Republican candidate again in the 1948 presidential election, with California governor Earl Warren on the bottom half of the ticket. Dewey was almost unanimously projected to win against incumbent Harry S. Truman, who had taken over from FDR when he died in office in 1945.\nDuring the primaries, Dewey was repeatedly urged to engage in red-baiting, but he refused. In a debate before the Oregon primary with Harold Stassen, Dewey argued against outlawing the Communist Party of the United States of America, saying \"you can't shoot an idea with a gun.\" He later told Styles Bridges, the Republican national campaign manager, that he was not \"going around looking under beds\".\nGiven Truman's sinking popularity and the Democratic Party's three-way split (the left-winger Henry A. Wallace and the Southern segregationist Strom Thurmond ran third-party campaigns), Dewey seemed unbeatable to the point that the Republicans believed that all they had to do to win was to avoid making any major mistakes.\nFollowing this advice, Dewey carefully avoided risks and spoke in platitudes, avoiding controversial issues, and remained vague on what he planned to do as president, with speech after speech being nonpartisan and also filled with optimistic assertions or empty statements of the obvious, including the famous quote: \"You know that your future is still ahead of you.\" An editorial in the \"Louisville Courier-Journal\" summed it up:\nNo presidential candidate in the future will be so inept that four of his major speeches can be boiled down to these historic four sentences: Agriculture is important. Our rivers are full of fish. You cannot have freedom without liberty. Our future lies ahead.\nAnother reason Dewey ran such a cautious, vague campaign came from his experience as a presidential candidate in 1944, where Dewey felt that he had allowed Roosevelt to draw him into a partisan, verbal \"mudslinging\" match, and he believed that this had cost him votes.\nDewey was accordingly convinced in 1948 to appear as non-partisan as possible, and to emphasize the positive aspects of his campaign while ignoring his opponent: this strategy proved to be a total failure, as it allowed Truman to repeatedly criticize and ridicule Dewey, who never answered any of Truman's criticisms.\nAlthough Dewey was not as conservative as the Republican-controlled 80th Congress, the association proved problematic, as Truman tied Dewey to the \"do-nothing\" Congress.\nNear the end of the campaign, Dewey considered adopting a more aggressive style and responding directly to Truman's criticisms, going so far as to tell his aides one evening that he wanted to \"tear to shreds\" a speech draft and make it more critical of the Democratic ticket. However, nearly all his major advisors insisted that it would be a mistake to change tactics. Dewey's wife Frances strongly opposed her husband changing tactics, telling him, \"If I have to stay up all night to see that you don't tear up that speech [draft], I will.\" Dewey relented and continued to ignore Truman's attacks and to focus on positive generalities instead of specific issues.\nThe \"Chicago Daily Tribune\" printed \"DEWEY DEFEATS TRUMAN\" as its post-election headline, issuing 150,000 copies before the returns showed Truman winning.\nDewey received 45.1% of the popular vote to Truman's 49.6%. In the Electoral College, Dewey won 16 states with 189 electoral votes, Truman 28 states with 303 electoral votes, and Thurmond four states (all in the South) with 39 electoral votes. The key states in the election were Illinois, California, and Ohio, which together had a combined 78 electoral votes. Truman won each of these three states by less than one percentage point; had Dewey won all three states, he would have won the election in the Electoral College, and if he had any two, this would have forced a contingent election in the House of Representatives. Summarizing Dewey's campaign, a biographer wrote that \"Dewey had swept the industrial Northeast, pared Democratic margins in the big cities by a third, run better than any Republican since Herbert Hoover in the South, and still lost decisively.\" After the election, Dewey told publisher Henry Luce that \"you can analyze figures from now to kingdom come, and all they will show is that we lost the farm vote which we had in 1944 and that lost us the election.\"\nA biographer noted that Dewey \"rarely mentioned 1948 in the years thereafter. It was like a locked room in a musty mansion whose master never entered ... he seemed a bit bewildered at the unanimous front put up by his Albany advisers [during the campaign], regretted not having taken a final poll when his own senses detected slippage, and couldn't resist a potshot at \"that bastard Truman\" for having successfully exploited farmers' fears of a new depression.\"\nPre-election planning by Dewey and his advisors for a potential presidential transition was much greater in 1948 than in any previous election cycle, and included selection by Dewey of potential cabinet officers. Though these efforts were ridiculed after Dewey was defeated, pre-election transition planning later became standard practice.\n1952.\nDewey did not run for president in 1952, but he played a key role in securing the Republican nomination for General Dwight D. Eisenhower. Taft was a candidate and, given his age, he freely admitted 1952 would be his last chance to win the presidency. Once Eisenhower clinched the nomination, Dewey used his powerful political machine to win Eisenhower the support of delegates in New York and elsewhere.\nThe 1952 campaign culminated in a climactic moment in the fierce rivalry between Dewey and Taft for control of the Republican Party. At the Republican Convention, pro-Taft delegates and speakers verbally attacked Dewey as the real power behind Eisenhower, but Dewey had the satisfaction of seeing Eisenhower win the nomination and end Taft's presidential hopes for the last time.\nDewey played a major role in helping California Senator Richard Nixon become Eisenhower's running mate. When Eisenhower won the presidency later that year, many of Dewey's closest aides and advisors became leading figures in the Eisenhower Administration. Among them were Herbert Brownell, who would become Eisenhower's Attorney General; James Hagerty, who would become White House Press Secretary; and John Foster Dulles, who would become Eisenhower's Secretary of State.\nDewey's campaign to secure the nomination for Eisenhower saw Dewey at odds with his two former running mates. 1948 vice presidential nominee Warren was a candidate for the presidential nomination, while 1944 running mate John W. Bricker backed Taft.\nRivalry with Robert A. Taft.\nDewey's biographer Richard Norton Smith wrote, \"For fifteen years\u00a0... these two combatants waged political warfare. Their dispute pitted East against Midwest, city against countryside, internationalist against isolationist, pragmatic liberals against principled conservatives. Each man thought himself the genuine spokesman of the future; each denounced the other as a political heretic.\" \nIn a 1949 speech, Dewey criticized Taft and his followers by saying that \"we have in our party some fine, high-minded patriotic people who honestly oppose farm price supports, unemployment insurance, old age benefits, slum clearance, and other social programs... these people believe in a laissez-faire society and look back wistfully to the miscalled 'good old days' of the nineteenth century... if such efforts to turn back the clock are actually pursued, you can bury the Republican Party as the deadest pigeon in the country.\" He added that people who opposed such social programs should \"go out and try to get elected in a typical American community and see what happens to them. But they ought not to do it as Republicans.\"\nIn the speech, Dewey added that the Republican Party believed in social progress \"under a flourishing, competitive system of private enterprise where every human right is expanded\u00a0... we are opposed to delivering the nation into the hands of any group who will have the power to tell the American people whether they may have food or fuel, shelter or jobs.\" Dewey believed in what he called \"compassionate capitalism\", and argued that \"in the modern age, man's needs include as much economic security as is consistent with individual freedom.\" When Taft and his supporters criticized Dewey's policies as liberal \"me-tooism\", or \"aping the New Deal in a vain attempt to outbid Roosevelt's heirs\", Dewey responded that he was following in the tradition of Republicans such as Abraham Lincoln and Theodore Roosevelt, and that \"it was conservative reforms like anti-trust laws and federal regulation of railroads\u00a0... that retained the allegiance of the people for a capitalist system combining private incentive and public conscience.\"\nHis rivalry with Taft notwithstanding, Dewey nevertheless went surreptitiously to the hospital in 1953 to visit with Taft when the latter was gravely ill. The two talked for half an hour, and afterward Taft joked that \"Tom came around to see whether I am really out of the running.\"\nLater career.\nIn May 1953, Governor Dewey set up a nine-member advisory board to help the State Safety Division's Bureau of Safety and Accident Prevention and appointed Edward Burton Hughes (the Deputy New York State Superintendent of Public Works) as chairman. The advisory board was formed to draft accident prevention policies and programs.\nDewey's third term as governor of New York expired at the end of 1954, after which he retired from public service and returned to his law practice, Dewey Ballantine, although he remained a power broker behind the scenes in the Republican Party. In 1956, when Eisenhower mulled not running for a second term, he suggested Dewey as his choice as successor, but party leaders made it plain that they would not entrust the nomination to Dewey yet again, and ultimately Eisenhower decided to run for re-election. Dewey also played a major role that year in convincing Eisenhower to keep Nixon as his running mate; Eisenhower had considered dropping Nixon from the Republican ticket and picking someone he felt would be less partisan and controversial. However, Dewey argued that dropping Nixon from the ticket would only anger Republican voters while winning Eisenhower few votes from the Democrats. Dewey's arguments helped convince Eisenhower to keep Nixon on the ticket. In 1960, Dewey would strongly support Nixon's ultimately unsuccessful presidential campaign against Democrat John F. Kennedy.\nAlthough Dewey publicly supported Nelson Rockefeller in all four of his campaigns for Governor of New York, and backed Rockefeller in his losing 1964 bid for the Republican presidential nomination against Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater, he did privately express concern and disappointment with what he regarded as Rockefeller's \"spendthrift\" methods as governor, and once told him \"I like you Nelson, but I don't think I can afford you.\" In 1968, when both Rockefeller and Nixon were competing for the Republican presidential nomination, Dewey was publicly neutral, but \"privately, according to close friends, he favored Nixon.\"\nBy the 1960s, as the conservative wing assumed more and more power within the Republican Party, Dewey removed himself further and further from party matters. When the Republicans in 1964 gave the conservative Senator Goldwater their presidential nomination, Dewey declined to even attend the Republican Convention in San Francisco; it was the first Republican Convention he had missed since 1936. Still, however, he did publicly support Goldwater for president in the election.\nAlthough closely identified with the Republican Party for virtually his entire adult life, Dewey was a close friend of Democratic Senator Hubert H. Humphrey, and Dewey aided Humphrey in being named as the Democratic nominee for vice-president in 1964, advising President Lyndon Johnson on ways to block efforts at the party convention by Kennedy loyalists to stampede Robert F. Kennedy onto the ticket as Johnson's running mate.\nIn the mid-1960s, President Johnson tried to convince Dewey to accept positions on several government commissions, especially a national crime commission, which Johnson wanted Dewey to chair. After Nixon won the presidency in 1968, there were rumors that Dewey would be offered a Cabinet position, or a seat on the U.S. Supreme Court. However, Dewey declined all offers to return to government service, preferring instead to concentrate on his highly profitable law firm. By the early 1960s, his share of the firm's profits had made him a millionaire, and his net worth at the time of his death was estimated at over $3\u00a0million (or over $\u00a0million in 2024 dollars).\nDewey was offered the position of Chief Justice of the United States twice, first by Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1953 and again by Richard Nixon in 1969. He declined the offer both times. Two years after the 1948 campaign, Harry S. Truman offered Dewey the position of United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom. However, he declined the offer.\nDeath.\nDewey's wife Frances died in July 1970, six years after being diagnosed with breast cancer. Later that year he began dating actress Kitty Carlisle, and there was talk of marriage.\nOn March 15, 1971, Dewey traveled to Miami, Florida, for a brief golfing vacation with his friend Dwayne Andreas, and others. The next day, following a round of golf with baseball star Carl Yastrzemski, Dewey failed to appear for his ride to Miami International Airport. He was found dead in his hotel room. An autopsy determined that he had died suddenly from a heart attack.\nFollowing a public memorial service at Saint James' Episcopal Church in New York City, which was attended by President Nixon, former vice president Hubert Humphrey, New York governor Nelson Rockefeller, and other prominent politicians, Dewey was buried next to his wife Frances in the town cemetery of Pawling, New York. After his death, his farm of Dapplemere was sold and renamed \"Dewey Lane Farm\" in his honor.\nPublic image.\nDewey received varied reactions from the public and fellow politicians, with praise for his good intentions, honesty, administrative talents, and inspiring speeches, but most of them also criticized his ambition and his perceived stiffness in public. One of his biographers wrote that he had \"a personality that attracted contempt and adulation in equal proportion.\"\nDewey was a forceful and inspiring speaker, traveling the whole country during his presidential campaigns and attracting uncommonly huge crowds. His friend and neighbor Lowell Thomas believed that Dewey was \"an authentic colossus\" whose \"appetite for excellence [tended] to frighten less obsessive types\", and his 1948 running mate Earl Warren \"professed little personal affection for Dewey, but [believed] him a born executive who would make a great president.\" The pollster George Gallup once described Dewey as \"the ablest public figure of his lifetime... the most misunderstood man in recent American history.\"\nOn the other hand, President Franklin D. Roosevelt privately called Dewey \"the little man\" and a \"son of a bitch\", and to Robert Taft and other conservative Republicans Dewey \"became synonymous with\u00a0... New York newspapers, New York banks, New York arrogance \u2013 the very city Taft's America loves to hate.\" A Taft supporter once referred to Dewey as \"that snooty little governor of New York.\"\nHerbert Brownell, Dewey's campaign manager in his 1944 and 1948 presidential campaigns, later recalled that Dewey was \"a tough man to herd...He'd see a local political leader who wasn't doing a very good job and he'd tell him so. Well, he should have left that to his managers to do...he could tell another person what to do brilliantly, but he wouldn't do it himself. He'd give me the perfect formula for handling a difficult person, but then he'd get annoyed at something the guy said.\" According to Brownell, \"perfectionism had its price, and Dewey paid it...He didn't really like handshaking, and he wasn't good at it...he'd climbed up the [political] ladder the hard way. He worked harder, studied longer than anyone else. He could take a problem, break it down into component parts, assign it to talented people. He was a real fighter. As president he would have been boss, but the glad handing, small talk, personality side of politics, he just could not do.\" When asked if Dewey was happy in politics, Brownell replied \"I don't think he was ever happy. He got joy out of attainment. He was satisfied with many of his accomplishments. But as for happiness, in the usual sense of the word \u2013 he wasn't really geared to our political system.\"\nAppearance and knowledge.\nDewey grew his mustache when he was dating Frances, and because \"she liked it, the mustache stayed, to delight cartoonists and dismay political advisers for 20 years.\" During the 1944 election campaign, Dewey suffered an unexpected blow when Alice Roosevelt Longworth was reported as having mocked Dewey as \"the little man on the wedding cake\", alluding to his neat mustache and dapper dress. It was ridicule he could never shake.\nDewey alienated former Republican president Herbert Hoover, who confided to a friend \"Dewey has no inner reservoir of knowledge on which to draw for his thinking,\" elaborating that \"A man couldn't wear a mustache like that without having it affect his mind.\"\nAloofness.\nDewey had a tendency towards pomposity and was considered stiff and unapproachable in public, with his aide Ruth McCormick Simms once describing him as \"cold, cold as a February iceberg\". She added that \"he was brilliant and thoroughly honest.\"\nDuring his governorship, one writer observed: \"A blunt fact about Mr. Dewey should be faced: it is that many people do not like him. He is, unfortunately, one of the least seductive personalities in public life. That he has made an excellent record as governor is indisputable. Even so, people resent what they call his vindictiveness, the 'metallic' nature of his efficiency, his cockiness (which actually conceals a nature basically shy), and his suspiciousness. People say... that he is as devoid of charm as a rivet or a lump of stone.\"\nHowever, Dewey's friends considered him a warm and friendly companion. Journalist Irwin Ross noted that, \"more than most politicians, [Dewey] displayed an enormous gap between his private and his public manner. To friends and colleagues he was warm and gracious, considerate of others' views\u2026 He could tell a joke and was not dismayed by an off-color story. In public, however, he tended to freeze up, either out of diffidence or too stern a sense of the dignity of office. The smiles would seem forced\u2026 the glad-handing gesture awkward.\"\nA magazine writer described the difference between Dewey's private and public behavior by noting that, \"Till he gets to the door, he may be cracking jokes and laughing like a schoolboy. But the moment he enters a room he ceases to be Tom Dewey and becomes what he thinks the Governor of New York ought to be.\"\nLeo W. O'Brien, a reporter for United Press International (UPI) who was later elected to Congress as a Democrat, recalled Dewey in an interview by saying that \"I hated his guts when he first came to Albany, and I loved him by the time he left. It was almost tragic \u2013 how he put on a pose that alienated people. Behind a pretty thin veneer he was a wonderful guy.\" John Gunther wrote in 1947 that many supporters were fiercely loyal to Dewey.\nOpportunism and vagueness.\nDewey's presidential campaigns were hampered by his habit of not being \"prematurely specific\" on controversial issues. President Truman poked fun at Dewey's vague campaign by joking that G.O.P. actually stood for \"grand old platitudes.\"\nDewey's frequent refusal to discuss specific issues and proposals in his campaigns was based partly on his belief in public opinion polls; one biographer claimed that he \"had an almost religious belief in the revolutionary science of public-opinion sampling.\" He was the first presidential candidate to employ his own team of pollsters, and when a worried businessman told Dewey in the 1948 presidential campaign that he was losing ground to Truman and urged him to \"talk specifics in his closing speeches\", Dewey and his aide Paul Lockwood displayed polling data that showed Dewey still well ahead of Truman, and Dewey told the businessman \"when you're leading, don't talk.\"\nWalter Lippman regarded Dewey as an opportunist, who \"changes his views from hour to hour\u2026 always more concerned with taking the popular position than he is in dealing with the real issues.\"\nThe journalist John Gunther wrote that \"There are plenty of vain and ambitious and uncharming politicians. This would not be enough to cause Dewey's lack of popularity. What counts more is that so many people think of him as opportunistic. Dewey seldom goes out on a limb by taking a personal position which may be unpopular... every step is carefully calculated and prepared.\"\nRelationship with legislators.\nAs governor, Dewey had a reputation for ruthless treatment of New York legislators and political opponents.\n[Dewey] cracked the whip ruthlessly on [Republican] legislators who strayed from the party fold. Assemblymen have found themselves under investigation by the State Tax Department after opposing the Governor over an insurance regulation bill. Others discover job-rich construction projects, state buildings, even highways, directed to friendlier [legislators]... [He] forced the legislature his own party dominates to reform its comfortable ways of payroll padding. Now legislative workers must verify in writing every two weeks what they have been doing to earn their salary; every state senator and assemblyman must verify that [they] are telling the truth. All this has occasioned more than grumbling. Some Assemblymen have quit in protest. Others have been denied renomination by Dewey's formidable political organization. Reporters mutter among themselves about government by blackmail.\nHonesty and integrity.\nDewey received positive publicity for his reputation for honesty and integrity. The newspaper editor William Allen White praised Dewey as \"an honest cop with the mind of an honest cop.\" An October 1953 editorial in the \"Oneonta Star\" said that \"We think the Governor is ruthless in his actions, but we also think he will countenance nothing that smacks of trickery and dishonesty in public administration.\"\nHe insisted on having every candidate for a job paying $2,500 or more rigorously probed by state police. He was so concerned about the elected public official being motivated by the wealth his position could produce that he frequently said, \"No man should be in public office who can't make more money in private life.\" Dewey accepted no anonymous campaign contributions and had every large contributor not known personally to him investigated \"for motive.\" When he signed autographs, he would date them so that no one could imply a closer relationship than actually existed.\nA journalist noted in 1947 that Dewey \"has never made the slightest attempt to capitalize on his enormous fame, except politically. Even when temporarily out of office, in the middle 1930s, he rigorously resisted any temptation to be vulgarized or exploited...he could easily have become a millionaire several times over by succumbing to various movie and radio offers. He would have had to do nothing except give permission for movies or radio serials to be built around his career and name. Be it said to his honor, he never did so.\"\nLegacy.\nIn 1964, the New York State legislature officially renamed the New York State Thruway in honor of Dewey. Signs on Interstate 95 between the end of the Bruckner Expressway (in the Bronx) and the Connecticut state line, as well as on the Thruway mainline (Interstate 87 between the Bronx\u2013Westchester line and Albany, and Interstate 90 between Albany and the New York\u2013Pennsylvania line) designate the name as \"Governor Thomas E. Dewey Thruway\", though this official designation is rarely used in reference to these roads.\nDewey's official papers from his years in politics and public life were given to the University of Rochester; they are housed in the university library and are available to historians and other writers.\nIn 2005, the New York City Bar Association named an award after Dewey. The Thomas E. Dewey Medal, formerly sponsored by the law firm of Dewey &amp; LeBoeuf LLP, is awarded annually to one outstanding assistant district attorney in each of New York City's five counties (New York, Kings, Queens, Bronx, and Richmond). The medal was first awarded on November 29, 2005. The Thomas E. Dewey Medal is now sponsored by the law firm Dewey Pegno &amp; Kramarsky LLP.\nIn May 2012, Dewey &amp; LeBoeuf (the successor firm to Dewey Ballantine) filed for bankruptcy.\nDisney writer Dana Coty named Donald Duck's nephew Dewey after Thomas E. Dewey.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrimary sources"}
{"id": "45597", "revid": "17753739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45597", "title": "Henry V of England", "text": "King of England from 1413 to 1422\nHenry V (16 September 1386 \u2013 31 August 1422), also called Henry of Monmouth, was King of England from 1413 until his death in 1422. Despite his relatively short reign, Henry's outstanding military successes in the Hundred Years' War against France made England one of the strongest military powers in Europe. Immortalised in Shakespeare's Henriad plays, Henry is known and celebrated as one of the greatest warrior-kings of medieval England.\nHenry of Monmouth, the eldest son of Henry IV, became heir apparent and Prince of Wales after his father seized the throne in 1399. During the reign of his father, the young Prince Henry gained early military experience in Wales during the Glynd\u0175r rebellion, and by fighting against the powerful Percy family of Northumberland. He played a central part at the Battle of Shrewsbury despite being just sixteen years of age. As he entered adulthood, Henry played an increasingly central role in England's government due to the declining health of his father, but disagreements between Henry and his father led to political conflict between the two. After his father's death in March 1413, Henry ascended to the throne of England and assumed complete control of the country, also reviving the historic English claim to the French throne.\nIn 1415, Henry followed in the wake of his great-grandfather, Edward III, by renewing the Hundred Years' War with France, beginning the Lancastrian phase of the conflict (1415\u20131453). His first military campaign included capturing the port of Harfleur and a famous victory at the Battle of Agincourt, which inspired a proto-nationalistic fervour in England and Wales. During his second campaign (1417\u201320), his armies captured Paris and conquered most of northern France, including the formerly English-held Duchy of Normandy. Taking advantage of political divisions within France, Henry put unparalleled pressure on Charles VI of France (\"the Mad\"), resulting in the largest holding of French territory by an English king since the Angevin Empire. The Treaty of Troyes (1420) recognised Henry V as regent of France and heir apparent to the French throne, disinheriting Charles's own son, the Dauphin Charles. Henry was subsequently married to Charles VI's daughter, Catherine of Valois. The treaty ratified the unprecedented formation of a union between the kingdoms of England and France, in the person of Henry, upon the death of the ailing Charles. However, Henry died in August 1422, less than two months before his father-in-law, and was succeeded by his only son and heir, the infant Henry VI.\nAnalyses of Henry's reign are varied. According to Charles Ross, he was widely praised for his personal piety, bravery, and military genius; Henry was admired even by contemporary French chroniclers. However, his occasionally cruel temperament and lack of focus regarding domestic affairs have made him the subject of criticism. Nonetheless, Adrian Hastings believes his militaristic pursuits during the Hundred Years' War fostered a strong sense of English nationalism and set the stage for the rise of England (later Great Britain) to prominence as a dominant global power.\nEarly life.\nBirth and family.\nHenry was born in the tower above the gatehouse of Monmouth Castle in Monmouthshire, and for that reason was sometimes called Henry of Monmouth. He was the son of Henry of Bolingbroke (later Henry IV of England) and Mary de Bohun. His father's cousin was the reigning English monarch, Richard II. Henry's paternal grandfather was the influential John of Gaunt, a son of Edward III. As he was not close to the line of succession to the throne, Henry's date of birth was not officially documented, and for many years it was disputed whether he was born in 1386 or 1387. However, records indicate that his younger brother Thomas was born in the autumn of 1387 and that his parents were at Monmouth in 1386 but not in 1387. It is now accepted that he was born on 16 September 1386.\nUpon the exile of Henry's father in 1398, Richard II took the boy into his own charge and treated him kindly. The young Henry accompanied Richard to Ireland. While in the royal service, he visited Trim Castle in County Meath, the ancient meeting place of the Parliament of Ireland.\nIn 1399, John of Gaunt died. In the same year Richard II was overthrown by the Lancastrian usurpation that brought Henry's father to the throne, and Henry was recalled from Ireland into prominence as heir apparent to the Kingdom of England. He was created Prince of Wales at his father's coronation and Duke of Lancaster on 10 November 1399, the third person to hold the title that year. His other titles were Duke of Cornwall, Earl of Chester and Duke of Aquitaine. A contemporary record notes that in 1399, Henry spent time at The Queen's College, Oxford, under the care of his uncle Henry Beaufort, the chancellor of the university. During this time, due to taking a liking to both literature and music, he learned to read and write in English, the vernacular; this made him the first English King that was educated in this regard. Because of his love of music, he subsequently granted pensions to composers.\nEarly military career and role in government.\nFrom 1400 to 1404, he carried out the duties of High Sheriff of Cornwall. During that time, Henry was also in command of part of the English forces. He led his own army into Wales against Owain Glynd\u0175r and joined forces with his father to fight Henry \"Hotspur\" Percy at the Battle of Shrewsbury in 1403. It was there that the 16-year-old prince was almost killed by an arrow in his left cheekbone. An ordinary soldier might have died from such a wound, but Henry had the benefit of the best possible care. Over a period of several days, John Bradmore, the royal physician, treated the wound with honey to act as an antiseptic, crafted a tool to screw into the embedded arrowhead (bodkin point) and thus extract it without doing further damage, and flushed the wound with alcohol. The operation was successful, but it left Henry with permanent scars \u2013 evidence of his experience in battle. Bradmore recorded this account in Latin, in his manuscript titled \"Philomena\". Henry's treatment also appeared in an anonymous Middle English surgical treatise dated to 1446, that has since been attributed to Thomas Morstede.\nThe Welsh revolt of Owain Glynd\u0175r absorbed Henry's energies until 1408. Then, as a result of the king's ill health, Henry began to take a wider share in politics. From January 1410, helped by his uncles Henry and Thomas Beaufort, legitimised sons of John of Gaunt, he had practical control of the government. Both in foreign and domestic policy he differed from the king, who discharged his son from the council in November 1411. The quarrel between father and son was political only, though it is probable that the Beauforts had discussed the abdication of Henry IV. Their opponents certainly endeavoured to defame Prince Henry.\nIt may be that the tradition of Henry's riotous youth, immortalised by Shakespeare, is partly due to political enmity. Henry's record of involvement in war and politics, even in his youth, disproves this tradition. The most famous incident, his quarrel with the chief justice, has no contemporary authority and was first related by Sir Thomas Elyot in 1531. The closest contemporary source of such behavior is vague statements made by then Bishop of Norwich, Richard Courtenay, stating that the king had given up youthful pursuits and become chaste. This sources is suspect at best as Courtenay was a longtime friend of the young King and was typically unreliable.\nThe story of Falstaff originated in Henry's early friendship with Sir John Oldcastle, a supporter of the Lollards. Shakespeare's Falstaff was originally named \"Oldcastle\", following his main source, \"The Famous Victories of Henry V\". Oldcastle's descendants objected, and the name was changed (the character became a composite of several real persons, including Sir John Fastolf). That friendship, and the prince's political opposition to Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, perhaps encouraged Lollard hopes. If so, their disappointment may account for the statements of ecclesiastical writers like Thomas Walsingham that Henry, on becoming king, was suddenly changed into a new man.\nReign (1413\u20131422).\nAccession.\nAfter Henry IV died on 20 March 1413, Henry V succeeded him and was crowned on 9 April 1413 at Westminster Abbey. The ceremony was marked by a terrible snowstorm, but the common people were undecided as to whether it was a good or bad omen. Henry was described as having been \"very tall (6 feet 3 inches), slim, with dark hair cropped in a ring above the ears, and clean-shaven\". His complexion was ruddy, his face lean with a prominent and pointed nose. Depending on his mood, his eyes \"flashed from the mildness of a dove's to the brilliance of a lion's\".\nDomestic affairs.\nHenry tackled all of the domestic policies together and gradually built on them a wider policy. From the first, he made it clear that he would rule England as the head of a united nation. He let past differences be forgotten\u2014the late Richard II was honourably re-interred; the young Edmund Mortimer, 5th Earl of March, was taken into favour; the heirs of those who had suffered under the last reign were restored gradually to their titles and estates. Yet, where Henry saw a grave domestic danger, he acted firmly and ruthlessly, such as during the Lollard discontent in January 1414 and including the execution by burning of Henry's old friend, Sir John Oldcastle, in 1417 to \"nip the movement in the bud\" and make his own position as ruler secure.\nHenry's reign was generally free from serious trouble at home. The exception was the Southampton Plot in favour of Mortimer, involving Henry, Baron Scrope, and Richard, Earl of Cambridge (grandfather of the future King Edward IV), in July 1415. Mortimer himself remained loyal to the King.\nStarting in August 1417, Henry promoted the use of the English language in government and his reign marks the appearance of Chancery Standard English as well as the adoption of English as the language of record within government. He was the first king to use English in his personal correspondence since the Norman Conquest 350 years earlier.\nWar in France.\nDispute with France.\nHenry could now turn his attention to foreign affairs. A writer of the next generation was the first to allege that Henry was encouraged by ecclesiastical statesmen to enter into the French war as a means of diverting attention from home troubles. This story seems to have no foundation. Old commercial disputes and the support the French had lent to Owain Glynd\u0175r were used as an excuse for war, while the disordered state of France afforded no security for peace. King Charles VI of France was prone to mental illness; at times he thought he was made of glass, and his eldest surviving son, Louis, Duke of Guyenne, was an unpromising prospect. However, it was the old dynastic claim to the throne of France, first pursued by Edward III of England, that justified war with France in English opinion.\nHenry may have regarded the assertion of his own claims as part of his royal duty, but a permanent settlement of the national debate was essential to the success of his foreign policy. Following the instability back in England during the reign of King Richard II, the war in France came to a halt, as during most of his reign relations between England \nand France were largely peaceful and so they were during his father's reign as well. But in 1415, hostilities were renewed between the two nations, and though Henry had a claim to the French throne, through his great\u2013grandfather King Edward III by his mother's side, the French ultimately rejected this claim as its nobles pointed out that under the Salic law of the Franks, women were forbidden from inheriting the throne. Thus the throne went to a distant male relative of a cadet branch of the House of Capet, Philip VI of France, resulting in the Hundred Years' War beginning in 1337. Wanting to claim the French throne for himself, Henry resumed the war against France in 1415. This would lead to one of England's most successful military campaigns during the whole conflict and would result in one of the most decisive victories for an English army during this period.\n1415 campaign.\nOn 11 and 12 August 1415, Henry sailed from Southampton and landed near Harfleur on the Norman coast by 14 August. His forces then besieged the fortress at Harfleur, capturing it on 22 September. Many of his troops succumbed to illness; therefore, he decided to begin marching his army towards Calais on 8 October, against the warnings of his council. Around mid-October, he encountered a blockade of the classic ford at Blanchetaque near Abbeville, forcing Henry inland in search of another crossing. On October 19 and 20, Henry and his army crossed south of P\u00e9ronne at B\u00e9thencourt and Voyennes, then turned north again towards Calais. The French army intercepted Henry on 24 October near Azincourt, which led to the famous Battle of Agincourt. On 25 October, on the plains near the village of Agincourt, a French army intercepted his route. Despite his men-at-arms' being exhausted, outnumbered and malnourished, Henry led his men into battle, decisively defeating the French, who suffered severe losses. The French men-at-arms were bogged down in the muddy battlefield, soaked from the previous night of heavy rain, thus hindering the French advance and making them sitting targets for the flanking English archers. Most were simply hacked to death while completely stuck in the deep mud. It was Henry's greatest military victory, ranking alongside the Battle of Cr\u00e9cy (1346) and the Battle of Poitiers (1356) as the greatest English victories of the Hundred Years' War. This victory both solidified and strengthened Henry V's own rule in England and also legitimized his claim to the French throne more than ever. \nDuring the battle, Henry ordered that the French prisoners taken during the battle be put to death, including some of the most illustrious who could have been held for ransom. Cambridge historian Brett Tingley suggests that Henry ordered them killed out of concern that the prisoners might turn on their captors when the English were busy repelling a third wave of enemy troops, thus jeopardising a hard-fought victory.\nThe victorious conclusion of Agincourt, from the English viewpoint, was only the first step in the campaign to recover the French possessions that Henry felt belonged to the English crown. Agincourt also held out the promise that Henry's pretensions to the French throne might be realized. After the victory, Henry marched to Calais and the king returned in triumph to England in November and received a hero's welcome. The brewing nationalistic sentiment among the English people was so great that contemporary writers describe firsthand how Henry was welcomed with triumphal pageantry into London upon his return. These accounts also describe how Henry was greeted by elaborate displays and with choirs following his passage to St. Paul's Cathedral.\nMost importantly, the victory at Agincourt inspired and boosted the English morale, while it caused a heavy blow to the French as it further aided the English in their conquest of Normandy and much of northern France by 1419. The French, especially the nobility, who by this stage were weakened and exhausted by the disaster, began quarrelling and fighting among themselves. This quarrelling also led to a division in the French aristocracy and caused a rift in the French royal family, leading to infighting. By 1420, a treaty was signed between Henry V and Charles VI of France, known as the Treaty of Troyes, which acknowledged Henry as regent and heir to the French throne and also married Henry to Charles's daughter Catherine of Valois.\nDiplomacy.\nFollowing the Battle of Agincourt, King Sigismund of Hungary (later Holy Roman Emperor) made a visit to Henry in hopes of making peace between England and France. His goal was to persuade Henry to modify his demands against the French. Henry lavishly entertained him and even had him enrolled in the Order of the Garter. Sigismund, in turn, inducted Henry into the Order of the Dragon. Henry had intended to crusade for the order after uniting the English and French thrones, but he died before fulfilling his plans. Sigismund left England several months later, having signed the Treaty of Canterbury acknowledging English claims to France.\nCommand of the sea was secured by driving the Genoese allies of the French out of the English Channel. While Henry was occupied with peace negotiations in 1416, a French and Genoese fleet surrounded the harbour at the English-garrisoned Harfleur. A French land force also besieged the town. In March 1416 a raiding force of soldiers under the Earl of Dorset, Thomas Beaufort, was attacked and narrowly escaped defeat at the Battle of Valmont after a counterattack by the garrison of Harfleur. To relieve the town, Henry sent his brother, John, Duke of Bedford, who raised a fleet and set sail from Beachy Head on 14 August. The Franco-Genoese fleet was defeated the following day after the gruelling seven-hour Battle of the Seine and Harfleur was relieved. Diplomacy successfully detached Emperor Sigismund from supporting France, and the Treaty of Canterbury \u2014 also signed in August 1416 \u2014 confirmed a short-lived alliance between England and the Holy Roman Empire.\n1417\u20131421 campaigns.\nWith those two potential enemies gone, and after two years of patient preparation following the Battle of Agincourt, Henry renewed the war on a larger scale in 1417. After taking Caen, he quickly conquered Lower Normandy and Rouen was cut off from Paris and besieged. This siege has cast an even darker shadow on the reputation of the king adding to the loss of honor following his order to slay the French prisoners at Agincourt. The leaders of Rouen, who were unable to support and feed the women and children of the town, forced them out through the gates believing that Henry would allow them to pass through his army unmolested. However, Henry refused to allow this, and the expelled women and children died of starvation in the ditches surrounding the town. The French were paralysed by the disputes between the Burgundians and the Armagnacs. Henry skillfully played one against the other without relaxing his warlike approach.\nIn January 1419, Rouen fell. Those Norman French who had resisted were severely punished: Alain Blanchard, who had hanged English prisoners from the walls of Rouen, was summarily executed; Robert de Livet, Canon of Rouen, who had excommunicated the English king, was packed off to England and imprisoned for five years.\nBy August, the English were outside the walls of Paris. The intrigues of the French parties culminated in the assassination of John the Fearless, Duke of Burgundy, by the Dauphin Charles's partisans at Montereau-Fault-Yonne on 10 September. Philip the Good, the new duke, and the French court threw themselves into Henry's arms. After six months of negotiation, the Treaty of Troyes recognised Henry as the heir and regent of France. On 2 June 1420 at Troyes Cathedral, Henry married Catherine, daughter of Charles VI. They had only one son, Henry, born on 6 December 1421 at Windsor Castle. From June to July 1420, Henry V's army besieged and took the military fortress castle at Montereau-Fault-Yonne close to Paris. He besieged and captured Melun in November 1420, returning to England shortly thereafter. In 1428, Charles VII retook Montereau, only to see the English once again take it over within a short time. Finally, on 10 October 1437, Charles VII was victorious in regaining Montereau-Fault-Yonne.\nWhile Henry was in England, his brother Thomas, Duke of Clarence, led the English forces in France. On 22 March 1421, Thomas led the English to a disastrous defeat at the Battle of Baug\u00e9 against a Franco-Scottish army. The duke was killed in the battle. On 10 June, Henry sailed back to France to retrieve the situation. It was to be his last military campaign. From July to August, Henry's forces besieged and captured Dreux, thus relieving allied forces at Chartres. On 6 October, his forces laid siege to Meaux, capturing it on 10 May 1422.\nDeath.\nHenry V died on 31 August 1422 at the Ch\u00e2teau de Vincennes to the east of Paris. The commonly held view is that he contracted dysentery just after the Siege of Meaux, which ended on 9 May. However, the symptoms and severity of dysentery present quickly. Recovery from mild forms may only be days while severe forms of dysentery are rapidly debilitating and deadly. He may have contracted a mild form of dysentery but in the weeks following, Henry seems to have been reasonably healthy. Though at the time, speculative causes of his recent illness included smallpox, the bacterial infection erysipelas, and leprosy. There is no historical evidence for poisoning. But his recent victories in France and establishing himself as heir to the French throne with the Treaty of Troyes, he would have had many enemies. Recovering at the castle of Vincennes, by the end of June it seems he was well enough to lead his forces with the intent of engaging the Dauphinist forces at Cosne-sur-Loire. He would have ridden full armour, probably in blistering heat, as that summer was especially hot. He was struck down again, with a debilitating fever, possibly heatstroke or a relapse of his previous illness. For a few short weeks he was carried around in a litter, and his enemies having retreated, he decided to return to Paris. One story has him trying and failing, one last time, to mount a horse at Charenton. He was taken back to Vincennes, around 10 August, where he died weeks later. Henry's comrade-in-arms and Lord Steward, John Sutton, 1st Baron Dudley, brought Henry's body back to England and bore the royal standard at his funeral. Henry V was buried in Westminster Abbey on 7 November 1422. Seven years prior during the siege of Harfluer his close companion and Privy Counsel member Richard Courtenay died of dysentery, and Henry gave orders that he be buried at the site of Henry's own tomb. At his own death Henry was buried in a secret chamber above that of his friend.\nHenry was 35 and had reigned for 9 years. Shortly before his death, Henry V named his brother, John, Duke of Bedford, regent of France in the name of his son, Henry VI of England, then only a few months old. Henry V did not live to be crowned King of France, as he might have expected after the Treaty of Troyes, because Charles VI, from whom he would have inherited the crown, survived him by two months.\nLegacy.\nPolitical.\nHenry V's death at thirty-five years of age was a political and dynastic turning point for both the kingdoms of England and France. The Lancastrian ruler had been set to rule both realms after Charles VI's death, which occurred in October 1422, less than two months after Henry's own premature death. This caused his infant son, also called Henry, to ascend the throne as King Henry VI of England, at the age of nine months. Due to the new king's age, a regency government was formed by Henry's surviving brothers, John, Duke of Bedford, and Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester. This acted as the sole governing force of England and its possessions in France until Henry VI came of age in 1437. Although for a time this largely proved to be a success, with England achieving their greatest territorial extent in France under the command of Bedford, the later reign of Henry VI saw the majority of the territories held by the English lost or returned to the French, through reconquest or diplomatic cession; English military power in the region eventually ceased to exist. This marked the end of England's sustained military success in the Hundred Years' War, with all their historic possessions in France being lost, with the exception of the Pale of Calais, which remained England's only foothold in the continent until it was lost in 1558. The loss of land in France contributed significantly to civil strife over the succession of the English crown in the ensuing decades, culminating in the Wars of the Roses (1455\u20131487) between Henry V's descendants, the House of Lancaster, and its rival, the House of York.\nArchitectural.\nHenry V is not only remembered for his military prowess but for his architectural patronage. He commissioned the building of King's College Chapel and Eton College Chapel, and although some of his building works were discontinued after his death, others were continued by his son and successor Henry VI. He also contributed to the founding of the monastery of the Syon Abbey, which was completed under Henry VI. In the 16th century the monastery was demolished as a result of the growing movement of the English Reformation during the reign of King Henry VIII.\nReputation.\nHenry V is remembered by both his countrymen and his foes as a capable military commander during the war against France and is one of the most renowned monarchs in English and British history. He is largely seen as a symbol of English military might and power, which inspired later kings and queens of England. His effect on English history, culture, and the military is profound. Henry's victories created a national sensation and caused a patriotic fervour among the English people that influenced both the medieval English army and the British army for centuries. His victories against the French during 1417\u20131422 led to many romanticized depictions of Henry V as a figure of nationalism and patriotism, both in literature and in the works of Shakespeare, and in the film industry in modern times.\nAccording to British historian Dan Jones, Henry \"had a reputation for being austere to the point of desiccation, yet he was also theatrical and astonishingly adept at the art of public spectacle. He was a hardened warrior...Yet he was also creative, artistic, and literary, with a bookish temperament and a talent for composing music and playing a number of instruments.\" Jones does however conclude that Henry V is \"'the greatest man who ever ruled England.'\"\nIn popular culture.\nIn literature.\nHenry V has been depicted in many literary works, the most famous and influential depiction being William Shakespeare's series of plays \"Henry IV, Part 1\", \"Henry IV, Part 2\", and \"Henry V\" (which, along with \"Richard II\", are known collectively as the Henriad in Shakespearean scholarship). Shakespeare's plays dramatise Henry's transformation from a reckless youth who keeps bad company into a virtuous ruler who wins France for England.\nHenry is a minor character in William Kenrick's sequel to Shakespeare's \"Henry IV, Part 2\", titled \"Falstaff's Wedding\". He is the subject of the historical novel \"Good King Harry\" by Denise Giardina. He also appears as a minor character in the historical novels \"Simon the Coldheart\" by Georgette Heyer and novel and \"Azincourt\" by Bernard Cornwell.\nIn film and television.\nHenry V has been depicted in many historical films and operas such as Laurence Olivier's 1944 film \"Henry V\"; Olivier played the lead role himself, for which he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor. Henry also appears in the 1935 film \"Royal Cavalcade\", in which he was played by actor Matheson Lang. Henry is played by Kenneth Branagh in the 1989 film \"Henry V\", for which Branagh was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor, Best Director, and the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role. Henry V appears as a major character played by Keith Baxter in Orson Welles's 1966 film \"Chimes at Midnight\". He is also played by Timoth\u00e9e Chalamet in 2019 Netflix film \"The King\" directed by David Mich\u00f4d. He is portrayed by Tom Hiddleston in the BBC television series \"The Hollow Crown\".\nIn comics and video games.\nHenry V is a character in the comic series \"The Hammer Man\" in the BBC comic strip \"The Victor\" featuring him as the commander of the hero, Chell Paddock. King Henry V is a character in the video game ' and also in the ' in which he was featured as a paladin.\nArms.\nHenry's arms as Prince of Wales were those of the kingdom, differenced by a label argent of three points. Upon his accession, he inherited the use of the arms of the kingdom undifferenced.\nMarriage.\nAfter his father became king, Henry was created Prince of Wales. It was suggested that Henry should marry the widow of Richard II, Isabella of Valois, but this had been refused. After this, negotiations took place for his marriage to Catherine of Pomerania between 1401 and 1404, but ultimately failed.\nDuring the following years, marriage had apparently assumed a lower priority until the conclusion of the Treaty of Troyes in 1420 when Henry V was named heir to Charles VI of France and provided in marriage to Charles's daughter Catherine of Valois, younger sister of Isabella of Valois. Her dowry, upon the agreement between the two kingdoms, was 600,000 crowns. Together the couple had one child, Henry, born in late 1421. Upon Henry V's death in 1422, the infant prince became King Henry VI of England.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45598", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45598", "title": "Strepsiptera", "text": "Order of insects\nStrepsiptera (), from Ancient Greek \u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03ad\u03c8\u03b9\u03c2 (\"str\u00e9psis\"), meaning \"turning around\", and \u03c0\u03c4\u03b5\u03c1\u03cc\u03bd (\"pter\u00f3n\"), meaning \"wing\", are an order of insects with eleven extant families that include about 600 described species. They are endoparasites of other insects, such as bees, wasps, leafhoppers, silverfish, and cockroaches. Females of most species never emerge from the host after entering its body, finally dying inside it. The early-stage larvae do emerge because they must find an unoccupied living host, and the short-lived males must emerge to seek a receptive female in her host. They are believed to be most closely related to beetles, from which they diverged 300\u2013350\u00a0million years ago, but do not appear in the fossil record until the mid-Cretaceous around 100\u00a0million years ago.\nThe order is not well known to non-specialists, and the nearest they have to a common name is stylops, in reference to the genus \"Stylops\". The name of the order translates to \"twisted wing\", giving rise to other common names used for the order, twisted-wing insects and twisted-winged parasites.\nAdult males are rarely observed, although specimens may be lured using cages containing virgin females. Nocturnal specimens can also be collected at light traps.\nBiology.\nAppearance and structure.\nMales.\nMales of the Strepsiptera have wings, legs, eyes, and antennae, though their mouthparts cannot be used for feeding. Many have mouthparts modified into sensory structures. The males bear a superficial resemblance to flies. The forewings are modified into small club-shaped structures called halteres, which sense gyroscopic information. A similar organ exists in flies, though in that group the hindwings are modified instead, and the two groups are thought to have independently evolved the structures. The hindwings are generally fan-shaped, and have strongly reduced venation. The antennae are flabellate, and are covered in specialised chemoreceptors, likely to detect females over long distances.\nAdult male Strepsiptera have eyes unlike those of any other insect, resembling the eyes found in the trilobite group Phacopina. Instead of a compound eye consisting of hundreds to thousands of ommatidia, that each produce a pixel of the entire image, the strepsipteran eyes consist of only a few dozen \"eyelets\" that each produce a complete image. These eyelets are separated by cuticle and/or setae, giving the cluster eye as a whole a blackberry-like appearance.\nFemales.\nThe females of Stylopidia, which includes 97% of all described strepsipteran species and all modern strepsipteran families except Mengenillidae and Bahiaxenidae, are not known to leave their hosts and are neotenic in form, lacking wings, legs, and eyes, but have a well sclerotised cephalothorax (fused head and thorax). Adult female mengenillids are wingless but are free living and somewhat mobile with legs and small eyes. This is probably also true for the bahiaxenids, though this has not been observed.\nLarvae.\nNewly hatched primary (first instar) larvae are on average in length, smaller than many single-celled organisms. They are highly mobile with well developed stemmata, which are able to distinguish color. The underside of the body is covered in minute hair-like structures (microtrichia), which allow the larvae to stick to wet surfaces via capillary action. At the back of the body are well developed large bristle-like cerci, which are attached to muscles, which allow the larvae to jump. The tarsal segment of their legs have structures which allow them to cling to their hosts. Later larval instars which develop inside the host are completely immobile.\nLife cycle.\nVirgin females release a pheromone which the males use to locate them. Mating in at least some species is polyandrous, where the female mates with more than one male.\nIn the Stylopidia, the female's anterior region protrudes out between the segments of the host's abdomen. In all strepsipterans the male mates by rupturing the female's cuticle (in the case of Stylopidia, this is in a deep narrow fissure of the cephalothorax near the birth canal). Sperm passes through the opening directly into the body in a process called traumatic insemination, which has independently evolved in some other insects like bed bugs.\nStrepsiptera eggs hatch inside the female, and the planidium larvae can move around freely within the female's haemocoel; this behavior is unique to these insects. The offspring consume their mother from the inside in a process known as haemocoelous viviparity. Each female produces many thousands of planidium larvae. The larvae emerge from the brood opening/canal on the female's head, which protrudes outside the host body.\nLarvae have legs and actively seek out new hosts. Their legs are partly vestigial in that they lack a trochanter, the leg segment that forms the articulation between the basal coxa and the femur. The larvae are very active as they only have a limited amount of time to find a host before they exhaust their energy reserves. These first-instar larvae have stemmata (simple, single-lens eyes). When the larvae latch onto a host, they enter it by secreting enzymes that soften the cuticle, usually in the abdominal region of the host. Some species have been reported to enter the eggs of hosts. Larvae of \"Stichotrema dallatorreanum\" Hofeneder from Papua New Guinea were found to enter their orthopteran host's tarsus (foot).\nOnce inside the host, they undergo hypermetamorphosis and transform into a less-mobile, legless larval form. They induce the host to produce a bag-like structure inside which they feed and grow. This structure, made from host tissue, protects them from the immune defences of the host. Larvae go through four more instars, and in each moult the older cuticle separates but is not discarded (\"apolysis without ecdysis\"), so multiple layers form around the larvae. Male larvae pupate after the last moult, but females directly become neotenous adults. The colour and shape of the host's abdomen may be changed and the host usually becomes sterile. The parasites then undergo pupation to become adults. Adult males emerge from the host bodies, while females stay inside. Females may occupy up to 90% of the abdominal volume of their hosts. Adult males are very short-lived, usually surviving less than five hours, and do not feed.\nParasitism.\nStrepsiptera of various species have been documented to attack hosts in many orders, including members of the orders Zygentoma (silverfish and allies), Orthoptera (grasshoppers, crickets), Blattodea (cockroaches), Mantodea (praying mantis), Heteroptera (bugs), Hymenoptera (wasps, ants and bees), and Diptera (flies). In the strepsipteran family Myrmecolacidae, the males parasitize ants, whereas the females parasitize Orthoptera. Members of Mengenillidae target Zygentoma exclusively, whereas Stylopidia targets only winged insects, with a large number of stylopidians targeting wasps and bees, whereas the largest family of strepsipterans, the Stylopidae, with over 27% of all described strepsipterans, targets bees exclusively.\nVery rarely, multiple females may live within a single stylopized host; multiple males within a single host are somewhat more common.\nStrepsiptera of the family Myrmecolacidae can influence their host's behaviour, causing their ant hosts to linger on the tips of grass leaves, increasing the chance of being found by strepsipteran males (in the case of females) and putting them in a good position for male emergence (in the case of males).\nTaxonomy.\nThe order, named by William Kirby in 1813, is named for the hindwings, which are held at a twisted angle when at rest (from Ancient Greek \u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03ad\u03c8\u03b9\u03c2 (\"str\u00e9psis\"), meaning \"turning around\", and \u03c0\u03c4\u03b5\u03c1\u03cc\u03bd (\"pter\u00f3n\"), meaning \"wing\"), wing). The forewings are reduced to halteres.\nStrepsiptera were once believed to be the sister group to the beetle families Meloidae and Ripiphoridae, which have similar parasitic development and forewing reduction. Early molecular research suggested their inclusion as a sister group to the flies, in a clade called Halteria, which have one pair of the wings modified into halteres, and failed to support their relationship to the beetles. Further molecular studies, however, suggested they are outside the clade Mecopterida (containing the Diptera and Lepidoptera), but found no strong evidence for affinity with any other extant group. Study of their evolutionary position has been problematic due to difficulties in phylogenetic analysis arising from long branch attraction. Most modern molecular studies find strepsipterans as the sister group of beetles (Coleoptera), with both groups together forming the clade Coleopterida. The most basal strepsipteran is the fossil \"Protoxenos janzeni\" discovered in Eocene aged Baltic amber, whereas the most basal living strepsipteran is \"Bahiaxenos relictus\", the sole member of the family Bahiaxenidae. The earliest known strepsipteran fossils are those of \"Cretostylops engeli\" (Cretostylopdiae) and \"Kinzelbachilla ellenbergeri\", \"Phthanoxenos nervosus\" and \"Heterobathmilla kakopoios\" (Phthanoxenidae), discovered in middle Cretaceous Burmese amber from Myanmar, around 99\u00a0million years old, which all lie outside the crown group, but are all more closely related to modern strepsiperans than \"Protoxenos\" is. The finding of a parasitic first instar in the same deposit indicates that the parasitic lifestyle of the group has likely existed nearly unchanged for 100\u00a0million years, though their evolutionary history prior to this remains a mystery. The idea that mengellinids' targeting of zygentomans represents the ancestral ecology of the group as a whole has been considered questionable.\nFamilies.\nThe vast majority of living strepispterans are placed within the grouping Stylopidia, which includes the families Corioxenidae, Halictophagidae, Callipharixenidae, Bohartillidae, Elenchidae, Myrmecolacidae, Stylopidae, Protelencholacidae (extinct) and Xenidae. All Stylopidia have endoparasitic females that have multiple genital openings. Two living families, Mengenillidae and Bahiaxenidae, are placed outside of this group, along with several extinct families.\nThe Stylopidae have four-segmented tarsi and four- to six-segmented antennae, with the third segment having a lateral process. The family Stylopidae may be paraphyletic. The Elenchidae have two-segmented tarsi and four-segmented antennae, with the third segment having a lateral process. The Halictophagidae have three-segmented tarsi and seven-segmented antennae, with lateral processes from the third and fourth segments.\nThe Stylopidae mostly parasitize wasps and bees, the Elenchidae are known to parasitize Fulgoroidea, whereas the Halictophagidae are found on leafhoppers, treehoppers, and mole cricket hosts.\nStrepsipteran insects in the genus \"Xenos\" parasitize \"Polistes carnifex\", a species of social wasps. These obligate parasites infect the developing wasp larvae in the nest and are present within the abdomens of female wasps when they hatch out. Here they remain until they thrust through the cuticle and pupate (males) or release infective first-instar larvae onto flowers (females). These larvae are transported back to their nests by foraging wasps.\nCladogram.\nAfter:\nRelationship with humans.\nSome insects which have been considered pests may have strepsipteran endoparasites. Inoculation of a pest population with the corresponding parasitoid may sometimes aid in reducing the impact of such pests, although no strepsipterans have ever been tested for use in this capacity, let alone being available for such purposes, either commercially or experimentally.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45599", "revid": "41002480", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45599", "title": "Surgery", "text": "Medical procedures that involve incisive or invasive instruments into body cavities\nSurgery is a medical specialty that uses manual and instrumental techniques to diagnose or treat pathological conditions (e.g., trauma, disease, injury, malignancy), to alter bodily functions (e.g., malabsorption created by bariatric surgery such as gastric bypass), to reconstruct or alter aesthetics and appearance (cosmetic surgery), or to remove unwanted tissues, neoplasms, or foreign bodies.\nThe act of performing surgery may be called a surgical procedure or surgical operation, or simply \"surgery\" or \"operation\". In this context, the verb \"operate\" means to perform surgery. The adjective surgical means pertaining to surgery; e.g. surgical instruments, surgical facility or surgical nurse. Most surgical procedures are performed by a pair of operators: a surgeon who is the main operator performing the surgery, and a surgical assistant who provides in-procedure manual assistance during surgery. Modern surgical operations typically require a surgical team that typically consists of the surgeon, the surgical assistant, an anaesthetist (often also complemented by an anaesthetic nurse), a scrub nurse (who handles sterile equipment), a circulating nurse and a surgical technologist, while procedures that mandate cardiopulmonary bypass will also have a perfusionist. All surgical procedures are considered \"invasive\" and often require a period of \"postoperative\" care (sometimes intensive care) for the patient to recover from the iatrogenic trauma inflicted by the procedure. The duration of surgery can span from several minutes to tens of hours depending on the specialty, the nature of the condition, the target body parts involved and the circumstance of each procedure, but most surgeries are designed to be one-off interventions that are typically not intended as an ongoing or repeated type of treatment.\nIn British colloquialism, the term \"surgery\" can also refer to the facility where surgery is performed, or simply the office/clinic of a physician, dentist or veterinarian.\nDefinitions.\nAs a general rule, a procedure is considered surgical when it involves cutting of a person's tissues or closure of a previously sustained wound. Other procedures that do not necessarily fall under this rubric, such as angioplasty or endoscopy, may be considered surgery if they involve \"common\" surgical procedure or settings, such as use of antiseptic measures and sterile fields, sedation/anesthesia, proactive hemostasis, typical surgical instruments, suturing or stapling. All forms of surgery are considered invasive procedures; the so-called \"noninvasive surgery\" ought to be more appropriately called minimally invasive procedures, which usually refers to a procedure that utilizes natural orifices (e.g. most urological procedures) or does not penetrate the structure being excised (e.g. endoscopic polyp excision, rubber band ligation, laser eye surgery), are percutaneous (e.g. arthroscopy, catheter ablation, angioplasty and valvuloplasty), or to a radiosurgical procedure (e.g. irradiation of a tumor).\nTypes of surgery.\nSurgical procedures are commonly categorized by urgency, type of procedure, body system involved, the degree of invasiveness, and special instrumentation.\nDescription of surgical procedure.\nSetting.\nInpatient surgery is performed in a hospital, and the person undergoing surgery stays at least one night in the hospital after the surgery. Outpatient surgery occurs in a hospital outpatient department or freestanding ambulatory surgery center, and the person who had surgery is discharged the same working day. Office-based surgery occurs in a physician's office, and the person is discharged the same day.\nAt a hospital, modern surgery is often performed in an operating theater using surgical instruments, an operating table, and other equipment. Among United States hospitalizations for non-maternal and non-neonatal conditions in 2012, more than one-fourth of stays and half of hospital costs involved stays that included operating room (OR) procedures. The environment and procedures used in surgery are governed by the principles of aseptic technique: the strict separation of \"sterile\" (free of microorganisms) things from \"unsterile\" or \"contaminated\" things. All surgical instruments must be sterilized, and an instrument must be replaced or re-sterilized if it becomes contaminated (i.e. handled in an unsterile manner, or allowed to touch an unsterile surface). Operating room staff must wear sterile attire (scrubs, a scrub cap, a sterile surgical gown, sterile latex or non-latex polymer gloves and a surgical mask), and they must scrub hands and arms with an approved disinfectant agent before each procedure.\nPreoperative care.\nPrior to surgery, the person is given a medical examination, receives certain pre-operative tests, and their physical status is rated according to the ASA physical status classification system. If these results are satisfactory, the person requiring surgery signs a consent form and is given a surgical clearance. If the procedure is expected to result in significant blood loss, an autologous blood donation may be made some weeks prior to surgery. If the surgery involves the digestive system, the person requiring surgery may be instructed to perform a bowel prep by drinking a solution of polyethylene glycol the night before the procedure. People preparing for surgery are also instructed to abstain from food or drink (an NPO order after midnight on the night before the procedure), to minimize the effect of stomach contents on pre-operative medications and reduce the risk of aspiration if the person vomits during or after the procedure.\nSome medical systems have a practice of routinely performing chest x-rays before surgery. The premise behind this practice is that the physician might discover some unknown medical condition which would complicate the surgery, and that upon discovering this with the chest x-ray, the physician would adapt the surgery practice accordingly. However, medical specialty professional organizations recommend against routine pre-operative chest x-rays for people who have an unremarkable medical history and presented with a physical exam which did not indicate a chest x-ray. Routine x-ray examination is more likely to result in problems like misdiagnosis, overtreatment, or other negative outcomes than it is to result in a benefit to the person. Likewise, other tests including complete blood count, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, basic metabolic panel, and urinalysis should not be done unless the results of these tests can help evaluate surgical risk.\nPreparing for surgery.\nA surgical team may include a surgeon, anesthetist, a circulating nurse, and a \"scrub tech\", or surgical technician, as well as other assistants who provide equipment and supplies as required. While informed consent discussions may be performed in a clinic or acute care setting, the pre-operative holding area is where documentation is reviewed and where family members can also meet the surgical team. Nurses in the preoperative holding area confirm orders and answer additional questions of the family members of the patient prior to surgery. In the pre-operative holding area, the person preparing for surgery changes out of their street clothes and are asked to confirm the details of his or her surgery as previously discussed during the process of informed consent. A set of vital signs are recorded, a peripheral IV line is placed, and pre-operative medications (antibiotics, sedatives, etc.) are given.\nWhen the patient enters the operating room and is appropriately anesthetized, the team will then position the patient in an appropriate surgical position. If hair is present at the surgical site, it is clipped (instead of shaving). The skin surface within the operating field is cleansed and prepared by applying an antiseptic (typically chlorhexidine gluconate in alcohol, as this is twice as effective as povidone-iodine at reducing the risk of infection). Sterile drapes are then used to cover the borders of the operating field. Depending on the type of procedure, the cephalad drapes are secured to a pair of poles near the head of the bed to form an \"ether screen\", which separate the anesthetist/anesthesiologist's working area (unsterile) from the surgical site (sterile).\nAnesthesia is administered to prevent pain from the trauma of cutting, tissue manipulation, application of thermal energy, and suturing. Depending on the type of operation, anesthesia may be provided locally, regionally, or as general anesthesia. Spinal anesthesia may be used when the surgical site is too large or deep for a local block, but general anesthesia may not be desirable. With local and spinal anesthesia, the surgical site is anesthetized, but the person can remain conscious or minimally sedated. In contrast, general anesthesia may render the person unconscious and paralyzed during surgery. The person is typically intubated to protect their airway and placed on a mechanical ventilator, and anesthesia is produced by a combination of injected and inhaled agents. The choice of surgical method and anesthetic technique aims to solve the indicated problem, minimize the risk of complications, optimize the time needed for recovery, and limit the surgical stress response.\nIntraoperative phase.\nThe intraoperative phase begins when the surgery subject is received in the surgical area (such as the operating theater or surgical department), and lasts until the subject is transferred to a recovery area (such as a post-anesthesia care unit).\nAn incision is made to access the surgical site. Blood vessels may be clamped or cauterized to prevent bleeding, and retractors may be used to expose the site or keep the incision open. The approach to the surgical site may involve several layers of incision and dissection, as in abdominal surgery, where the incision must traverse skin, subcutaneous tissue, three layers of muscle and then the peritoneum. In certain cases, bone may be cut to further access the interior of the body; for example, cutting the skull for brain surgery or cutting the sternum for thoracic (chest) surgery to open up the rib cage. Whilst in surgery aseptic technique is used to prevent infection or further spreading of the disease. The surgeons' and assistants' hands, wrists and forearms are washed thoroughly for at least 4 minutes to prevent germs getting into the operative field, then sterile gloves are placed onto their hands. An antiseptic solution is applied to the area of the person's body that will be operated on. Sterile drapes are placed around the operative site. Surgical masks are worn by the surgical team to avoid germs on droplets of liquid from their mouths and noses from contaminating the operative site.\nWork to correct the problem in body then proceeds. This work may involve:\n*clearing clogged ducts, blood or other vessels\n*removal of calculi (stones)\n*draining of accumulated fluids\n*debridement \u2013 removal of dead, damaged, or diseased tissue\nBlood or blood expanders may be administered to compensate for blood lost during surgery. Once the procedure is complete, sutures or staples are used to close the incision. Once the incision is closed, the anesthetic agents are stopped or reversed, and the person is taken off ventilation and extubated (if general anesthesia was administered).\nPostoperative care.\nAfter completion of surgery, the person is transferred to the post anesthesia care unit and closely monitored. When the person is judged to have recovered from the anesthesia, he/she is either transferred to a surgical ward elsewhere in the hospital or discharged home. During the post-operative period, the person's general function is assessed, the outcome of the procedure is assessed, and the surgical site is checked for signs of infection. There are several risk factors associated with postoperative complications, such as immune deficiency and obesity. Obesity has long been considered a risk factor for adverse post-surgical outcomes. It has been linked to many disorders such as obesity hypoventilation syndrome, atelectasis and pulmonary embolism, adverse cardiovascular effects, and wound healing complications. If removable skin closures are used, they are removed after 7 to 10 days post-operatively, or after healing of the incision is well under way.\nIt is not uncommon for surgical drains to be required to remove blood or fluid from the surgical wound during recovery. Mostly these drains stay in until the volume tapers off, then they are removed. These drains can become clogged, leading to abscess.\nPostoperative therapy may include adjuvant treatment such as chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or administration of medication such as anti-rejection medication for transplants. For postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV), solutions like saline, water, controlled breathing placebo and aromatherapy can be used in addition to medication. Other follow-up studies or rehabilitation may be prescribed during and after the recovery period. A recent post-operative care philosophy has been early ambulation. Ambulation is getting the patient moving around. This can be as simple as sitting up or even walking around. The goal is to get the patient moving as early as possible. It has been found to shorten the patient's length of stay. Length of stay is the amount of time a patient spends in the hospital after surgery before they are discharged. In a recent study done with lumbar decompressions, the patient's length of stay was decreased by 1\u20133 days.\nThe use of topical antibiotics on surgical wounds to reduce infection rates has been questioned. Antibiotic ointments are likely to irritate the skin, slow healing, and could increase risk of developing contact dermatitis and antibiotic resistance. It has also been suggested that topical antibiotics should only be used when a person shows signs of infection and not as a preventative. A systematic review published by Cochrane (organisation) in 2016, though, concluded that topical antibiotics applied over certain types of surgical wounds reduce the risk of surgical site infections, when compared to no treatment or use of antiseptics. The review also did not find conclusive evidence to suggest that topical antibiotics increased the risk of local skin reactions or antibiotic resistance.\nThrough a retrospective analysis of national administrative data, the association between mortality and day of elective surgical procedure suggests a higher risk in procedures carried out later in the working week and on weekends. The odds of death were 44% and 82% higher respectively when comparing procedures on a Friday to a weekend procedure. This \"weekday effect\" has been postulated to be from several factors including poorer availability of services on a weekend, and also, decrease number and level of experience over a weekend.\nPostoperative pain affects an estimated 80% of people who underwent surgery. While pain is expected after surgery, there is growing evidence that pain may be inadequately treated in many people in the acute period immediately after surgery. It has been reported that incidence of inadequately controlled pain after surgery ranged from 25.1% to 78.4% across all surgical disciplines. There is insufficient evidence to determine if giving opioid pain medication pre-emptively (before surgery) reduces postoperative pain the amount of medication needed after surgery.\nPostoperative recovery has been defined as an energy\u2010requiring process to decrease physical symptoms, reach a level of emotional well\u2010being, regain functions, and re\u2010establish activities. Most people are discharged from the hospital or surgical center before they are fully recovered. The recovery process may include complications such as postoperative cognitive dysfunction and postoperative depression.\nEpidemiology.\nUnited States.\nIn 2011, of the 38.6\u00a0million hospital stays in U.S. hospitals, 29% included at least one operating room procedure. These stays accounted for 48% of the total $387\u00a0billion in hospital costs.\nThe overall number of procedures remained stable from 2001 to 2011. In 2011, over 15 million operating room procedures were performed in U.S. hospitals.\nData from 2003 to 2011 showed that U.S. hospital costs were highest for the surgical service line; the surgical service line costs were $17,600 in 2003 and projected to be $22,500 in 2013. For hospital stays in 2012 in the United States, private insurance had the highest percentage of surgical expenditure. in 2012, mean hospital costs in the United States were highest for surgical stays.\nSpecial populations.\nElderly people.\nOlder adults have widely varying physical health. Frail elderly people are at significant risk of post-surgical complications and the need for extended care. Assessment of older people before elective surgery can accurately predict the person's recovery trajectories. One frailty scale uses five items: unintentional weight loss, muscle weakness, exhaustion, low physical activity, and slowed walking speed. A healthy person scores 0; a very frail person scores 5. Compared to non-frail elderly people, people with intermediate frailty scores (2 or 3) are twice as likely to have post-surgical complications, spend 50% more time in the hospital, and are three times as likely to be discharged to a skilled nursing facility instead of to their own homes. People who are frail and elderly (score of 4 or 5) have even worse outcomes, with the risk of being discharged to a nursing home rising to twenty times the rate for non-frail elderly people.\nChildren.\nSurgery on children requires considerations that are not common in adult surgery. Children and adolescents are still developing physically and mentally making it difficult for them to make informed decisions and give consent for surgical treatments. Bariatric surgery in youth is among the controversial topics related to surgery in children.\nVulnerable populations.\nDoctors perform surgery with the consent of the person undergoing surgery. Some people are able to give better informed consent than others. Populations such as incarcerated persons, people living with dementia, the mentally incompetent, persons subject to coercion, and other people who are not able to make decisions with the same authority as others, have special needs when making decisions about their personal healthcare, including surgery.\nGlobal surgery.\nGlobal surgery has been defined as 'the multidisciplinary enterprise of providing improved and equitable surgical care to the world's population, with its core belief as the issues of need, access and quality\". Halfdan T. Mahler, the 3rd Director-General of the World Health Organization (WHO), first brought attention to the disparities in surgery and surgical care in 1980 when he stated in his address to the World Congress of the International College of Surgeons, \"'the vast majority of the world's population has no access whatsoever to skilled surgical care and little is being done to find a solution.As such, surgical care globally has been described as the 'neglected stepchild of global health,' a term coined by Paul Farmer to highlight the urgent need for further work in this area. Furthermore, Jim Young Kim, the former President of the World Bank, proclaimed in 2014 that \"surgery is an indivisible, indispensable part of health care and of progress towards universal health coverage.\"\nIn 2015, the Lancet Commission on Global Surgery (LCoGS) published the landmark report titled \"Global Surgery 2030: evidence and solutions for achieving health, welfare, and economic development\", describing the large, pre-existing burden of surgical diseases in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) and future directions for increasing universal access to safe surgery by the year 2030. The Commission highlighted that about 5 billion people lack access to safe and affordable surgical and anesthesia care and 143 million additional procedures were needed every year to prevent further morbidity and mortality from treatable surgical conditions as well as a $12.3 trillion loss in economic productivity by the year 2030. This was especially true in the poorest countries, which account for over one-third of the population but only 3.5% of all surgeries that occur worldwide. It emphasized the need to significantly improve the capacity for Bellwether procedures \u2013 laparotomy, caesarean section, open fracture care \u2013 which are considered a minimum level of care that first-level hospitals should be able to provide in order to capture the most basic emergency surgical care. In terms of the financial impact on the patients, the lack of adequate surgical and anesthesia care has resulted in 33 million individuals every year facing catastrophic health expenditure \u2013 the out-of-pocket healthcare cost exceeding 40% of a given household's income.\nIn alignment with the LCoGS call for action, the World Health Assembly adopted the resolution WHA68.15 in 2015 that stated, \"Strengthening emergency and essential surgical care and anesthesia as a component of universal health coverage.\" This not only mandated the WHO to prioritize strengthening the surgical and anesthesia care globally, but also led to governments of the member states recognizing the urgent need for increasing capacity in surgery and anesthesia. Additionally, the third edition of Disease Control Priorities (DCP3), published in 2015 by the World Bank, declared surgery as essential and featured an entire volume dedicated to building surgical capacity.\nData from WHO and the World Bank indicate that scaling up infrastructure to enable access to surgical care in regions where it is currently limited or is non-existent is a low-cost measure relative to the significant morbidity and mortality caused by lack of surgical treatment. In fact, a systematic review found that the cost-effectiveness ratio \u2013 dollars spent per DALYs averted \u2013 for surgical interventions is on par or exceeds those of major public health interventions such as oral rehydration therapy, breastfeeding promotion, and even HIV/AIDS antiretroviral therapy. This finding challenged the common misconception that surgical care is financially prohibitive endeavor not worth pursuing in LMICs.\nA key policy framework that arose from this renewed global commitment towards surgical care worldwide is the National Surgical Obstetric and Anesthesia Plan (NSOAP). NSOAP focuses on policy-to-action capacity building for surgical care with tangible steps as follows: (1) analysis of baseline indicators, (2) partnership with local champions, (3) broad stakeholder engagement, (4) consensus building and synthesis of ideas, (5) language refinement, (6) costing, (7) dissemination, and (8) implementation. This approach has been widely adopted and has served as guiding principles between international collaborators and local institutions and governments. Successful implementations have allowed for sustainability in terms of longterm monitoring, quality improvement, and continued political and financial support.\nHuman rights.\nAccess to surgical care is increasingly recognized as an integral aspect of healthcare and therefore is evolving into a normative derivation of human right to health. The ICESCR Article 12.1 and 12.2 define the human right to health as \"the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health\" In the August 2000, the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) interpreted this to mean \"right to the enjoyment of a variety of facilities, goods, services, and conditions necessary for the realization of the highest attainable health\". Surgical care can be thereby viewed as a positive right \u2013 an entitlement to protective healthcare.\nWoven through the International Human and Health Rights literature is the right to be free from surgical disease. The 1966 ICESCR Article 12.2a described the need for \"provision for the reduction of the stillbirth-rate and of infant mortality and for the healthy development of the child\" which was subsequently interpreted to mean \"requiring measures to improve... emergency obstetric services\". Article 12.2d of the ICESCR stipulates the need for \"the creation of conditions which would assure to all medical service and medical attention in the event of sickness\", and is interpreted in the 2000 comment to include timely access to \"basic preventative, curative services... for appropriate treatment of injury and disability.\". Obstetric care shares close ties with reproductive rights, which includes access to reproductive health.\nSurgeons and public health advocates, such as Kelly McQueen, have described surgery as \"Integral to the right to health\". This is reflected in the establishment of the WHO Global Initiative for Emergency and Essential Surgical Care in 2005, the 2013 formation of the Lancet Commission for Global Surgery, the 2015 World Bank Publication of Volume 1 of its Disease Control Priorities Project \"Essential Surgery\", and the 2015 World Health Assembly 68.15 passing of the Resolution for Strengthening Emergency and Essential Surgical Care and Anesthesia as a Component of Universal Health Coverage. The Lancet Commission for Global Surgery outlined the need for access to \"available, affordable, timely and safe\" surgical and anesthesia care; dimensions paralleled in ICESCR General Comment No. 14, which similarly outlines need for available, accessible, affordable and timely healthcare.\nHistory.\nTrepanation.\nSurgical treatments date back to the prehistoric era. The oldest for which there is evidence is trepanation, in which a hole is drilled or scraped into the skull, thus exposing the dura mater in order to treat health problems related to intracranial pressure.\nAncient Egypt.\nPrehistoric surgical techniques are seen in Ancient Egypt, where a mandible dated to approximately 2650 BC shows two perforations just below the root of the first molar, indicating the draining of an abscessed tooth. Surgical texts from ancient Egypt date back about 3500 years ago. Surgical operations were performed by priests, specialized in medical treatments similar to today, and used sutures to close wounds. Infections were treated with honey.\nIndia.\n\"Sushruta Samhita\" is one of the oldest known surgical texts and its period is usually placed in the first millennium BCE. It describes in detail the examination, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of numerous ailments, as well as procedures for various forms of cosmetic surgery, plastic surgery and rhinoplasty.\nSri Lanka.\nIn 1982 archaeologists were able to find significant evidence when the ancient land, called 'Alahana Pirivena' situated in Polonnaruwa, with ruins, was excavated. In that place ruins of an ancient hospital emerged. The hospital building was 147.5 feet in width and 109.2 feet in length. The instruments which were used for complex surgeries were there among the things discovered from the place, including forceps, scissors, probes, lancets, and scalpels. The instruments discovered may be dated to 11th century AD.\nAncient and Medieval Greece.\nIn ancient Greece, temples dedicated to the healer-god Asclepius, known as \"Asclepieia\" (, sing. \"Asclepieion\" \"\u0391\u03c3\u03ba\u03bb\u03b7\u03c0\u03b9\u03b5\u03af\u03bf\u03bd\"), functioned as centers of medical advice, prognosis, and healing. In the Asclepieion of Epidaurus, some of the surgical cures listed, such as the opening of an abdominal abscess or the removal of traumatic foreign material, are realistic enough to have taken place. The Greek Galen was one of the greatest surgeons of the ancient world and performed many audacious operations\u00a0\u2013 including brain and eye surgery\u00a0\u2013 that were not tried again for almost two millennia. Hippocrates stated in the oath (c.\u2009400 BCE) \"I will not use the knife, even upon those suffering from stones, but I will leave this to those who are trained in this craft.\"\nResearchers from the Adelphi University discovered in the Paliokastro on Thasos ten skeletal remains, four women and six men, who were buried between the fourth and seventh centuries A.D. Their bones illuminated their physical activities, traumas, and even a complex form of brain surgery. According to the researchers: \"The very serious trauma cases sustained by both males and females had been treated surgically or orthopedically by a very experienced physician/surgeon with great training in trauma care. We believe it to have been a military physician\". The researchers were impressed by the complexity of the brain surgical operation.\nIn 1991 at the Polystylon fort in Greece, researchers discovered the head of a Byzantine warrior of the 14th century. Analysis of the lower jaw revealed that a surgery has been performed, when the warrior was alive, to the jaw which had been badly fractured and it tied back together until it healed.\nIslamic world.\nDuring the Islamic Golden Age, largely based upon Paul of Aegina's \"Pragmateia\", the writings of Albucasis (Abu al-Qasim Khalaf ibn al-Abbas Al-Zahrawi), an Andalusian-Arab physician and scientist who practiced in the Zahra suburb of C\u00f3rdoba, were influential. Al-Zahrawi specialized in curing disease by cauterization. He invented several surgical instruments for purposes such as inspection of the interior of the urethra and for removing foreign bodies from the throat, the ear, and other body organs. He was also the first to illustrate the various cannulae and to treat warts with an iron tube and caustic metal as a boring instrument. He describes what is thought to be the first attempt at reduction mammaplasty for the management of gynaecomastia and the first mastectomy to treat breast cancer. He is credited with the performance of the first thyroidectomy. Al-Zahrawi pioneered techniques of neurosurgery and neurological diagnosis, treating head injuries, skull fractures, spinal injuries, hydrocephalus, subdural effusions and headache. The first clinical description of an operative procedure for hydrocephalus was given by Al-Zahrawi, who clearly describes the evacuation of superficial intracranial fluid in hydrocephalic children.\nEarly modern Europe.\nIn Europe, the demand grew for surgeons to formally study for many years before practicing; universities such as Montpellier, Padua and Bologna were particularly renowned. In the 12th century, Rogerius Salernitanus composed his \"Chirurgia\", laying the foundation for modern Western surgical manuals. Barber-surgeons generally had a bad reputation that was not to improve until the development of academic surgery as a specialty of medicine, rather than an accessory field. Basic surgical principles for asepsis etc., are known as Halsteads principles.\nThere were some important advances to the art of surgery during this period. The professor of anatomy at the University of Padua, Andreas Vesalius, was a pivotal figure in the Renaissance transition from classical medicine and anatomy based on the works of Galen, to an empirical approach of 'hands-on' dissection. In his anatomic treaties \"De humani corporis fabrica\", he exposed the many anatomical errors in Galen and advocated that all surgeons should train by engaging in practical dissections themselves.\nThe second figure of importance in this era was Ambroise Par\u00e9 (sometimes spelled \"Ambrose\"), a French army surgeon from the 1530s until his death in 1590. The practice for cauterizing gunshot wounds on the battlefield had been to use boiling oil; an extremely dangerous and painful procedure. Par\u00e9 began to employ a less irritating emollient, made of egg yolk, rose oil and turpentine. He also described more efficient techniques for the effective ligation of the blood vessels during an amputation.\nModern surgery.\nThe discipline of surgery was put on a sound, scientific footing during the Age of Enlightenment in Europe. An important figure in this regard was the Scottish surgical scientist, John Hunter, generally regarded as the father of modern scientific surgery. He brought an empirical and experimental approach to the science and was renowned around Europe for the quality of his research and his written works. Hunter reconstructed surgical knowledge from scratch; refusing to rely on the testimonies of others, he conducted his own surgical experiments to determine the truth of the matter. To aid comparative analysis, he built up a collection of over 13,000 specimens of separate organ systems, from the simplest plants and animals to humans.\nHe greatly advanced knowledge of venereal disease and introduced many new techniques of surgery, including new methods for repairing damage to the Achilles tendon and a more effective method for applying ligature of the arteries in case of an aneurysm. He was also one of the first to understand the importance of pathology, the danger of the spread of infection and how the problem of inflammation of the wound, bone lesions and even tuberculosis often undid any benefit that was gained from the intervention. He consequently adopted the position that all surgical procedures should be used only as a last resort.\nOther important 18th- and early 19th-century surgeons included Percival Pott (1713\u20131788) who described tuberculosis on the spine and first demonstrated that a cancer may be caused by an environmental carcinogen (he noticed a connection between chimney sweep's exposure to soot and their high incidence of scrotal cancer). Astley Paston Cooper (1768\u20131841) first performed a successful ligation of the abdominal aorta, and James Syme (1799\u20131870) pioneered the Symes Amputation for the ankle joint and successfully carried out the first hip disarticulation.\nModern pain control through anesthesia was discovered in the mid-19th century. Before the advent of anesthesia, surgery was a traumatically painful procedure and surgeons were encouraged to be as swift as possible to minimize patient suffering. This also meant that operations were largely restricted to amputations and external growth removals. Beginning in the 1840s, surgery began to change dramatically in character with the discovery of effective and practical anaesthetic chemicals such as ether, first used by the American surgeon Crawford Long, and chloroform, discovered by Scottish obstetrician James Young Simpson and later pioneered by John Snow, physician to Queen Victoria. In addition to relieving patient suffering, anaesthesia allowed more intricate operations in the internal regions of the human body. In addition, the discovery of muscle relaxants such as curare allowed for safer applications.\nInfection and antisepsis.\nThe introduction of anesthetics encouraged more surgery, which inadvertently caused more dangerous patient post-operative infections. The concept of infection was unknown until relatively modern times. The first progress in combating infection was made in 1847 by the Hungarian doctor Ignaz Semmelweis who noticed that medical students fresh from the dissecting room were causing excess maternal death compared to midwives. Semmelweis, despite ridicule and opposition, introduced compulsory handwashing for everyone entering the maternal wards and was rewarded with a plunge in maternal and fetal deaths; however, the Royal Society dismissed his advice.\nUntil the pioneering work of British surgeon Joseph Lister in the 1860s, most medical men believed that chemical damage from exposures to bad air (see \"miasma\") was responsible for infections in wounds, and facilities for washing hands or a patient's wounds were not available. Lister became aware of the work of French chemist Louis Pasteur, who showed that rotting and fermentation could occur under anaerobic conditions if micro-organisms were present. Pasteur suggested three methods to eliminate the micro-organisms responsible for gangrene: filtration, exposure to heat, or exposure to chemical solutions. Lister confirmed Pasteur's conclusions with his own experiments and decided to use his findings to develop antiseptic techniques for wounds. As the first two methods suggested by Pasteur were inappropriate for the treatment of human tissue, Lister experimented with the third, spraying carbolic acid on his instruments. He found that this remarkably reduced the incidence of gangrene and he published his results in \"The Lancet\". Later, on 9 August 1867, he read a paper before the British Medical Association in Dublin, on the \"Antiseptic Principle of the Practice of Surgery\", which was reprinted in the \"British Medical Journal\". His work was groundbreaking and laid the foundations for a rapid advance in infection control that saw modern antiseptic operating theatres widely used within 50 years.\nLister continued to develop improved methods of antisepsis and asepsis when he realised that infection could be better avoided by preventing bacteria from getting into wounds in the first place. This led to the rise of sterile surgery. Lister introduced the Steam Steriliser to sterilize equipment, instituted rigorous hand washing and later implemented the wearing of rubber gloves. These three crucial advances \u2013 the adoption of a scientific methodology toward surgical operations, the use of anaesthetic and the introduction of sterilised equipment \u2013 laid the groundwork for the modern invasive surgical techniques of today.\nThe use of X-rays as an important medical diagnostic tool began with their discovery in 1895 by German physicist Wilhelm R\u00f6ntgen. He noticed that these rays could penetrate the skin, allowing the skeletal structure to be captured on a specially treated photographic plate.\nSurgical specialties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLearned societies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nList of Surgery-related fields.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45600", "revid": "6783346", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45600", "title": "Reed\u2013Solomon error correction", "text": "Error-correcting codes\nIn information theory and coding theory, Reed\u2013Solomon codes are a group of error-correcting codes that were introduced by Irving S. Reed and Gustave Solomon in 1960.\nThey have many applications, including consumer technologies such as MiniDiscs, CDs, DVDs, Blu-ray discs, QR codes, Data Matrix, data transmission technologies such as DSL and WiMAX, broadcast systems such as satellite communications, DVB and ATSC, and storage systems such as RAID 6.\nReed\u2013Solomon codes operate on a block of data treated as a set of finite-field elements called symbols. Reed\u2013Solomon codes RS(\"n\", \"k\") are able to detect and correct multiple symbol errors. By adding \"t\" \n \"n\" \u2212 \"k\" check symbols to the data, a Reed\u2013Solomon code can detect (but not correct) any combination of up to t erroneous symbols, \"or\" locate and correct up to \u230a\"t\"/2\u230b erroneous symbols at unknown locations. As an erasure code, it can correct up to t erasures at locations that are known and provided to the algorithm, or it can detect and correct combinations of errors and erasures. Reed\u2013Solomon codes are also suitable as multiple-burst bit-error correcting codes, since a sequence of \"b\"\u00a0+\u00a01 consecutive bit errors can affect at most two symbols of size b. The choice of t is up to the designer of the code and may be selected within wide limits.\nThere are two basic types of Reed\u2013Solomon codes\u00a0\u2013 original view and BCH view\u00a0\u2013 with BCH view being the most common, as BCH view decoders are faster and require less working storage than original view decoders.\nHistory.\nReed\u2013Solomon codes were developed in 1960 by Irving S. Reed and Gustave Solomon, who were then staff members of MIT Lincoln Laboratory. Their seminal article was titled \"Polynomial Codes over Certain Finite Fields\". The original encoding scheme described in the Reed and Solomon article used a variable polynomial based on the message to be encoded where only a fixed set of values (evaluation points) to be encoded are known to encoder and decoder. The original theoretical decoder generated potential polynomials based on subsets of \"k\" (unencoded message length) out of \"n\" (encoded message length) values of a received message, choosing the most popular polynomial as the correct one, which was impractical for all but the simplest of cases. This was initially resolved by changing the original scheme to a BCH-code-like scheme based on a fixed polynomial known to both encoder and decoder, but later, practical decoders based on the original scheme were developed, although slower than the BCH schemes. The result of this is that there are two main types of Reed\u2013Solomon codes: ones that use the original encoding scheme and ones that use the BCH encoding scheme.\nAlso in 1960, a practical fixed polynomial decoder for BCH codes developed by Daniel Gorenstein and Neal Zierler was described in an MIT Lincoln Laboratory report by Zierler in January 1960 and later in an article in June 1961. The Gorenstein\u2013Zierler decoder and the related work on BCH codes are described in a book \"Error-Correcting Codes\" by W. Wesley Peterson (1961). By 1963 (or possibly earlier), J.J. Stone (and others) recognized that Reed\u2013Solomon codes could use the BCH scheme of using a fixed generator polynomial, making such codes a special class of BCH codes, but Reed\u2013Solomon codes based on the original encoding scheme are not a class of BCH codes, and depending on the set of evaluation points, they are not even cyclic codes.\nIn 1969, an improved BCH scheme decoder was developed by Elwyn Berlekamp and James Massey and has since been known as the Berlekamp\u2013Massey decoding algorithm.\nIn 1975, another improved BCH scheme decoder was developed by Yasuo Sugiyama, based on the extended Euclidean algorithm.\nIn 1977, Reed\u2013Solomon codes were implemented in the Voyager program in the form of concatenated error correction codes. The first commercial application in mass-produced consumer products appeared in 1982 with the compact disc, where two interleaved Reed\u2013Solomon codes are used. Today, Reed\u2013Solomon codes are widely implemented in digital storage devices and digital communication standards, though they are being slowly replaced by Bose\u2013Chaudhuri\u2013Hocquenghem (BCH) codes. For example, Reed\u2013Solomon codes are used in the Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) standard DVB-S, in conjunction with a convolutional inner code, but BCH codes are used with LDPC in its successor, DVB-S2.\nIn 1986, an original scheme decoder known as the Berlekamp\u2013Welch algorithm was developed.\nIn 1996, variations of original scheme decoders called list decoders or soft decoders were developed by Madhu Sudan and others, and work continues on these types of decoders (see Guruswami\u2013Sudan list decoding algorithm).\nIn 2002, another original scheme decoder was developed by Shuhong Gao, based on the extended Euclidean algorithm.\nApplications.\nData storage.\nReed\u2013Solomon coding is very widely used in mass storage systems to correct\nthe burst errors associated with media defects.\nReed\u2013Solomon coding is a key component of the compact disc. It was the first use of strong error correction coding in a mass-produced consumer product, and DAT and DVD use similar schemes. In the CD, two layers of Reed\u2013Solomon coding separated by a 28-way convolutional interleaver yields a scheme called Cross-Interleaved Reed\u2013Solomon Coding (CIRC). The first element of a CIRC decoder is a relatively weak inner (32,28) Reed\u2013Solomon code, shortened from a (255,251) code with 8-bit symbols. This code can correct up to 2 byte errors per 32-byte block. More importantly, it flags as erasures any uncorrectable blocks, i.e., blocks with more than 2 byte errors. The decoded 28-byte blocks, with erasure indications, are then spread by the deinterleaver to different blocks of the (28,24) outer code. Thanks to the deinterleaving, an erased 28-byte block from the inner code becomes a single erased byte in each of 28 outer code blocks. The outer code easily corrects this, since it can handle up to 4 such erasures per block.\nThe result is a CIRC that can completely correct error bursts up to 4000 bits, or about 2.5\u00a0mm on the disc surface. This code is so strong that most CD playback errors are almost certainly caused by tracking errors that cause the laser to jump track, not by uncorrectable error bursts.\nDVDs use a similar scheme, but with much larger blocks, a (208,192) inner code, and a (182,172) outer code.\nReed\u2013Solomon error correction is also used in parchive files which are commonly posted accompanying multimedia files on USENET. The distributed online storage service Wuala (discontinued in 2015) also used Reed\u2013Solomon when breaking up files.\nBar code.\nAlmost all two-dimensional bar codes such as PDF-417, MaxiCode, Datamatrix, QR Code, Aztec Code and Han Xin code use Reed\u2013Solomon error correction to allow correct reading even if a portion of the bar code is damaged. When the bar code scanner cannot recognize a bar code symbol, it will treat it as an erasure.\nReed\u2013Solomon coding is less common in one-dimensional bar codes, but is used by the PostBar symbology.\nData transmission.\nSpecialized forms of Reed\u2013Solomon codes, specifically Cauchy-RS and Vandermonde-RS, can be used to overcome the unreliable nature of data transmission over erasure channels. The encoding process assumes a code of RS(\"N\",\u00a0\"K\") which results in \"N\" codewords of length \"N\" symbols each storing \"K\" symbols of data, being generated, that are then sent over an erasure channel.\nAny combination of \"K\" codewords received at the other end is enough to reconstruct all of the \"N\" codewords. The code rate is generally set to 1/2 unless the channel's erasure likelihood can be adequately modelled and is seen to be less. In conclusion, \"N\" is usually 2\"K\", meaning that at least half of all the codewords sent must be received in order to reconstruct all of the codewords sent.\nReed\u2013Solomon codes are also used in xDSL systems and CCSDS's Space Communications Protocol Specifications as a form of forward error correction.\nSpace transmission.\nOne significant application of Reed\u2013Solomon coding was to encode the digital pictures sent back by the Voyager program.\nVoyager introduced Reed\u2013Solomon coding concatenated with convolutional codes, a practice that has since become very widespread in deep space and satellite (e.g., direct digital broadcasting) communications.\nViterbi decoders tend to produce errors in short bursts. Correcting these burst errors is a job best done by short or simplified Reed\u2013Solomon codes.\nModern versions of concatenated Reed\u2013Solomon/Viterbi-decoded convolutional coding were and are used on the Mars Pathfinder, Galileo, Mars Exploration Rover and Cassini missions, where they perform within about 1\u20131.5 dB of the ultimate limit, the Shannon capacity.\nThese concatenated codes are now being replaced by more powerful turbo codes:\nConstructions (encoding).\nThe Reed\u2013Solomon code is actually a family of codes, where every code is characterised by three parameters: an alphabet size q, a block length n, and a message length k\",\" with formula_1. The set of alphabet symbols is interpreted as the finite field formula_2 of order formula_3, and thus, formula_3 must be a prime power. In the most useful parameterizations of the Reed\u2013Solomon code, the block length is usually some constant multiple of the message length, that is, the rate formula_5 is some constant, and furthermore, the block length is either equal to the alphabet size or one less than it, i.e., formula_6 or formula_7.\nReed &amp; Solomon's original view: The codeword as a sequence of values.\nThere are different encoding procedures for the Reed\u2013Solomon code, and thus, there are different ways to describe the set of all codewords.\nIn the original view of Reed and Solomon, every codeword of the Reed\u2013Solomon code is a sequence of function values of a polynomial of degree less than formula_8. In order to obtain a codeword of the Reed\u2013Solomon code, the message symbols (each within the q-sized alphabet) are treated as the coefficients of a polynomial formula_9 of degree less than formula_8, over the finite field formula_2 with formula_3 elements.\nIn turn, the polynomial formula_9 is evaluated at a set of formula_14 distinct points in any order formula_15 of the field formula_2, and the sequence of values is the corresponding codeword. Common choices for a set of evaluation points include formula_17, formula_18, or for formula_19, formula_20, ... , where formula_21 is a primitive element of formula_2.\nFormally, the set formula_23 of codewords of the Reed\u2013Solomon code is defined as follows:\nformula_24\nSince any two \"distinct\" polynomials of degree less than formula_8 agree in at most formula_26 points, this means that any two codewords of the Reed\u2013Solomon code disagree in at least formula_27 positions. Furthermore, there are two polynomials that do agree in formula_26 points but are not equal, and thus, the distance of the Reed\u2013Solomon code is exactly formula_29. Then the relative distance is formula_30, where formula_31 is the rate. This trade-off between the relative distance and the rate is asymptotically optimal since, by the Singleton bound, \"every\" code satisfies formula_32.\nBeing a code that achieves this optimal trade-off, the Reed\u2013Solomon code belongs to the class of maximum distance separable codes.\nWhile the number of different polynomials of degree less than \"k\" and the number of different messages are both equal to formula_33, and thus every message can be uniquely mapped to such a polynomial, there are different ways of doing this encoding. The original construction of Reed &amp; Solomon interprets the message \"x\" as the \"coefficients\" of the polynomial \"p\", whereas subsequent constructions interpret the message as the \"values\" of the polynomial at the first \"k\" points formula_34 and obtain the polynomial \"p\" by interpolating these values with a polynomial of degree less than \"k\". The latter encoding procedure, while being slightly less efficient, has the advantage that it gives rise to a systematic code, that is, the original message is always contained as a subsequence of the codeword.\nSimple encoding procedure: The message as a sequence of coefficients.\nIn the original construction of Reed and Solomon, the message formula_35 is mapped to the polynomial formula_36 with\nformula_37\nThe codeword of formula_38 is obtained by evaluating formula_36 at formula_40 different points formula_41 of the field formula_2. Thus the classical encoding function formula_43 for the Reed\u2013Solomon code is defined as follows:\nformula_44\nThis function formula_45 is a linear mapping, that is, it satisfies formula_46 for the following formula_47-matrix formula_48 with elements from formula_2.\nformula_50\nThis matrix is a Vandermonde matrix over formula_2. In other words, the Reed\u2013Solomon code is a linear code, and in the classical encoding procedure, its generator matrix is formula_48.\nSystematic encoding procedure: The message as an initial sequence of values.\nThere are alternative encoding procedures that produce a systematic Reed\u2013Solomon code. One method uses Lagrange interpolation to compute polynomial formula_36 such that formula_54 Then formula_36 is evaluated at the other points formula_56.\nformula_44\nThis function formula_45 is a linear mapping. To generate the corresponding systematic encoding matrix G, multiply the matrix A by the inverse of A's left square submatrix.\nformula_59\nformula_60 for the following formula_47-matrix formula_62 with elements from formula_2.\nformula_64\nDiscrete Fourier transform and its inverse.\nA discrete Fourier transform is essentially the same as the encoding procedure; it uses the generator polynomial formula_36 to map a set of evaluation points into the message values as shown above:\nformula_44\nThe inverse Fourier transform could be used to convert an error free set of \"n\" &lt; \"q\" message values back into the encoding polynomial of \"k\" coefficients, with the constraint that in order for this to work, the set of evaluation points used to encode the message must be a set of increasing powers of \"\u03b1\":\nformula_67\nformula_68\nHowever, Lagrange interpolation performs the same conversion without the constraint on the set of evaluation points or the requirement of an error free set of message values and is used for systematic encoding, and in one of the steps of the Gao decoder.\nThe BCH view: The codeword as a sequence of coefficients.\nNote that BCH Code and most implementations of BCH view are most significant term first. In this view, the message is interpreted as the coefficients of a polynomial formula_69:\nformula_70\nA generator polynomial formula_71 is defined as the polynomial whose roots are sequential powers of the Galois field primitive formula_21&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\nformula_73&lt;br&gt;\nFor a \"narrow sense code\", formula_74.\nEncoding computes a codeword polynomial formula_75 that is an exact multiple of formula_71.&lt;br&gt;\nSimple encoding procedure.\nThe sender computes a related polynomial formula_77 of degree formula_78 where formula_79 and sends the polynomial formula_77. The polynomial formula_77 is constructed by multiplying the message polynomial formula_69, which has degree formula_26, with the generator polynomial formula_71 of degree formula_85 that is known to both the sender and the receiver. formula_86.\nThis function formula_45 is a linear mapping, that is, it satisfies formula_46 for the following formula_47-matrix formula_48 with elements from formula_2.\nformula_92\nformula_93 for the following formula_47 matrix formula_62 with elements from formula_2.\nformula_97\nSystematic encoding procedure.\nThe encoding procedure for the BCH view of Reed\u2013Solomon codes can be modified to yield a systematic encoding procedure, in which each codeword contains the message as a prefix, and simply appends error correcting symbols as a suffix. Here, instead of sending formula_86, the encoder constructs the transmitted polynomial formula_77 such that the coefficients of the formula_8 largest monomials are equal to the corresponding coefficients of formula_69, and the lower-order coefficients of formula_77 are chosen in such a way that formula_77 becomes exactly divisible by formula_71. Then the coefficients of formula_69 are a subsequence of the coefficients of formula_77. To get a code that is overall systematic, we construct the message polynomial formula_77 by interpreting the message as the sequence of its coefficients.\nFormally, the construction is done by multiplying formula_77 by formula_109 to make room for the formula_110 check symbols, dividing that product by formula_71 to find the remainder, and then compensating for that remainder by subtracting it. The formula_112 check symbols are created by computing the remainder formula_113:\nformula_114\nThe remainder has degree at most formula_115, whereas the coefficients of formula_116 in the polynomial formula_117 are zero. Therefore, the following definition of the codeword formula_77 has the property that the first formula_8 coefficients are identical to the coefficients of formula_77:\nformula_121\nAs a result, formula_77 is exactly divisible by formula_71:&lt;br&gt;\nformula_124\nThis function formula_45 is a linear mapping. To generate the corresponding systematic encoding matrix G, multiply the matrix A by the inverse of A's left square submatrix (or set G's left square submatrix to the identity matrix and encode each row).\nformula_126\nformula_60 for the following formula_47 matrix formula_62 with elements from formula_2.\nformula_131\nProperties.\nThe Reed\u2013Solomon code is a [\"n\", \"k\", \"n\" \u2212 \"k\" + 1] code; in other words, it is a linear block code of length \"n\" (over \"F\") with dimension \"k\" and minimum Hamming distance formula_132 The Reed\u2013Solomon code is optimal in the sense that the minimum distance has the maximum value possible for a linear code of size (\"n\",\u00a0\"k\"); this is known as the Singleton bound. Such a code is also called a maximum distance separable (MDS) code.\nThe error-correcting ability of a Reed\u2013Solomon code is determined by its minimum distance, or equivalently, by formula_133, the measure of redundancy in the block. If the locations of the error symbols are not known in advance, then a Reed\u2013Solomon code can correct up to formula_134 erroneous symbols, i.e., it can correct half as many errors as there are redundant symbols added to the block. Sometimes error locations are known in advance (e.g., \"side information\" in demodulator signal-to-noise ratios)\u2014these are called erasures. A Reed\u2013Solomon code (like any MDS code) is able to correct twice as many erasures as errors, and any combination of errors and erasures can be corrected as long as the relation 2\"E\" + \"S\" \u2264 \"n\" \u2212 \"k\" is satisfied, where formula_135 is the number of errors and formula_136 is the number of erasures in the block.\nThe theoretical error bound can be described via the following formula for the AWGN channel for FSK:\nformula_137\nand for other modulation schemes:\nformula_138\nwhere formula_139, formula_140, formula_141, formula_142 is the symbol error rate in uncoded AWGN case and formula_143 is the modulation order.\nFor practical uses of Reed\u2013Solomon codes, it is common to use a finite field formula_2 with formula_145 elements. In this case, each symbol can be represented as an formula_38-bit value.\nThe sender sends the data points as encoded blocks, and the number of symbols in the encoded block is formula_147. Thus a Reed\u2013Solomon code operating on 8-bit symbols has formula_148 symbols per block. (This is a very popular value because of the prevalence of byte-oriented computer systems.) The number formula_8, with formula_150, of \"data\" symbols in the block is a design parameter. A commonly used code encodes formula_151 eight-bit data symbols plus 32 eight-bit parity symbols in an formula_152-symbol block; this is denoted as a formula_153 code, and is capable of correcting up to 16 symbol errors per block.\nThe Reed\u2013Solomon code properties discussed above make them especially well-suited to applications where errors occur in bursts. This is because it does not matter to the code how many bits in a symbol are in error \u2014 if multiple bits in a symbol are corrupted it only counts as a single error. Conversely, if a data stream is not characterized by error bursts or drop-outs but by random single bit errors, a Reed\u2013Solomon code is usually a poor choice compared to a binary code.\nThe Reed\u2013Solomon code, like the convolutional code, is a transparent code. This means that if the channel symbols have been inverted somewhere along the line, the decoders will still operate. The result will be the inversion of the original data. However, the Reed\u2013Solomon code loses its transparency when the code is shortened (\"see 'Remarks' at the end of this section\"). The \"missing\" bits in a shortened code need to be filled by either zeros or ones, depending on whether the data is complemented or not. (To put it another way, if the symbols are inverted, then the zero-fill needs to be inverted to a one-fill.) For this reason it is mandatory that the sense of the data (i.e., true or complemented) be resolved before Reed\u2013Solomon decoding.\nWhether the Reed\u2013Solomon code is cyclic or not depends on subtle details of the construction. In the original view of Reed and Solomon, where the codewords are the values of a polynomial, one can choose the sequence of evaluation points in such a way as to make the code cyclic. In particular, if formula_21 is a primitive root of the field formula_2, then by definition all non-zero elements of formula_2 take the form formula_157 for formula_158, where formula_159. Each polynomial formula_9 over formula_2 gives rise to a codeword formula_162. Since the function formula_163 is also a polynomial of the same degree, this function gives rise to a codeword formula_164; since formula_165 holds, this codeword is the cyclic left-shift of the original codeword derived from formula_9. So choosing a sequence of primitive root powers as the evaluation points makes the original view Reed\u2013Solomon code cyclic. Reed\u2013Solomon codes in the BCH view are always cyclic because BCH codes are cyclic.\nRemarks.\nDesigners are not required to use the \"natural\" sizes of Reed\u2013Solomon code blocks. A technique known as \"shortening\" can produce a smaller code of any desired size from a larger code. For example, the widely used (255,223) code can be converted to a (160,128) code by padding the unused portion of the source block with 95 binary zeroes and not transmitting them. At the decoder, the same portion of the block is loaded locally with binary zeroes.\nThe QR code, Ver 3 (29\u00d729) uses interleaved blocks. The message has 26 data bytes and is encoded using two Reed-Solomon code blocks. Each block is a (255,233) Reed Solomon code shortened to a (35,13) code.\nThe Delsarte\u2013Goethals\u2013Seidel theorem illustrates an example of an application of shortened Reed\u2013Solomon codes. In parallel to shortening, a technique known as puncturing allows omitting some of the encoded parity symbols.\nBCH view decoders.\nThe decoders described in this section use the BCH view of a codeword as a sequence of coefficients. They use a fixed generator polynomial known to both encoder and decoder.\nPeterson\u2013Gorenstein\u2013Zierler decoder.\nDaniel Gorenstein and Neal Zierler developed a decoder that was described in a MIT Lincoln Laboratory report by Zierler in January 1960 and later in a paper in June 1961. The Gorenstein\u2013Zierler decoder and the related work on BCH codes are described in the book \"Error Correcting Codes\" by W. Wesley Peterson (1961).\nFormulation.\nThe transmitted message, formula_167, is viewed as the coefficients of a polynomial\nformula_168\nAs a result of the Reed\u2013Solomon encoding procedure, \"s\"(\"x\") is divisible by the generator polynomial\nformula_169\nwhere \"\u03b1\" is a primitive element.\nSince \"s\"(\"x\") is a multiple of the generator \"g\"(\"x\"), it follows that it \"inherits\" all its roots:\nformula_170\nTherefore,\nformula_171\nThe transmitted polynomial is corrupted in transit by an error polynomial\nformula_172\nto produce the received polynomial\nformula_173\nCoefficient \"ei\" will be zero if there is no error at that power of \"x\", and nonzero if there is an error. If there are \"\u03bd\" errors at distinct powers \"ik\" of \"x\", then\nformula_174\nThe goal of the decoder is to find the number of errors (\"\u03bd\"), the positions of the errors (\"ik\"), and the error values at those positions (\"eik\"). From those, \"e\"(\"x\") can be calculated and subtracted from \"r\"(\"x\") to get the originally sent message \"s\"(\"x\").\nSyndrome decoding.\nThe decoder starts by evaluating the polynomial as received at points formula_175. We call the results of that evaluation the \"syndromes\" \"S\"\"j\". They are defined as\nformula_176\nNote that formula_177 because formula_178 has roots at formula_179, as shown in the previous section.\nThe advantage of looking at the syndromes is that the message polynomial drops out. In other words, the syndromes only relate to the error and are unaffected by the actual contents of the message being transmitted. If the syndromes are all zero, the algorithm stops here and reports that the message was not corrupted in transit.\nError locators and error values.\nFor convenience, define the error locators \"Xk\" and error values \"Yk\" as\nformula_180\nThen the syndromes can be written in terms of these error locators and error values as\nformula_181\nThis definition of the syndrome values is equivalent to the previous since formula_182.\nThe syndromes give a system of \"n\" \u2212 \"k\" \u2265 2\"\u03bd\" equations in 2\"\u03bd\" unknowns, but that system of equations is nonlinear in the \"Xk\" and does not have an obvious solution. However, if the \"Xk\" were known (see below), then the syndrome equations provide a linear system of equations\nformula_183\nwhich can easily be solved for the \"Yk\" error values.\nConsequently, the problem is finding the \"Xk\", because then the leftmost matrix would be known, and both sides of the equation could be multiplied by its inverse, yielding Y\"k\"\nIn the variant of this algorithm where the locations of the errors are already known (when it is being used as an erasure code), this is the end. The error locations (\"Xk\") are already known by some other method (for example, in an FM transmission, the sections where the bitstream was unclear or overcome with interference are probabilistically determinable from frequency analysis). In this scenario, up to formula_133 errors can be corrected.\nThe rest of the algorithm serves to locate the errors and will require syndrome values up to formula_185, instead of just the formula_186 used thus far. This is why twice as many error-correcting symbols need to be added as can be corrected without knowing their locations.\nError locator polynomial.\nThere is a linear recurrence relation that gives rise to a system of linear equations. Solving those equations identifies those error locations \"Xk\".\nDefine the error locator polynomial \u039b(\"x\") as\nformula_187\nThe zeros of \u039b(\"x\") are the reciprocals formula_188. This follows from the above product notation construction, since if formula_189, then one of the multiplied terms will be zero, formula_190, making the whole polynomial evaluate to zero:\nformula_191\nLet formula_192 be any integer such that formula_193. Multiply both sides by formula_194, and it will still be zero:\nformula_195\nSum for \"k\" = 1 to \"\u03bd\", and it will still be zero:\nformula_196\nCollect each term into its own sum:\nformula_197\nExtract the constant values of formula_198 that are unaffected by the summation:\nformula_199\nThese summations are now equivalent to the syndrome values, which we know and can substitute in. This therefore reduces to\nformula_200\nSubtracting formula_201 from both sides yields\nformula_202\nRecall that \"j\" was chosen to be any integer between 1 and \"v\" inclusive, and this equivalence is true for all such values. Therefore, we have \"v\" linear equations, not just one. This system of linear equations can therefore be solved for the coefficients \u039b\"i\" of the error-location polynomial:\nformula_203\nThe above assumes that the decoder knows the number of errors \"\u03bd\", but that number has not been determined yet. The PGZ decoder does not determine \"\u03bd\" directly but rather searches for it by trying successive values. The decoder first assumes the largest value for a trial \"\u03bd\" and sets up the linear system for that value. If the equations can be solved (i.e., the matrix determinant is nonzero), then that trial value is the number of errors. If the linear system cannot be solved, then the trial \"\u03bd\" is reduced by one and the next smaller system is examined.\nFind the roots of the error locator polynomial.\nUse the coefficients \u039b\"i\" found in the last step to build the error location polynomial. The roots of the error location polynomial can be found by exhaustive search. The error locators \"Xk\" are the reciprocals of those roots. The order of coefficients of the error location polynomial can be reversed, in which case the roots of that reversed polynomial are the error locators formula_204 (not their reciprocals formula_188). Chien search is an efficient implementation of this step.\nCalculate the error values.\nOnce the error locators \"Xk\" are known, the error values can be determined. This can be done by direct solution for \"Yk\" in the error equations matrix given above, or using the Forney algorithm.\nCalculate the error locations.\nCalculate \"ik\" by taking the log base formula_21 of \"Xk\". This is generally done using a precomputed lookup table.\nFix the errors.\nFinally, \"e\"(\"x\") is generated from \"ik\" and \"eik\" and then is subtracted from \"r\"(\"x\") to get the originally sent message \"s\"(\"x\"), with errors corrected.\nExample.\nConsider the Reed\u2013Solomon code defined in \"GF\"(929) with \"\u03b1\" \n 3 and \"t\" \n 4 (this is used in PDF417 barcodes) for a RS(7,3) code. The generator polynomial is\nformula_207\nIf the message polynomial is \"p\"(\"x\") \n 3 \"x\"2 + 2 \"x\" + 1, then a systematic codeword is encoded as follows:\nformula_208\nformula_209\nErrors in transmission might cause this to be received instead:\nformula_210\nThe syndromes are calculated by evaluating \"r\" at powers of \"\u03b1\":\nformula_211\nformula_212\nyielding the system\nformula_213\nUsing Gaussian elimination,\nformula_214\nso\nformula_215\nwith roots \"x\"1 = 757 = 3\u22123 and \"x\"2 = 562 = 3\u22124.\nThe coefficients can be reversed:\nformula_216\nto produce roots 27 = 33 and 81 = 34 with positive exponents, but typically this isn't used. The logarithm of the inverted roots corresponds to the error locations (right to left, location 0 is the last term in the codeword).\nTo calculate the error values, apply the Forney algorithm:\nformula_217\nformula_218\nformula_219\nformula_220\nSubtracting formula_221 from the received polynomial \"r\"(\"x\") reproduces the original codeword \"s\".\nBerlekamp\u2013Massey decoder.\nThe Berlekamp\u2013Massey algorithm is an alternate iterative procedure for finding the error locator polynomial. During each iteration, it calculates a discrepancy based on a current instance of \u039b(\"x\") with an assumed number of errors \"e\":\nformula_222\nand then adjusts \u039b(\"x\") and \"e\" so that a recalculated \u0394 would be zero. The article Berlekamp\u2013Massey algorithm has a detailed description of the procedure. In the following example, \"C\"(\"x\") is used to represent \u039b(\"x\").\nExample.\nUsing the same data as the Peterson Gorenstein Zierler example above:\nThe final value of \"C\" is the error locator polynomial, \u039b(\"x\").\nSugiyama decoder.\nAnother iterative method for calculating both the error locator polynomial and the error value polynomial is based on Sugiyama's adaptation of the extended Euclidean algorithm.\nDefine \"S\"(\"x\"), \u039b(\"x\"), and \u03a9(\"x\") for \"t\" syndromes and \"e\" errors:\nformula_223\nThe key equation is:\nformula_224\nFor \"t\" = 6 and \"e\" = 3:\nformula_225\nThe middle terms are zero due to the relationship between \u039b and syndromes.\nThe extended Euclidean algorithm can find a series of polynomials of the form\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"A\"\"i\"(\"x\") \"S\"(\"x\") + \"B\"\"i\"(\"x\") \"x\"\"t\" = \"R\"\"i\"(\"x\")\nwhere the degree of \"R\" decreases as \"i\" increases. Once the degree of \"R\"\"i\"(\"x\") &lt; \"t\"/2, then\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"A\"\"i\"(\"x\") = \u039b(\"x\")\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"B\"\"i\"(\"x\") = \u2212Q(\"x\")\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"R\"\"i\"(\"x\") = \u03a9(\"x\").\n\"B\"(\"x\") and \"Q\"(\"x\") don't need to be saved, so the algorithm becomes:\n \"R\"\u22121 := \"x\"\"t\"\n \"R\"0 := \"S\"(\"x\")\n \"A\"\u22121 := 0\n \"A\"0 := 1\n \"i\" := 0\n while degree of \"R\"\"i\" \u2265 \"t\"/2\n \"i\" := \"i\" + 1\n \"Q\" := \"R\"\"i\"-2 / \"R\"\"i\"-1\n \"R\"\"i\" := \"R\"\"i\"-2 - \"Q\" \"R\"\"i\"-1\n \"A\"\"i\" := \"A\"\"i\"-2 - \"Q\" \"A\"\"i\"-1\nto set low order term of \u039b(\"x\") to 1, divide \u039b(\"x\") and \u03a9(\"x\") by \"A\"\"i\"(0):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\u039b(\"x\") = \"A\"\"i\" / \"A\"\"i\"(0)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\u03a9(\"x\") = \"R\"\"i\" / \"A\"\"i\"(0)\n\"A\"\"i\"(0) is the constant (low order) term of Ai.\nExample.\nUsing the same data as the Peterson\u2013Gorenstein\u2013Zierler example above:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\u039b(\"x\") = \"A\"2 / 544 = 329 \"x\"2 + 821 \"x\" + 001\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\u03a9(\"x\") = \"R\"2 / 544 = 546 \"x\" + 732\nDecoder using discrete Fourier transform.\nA discrete Fourier transform can be used for decoding. To avoid conflict with syndrome names, let \"c\"(\"x\") = \"s\"(\"x\") the encoded codeword. \"r\"(\"x\") and \"e\"(\"x\") are the same as above. Define \"C\"(\"x\"), \"E\"(\"x\"), and \"R\"(\"x\") as the discrete Fourier transforms of \"c\"(\"x\"), \"e\"(\"x\"), and \"r\"(\"x\"). Since \"r\"(\"x\") = \"c\"(\"x\") + \"e\"(\"x\"), and since a discrete Fourier transform is a linear operator, \"R\"(\"x\") = \"C\"(\"x\") + \"E\"(\"x\").\nTransform \"r\"(\"x\") to \"R\"(\"x\") using discrete Fourier transform. Since the calculation for a discrete Fourier transform is the same as the calculation for syndromes, \"t\" coefficients of \"R\"(\"x\") and \"E\"(\"x\") are the same as the syndromes:\nformula_226\nUse formula_227 through formula_228 as syndromes (they're the same) and generate the error locator polynomial using the methods from any of the above decoders.\nLet \"v\" = number of errors. Generate \"E\"(\"x\") using the known coefficients formula_229 to formula_230, the error locator polynomial, and these formulas\nformula_231\nThen calculate \"C\"(\"x\") = \"R\"(\"x\") \u2212 \"E\"(\"x\") and take the inverse transform (polynomial interpolation) of \"C\"(\"x\") to produce \"c\"(\"x\").\nDecoding beyond the error-correction bound.\nThe Singleton bound states that the minimum distance d of a linear block code of size (n,k) is upper-bounded by \"n\" - \"k\" + 1. The distance d was usually understood to limit the error-correction capability to \u230a(\"d\" - 1) / 2\u230b. The Reed\u2013Solomon code achieves this bound with equality, and can thus correct up to \u230a(\"n\" - \"k\") / 2\u230b errors. However, this error-correction bound is not exact.\nIn 1999, Madhu Sudan and Venkatesan Guruswami at MIT published \"Improved Decoding of Reed\u2013Solomon and Algebraic-Geometry Codes\" introducing an algorithm that allowed for the correction of errors beyond half the minimum distance of the code. It applies to Reed\u2013Solomon codes and more generally to algebraic geometric codes. This algorithm produces a list of codewords (it is a list-decoding algorithm) and is based on interpolation and factorization of polynomials over \"GF\"(2\"m\") and its extensions.\nIn 2023, coding theorists showed that Reed-Solomon codes defined over random evaluation points can achieve achieve list decoding capacity (up to \"n\" - \"k\" errors) over linear size alphabets with high probability. These results do not provide an algorithm for performing the decoding.\nSoft-decoding.\nThe algebraic decoding methods described above are hard-decision methods, which means that for every symbol a hard decision is made about its value. For example, a decoder could associate with each symbol an additional value corresponding to the channel demodulator's confidence in the correctness of the symbol. The advent of LDPC and turbo codes, which employ iterated soft-decision belief propagation decoding methods to achieve error-correction performance close to the theoretical limit, has spurred interest in applying soft-decision decoding to conventional algebraic codes. In 2003, Ralf Koetter and Alexander Vardy presented a polynomial-time soft-decision algebraic list-decoding algorithm for Reed\u2013Solomon codes, which was based upon the work by Sudan and Guruswami.\nIn 2016, Steven J. Franke and Joseph H. Taylor published a novel soft-decision decoder.\nReed Solomon original view decoders.\nThe decoders described in this section use the Reed Solomon original view of a codeword as a sequence of polynomial values where the polynomial is based on the message to be encoded. The same set of fixed values are used by the encoder and decoder, and the decoder recovers the encoding polynomial (and optionally an error locating polynomial) from the received message.\nTheoretical decoder.\nReed and Solomon described a theoretical decoder that corrected errors by finding the most popular message polynomial. The decoder only knows the set of values formula_232 to formula_233 and which encoding method was used to generate the codeword's sequence of values. The original message, the polynomial, and any errors are unknown. A decoding procedure could use a method like Lagrange interpolation on various subsets of n codeword values taken k at a time to repeatedly produce potential polynomials, until a sufficient number of matching polynomials are produced to reasonably eliminate any errors in the received codeword. Once a polynomial is determined, then any errors in the codeword can be corrected, by recalculating the corresponding codeword values. Unfortunately, in all but the simplest of cases, there are too many subsets, so the algorithm is impractical. The number of subsets is the binomial coefficient, formula_234, and the number of subsets is infeasible for even modest codes. For a (255,249) code that can correct 3 errors, the na\u00efve theoretical decoder would examine 359 billion subsets. \nBerlekamp Welch decoder.\nIn 1986, a decoder known as the Berlekamp\u2013Welch algorithm was developed as a decoder that is able to recover the original message polynomial as well as an error \"locator\" polynomial that produces zeroes for the input values that correspond to errors, with time complexity \"O\"(\"n\"3), where n is the number of values in a message. The recovered polynomial is then used to recover (recalculate as needed) the original message.\nExample.\nUsing RS(7,3), GF(929), and the set of evaluation points \"ai\" \n \"i\" \u2212 1\n \"a\" \n {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} \nIf the message polynomial is\n \"p\"(\"x\") \n 003\"x\"2 + 002\"x\" + 001\nThe codeword is\n \"c\" \n {001, 006, 017, 034, 057, 086, 121} \nErrors in transmission might cause this to be received instead.\n \"b\" \n \"c\" + \"e\" \n {001, 006, 123, 456, 057, 086, 121} \nThe key equation is:\n\"biE\"(\"ai\") - \"Q\"(\"ai\") \n 0\nAssume maximum number of errors: \"e\" \n 2. The key equation becomes:\n\"bi\"(\"e\"0 + \"e\"1\"ai\") - (\"q\"0 + \"q\"1\"ai\" + \"q\"2 \"a\" + \"q\"3\"a\" + \"q\"4\"a\") \n - \"bia\"\nformula_235\nUsing Gaussian elimination:\nformula_236\n \"Q\"(\"x\") \n 003\"x\"4 + 916\"x\"3 + 009\"x\"2 + 007\"x\" + 006\n \"E\"(\"x\") \n 001\"x\"2 + 924\"x\" + 006\n \"P\"(\"x\") \n 003\"x\"2 + 002\"x\" + 001\nRecalculate \"P\"(\"x\") where \"E\"(\"x\") \n 0 : {2, 3} to correct b resulting in the corrected codeword:\n \"c\" \nGao decoder.\nIn 2002, an improved decoder was developed by Shuhong Gao, based on the extended Euclid algorithm.\n \"Q\"(\"x\") \nExample.\n \"R\"2 \n 266\"x\"4 + 086\"x\"3 + 798\"x\"2 + 311\"x\" + 532\n \"E\"(\"x\") \n \"A\"2 \n 708\"x\"2 + 176\"x\" + 532\nTo duplicate the polynomials generated by Berlekamp Welsh,\ndivide \"Q\"(\"x\") and \"E\"(\"x\") by most significant coefficient of \"E\"(\"x\") = 708.\n \"Q\"(\"x\") \n 003\"x\"4 + 916\"x\"3 + 009\"x\"2 + 007\"x\" + 006\n \"E\"(\"x\") \n 001\"x\"2 + 924\"x\" + 006\n \"P\"(\"x\") \n 003\"x\"2 + 002\"x\" + 001\nRecalculate \"P\"(\"x\") where \"E\"(\"x\") \n 0 : {2, 3} to correct \"b\" resulting in the corrected codeword:\n \"c\" \n {001, 006, 017, 034, 057, 086, 121} \nSyndrome decoder.\nAround 2015, an improved decoder was developed. The decoder generates syndromes, and similar to BCH view, the key equation between the error locator polynomial and syndromes is the same, but the error locator polynomial has roots corresponding to formula_248, and a look up table is used to convert the roots into codeword offsets.\nInitialization:&lt;br&gt;\nA polynomial is defined: formula_249.&lt;br&gt;\nA set of formula_40 polynomials is defined: formula_251.&lt;br&gt;\nA set of formula_40 values is generated formula_253.&lt;br&gt;\nA set of formula_40 polynomials is generated: formula_255&lt;br&gt;\nDecoding - A codeword with possible errors is received formula_256.&lt;br&gt;\nA syndrome polynomial is generated formula_257.&lt;br&gt;\nIf formula_258 then no errors are detected, otherwise extended Euclid starts off with&lt;br&gt;\nformula_259, formula_260, formula_242, formula_243&lt;br&gt;\nand continues until degree of formula_263&lt;br&gt;\nThe error locator polynomial is formula_264&lt;br&gt;\nand the error value polynomial is formula_265&lt;br&gt;\nformula_266 and formula_267 are divided by the least significant term of formula_266&lt;br&gt;\nThe formal derivative of formula_266 is generated: formula_270&lt;br&gt;\nThe offsets formula_271 of the errors correspond to the roots of formula_266&lt;br&gt;\nfor root = formula_273, formula_274&lt;br&gt;\nThe error value for formula_275 is &lt;br&gt;\nformula_276.\nIf formula_277 then an error value corresponding to formula_278&lt;br&gt;\nhas been detected at offset formula_279, and a separate error value is calculated:&lt;br&gt;\nformula_280, the set of formula_281 corresponding to roots of formula_266&lt;br&gt;\nformula_283 most significant coefficient of formula_267&lt;br&gt;\nformula_285&lt;br&gt;\nExample.\nUsing the same data as the Berlekamp Welch example\nInitialization:\nformula_286&lt;br&gt;\nformula_287\nDecoding:\nformula_288&lt;br&gt;\nformula_289&lt;br&gt;\nEuclid:\nformula_290&lt;br&gt;\nformula_291&lt;br&gt;\ndivide formula_266 and formula_267 by 925\nformula_294&lt;br&gt;\nformula_295&lt;br&gt;\nformula_296&lt;br&gt;\nformula_297&lt;br&gt;\nformula_298&lt;br&gt;\nformula_299&lt;br&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45604", "revid": "51208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45604", "title": "Biowar", "text": ""}
{"id": "45606", "revid": "44220063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45606", "title": "Zorba the Greek (film)", "text": "1964 film by Michael Cacoyannis\nZorba the Greek (, \"Alexis Zorbas\") is a 1964 drama film written, produced, edited, and directed by Greek Cypriot filmmaker Michael Cacoyannis. It stars Anthony Quinn as Zorba, an earthy and boisterous Cretan peasant, and Alan Bates as Basil, the buttoned-up young intellectual he befriends. The cast also includes Lila Kedrova, Irene Papas, and Sotiris Moustakas. The musical score was composed by Mikis Theodorakis. The film is based on the 1946 novel \"The Life and Times of Alexis Zorba\" by Nikos Kazantzakis.\nThe film centers on Zorba and Basil's misadventures in trying to build a lignite mine through an impoverished Cretan village, as their polar different personalities lead them into affairs and schemes that end unexpectedly. Much of the film's interactions focus on the lead characters' views and attitudes, culminating in the final scene where they dance joyfully before parting ways.\nThough the film has elements of comedy, and Kazantzakis's anti-hero Zorba has been generally understood as a 'life-affirming' personality (faithfully reproduced in Cacoyannis's screenplay), it features a gruesome femicide, and Zorba's cynical, egotistical and manipulative personality combined with his determined optimism is explicitly shown to be a response to, and in defiance of, the cruelties and vicissitudes of life.\nProduced in Greece for under $1 million, \"Zorba\" was a considerable critical and commercial success, grossing over nine times its production budget at the U.S. box office alone. At the 37th Academy Awards, the film won awards for Best Supporting Actress (Kedrova), Best Cinematography and Best Art Direction. Other nominations included Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Actor for Anthony Quinn, whose performance also popularized the folk dance known as the sirtaki. The film and its source novel were later adapted into a Tony-winning stage musical, in which Cacoyannis, Quinn, and Kedrova all participated.\nPlot.\nBasil is a staid, somewhat buttoned-up, middle-class Greek-British writer raised in the United Kingdom. While at the Athens port of Piraeus waiting to catch a ferry to Crete he meets a middle-aged peasant and musician named Zorba who carries only a santouri in a case, in contrast to Basil's large quantity of luggage, including cases of books. Basil explains to Zorba that he is travelling to a Cretan village where he owns some land with the intention of re-opening a lignite mine and perhaps curing his writer's block. Zorba has already related that he has experience as a miner and inveigles himself a position as Basil's foreman and factotum.\nWhen they arrive at the Cretan village they are greeted enthusiastically by the impoverished populace. They lodge initially with an elderly French former cabaret dancer named Madame Hortense in her self-styled \"Hotel Ritz\". Hortense relates her glamorous and exotic past as a courtesan among the competing Mediterranean powers, hinting that she was the lover of an Italian Admiral called Cannavaro (after whom she has named her pet parrot). Zorba tries to persuade Basil to enter into a relationship with Madame Hortense, but he is reluctant so Zorba, with an eye on the main chance, seizes the opportunity, somewhat cynically exercising his considerable charm on the lonely woman.\nZorba admits to Basil that he has a chequered past, having been guilty of rape and murder as a soldier, his excuse being that they were 'only' Bulgarians and Turks. He asserts that now, however, he rejects nationalism and bears no one any grudges. He also shows Basil his battle wounds, 'all in front' (an oblique reference to Alexander the Great).\nOver the next few days, Basil and Zorba attempt to work the old lignite mine, but it collapses and Zorba narrowly avoids injury. Zorba then has an idea to use the forest in the nearby mountains to source lumber to make new pit-props to replace the rotten timbers of the mine. The land is owned by a monastery. Zorba tricks the monks into believing that a miracle has occurred, as part of a ploy to get them to give up the timber. Exultant, when he gets home he breaks spontaneously into a dance, the so-called 'butcher's dance' or sirtaki in a scene which contrasts his exultant egotism with Basil's nervous inhibition.\nZorba designs a system by which tree-trunks can be sent down the mountain suspended from a wire.\nAmong the other residents is a young and attractive widowed woman who is resented and hated by the villagers for not remarrying. A young local boy, the son of one of the more important peasants, is madly in love with her, but she has spurned him repeatedly. One rainy afternoon, Basil offers her his umbrella, which she reluctantly takes. Zorba, who increasingly treats his 'Boss' as a pupil or nephew, knowingly suggests that she is attracted to him, but Basil, ever shy, refuses to pursue her.\nTo get supplies to build the zip-wire to bring the timbers down the mountain, Basil gives Zorba some money and sends him to the large port of Chania to buy cable and other supplies. But in Chania Zorba gets drunk, visits a cabaret, and spends money on presents and on drinking champagne with a cabaret dancer/hospitality girl with whom he spends the night. He also has his hair dyed as a symbol of his rediscovered youth and potency. In a letter to Basil, he details his exploits. Angered by Zorba's irresponsibility and the squandering of his money, Basil untruthfully tells Madame Hortense, who is smitten with Zorba but feels abandoned, that Zorba intends to marry her upon his return, upon hearing which she is ecstatic. Meanwhile, the Widow returns Basil's umbrella by way of Mimithos, the village idiot.\nBasil, after much agonising, and untypically unshaven and perhaps drunk, goes to the Widow's house. She lets him in but then she sheds some tears. Embarrassed, he decides to leave but she stops him and they spend the night together. However, their assignation has been observed by the jealous men of the village.\nWhen Zorba eventually returns with the supplies and gifts he is surprised and angered to hear of Basil's lie to Madame Hortense. He also asks Basil about his whereabouts the night before. The brief encounter comes at a great cost. Word spreads of Basil's visit to the Widow and the men of the village, to make trouble, tell the youth who is in love with her, whereupon he drowns himself. When the widow attempts to attend the funeral, she is blocked from entering the church by the youth's father. The villagers blame her for the boy's suicide, and some of the men of the village corral her outside the church and begin to stone her, watched and encouraged by the villagers. Basil, unable to push through the crowd to intervene, sends Mimithos to fetch Zorba. Zorba arrives just as the villager who had maliciously informed the boy of Basil's tryst is about to kill the widow with his knife - with the explicit approval of the boy's father who is watching on. Zorba overpowers the younger man and disarms him but, thinking that the situation is under control, when he asks the widow to follow him and turns to go, the dead boy's father pulls his knife and cuts the widow's throat himself. The villagers close ranks around the father and his accomplices, shielding them as they all disperse, leaving only the outsiders, Basil, Zorba, and the idiot Mimithos, who is distraught. Basil laments his inability to intervene, and Zorba angrily laments the meaninglessness of the widow's death and of all deaths. The film cuts to a scene in which Basil, Zorba and the villagers construct the zip-wire system for the timber, to the accompaniment of light-hearted music on the soundtrack.\nOn a rainy day, Basil and Zorba come home and find Madame Hortense waiting. She expresses anger at Zorba for making no progress on the wedding. Zorba conjures up a story that he had ordered a white satin wedding dress, lined with pearls and adorned with real gold. Madame Hortense presents two golden rings she had made and proposes their immediate engagement. Zorba tries to stall, but eventually agrees with gusto, to Basil's surprise.\nSome time later, Madame Hortense contracts pneumonia and is seen on her deathbed. Zorba stays by her side, along with Basil. Meanwhile, word spreads that \"the foreigner\" is dying, and since she has no heirs, the State will take her possessions and money. The poor villagers crowd around her hotel, impatiently waiting for her demise so they can steal her belongings. As two old ladies enter her room and gaze expectantly at her, other women try to enter, but Zorba manages to fight them off. At the instant of her death, the women re-enter Madame Hortense's bedroom \"en masse\" to steal her valued possessions. Zorba leaves with a sigh, as the hotel is ransacked and stripped bare by the shrieking and excited villagers. When Zorba returns to Madame Hortense's bedroom, the room is barren apart from her bed (where she lies) and the parrot in her cage. Zorba takes the birdcage with him.\nFinally, Zorba's elaborate contraption to transport timber down the hill is complete. A festive ceremony is held, including lamb roasting on a spit and a barrel of wine, and all the villagers attend. After a blessing from the priests, Zorba signals by firing a rifle in the air and log is sent hurtling down the zip line but at excessive speed, destroying the log itself and slightly damaging part of the contraption. Zorba pretends to be unconcerned and gives orders for a second log to be sent down. This one also comes down too quickly and overshoots straight into the sea. By now the villagers and priests have grown fearful and head for cover. Zorba remains unfazed and signals for the third log, which accelerates with such violence that it destroys the entire contraption creating havoc among the crowd. The villagers and monks flee in terror, leaving only Basil and Zorba amidst the wreckage.\nThey sit by the shore to eat the roasted lamb and drink the wine alone. Zorba pretends to tell the future from a lamb bone, saying that he foresees a great journey to a big city. He asks Basil when he plans to leave, and Basil replies that he will go in a few days. Zorba tells him that the one thing Basil is missing is the element of 'madness' that enables a man to 'break free' (the implication being, free from circumstance, responsibility, care). They begin to laugh hysterically at the catastrophic outcome of their scheme and the effect on the villagers. Basil asks Zorba to teach him to dance, and the film ends with both men enthusiastically dancing the sirtaki on the deserted shore.\nProduction.\nThe film was shot in black and white on location on the Greek island of Crete. Specific locations featured include the city of Chania, the village of Kokkino Chorio in the Apokoronas region and Stavros Beach in the Akrotiri peninsula. The scene in which Quinn's character dances the Sirtaki was filmed on the beach of the village of Stavros.\nSimone Signoret began filming the role of Madame Hortense; Lila Kedrova replaced her early in the production.\nReception.\nBox office.\nThe film was a smash hit. Produced on a budget of only $783,000, it grossed $9 million at the U.S. box office, earning $4.4 million in U.S. theatrical rentals. At the worldwide box office, the film earned $9.4 million in rentals, placing the worldwide gross between $18.8 million and $23.5 million. It was the 17th highest-grossing film of 1964.\nAccording to Fox Records, the film needed to earn $3,000,000 in rentals to break even and made $9,400,000. By September 1970 it earned the studio an estimated profit of $2,565,000.\nCritical response.\nReviews of the film were generally positive, with Anthony Quinn and Lila Kedrova receiving numerous accolades for their performances, although a few critics found fault with the screenplay. Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" lauded Quinn for a \"brilliant performance\" and Kedrova for her \"brilliantly realized\" character, citing the only real weakness of the film as a lack of \"significant conflict to prove its dominant character. Zorba is powerful and provocative, but nobody gets in his way.\" Margaret Harford of the \"Los Angeles Times\" declared that the film would \"stand among the year's best motion pictures, an unusual, engrossing effort\" with spots both \"outrageously funny\" and \"painfully sad and tragic.\"\nRichard L. Coe of \"The Washington Post\" deemed it \"a memorable picture\" with a \"bravura performance\" from Quinn, adding that \"Lila Kedrova as the dying Mme Hortense is spectacularly touching.\" \"Variety\" found the film excessively long (at around two hours and thirty minutes) and overstuffed, writing that Cacoyannis's screenplay was \"packed with incidents of varying moods, so packed, in fact, that some of the more important ones cannot be developed fully.\" Brendan Gill of \"The New Yorker\" wrote that Cacoyannis had directed the film with \"enormous verve\" but had written a \"not very tidy, not very plausible screenplay.\" Gill particularly praised Kedrova's performance and thought that she \"comes within an ace of stealing the picture from Quinn.\" \"The Monthly Film Bulletin\" wrote that the film began well, but by the time the characters went to Crete \"the pace slows to a crawl, and the narrative line becomes blurred in a series of unrelated incidents of doubtful significance.\" The review concluded that for all its length, \"the film never gets down to a clear statement of its theme, or comes within measuring the distance of its vast pretensions.\"\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 15 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 7.8/10. On both sides of the Atlantic, \"Zorba\" was applauded and Quinn came in for the best reviews. He was lauded as Zorba, along with the other stars, including Greek-born Papas, who worked with Quinn on \"The Guns of Navarone\".\nPreservation.\nThe Academy Film Archive preserved \"Zorba the Greek\" in 2004.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45609", "revid": "40491554", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45609", "title": "Cheetah", "text": "Large feline of the genus Acinonyx\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus) is a large cat and the fastest land animal. It has a tawny to creamy white or pale buff fur that is marked with evenly spaced, solid black spots. The head is small and rounded, with a short snout and black tear-like facial streaks. It reaches at the shoulder, and the head-and-body length is between . Adults weigh between . The cheetah is capable of running at ; it has evolved specialized adaptations for speed, including a light build, long thin legs and a long tail.\nThe cheetah was first scientifically described in the late 18th century. Four subspecies are recognised today that are native to Africa and central Iran. An African subspecies was introduced to India in 2022. It is now distributed mainly in small, fragmented populations in northwestern, eastern and southern Africa and central Iran. It lives in a variety of habitats such as savannahs in the Serengeti, arid mountain ranges in the Sahara, and hilly desert terrain.\nThe cheetah lives in three main social groups: females and their cubs, male \"coalitions\", and solitary males. While females lead a nomadic life searching for prey in large home ranges, males are more sedentary and instead establish much smaller territories in areas with plentiful prey and access to females. The cheetah is active during the day, with peaks during dawn and dusk. It feeds on small- to medium-sized prey, mostly weighing under , and prefers medium-sized ungulates such as impala, springbok and Thomson's gazelles. The cheetah typically stalks its prey within before charging towards it, trips it during the chase and bites its throat to suffocate it to death. It breeds throughout the year. After a gestation of nearly three months, females give birth to a litter of three or four cubs. Cheetah cubs are highly vulnerable to predation by other large carnivores. They are weaned at around four months and are independent by around 20 months of age.\nThe cheetah is threatened by habitat loss, conflict with humans, poaching and high susceptibility to diseases. The global cheetah population was estimated at 6,517 individuals in 2021; it is listed as Vulnerable on the IUCN Red List. It has been widely depicted in art, literature, advertising, and animation. It was tamed in ancient Egypt and trained for hunting ungulates in the Arabian Peninsula and India. It has been kept in zoos since the early 19th century.\nEtymology.\nThe vernacular name \"cheetah\" is derived from Hindustani and (). This in turn comes from () meaning 'variegated', 'adorned' or 'painted'. In the past, the cheetah was often called \"hunting leopard\" because they could be tamed and used for coursing. The generic name \"Acinonyx\" probably derives from the combination of two Greek words: () meaning 'unmoved' or 'motionless', and () meaning 'nail' or 'hoof'. A rough translation is \"immobile nails\", a reference to the cheetah's limited ability to retract its claws. A similar meaning can be obtained by the combination of the Greek prefix \"a\u2013\" (implying a lack of) and () meaning 'to move' or 'to set in motion'. The specific name is Latin for 'crested, having a mane'.\nA few old generic names such as \"Cynailurus\" and \"Cynofelis\" allude to the similarities between the cheetah and canids.\nTaxonomy.\nIn 1777, Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber described the cheetah based on a skin from the Cape of Good Hope and gave it the scientific name \"Felis jubatus\". Joshua Brookes proposed the generic name \"Acinonyx\" in 1828. In 1917, Reginald Innes Pocock placed the cheetah in a subfamily of its own, Acinonychinae, given its striking morphological resemblance to the greyhound and significant deviation from typical felid features; the cheetah was classified in Felinae in later taxonomic revisions.\nIn the 19th and 20th centuries, several cheetah zoological specimens were described; some were proposed as subspecies.\nA South African specimen with notably dense fur was proposed as (\"Felis lanea\") by Philip Sclater in 1877 and became known as the \"woolly cheetah\". Its classification as a species was mostly disputed. There has been considerable confusion in the nomenclature of the cheetah and leopard (\"Panthera pardus\") as authors often confused the two; some considered \"hunting leopards\" an independent species, or equal to the leopard.\nSubspecies.\nIn 1975, five cheetah subspecies were considered valid taxa: \"A. j. hecki\", \"A. j. jubatus\", \"A. j. raineyi\", \"A. j. soemmeringii\" and \"A. j. venaticus\". In 2011, a phylogeographic study found minimal genetic variation between \"A. j. jubatus\" and \"A. j. raineyi\"; only four subspecies were identified. In 2017, the Cat Classification Task Force of the IUCN Cat Specialist Group revised felid taxonomy and recognised these four subspecies as valid. Their details are tabulated below:\nPhylogeny and evolution.\nThe cheetah's closest relatives are the cougar (\"Puma concolor\") and the jaguarundi (\"Herpailurus yagouaroundi\"). Together, these three species form the \"Puma\" lineage, one of the eight lineages of the extant felids; the \"Puma\" lineage genetically diverged from the rest 6.7 mya. The sister group of the \"Puma\" lineage is a clade of smaller Old World cats that includes the genera \"Felis\", \"Otocolobus\" and \"Prionailurus\".\nThe oldest cheetah fossils, excavated in eastern and southern Africa, date to 3.5\u20133 mya; the earliest known specimen from South Africa is from the lowermost deposits of the Silberberg Grotto (Sterkfontein). Though incomplete, these fossils indicate forms larger but less cursorial than the modern cheetah. The first occurrence of the modern species \"A.\u00a0jubatus\" in Africa may come from Cooper's D, a site in South Africa dating back to 1.5 to 1.4 Ma, during the Calabrian stage. Fossil remains from Europe are limited to a few Middle Pleistocene specimens from Hundsheim (Austria) and Mosbach Sands (Germany). Cheetah-like cats are known from as late as 10,000 years ago from the Old World. The giant cheetah (\"A. pardinensis\"), significantly larger and slower compared to the modern cheetah, occurred in Eurasia and eastern and southern Africa in the Villafranchian period roughly 3.8\u20131.9 mya. In the Middle Pleistocene a smaller cheetah, \"A.\u00a0intermedius\", ranged from Europe to China. The modern cheetah appeared in Africa around 1.9 mya; its fossil record is restricted to Africa.\nExtinct North American cheetah-like cats had historically been classified in \"Felis\", \"Puma\" or \"Acinonyx\"; two such species, \"F.\u00a0studeri\" and \"F.\u00a0trumani\", were considered to be closer to the puma than the cheetah, despite their close similarities to the latter. Noting this, palaeontologist Daniel Adams proposed \"Miracinonyx\", a new subgenus under \"Acinonyx\", in 1979 for the North American cheetah-like cats; this was later elevated to genus rank. Adams pointed out that North American and Old World cheetah-like cats may have had a common ancestor, and \"Acinonyx\" might have originated in North America instead of Eurasia. However, subsequent research has shown that \"Miracinonyx\" is phylogenetically closer to the cougar than the cheetah; the similarities to cheetahs have been attributed to parallel evolution.\nThe three species of the \"Puma\" lineage may have had a common ancestor during the Miocene (roughly 8.25 mya). Some suggest that North American cheetahs possibly migrated to Asia via the Bering Strait, then dispersed southward to Africa through Eurasia at least 100,000 years ago; some authors have expressed doubt over the occurrence of cheetah-like cats in North America, and instead suppose the modern cheetah to have evolved from Asian populations that eventually spread to Africa. The cheetah is thought to have experienced two population bottlenecks that greatly decreased the genetic variability in populations; one occurred about 100,000 years ago that has been correlated to migration from North America to Asia, and the second 10,000\u201312,000 years ago in Africa, possibly as part of the Late Pleistocene extinction event.\nGenetics.\nThe diploid number of chromosomes in the cheetah is 38, the same as in most other felids. The cheetah was the first felid observed to have unusually low genetic variability among individuals, which has led to poor breeding in captivity, increased spermatozoal defects, high juvenile mortality and increased susceptibility to diseases and infections. A prominent instance was the deadly feline coronavirus outbreak in the cheetah breeding facility at Wildlife Safari in Winston, Oregon in 1983 which had a mortality rate of 60%, higher than that recorded for previous epizootics of feline infectious peritonitis in any felid. The remarkable homogeneity in cheetah genes has been demonstrated by experiments involving the major histocompatibility complex (MHC); unless the MHC genes are highly homogeneous in a population, skin grafts exchanged between a pair of unrelated individuals would be rejected. Skin grafts exchanged between unrelated cheetahs are accepted well and heal, as if their genetic makeup were the same.\nThe low genetic diversity is thought to have been created by two population bottlenecks from about 100,000 years and about 12,000 years ago, respectively. The resultant level of genetic variation is around 0.1\u20134% of average living species, lower than that of Tasmanian devils, Virunga gorillas, Amur tigers, and even highly inbred domestic cats and dogs.\nSelective retention of gene duplication has been found in 10 gene candidates to explain energetics and anabolism related to muscle specialization in cheetahs:\nThis gene duplication may have allowed new functions to arise for the aforementioned genes; this selective pressure may also have contributed to the low genetic diversity in this species.\nPotentially harmful mutations has been found in a gene related to spermatogenesis (\"AKAP4\"). This could explain the high proportion of abnormal sperma in male cheetahs and poor reproductive success in the species.\nKing cheetah.\nThe king cheetah is a variety of cheetah with a rare mutation for cream-coloured fur marked with large, blotchy spots and three dark, wide stripes extending from the neck to the tail. In Manicaland, Zimbabwe, it was known as \"nsuifisi\" and thought to be a cross between a leopard and a hyena. In 1926, Major A.\u00a0Cooper wrote about a cheetah-like animal he had shot near modern-day Harare, with fur as thick as that of a snow leopard and spots that merged to form stripes. He suggested it could be a cross between a leopard and a cheetah. As more such individuals were observed it was seen that they had non-retractable claws like the cheetah.\nIn 1927, Pocock described these individuals as a new species by the name of \"Acinonyx rex\" (\"king cheetah\"). However, in the absence of proof to support his claim, he withdrew his proposal in 1939. Abel Chapman considered it a colour morph of the normally spotted cheetah. Since 1927, the king cheetah has been reported five more times in the wild in Zimbabwe, Botswana and northern Transvaal; one was photographed in 1975.\nIn 1981, two female cheetahs that had mated with a wild male from Transvaal at the De Wildt Cheetah and Wildlife Centre (South Africa) gave birth to one king cheetah each; subsequently, more king cheetahs were born at the centre. In 2012, the cause of this coat pattern was found to be a mutation in the gene for transmembrane aminopeptidase (Taqpep), the same gene responsible for the striped \"mackerel\" versus blotchy \"classic\" pattern seen in tabby cats. The appearance is caused by reinforcement of a recessive allele; hence if two mating cheetahs are heterozygous carriers of the mutated allele, a quarter of their offspring can be expected to be king cheetahs.\nCharacteristics.\nThe cheetah is a lightly built, spotted cat characterised by a small rounded head, a short snout, black tear-like facial streaks, a deep chest, long thin legs and a long tail. Its slender, canine-like form is highly adapted for speed, and contrasts sharply with the robust build of the genus \"Panthera\". Cheetahs typically reach at the shoulder and the head-and-body length is between . The weight can vary with age, health, location, sex and subspecies; adults typically range between . Cubs born in the wild weigh at birth, while those born in captivity tend to be larger and weigh around . The cheetah is sexually dimorphic, with males larger and heavier than females, but not to the extent seen in other large cats; females have a much lower body mass index than males. Studies differ significantly on morphological variations among the subspecies.\nThe coat is typically tawny to creamy white or pale buff (darker in the mid-back portion). The chin, throat and underparts of the legs and the belly are white and devoid of markings. The rest of the body is covered with around 2,000 evenly spaced, oval or round solid black spots, each measuring roughly . Each cheetah has a distinct pattern of spots which can be used to identify unique individuals. Besides the clearly visible spots, there are other faint, irregular black marks on the coat. Newly born cubs are covered in fur with an unclear pattern of spots that gives them a dark appearance\u2014pale white above and nearly black on the underside. The hair is mostly short and often coarse, but the chest and the belly are covered in soft fur; the fur of king cheetahs has been reported to be silky. There is a short, rough mane, covering at least along the neck and the shoulders; this feature is more prominent in males. The mane starts out as a cape of long, loose blue to grey hair in juveniles. Melanistic cheetahs are rare and have been seen in Zambia and Zimbabwe. In 1877\u20131878, Sclater described two partially albino specimens from South Africa. A tabby cheetah was photographed in Kenya in 2012.\nThe head is small and more rounded compared to big cats. Saharan cheetahs have canine-like slim faces. The ears are small, short and rounded; they are tawny at the base and on the edges and marked with black patches on the back. The eyes are set high and have round pupils. The whiskers, shorter and fewer than those of other felids, are fine and inconspicuous. The pronounced tear streaks (or malar stripes), unique to the cheetah, originate from the corners of the eyes and run down the nose to the mouth. The role of these streaks is not well understood\u2014they may protect the eyes from the sun's glare (a helpful feature as the cheetah hunts mainly during the day), or they could be used to define facial expressions. The exceptionally long and muscular tail, with a bushy white tuft at the end, measures . While the first two-thirds of the tail are covered in spots, the final third is marked with four to six dark rings or stripes.\nThe cheetah is superficially similar to the leopard, which has a larger head, fully retractable claws, rosettes instead of spots, lacks tear streaks and is more muscular. Moreover, the cheetah is taller than the leopard. The serval also resembles the cheetah in physical build, but is significantly smaller, has a shorter tail and its spots fuse to form stripes on the back. The cheetah appears to have evolved convergently with canids in morphology and behaviour; it has canine-like features such as a relatively long snout, long legs, a deep chest, tough paw pads and blunt, semi-retractable claws. The cheetah has often been likened to the greyhound, as both have similar morphology and the ability to reach tremendous speeds in a shorter time than other mammals, but the cheetah can attain much higher maximum speeds.\nInternal anatomy.\nThe cheetah shows several specialized adaptations for prolonged chases to catch prey at some of the fastest speeds reached by land animals. Its light, streamlined body makes it well-suited to short, explosive bursts of speed, rapid acceleration, and an ability to execute extreme changes in direction while moving at high speed. The large nasal passages, accommodated well due to the smaller size of the canine teeth, ensure fast flow of sufficient air, and the enlarged heart and lungs allow the enrichment of blood with oxygen in a short time. This allows cheetahs to rapidly regain their stamina after a chase. During a typical chase, their respiratory rate increases from 60 to 150 breaths per minute.\nThe cheetah has a fast heart rate, averaging 126\u2013173 beats per minute at resting without arrhythmia. Moreover, the reduced viscosity of the blood at higher temperatures (common in frequently moving muscles) could ease blood flow and increase oxygen transport.\nThe slightly curved claws are shorter and more straight than those of other cats, lack a protective sheath and are partly retractile. The limited retraction of the cheetah's claws may result from the earlier truncation of the development of the middle phalanx bone in cheetahs. The claws are blunt due to lack of protection, but the large and strongly curved dewclaw is sharp.\nThe protracted claws increase grip over the ground, while rough paw pads make the sprint more convenient over tough ground. The limbs of the cheetah are longer than what is typical for other cats its size; the thigh muscles are large, and the tibia and fibula are held close together making the lower legs less likely to rotate. This reduces the risk of losing balance during runs, but compromises the cat's ability to climb trees. The highly reduced clavicle is connected through ligaments to the scapula, whose pendulum-like motion increases the stride length and assists in shock absorption. The extension of the vertebral column can add as much as to the stride length.\nWhile running, the cheetah uses its tail as a rudder-like means of steering that enables them to make sharp turns, necessary to outflank antelopes which often change direction to escape during a chase.\nMuscle tissue analysed shows little differences in type IIx muscle fiber concentration, anaerobic lactate dehydrogenase enzyme activity, and glycogen concentration between sexes.\nThe cheetah resembles the smaller cats in cranial features, and in having a long and flexible spine, as opposed to the stiff and short one in other large felids. The roughly triangular skull has light, narrow bones, and the sagittal crest is poorly developed, possibly to reduce weight and enhance speed. The mouth can not be opened as widely as in other cats given the shorter length of muscles between the jaw and the skull.\nIt has less developed digit flexor muscles in its forearms than other felids, possibly due to its specialisation for running, losing grip ability; its flexor digitorum profundus muscle constitutes 1.2\u20131.3 % of the combined fore and hind limb muscle mass, compared to 1.6\u20132.6 % of other felids.\nThe cheetah has 30 teeth; the dental formula is 3.1.3.13.1.2.1. The small, flat canines are used to bite the throat and suffocate the prey. A study gave the bite force quotient (BFQ) of the cheetah as 119, close to that for the lion (112), suggesting that adaptations for a lighter skull may not have reduced the power of the cheetah's jaws for their size. Unlike other cats, the cheetah's canines have no gap or diastema behind them when the jaws close, as the top and bottom cheek teeth show extensive overlap. Cheetahs have relatively elongated, blade-like shape carnassial teeth, with reduced lingual cusps; this may have been an adaptation to consume quickly the flesh of a prey before more heavy-built predators from other species arrive to take it from them.\nThe cheetah's concentration of nerve cells is arranged in a band in the centre of the eyes, a visual streak, the most efficient among felids. This significantly sharpens the vision and enables the cheetah to swiftly locate prey against the horizon. The cheetah is unable to roar due to the presence of a sharp-edged vocal fold within the larynx.\nIn stressful situations, the cheetah has a lower cortisol level than the leopard, indicating better stress response; it also has lower immunoglobulin G and Serum amyloid A levels but a higher lysozyme level and a higher bacterial killing capacity than the leopard, indicating a poorer adaptive and induced innate immune systems but a better constitutive innate immune system; its constitutive innate immune system compensates for its low variation of major histocompatibility complex and poorer immune adaptability.\nThe cheetah's urine is odourless as it contains principally elemental sulfur, which may help the cheetah to remain undetected by its prey and other predators.\nSpeed and acceleration.\nThe cheetah is the world's fastest land animal. Estimates of the maximum speed attained range from . A commonly quoted value is , recorded in 1957, but this measurement is disputed. In 2012, an 11-year-old cheetah from the Cincinnati Zoo set a world record by running in 5.95 seconds over a set run, recording a maximum speed of .\nCheetahs equipped with GPS collars hunted at speeds during most of the chase much lower than the highest recorded speed; their run was interspersed with a few short bursts of a few seconds when they attained peak speeds. The average speed recorded during the high speed phase was , or within the range including error. The highest recorded value was . A hunt consists of two phases, an initial fast acceleration phase when the cheetah tries to catch up with the prey, followed by slowing down as it closes in on it, the deceleration varying by the prey in question. The initial linear acceleration observed was 13 m/s\u00b2, more than twice than 6\u00a0m/s\u00b2 of horses and greater than 10\u00a0m/s\u00b2 of greyhounds. Cheetahs can increase up 3\u00a0m/s (10.8\u00a0km/h) and decrease up 4\u00a0m/s (14.4\u00a0km/h) in a single stride. Speed and acceleration values for a hunting cheetah may be different from those for a non-hunter because while engaged in the chase, the cheetah is more likely to be twisting and turning and may be running through vegetation. The speeds of more than 100\u00a0km/h attained by the cheetah may be only slightly greater than those achieved by the pronghorn at and the springbok at , but the cheetah additionally has an exceptional acceleration, can go from 0\u201397\u00a0km/h (0\u201360\u00a0mph) in less than 3 seconds, \"faster than a Ferrari\". For comparison, polo horses can go from 0 to 36\u00a0km/h in 3.6 seconds.\nOne stride of a galloping cheetah measures ; the stride length and the number of jumps increases with speed. It has been estimated that a cheetah at full speed could take 4 strides per second. During more than half the duration of the sprint, the cheetah has all four limbs in the air, increasing the stride length. Running cheetahs can retain up to 90% of the heat generated during the chase. A 1973 study suggested the length of the sprint is limited by excessive build-up of body heat when the body temperature reaches . However, a 2013 study recorded the average temperature of cheetahs after hunts to be , suggesting high temperatures need not cause hunts to be abandoned.\nThe running speed of of the cheetah was obtained as an result of a single run of one individual by dividing the distance traveled for time spent. The run lasted 2.25 seconds and was supposed to have been long, but was later found to have been long. It was therefore discredited for a faulty method of measurement.\nCheetahs have subsequently been measured at running at a speed of as the fastest speed from three runs including in opposite direction, for a single individual, over a marked course, even starting the run behind the start line, starting the run already running on the course. Again dividing the distance by time, but this time to determine the maximum sustained speed, completing the runs in a time of 7.0, 6.9 and 7.2 seconds. This test was made in 1965 but published in 1997. In 2010, the running speed of 15 cheetahs was measured by means of high speed camera stationed on a tripod and placed at specific points on a track; the cheetahs were chasing a lure and there were several attempts per individual, and their length from the nose to base of the tail was used as a scale. The speed was estimated from the time the tip of the nose appeared until it was no longer visible on camera. The maximum speed recorded was 100.1 km/h for one individual. Subsequently, with GPS-IMU collars, in 2011 and 2012, running speed was measured for wild cheetahs during hunts with turns and manoeuvres, and the maximum speed recorded was 58 mph (93 km/h) sustained for 1\u20132 seconds. The speed was obtained by dividing the length by the time between footfalls of a stride.\nThere are indirect ways to measure how fast a cheetah can run. One case is known of a cheetah that overtook a young male pronghorn. Cheetahs can overtake a running antelope with a head start. Both animals were clocked at by speedometer reading while running alongside a vehicle at full speed. Cheetahs can easily capture gazelles galloping at full speed ().\nThe physiological reasons for speed in cheetahs are:\nDistribution and habitat.\nIn eastern and southern Africa, the cheetah occurs mostly in savannas like the Kalahari and Serengeti. In central, northern and western Africa, it inhabits arid mountain ranges and valleys; in the harsh climate of the Sahara, it prefers high mountains, which receive more rainfall than the surrounding desert. The vegetation and water resources in these mountains support antelopes. In Iran, it occurs in hilly terrain of deserts at elevations up to , where annual precipitation is generally below ; the primary vegetation in these areas is thinly distributed shrubs, less than tall.\nThe cheetah inhabits a variety of ecosystems and appears to be less selective in habitat choice than other felids; it prefers areas with greater availability of prey, good visibility and minimal chances of encountering larger predators. It seldom occurs in tropical forests. It has been reported at the elevation of . An open area with some cover, such as diffused bushes, is probably ideal for the cheetah because it needs to stalk and pursue its prey over a distance. This also minimises the risk of encountering larger carnivores. The cheetah tends to occur in low densities typically between 0.3 and 3.0 adults per ; these values are 10\u201330% of those reported for leopards and lions.\nHistorical range.\nIn prehistoric times, the cheetah was distributed throughout Africa, Asia and Europe. It gradually fell to extinction in Europe, possibly because of competition with the lion. Today the cheetah has been extirpated in most of its historical range; the numbers of the Asiatic cheetah had begun plummeting since the late 1800s, long before the other subspecies started their decline. As of 2017, cheetahs occur in just nine per cent of their erstwhile range in Africa, mostly in unprotected areas.\nIn the past until the mid-20th century, the cheetah ranged across vast stretches in Asia, from the Arabian Peninsula in the west to the Indian subcontinent in the east, and as far north as the Aral and Caspian Seas. A few centuries ago the cheetah was abundant in India, and its range coincided with the distribution of major prey like the blackbuck. However, its numbers in India plummeted from the 19th\u00a0century onward; Divyabhanusinh of the Bombay Natural History Society notes that the last three individuals in the wild were killed by Maharaja Ramanuj Pratap Singh of Surguja in 1947. The last confirmed sighting in India was of a cheetah that drowned in a well near Hyderabad in 1957.\nVladimir Geptner wrote that the cheetah's range in the Soviet Union encompassed the \"desert plains of Middle Asia and southern Kazakhstan and the eastern Trans-Caucasus\". During the Middle Ages, the cheetah ranged as far as western Georgia and probably survived in the Kura-Aras lowland and central Aras valley as recently as the eighteenth century, though it went extinct in the region following the decline of goitered gazelles and due to human persecution. By the mid-20th century, the cheetah was reportedly \"still quite extensively if sparsely distributed throughout the region west of the Amu-Darya and Aral Sea, but has been vanishing very rapidly\".\nIn Iraq, cheetahs were reported from Basra in the 1920s. In Iran there were around 400 cheetahs before World War\u00a0II, distributed across deserts and steppes to the east and the borderlands with Iraq to the west; the numbers were falling because of a decline in prey. Conservation efforts in the 1950s stabilised the population, but prey species declined again in the wake of the Iranian Revolution (1979) and the Iran\u2013Iraq War (1980\u20131988), leading to a significant contraction of the cheetah's historical range in the region.\nIn 1975, the cheetah population was estimated at 15,000 individuals throughout Sub-Saharan Africa, following the first survey in this region by Norman Myers. The range covered most of eastern and southern Africa, except for the desert region on the western coast of modern-day Angola and Namibia. In the following years, cheetah populations across the region have become smaller and more fragmented as their natural habitat has been modified dramatically.\nNatural cheetah mummies dating back thousands of years have been found in a cave system in Saudi Arabia.\nPresent distribution.\nThe cheetah occurs mostly in eastern and southern Africa; its presence in Asia is limited to the central deserts of Iran, though there have been unconfirmed reports of sightings in Afghanistan, Iraq and Pakistan in the last few decades. The global population of cheetahs was estimated at nearly 7,100 mature individuals in 2016. The Iranian population appears to have decreased from 60 to 100 individuals in 2007 to 43 in 2016, distributed in three subpopulations over less than in Iran's central plateau. The largest population of nearly 4,000 individuals is sparsely distributed over Angola, Botswana, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa and Zambia. Another population in Kenya and Tanzania comprises about 1,000 individuals. All other cheetahs occur in small, fragmented groups of less than 100 individuals each. Populations are thought to be declining.\nEcology and behaviour.\nCheetahs are active mainly during the day, whereas other carnivores such as leopards and lions are active mainly at night; These larger carnivores can kill cheetahs and steal their kills; hence, the diurnal tendency of cheetahs helps them avoid larger predators in areas where they are sympatric, such as the Okavango Delta. In areas where the cheetah is the major predator (such as farmlands in Botswana and Namibia), activity tends to increase at night. This may also happen in highly arid regions such as the Sahara, where daytime temperatures can reach . The lunar cycle can also influence the cheetah's routine\u2014activity might increase on moonlit nights as prey can be sighted easily, though this comes with the danger of encountering larger predators. Hunting is the major activity throughout the day, with peaks during dawn and dusk. Groups rest in grassy clearings after dusk. Cheetahs often inspect their vicinity at observation points such as elevations to check for prey or larger carnivores; even while resting, they take turns at keeping a lookout.\nSocial organisation.\nCheetahs have a flexible and complex social structure and tend to be more gregarious than several other cat species. Individuals typically avoid one another but are generally amicable; males may fight over territories or access to females in oestrus, and on rare occasions such fights can result in severe injury and death. Females are not social and have minimal interaction with other individuals, barring the interaction with males when they enter their territories or during the mating season. Some females, generally mother and offspring or siblings, may rest beside one another during the day. Females tend to lead a solitary life or live with offspring in undefended home ranges; young females often stay close to their mothers for life but young males leave their mother's range to live elsewhere.\nSome males are territorial, and group together for life, forming coalitions that collectively defend a territory which ensures maximum access to females\u2014this is unlike the behaviour of the male lion who mates with a particular group (pride) of females. In most cases, a coalition will consist of brothers born in the same litter who stayed together after weaning, but biologically unrelated males are often allowed into the group; in the Serengeti, 30% of members in coalitions are unrelated males. If a cub is the only male in a litter, he will typically join an existing group, or form a small group of solitary males with two or three other lone males who may or may not be territorial. In the Kalahari Desert around 40% of the males live in solitude.\nMales in a coalition are affectionate toward each other, grooming mutually and calling out if any member is lost; unrelated males may face some aversion in their initial days in the group. All males in the coalition typically have equal access to kills when the group hunts together, and possibly also to females who may enter their territory. A coalition generally has a greater chance of encountering and acquiring females for mating; however, its large membership demands greater resources than do solitary males. A 1987 study showed that solitary and grouped males have a nearly equal chance of coming across females, but the males in coalitions are notably healthier and have better chances of survival than their solitary counterparts.\nMale cheetahs seem to be more tolerant to cubs that are not their offspring than other felids, and supposed evidence of infanticide is considered circumstantial.\nHome ranges and territories.\nUnlike many other felids, among cheetahs, females tend to occupy larger areas compared to males. Females typically disperse over large areas in pursuit of prey, but they are less nomadic and roam in a smaller area if prey availability in the area is high. As such, the size of their home range depends on the distribution of prey in a region. In central Namibia, where most prey species are sparsely distributed, home ranges average , whereas in the woodlands of the Phinda Game Reserve (South Africa), which have plentiful prey, home ranges are in size. Cheetahs can travel long stretches overland in search of food; a study in the Kalahari Desert recorded an average displacement of nearly every day and walking speeds ranged between .\nMales are generally less nomadic than females; often males in coalitions (and sometimes solitary males staying far from coalitions) establish territories. Whether males settle in territories or disperse over large areas forming home ranges depends primarily on the movements of females. Territoriality is preferred only if females tend to be more sedentary, which is more feasible in areas with plenty of prey. Some males, called floaters, switch between territoriality and nomadism depending on the availability of females. A 1987 study showed territoriality depended on the size and age of males and the membership of the coalition. The ranges of floaters averaged in the Serengeti to in central Namibia. In the Kruger National Park (South Africa) territories were much smaller. A coalition of three males occupied a territory measuring , and the territory of a solitary male measured . When a female enters a territory, the males will surround her; if she tries to escape, the males will bite or snap at her. Generally, the female can not escape on her own; the males themselves leave after they lose interest in her. They may smell the spot she was sitting or lying on to determine if she was in oestrus.\nCommunication.\nThe cheetah is a vocal felid with a broad repertoire of calls and sounds; the acoustic features and the use of many of these have been studied in detail. The vocal characteristics, such as the way they are produced, are often different from those of other cats. For instance, a study showed that exhalation is louder than inhalation in cheetahs, while no such distinction was observed in the domestic cat. Listed below are some commonly recorded vocalisations observed in cheetahs:\nAnother major means of communication is by scent\u2014the male will often raise his tail and spray urine on elevated landmarks such as a tree trunks, stumps or rocks; other cheetahs will sniff these landmarks and repeat the ritual. Females may also show marking behaviour but less prominently than males do. Females in oestrus will show maximum urine-marking, and their excrement can attract males from far off. In Botswana, cheetahs are frequently captured by ranchers to protect livestock by setting up traps in traditional marking spots; the calls of the trapped cheetah can attract more cheetahs to the place. An analysis of camera traps at scent-marking sites in north-central Namibia found that cheetahs defecate on marking sites much more frequently than leopards.\nTouch and visual cues are other ways of signalling in cheetahs. Social meetings involve mutual sniffing of the mouth, anus and genitals. Individuals will groom one another, lick each other's faces and rub cheeks. However, they seldom lean on or rub their flanks against each other. The tear streaks on the face can sharply define expressions at close range. Mothers probably use the alternate light and dark rings on the tail to signal their cubs to follow them.\nDiet and hunting.\nThe cheetah is a carnivore that hunts small to medium-sized prey weighing , but mostly less than . Its primary prey are medium-sized ungulates. They are the major component of the diet in certain areas, such as Dama and Dorcas gazelles in the Sahara, impala in the eastern and southern African woodlands, springbok in the arid savannas to the south and Thomson's gazelle in the Serengeti. Smaller antelopes like the common duiker are frequent prey in the southern Kalahari. Larger ungulates are typically avoided, though nyala, whose males weigh around , were found to be the major prey in a study in the Phinda Game Reserve. In Namibia cheetahs are the major predators of livestock. The diet of the Asiatic cheetah consists of chinkara, desert hare, goitered gazelle, urial, wild goats, and livestock; in India cheetahs used to prey mostly on blackbuck.\nPrey preferences and hunting success vary with the age, sex and number of cheetahs involved in the hunt and on the vigilance of the prey. Generally, only groups of cheetahs (coalitions or mother and cubs) try to kill larger prey; mothers with cubs especially look out for larger prey and tend to be more successful than females without cubs. Individuals on the periphery of the prey herd are common targets; vigilant prey which would react quickly on seeing the cheetah are not preferred.\nThe cheetah is one of the most iconic pursuit predators, hunting primarily throughout the day, sometimes with peaks at dawn and dusk; it tends to avoid larger predators like the primarily nocturnal lion.\nOne record of a cheetah is known that cooperated with black-backed jackals in bringing down prey.\nCheetahs in the Sahara and Maasai Mara in Kenya hunt after sunset to escape the high temperatures of the day. Cheetahs use their vision to hunt instead of their sense of smell; they keep a lookout for prey from resting sites or low branches. The cheetah stalks its prey, trying to conceal itself in cover, and approach as close as possible, often within of the prey (or even closer for less alert prey). Alternatively the cheetah can lie hidden in cover and wait for the prey to come nearer. A stalking cheetah assumes a partially crouched posture, with the head lower than the shoulders; it moves slowly and remains still at times. In areas of minimal cover, the cheetah may approach within of the prey and start the chase. The chase typically lasts 37.9 seconds in average. In a 2013 study, the length of chases averaged , and the longest run measured . The cheetah can give up the hunt attempt if it is detected by the prey early or if it cannot make a kill quickly. Having less muscled forearms than other predators, cheetahs lack the claw strength to tackle down the prey, and instead catch the prey using their well-developed dewclaw in the forepaws to hook the limbs or rump of the prey in full pursuit to disrupt its balance and cause it to fall, allowing the cheetah to pounce on the prey. Such a fall during a high-speed chase may cause the prey to collapse hard enough to break some of its limbs.\nCheetahs can decelerate dramatically toward the end of the hunt, slowing down from to in just three strides, and can easily follow any twists and turns the prey makes as it tries to flee. To kill medium- to large-sized prey, the cheetah bites the prey's throat to strangle it, maintaining the bite for around five minutes, within which the prey succumbs to asphyxiation and stops struggling. A bite on the nape of the neck or the snout (and sometimes on the skull) suffices to kill smaller prey. Cheetahs have an average hunting success rate of 25\u201340%, higher for smaller and more vulnerable prey.\nOnce the hunt is over, the prey is taken near a bush or under a tree; the cheetah, highly exhausted after the chase, rests beside the kill and pants heavily for five to 55 minutes. Meanwhile, cheetahs nearby, who did not take part in the hunt, might feed on the kill immediately. Groups of cheetah consume the kill peacefully, though minor noises and snapping may be observed. Cheetahs can consume large quantities of food; a cheetah at the Etosha National Park (Namibia) was found to consume as much as within two hours. However, on a daily basis, a cheetah feeds on around of meat. Cheetahs, especially mothers with cubs, remain cautious even as they eat, pausing to look around for vultures and predators who may steal the kill.\nCheetahs move their heads from side to side so the blade-like shape carnassial teeth tear the flesh, which can then be swallowed without chewing. They typically begin with the hindquarters where the tissue is the softest, and then progress toward the abdomen and the spine. Ribs are chewed on at the ends, and the limbs are not generally torn apart while eating. Unless the prey is very small, the skeleton is left almost intact after feeding on the meat. Cheetahs have been reported to lose 9\u201314% of their kills to larger and stronger predators. Unlike African wild dogs, cheetahs could cope with a 25% loss of kills, needing to spend only 4 hours per day hunting to recover the energy wasted; their high speed and short duration pursuits would make them energetically flexible. To defend itself or its prey, a cheetah holds its body low to the ground and snarls with its mouth wide open, the eyes staring threateningly ahead and the ears folded backward. This may be accompanied by moans, hisses and growls, and hitting the ground with the forepaws. Although uncommon, cases of wild cheetahs scavenging carcasses that they did not hunt themselves have been observed; even one case of a cheetah mother and her three 15 month old cubs stealing a kill from a spotted hyena (a topi) is known. Causes of this scavenging behavior are unclear.\nCheetahs appear to have a comparatively higher hunting success rate than other predators. Their success rate for hunting Thomson gazelles is 70%, whereas the success rate of African wild dogs is 57%, of spotted hyenas 33%, and of lions 26%. Their success rate for hunting impalas is 26%, but of African wild dogs only 15.5%.\nReproduction and life cycle.\nThe cheetah breeds throughout the year; females are polyestrous and induced ovulators with an estrous cycle of 12\u00a0days on average that can vary from three days to a month. They have their first litter at two to three years of age and can conceive again after 17 to 20 months from giving birth, or even sooner if a whole litter is lost. Males can breed at less than two years of age in captivity, but this may be delayed in the wild until the male acquires a territory. A 2007 study showed that females who gave birth to more litters early in their life often died younger, indicating a trade-off between longevity and yearly reproductive success.\nUrine-marking in males can become more pronounced when a female in their vicinity comes into estrus. Males, sometimes even those in coalitions, fight among one another to secure access to the female. Often one male will eventually win dominance over the others and mate with the female, though a female can mate with different males. Mating begins with the male approaching the female, who lies down on the ground; individuals often chirp, purr or yelp at this time. No courtship behaviour is observed; the male immediately secures hold of the female's nape, and copulation takes place. The pair then ignore each other, but meet and copulate a few more times three to five times a day for the next two to three days before finally parting ways.\nAfter a gestation of nearly three months, a litter of one to eight cubs is born (though those of three to four cubs are more common). Births take place at 20\u201325 minute intervals in a sheltered place such as thick vegetation. The eyes are shut at birth, and open in four to 11 days. Newborn cubs might spit a lot and make soft churring noises; they start walking by two weeks. Their nape, shoulders and back are thickly covered with long bluish-grey hair, called a mantle, which gives them a mohawk-type appearance; this fur is shed as the cheetah grows older. A study suggested that this mane gives a cheetah cub the appearance of a honey badger, and could act as camouflage from attacks by these badgers or predators that tend to avoid them.\nCompared to other felids, cheetah cubs are highly vulnerable to several predators during the first few weeks of their life. Mothers keep their cubs hidden in dense vegetation for the first two months and nurse in the early morning. The mother is extremely vigilant at this stage; she stays within of the lair, frequently visits her cubs, moves them every five to six days, and remains with them after dark. Despite trying to make minimal noise, she cannot generally defend her litter from predators. Predation is the leading cause of mortality in cheetah cubs; a study showed that in areas with a low density of predators (such as Namibian farmlands) around 70% of the cubs make it beyond the age of 14 months, whereas in areas like the Serengeti National Park, where several large carnivores exist, the survival rate was just 17%. Deaths also occur from starvation if their mothers abandon them, fires, or pneumonia because of exposure to bad weather. Generation length of the cheetah is six years. The overall juvenile survival rate for cheetahs is 35.7% in the Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park and 34.3% in the Kalahari, compared to a juvenile survival rate of 37% for leopards in the Sabi Sand Game Reserve; high juvenile mortality appears to be a natural part of population dynamics among predators.\nCubs start coming out of the lair at two months of age, trailing after their mother wherever she goes. At this point the mother nurses less and brings solid food to the cubs; they retreat away from the carcass in fear initially, but gradually start eating it. The cubs might purr as the mother licks them clean after the meal. Weaning occurs at four to six months. To train her cubs in hunting, the mother will catch and let go of live prey in front of her cubs. Cubs' play behaviour includes chasing, crouching, pouncing and wrestling; there is plenty of agility, and attacks are seldom lethal. Playing can improve catching skills in cubs, though the ability to crouch and hide may not develop remarkably.\nCubs as young as six months try to capture small prey like hares and young gazelles. However, they may have to wait until as long as 15 months of age to make a successful kill on their own. At around 20 months, offspring become independent; mothers might have conceived again by then. Siblings may remain together for a few more months before parting ways. While females stay close to their mothers, males move farther off. The lifespan of wild cheetahs is 14 to 15 years for females, and their reproductive cycle typically ends by 12 years of age; males generally live as long as ten years.\nCompetition.\nAlthough cheetahs and spotted hyenas favor different prey, the latter will nevertheless steal cheetah kills with no difficulty, with George Schaller observing that cheetahs in the Serengeti lost 4% of their kills to them. Cheetahs, particularly females with cubs, may attempt to protect their kills from hyenas by making threatening vocalizations and lunges, but may retreat if the larger carnivores persist, though exceptions have occurred.\nIn Iran, cheetahs compete with leopards for chinkara, bezoar ibex and urial. One study undertaken in the Bafq Protected Area found that cheetahs avoided leopards by occupying lower elevations, though one cheetah was nevertheless killed by a leopard during the study. Cheetah mothers have however been observed to drive off leopards threatening their cubs. In north-central Namibia, cheetahs and leopards sometimes visit the same scent marking sites, though they avoid interacting with each other by marking at different times, with cheetahs visiting such sites at night, while leopards do so in daylight.\nThreats.\nThe cheetah is threatened by several factors, like habitat loss and fragmentation of populations. Habitat loss is caused mainly by the introduction of commercial land use, such as agriculture and industry. It is further aggravated by ecological degradation, like woody plant encroachment, which is common in southern Africa. Moreover, the species apparently requires a sizeable area to live in as indicated by its low population densities. Shortage of prey and conflict with other species such as humans and large carnivores are other major threats. The cheetah appears to be less capable of coexisting with humans than the leopard. With 76% of its range consisting of unprotected land, the cheetah is often targeted by farmers and pastoralists who attempt to protect their livestock, especially in Namibia. Illegal wildlife trade and trafficking is another problem in some places (like Ethiopia). Some tribes, like the Maasai people in Tanzania, have been reported to use cheetah skins in ceremonies. Roadkill is a threat in areas where roads have been constructed in natural habitats or through protected areas; roadkilled cheetahs were found in Kalmand, Touran National Park and Bafq in Iran. The reduced genetic variability makes cheetahs more vulnerable to diseases; however, the threat posed by infectious diseases may be minor, given the low population densities and hence a reduced chance of infection.\nConservation.\nThe cheetah has been classified as Vulnerable on the IUCNRed List; it is listed under AppendixI of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals and AppendixI of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species. The Endangered Species Act enlists the cheetah as Endangered.\nIn Africa.\nUntil the 1970s, cheetahs and other carnivores were frequently killed to protect livestock in Africa. Gradually the understanding of cheetah ecology increased and their falling numbers became a matter of concern. The De Wildt Cheetah and Wildlife Centre was set up in 1971 in South Africa to provide care for wild cheetahs regularly trapped or injured by Namibian farmers. By 1987, the first major research project to outline cheetah conservation strategies was underway. The Cheetah Conservation Fund, founded in 1990 in Namibia, put efforts into field research and education about cheetahs on the global platform. The CCF runs a cheetah genetics laboratory, the only one of its kind, in Otjiwarongo (Namibia); \"Bushblok\" is an initiative to restore habitat systematically through targeted bush thinning and biomass utilisation. Several more cheetah-specific conservation programmes have since been established, like Cheetah Outreach in South Africa.\nThe Global Cheetah Action Plan Workshop in 2002 laid emphasis on the need for a range-wide survey of wild cheetahs to demarcate areas for conservation efforts and on creating awareness through training programs. The Range Wide Conservation Program for Cheetah and African Wild Dogs began in 2007 as a joint initiative of the IUCN Cat and Canid Specialist Groups, the Wildlife Conservation Society and the Zoological Society of London. National conservation plans have been developed for several African countries. In 2014, the CITES Standing Committee recognised the cheetah as a \"species of priority\" in their strategies in northeastern Africa to counter wildlife trafficking. In December 2016, the results of an extensive survey detailing the distribution and demography of cheetahs throughout the range were published; the researchers recommended listing the cheetah as Endangered on the IUCN Red List.\nThe cheetah was reintroduced in Malawi in 2017.\nIn Asia.\nIn 2001, the Iranian government collaborated with the CCF, the IUCN, Panthera Corporation, United Nations Development Programme and the Wildlife Conservation Society on the Conservation of Asiatic Cheetah Project (CACP) to protect the natural habitat of the Asiatic cheetah and its prey. In 2004, the Iranian Centre for Sustainable Development (CENESTA) conducted an international workshop to discuss conservation plans with local stakeholders. Iran declared 31August as National Cheetah Day in 2006. The Iranian Cheetah Strategic Planning meet in 2010 formulated a five-year conservation plan for Asiatic cheetahs. The CACP Phase II was implemented in 2009, and the third phase was drafted in 2018.\nDuring the early 2000s scientists from the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (Hyderabad) proposed a plan to clone Asiatic cheetahs from Iran for reintroduction in India, but Iran denied the proposal. In September 2009, the Minister of Environment and Forests assigned the Wildlife Trust of India and the Wildlife Institute of India with examining the potential of importing African cheetahs to India. Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary and Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary were suggested as reintroduction sites for the cheetah because of the high prey density. However, plans for reintroduction were stalled in May 2012 by the Supreme Court of India because of a political dispute and concerns over introducing a non-native species to the country. Opponents stated the plan was \"not a case of intentional movement of an organism into a part of its native range\". On 28 January 2020, the Supreme Court allowed the central government to introduce cheetahs to a suitable habitat in India on an experimental basis to see if they can adapt to it. In 2020, India signed a memorandum of understanding with Namibia as part of Project Cheetah. In July 2022, it was announced that eight cheetahs would be transferred from Namibia to India in August. The eight cheetahs were released into Kuno National Park on 17 September 2022. Since their introduction, they gave birth to 17 cubs. However, by September 2024, eight adult cheetahs and four cubs already died.\nInteraction with humans.\nTaming.\nThe cheetah shows little aggression toward humans, and can be tamed easily, as it has been since antiquity. The earliest known depictions of the cheetah are from the Chauvet Cave in France, dating back to 32,000\u201326,000 BC. According to historians such as Heinz Friederichs and Burchard Brentjes, the cheetah was first tamed in Sumer and this gradually spread out to central and northern Africa, from where it reached India. The evidence for this is mainly pictorial; for instance, a Sumerian seal dating back to c.\u20093000 BC, featuring a long-legged leashed animal has fueled speculation that the cheetah was first tamed in Sumer. However, Thomas Allsen argues that the depicted animal might be a large dog. Other historians, such as Frederick Zeuner, have opined that ancient Egyptians were the first to tame the cheetah, from where it gradually spread into central Asia, Iran and India.\nIn comparison, theories of the cheetah's taming in Egypt are stronger and include timelines proposed on this basis. Mafdet, one of the ancient Egyptian deities worshiped during the First Dynasty (3100\u20132900BC), was sometimes depicted as a cheetah. Ancient Egyptians believed the spirits of deceased pharaohs were taken away by cheetahs. Reliefs in the Deir el-Bahari temple complex tell of an expedition by Egyptians to the Land of Punt during the reign of Hatshepsut (1507\u20131458BC) that fetched, among other things, animals called \"panthers\". During the New Kingdom (16th to 11th centuries\u00a0BC), cheetahs were common pets for royalty, who adorned them with ornate collars and leashes. Rock carvings depicting cheetahs dating back to 2000\u20136000 years ago have been found in Twyfelfontein; little else has been discovered in connection to the taming of cheetahs (or other cats) in southern Africa.\nHunting cheetahs are known in pre-Islamic Arabic art from Yemen. Hunting with cheetahs became more prevalent toward the seventh centuryAD. In the Middle East, the cheetah would accompany the nobility to hunts in a special seat on the back of the saddle. Taming was an elaborate process and could take a year to complete. The Romans may have referred to the cheetah as the () or (), believing it to be a hybrid between a leopard and a lion because of the mantle seen in cheetah cubs and the difficulty of breeding them in captivity. A Roman hunting cheetah is depicted in a 4th-century mosaic from Lod, Israel. Cheetahs continued to be used into the Byzantine period of the Roman Empire, with \"hunting leopards\" being mentioned in the \"Cynegetica\" (283/284 AD).\nIn eastern Asia, records are confusing as regional names for the leopard and the cheetah may be used interchangeably. The earliest depiction of cheetahs from eastern Asia dates back to the Tang dynasty (7th to 10th centuriesAD); paintings depict tethered cheetahs and cheetahs mounted on horses. Chinese emperors would use cheetahs and caracals as gifts. In the 13th and 14th centuries, the Yuan rulers bought numerous cheetahs from the western parts of the empire and from Muslim merchants. According to the , the subsequent Ming dynasty (14th to 17th centuries) continued this practice. Tomb figurines from the Mongol empire, dating back to the reign of Kublai Khan (1260\u20131294AD), represent cheetahs on horseback. The Mughal ruler Akbar the Great (1556\u20131605AD) is said to have kept as many as 1000 \"khasa\" (imperial) cheetahs. His son Jahangir wrote in his memoirs, \"Tuzk-e-Jahangiri\", that only one of them gave birth. Mughal rulers trained cheetahs and caracals in a similar way as the western Asians, and used them to hunt game, especially blackbuck. The rampant hunting severely affected the populations of wild animals in India; by 1927, cheetahs had to be imported from Africa.\nIn captivity.\nThe first cheetah to be brought into captivity in a zoo was at the Zoological Society of London in 1829. Early captive cheetahs showed a high mortality rate, with an average lifespan of 3\u20134 years. After trade of wild cheetahs was delimited by the enforcement of CITES in 1975, more efforts were put into breeding in captivity; in 2014 the number of captive cheetahs worldwide was estimated at 1730 individuals, with 87% born in captivity.\nMortality under captivity is generally high; in 2014, 23% of the captive cheetahs worldwide died under one year of age, mostly within a month of birth. Although a comparative study from 1985 found that cheetah cub mortality at 24 % was generally lower than the average of 33 % for 17 carnivore mammals, including 9 felids; cheetah cub mortality was the second lowest among felids. Deaths result from several reasons\u2014stillbirths, birth defects, cannibalism, hypothermia, maternal neglect, and infectious diseases. Compared to other felids, cheetahs need specialised care because of their higher vulnerability to stress-induced diseases; this has been attributed to their low genetic variability and factors of captive life. Common diseases of cheetahs include feline herpesvirus, feline infectious peritonitis, gastroenteritis, glomerulosclerosis, leukoencephalopathy, myelopathy, nephrosclerosis and veno-occlusive disease. High density of cheetahs in a place, closeness to other large carnivores in enclosures, improper handling, exposure to public and frequent movement between zoos can be sources of stress for cheetahs. Recommended management practices for cheetahs include spacious and ample access to outdoors, stress minimisation by exercise and limited handling, and following proper hand-rearing protocols (especially for pregnant females).\nWild cheetahs are far more successful breeders than captive cheetahs; this has also been linked to increased stress levels in captive individuals. In a study in the Serengeti, females were found to have a 95% success rate in breeding, compared to 20% recorded for North American captive cheetahs in another study. On 26\u00a0November 2017, a female cheetah gave birth to eight cubs at the Saint Louis Zoo, setting a record for the most births recorded by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums. Chances of successful mating in captive males can be improved by replicating social groups such as coalitions observed in the wild.\nAttacks on humans.\nThere are no documented records of lethal attacks on humans by wild cheetahs. However, there have been instances of people being fatally mauled by captive cheetahs. In 2007, a 37-year-old woman from Antwerp was killed by a cheetah in a Belgian zoo after sneaking into its cage outside of visiting hours. In 2017, a three-year-old child was attacked by a captive cheetah on a farm in Philippolis, South Africa. Despite being airlifted to a hospital in Bloemfontein, the boy died from his injuries.\nIn culture.\nThe cheetah has been widely portrayed in a variety of artistic works. In \"Bacchus and Ariadne\", an oil painting by the 16th-century Italian painter Titian, the chariot of the Greek god Dionysus (Bacchus) is depicted as being drawn by two cheetahs. The cheetahs in the painting were previously considered to be leopards. In 1764, English painter George Stubbs commemorated the gifting of a cheetah to George III by the English Governor of Madras, Sir George Pigot in his painting \"Cheetah with Two Indian Attendants and a Stag\". The painting depicts a cheetah, hooded and collared by two Indian servants, along with a stag it was supposed to prey upon. The 1896 painting \"The Caress\" by the 19th-century Belgian symbolist painter Fernand Khnopff is a representation of the myth of Oedipus and the Sphinx and portrays a creature with a woman's head and a cheetah's body.\nAccording to theologian Philip Schaff, the \"leopard\" mentioned in Habakkuk 1: 8 could actually be a cheetah.\nTwo cheetahs are depicted standing upright and supporting a crown in the coat of arms of the Free State (South Africa).\nIn 1969, Joy Adamson, of \"Born Free\" fame, wrote \"The Spotted Sphinx\", a biography of her pet cheetah Pippa. \"Hussein, An Entertainment\", a novel by Patrick O'Brian set in the British Raj period in India, illustrates the practice of royalty keeping and training cheetahs to hunt antelopes. The book \"How It Was with Dooms\" tells the true story of a family raising an orphaned cheetah cub named Dooms in Kenya. The 2005 film \"Duma\" was based loosely on this book. The animated series \"ThunderCats\" had a character named \"Cheetara\", an anthropomorphic cheetah, voiced by Lynne Lipton. Comic book heroine Wonder Woman's chief adversary is Barbara Ann Minerva alias The Cheetah.\nThe Bill Thomas Cheetah American racing car, a Chevrolet-based coupe first designed and driven in 1963, was never homologated for competition beyond prototype status; its production ended in 1966. In 1986, Frito-Lay introduced Chester Cheetah, an anthropomorphic cheetah, as the mascot for their snack food Cheetos. The Mac OS X 10.0 was code-named \"Cheetah\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; The dictionary definition of \"cheetah\" at Wiktionary"}
{"id": "45610", "revid": "700033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45610", "title": "Mata Hari", "text": "Dutch exotic dancer (1876\u20131917)\nMargaretha Geertruida MacLeod (n\u00e9e\u00a0Zelle, ; 7 August 1876\u00a0\u2013\u00a015 October 1917), better known by the stage name Mata Hari ( , ; , lit.\u2009'eye of the day'), was a Dutch exotic dancer and courtesan who was convicted of being a spy for Germany during World War I. She was executed by firing squad in France.\nThe idea of a beautiful exotic dancer using her powers of seduction as a spy made her name synonymous with the \"femme fatale\". Mata Hari's story has inspired books, films, and other works. It has been said that she was convicted and condemned because the French Army needed a scapegoat, and that the files used to secure her conviction contained falsifications. Some have even stated that she could not have been a spy and was innocent.\nEarly life.\nMargaretha Geertruida Zelle was born on 7 August 1876 in Leeuwarden, a town in the north of the Netherlands, to Antje van der Meulen (1842\u20131891) and her husband, Adam Zelle (1840\u20131910). She had three younger brothers: Johannes Hendriks, Arie Anne, and Cornelis Coenraad. She was affectionately called \"M'greet\" by her family. Despite traditional assertions that Mata Hari was partly of Jewish, Malay, or Javanese, i.e., Indonesian, descent, scholars conclude she had no Jewish or Indonesian ancestry, and both of her parents were Dutch. Her father owned a hat factory and shop, made investments in the oil industry, and became affluent enough to give Margaretha and her siblings a lavish early childhood that included exclusive schools until the age of 13.\nSoon after Margaretha's father went bankrupt in 1889, her parents divorced, and her mother died in 1891. Her father remarried in Amsterdam on 9 February 1893 to Susanna Catharina ten Hoove (1844\u20131913). The family fell apart, and Margaretha was sent to live with her godfather, Mr.\u00a0Visser, in Sneek. She studied to be a kindergarten teacher in Leiden, but when the headmaster began to flirt with her conspicuously, she was removed from the institution by her godfather. A few months later, she fled to her uncle's home in The Hague.\nDutch East Indies.\nAt 18, Margaretha answered an advertisement in a Dutch newspaper placed by Dutch colonial army captain Rudolf MacLeod (1856\u20131928), who was living in what was then the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia) and was looking for a wife. Margaretha married MacLeod in Amsterdam on 11 July 1895. He was the son of Captain John Brienen MacLeod (a descendant of the Gesto branch of the MacLeods of Skye, hence his Scottish surname) and his wife Baroness Dina Louisa Sweerts de Landas. The marriage enabled Zelle to move into the Dutch upper class and placed her finances on a sound footing. She moved with her husband to Malang on the east side of the island of Java, travelling out on the in May 1897. They had two children, Norman-John MacLeod (1897\u20131899) and Louise Jeanne MacLeod (1898\u20131919).\nThe marriage was overall a disappointment. Rudolf was an alcoholic, physically abused Margaretha, and blamed her for his lack of promotion. He openly kept a concubine, a socially accepted practice in the Dutch East Indies at the time. When Rudolf was posted to Medan, Margaretha and the children remained in Toempoeng with the family of Mr. van Rheede, the government comptroller. Friends of Margaretha's in the Netherlands recall her writing to them around this time to say that she had taken the name \"Mata Hari,\" the word for \"sun\" in the local Indonesian language (literally, \"eye of the day\").\nAt Rudolf's urging, Margaretha returned to him, but his behavior did not change. In 1899, their children fell violently ill from complications relating to the treatment of syphilis contracted from their parents, though the family claimed an irate servant poisoned them. Jeanne survived, but Norman died. Some sources maintain that one of Rudolf's enemies may have poisoned their supper to kill both of their children. After moving back to the Netherlands, the couple officially separated on 30 August 1902. The divorce became final in 1906, and Margaretha was awarded custody of Jeanne. Rudolf was legally required to pay child support but never did. Once when Jeanne visited Rudolf, he did not return her to her mother. Margaretha did not have the resources to fight the situation and accepted it, believing that while Rudolf had been an abusive husband, he had been a good father. Jeanne later died at the age of 21, possibly from complications related to syphilis.\nCareer.\nParis.\nIn 1903, Zelle moved to Paris, where she performed as a circus horse rider using the name Lady MacLeod, much to the disapproval of the Dutch MacLeods. Struggling to earn a living, she also posed as an artist's model.\nBy 1904, Mata Hari rose to prominence as an exotic dancer. She was a contemporary of dancers Isadora Duncan and Ruth St. Denis, leaders in the early modern dance movement, which around the turn of the 20th century, looked to Asia and Egypt for artistic inspiration. Gabriel Astruc became her personal booking agent.\nPromiscuous, flirtatious, and openly flaunting her body, Mata Hari captivated her audiences and was an overnight success from the debut of her act at the Mus\u00e9e Guimet on 13 March 1905. She became the long-time mistress of the millionaire industrialist \u00c9mile \u00c9tienne Guimet, who had founded the Mus\u00e9e. Entertainers of her era commonly invented colourful stories about their origins, and she posed as a Javanese princess of priestly Hindu birth, pretending to have been immersed in the art of sacred Indian dance since childhood. She was photographed numerous times during this period, nude or nearly so. Some of these pictures were obtained by MacLeod and strengthened his case in keeping custody of their daughter.\nMata Hari brought a carefree provocative style to the stage in her act, which garnered wide acclaim. The most celebrated segment of her act was her progressive shedding of clothing until she wore just a jeweled breastplate and some ornaments upon her arms and head. She was never seen bare-chested as she was self-conscious about having small breasts. Early in her career, she wore for her performances a bodystocking that was similar in color to her skin, but that was later omitted.\nHer act was successful because it elevated erotic dance to a more respectable status and broke new ground in a style of entertainment for which Paris was later world-famous. Her style and free-willed attitude made her popular, as did her eagerness to perform in exotic and revealing clothing. She posed for provocative photos and mingled in wealthy circles. Since most Europeans at the time were unfamiliar with the Dutch East Indies, Mata Hari was thought of as exotic, and her claims were accepted as genuine. One enthusiastic French journalist wrote in a Paris newspaper that Mata Hari was \"so feline, extremely feminine, majestically tragic, the thousand curves and movements of her body trembling in a thousand rhythms.\" One journalist in Vienna wrote after seeing one of her performances that Mata Hari was \"slender and tall with the flexible grace of a wild animal, and with blue-black hair\" and that her face \"makes a strange foreign impression.\"\nBy about 1910, myriad imitators had arisen. Critics began to opine that the success and dazzling features of the popular Mata Hari were due to cheap exhibitionism and lacked artistic merit. Although she continued to schedule important social events throughout Europe, she was disdained by serious cultural institutions as a dancer who did not know how to dance.\nMata Hari's career went into decline after 1912. On 13 March 1915, she performed in the last show of her career. She had begun her career relatively late as a dancer and had started putting on weight. However, by this time, she had become a successful courtesan, known more for her sensuality and eroticism than for her classical beauty. She had relationships with high-ranking military officers, politicians, and others in influential positions in many countries. Her relationships and liaisons with powerful men frequently took her across international borders. Before World War I, she was generally viewed as an artist and a free-spirited bohemian, but as war approached, she began to be seen by some as a wanton and promiscuous woman, and perhaps a dangerous seductress.\nEspionage.\nDuring World War I, the Netherlands remained neutral. As a Dutch subject, Zelle was thus able to cross national borders freely. To avoid the battlefields, she traveled between France and the Netherlands via Spain and Britain, and her movements inevitably attracted attention. During the war, Zelle was involved in what was described as a very intense romantic-sexual relationship with Captain Vadim Maslov, a 23-year-old Russian Staff Captain of the 1st Special Infantry Regiment serving with the French, whom she called the love of her life. Maslov was part of the 50,000-strong Russian Expeditionary Force sent to the Western Front in the spring of 1916.\nIn April 1916, Maslov was wounded fighting in the ill-fated Nivelles Offensive to capture the German controlled fortified Brimont mountain range, losing his sight in his left eye, leading Zelle to ask for permission to visit her wounded lover at the hospital where he was staying near the front. As a citizen of a neutral country, Zelle would not normally be allowed near the front. Zelle was met by agents from the Deuxi\u00e8me Bureau, who told her that she would be allowed to see Maslov if she agreed to spy for France.\nBefore the war, Zelle had performed as Mata Hari several times before the Crown Prince Wilhelm, eldest son of Kaiser Wilhelm II and nominally a senior German general on the Western Front. The Deuxi\u00e8me Bureau believed she could obtain information by seducing the Crown Prince for military secrets. In fact, his involvement was minimal, and it was German government propaganda that promoted the image of the Crown Prince as a great warrior, the worthy successor to the Hohenzollern monarchs who had made Prussia strong and powerful. They wanted to avoid publicising that the man expected to be the next Kaiser was a playboy noted for womanising, partying, and indulging in alcohol, who spent a portion of his time associating with far right-wing politicians, with the intent to have his father declared insane and deposed.\nUnaware that the Crown Prince did not have much to do with the running of Army Group Crown Prince or the 5th Army, the Deuxi\u00e8me Bureau offered Zelle one million francs if she could seduce him and provide France with good intelligence about German plans. The fact that the Crown Prince had, before 1914, never commanded a unit larger than a regiment, and was now supposedly commanding both an army and an army group at the same time, should have been a clue that his role in German Imperial decision-making was mostly nominal. Zelle's contact with the Deuxi\u00e8me Bureau was Captain Georges Ladoux, who later emerged as one of her principal accusers.\nIn November 1916, she was traveling from Spain aboard the steamship . When the ship called at the British port of Falmouth in Cornwall, she was arrested and taken to London, where she was interrogated at length by Assistant Commissioner Sir Basil Thomson of the Metropolitan Police; Sir Basil was based at New Scotland Yard and was in charge of counter-espionage. He gave an account of this in his 1922 book \"Queer People\", saying that she eventually admitted to working for the Deuxi\u00e8me Bureau. Initially detained in Canon Row police station, she was then released and stayed at the Savoy Hotel. A full transcript of the interview is in Britain's National Archives at Kew and was broadcast, with Mata Hari played by Eleanor Bron, on the independent radio station LBC in 1980. It is unclear if she lied on this occasion, believing the story made her sound more intriguing, or if the French authorities were using her in such a way but would not acknowledge her due to the embarrassment and international backlash it could cause.\nIn late 1916, Zelle traveled to Madrid, where she met the German military attach\u00e9, Major Arnold Kalle, and asked if he could arrange a meeting with the German Crown Prince. During this period, Zelle apparently offered to share French secrets with the German Empire in exchange for money, though whether this was because of greed or an attempt to set up a meeting with Crown Prince Wilhelm remains unclear.\nIn January 1917, Kalle transmitted radio messages to Berlin describing the helpful activities of a German spy code-named H-21, whose biography so closely matched Zelle's that it was obvious that Agent H-21 must be her. The Deuxi\u00e8me Bureau intercepted the messages and, from the information they contained, identified H-21 as Mata Hari. The messages were in a code that German intelligence knew had already been broken by the French, suggesting that the messages were contrived to have Zelle arrested by the French.\nGeneral Walter Nicolai, the chief intelligence officer of the German Imperial Army, had grown annoyed that Mata Hari had provided him with no real intelligence, instead selling the Germans mere Paris gossip about the sex lives of French politicians and generals, and decided to terminate her employment by exposing her as a German spy to the French.\nTrial.\nIn December 1916, the Second Bureau of the French War Ministry let Mata Hari obtain the names of six Belgian agents. Five were suspected of submitting fake material and working for the Germans, while the sixth was suspected of being a double agent for Germany and France. Two weeks after Mata Hari had left Paris for a trip to Madrid, the Germans executed the double agent while the five others continued their operations. This development proved to the Second Bureau that Mata Hari had communicated the names of the six spies to the Germans.\nOn 13 February 1917, Mata Hari was arrested in her room at the Hotel Elys\u00e9e Palace on the Champs Elys\u00e9es in central Paris. She was tried on 24 July, accused of spying for Germany and consequently causing the deaths of at least 50,000 soldiers. Although the French and British intelligence services suspected her of spying for Germany, neither could produce definite evidence against her.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A harlot? Yes, but a traitoress, never!\u2014\u200a\nZelle's principal interrogator, who grilled her relentlessly, was Captain Pierre Bouchardon; he later prosecuted her at trial. Bouchardon established that much of the Mata Hari persona was invented. Far from being a Javanese princess, Zelle was a white Dutch person, which he used as evidence of her dubious and dishonest character at her trial. Zelle admitted to Bouchardon that she had accepted 20,000 francs from a German diplomat and former lover as reimbursement for belongings taken from her by the German Imperial authorities. Bouchardon claimed that this was, in fact, payment to her for spying for Germany. In the meantime, Ladoux had been preparing a case against his former agent by casting all of her activities in the worst possible light, going so far as to engage in evidence tampering.\nScapegoat.\nIn 1917, France had been badly shaken by the Great Mutinies of the French Army in the spring of 1917 following the failure of the Nivelle Offensive and massive strikes. France might have collapsed from war exhaustion. Having one German spy on whom everything that went wrong with the war could be blamed was convenient for the French government. Mata Hari seemed the perfect scapegoat. The case against her received maximum publicity in the French press and led to her importance being greatly exaggerated. The Canadian historian Wesley Wark stated in a 2014 interview that Mata Hari was never an important spy but a scapegoat for French military failures that had nothing to do with her. Wark stated: \"They needed a scapegoat, and she was a notable target for scapegoating.\" The British historian Julie Wheelwright stated: \"She really did not pass on anything that you couldn't find in the local newspapers in Spain.\" Wheelwright described Zelle as \"an independent woman, a divorc\u00e9e, a citizen of a neutral country, a courtesan, and a dancer, which made her a perfect scapegoat for the French, who were then losing the war. She was held up as an example of what might happen if your morals were too loose.\"\nClaiming her innocence, Zelle wrote letters to the Dutch Ambassador in Paris. \"My international connections are due [to] my work as a dancer, nothing else. Because I really did not spy, it is terrible that I cannot defend myself.\" A difficult moment for Mata Hari during the trial occurred when her lover Maslov\u2014by now deeply embittered as a result of losing his eye in combat\u2014declined to testify for her and told her that he did not care whether she was convicted. When Zelle learned that Maslov had abandoned her, she fainted.\nHer defense counsel, veteran international lawyer \u00c9douard Clunet, faced impossible odds; he was denied permission to cross-examine the prosecution's witnesses or to examine his witnesses directly. Bouchardon used the fact that Zelle was a woman as evidence of her guilt, saying: \"Without scruples, accustomed to making use of men, she is the type of woman who is born to be a spy.\" Zelle has often been portrayed as a femme fatale, the dangerous, seductive woman who uses her sexuality to manipulate men effortlessly, but others view her differently: in the words of the American historians Norman Polmer and Thomas Allen she was \"na\u00efve and easily duped\", a victim of men rather than a victimiser.\nAlthough news reports following her execution claimed she had admitted to spying for Germany, Mata Hari made no such admission. She maintained throughout her ordeal that she had never been a German spy. At her trial, Zelle vehemently insisted that her sympathies were with the Allies and declared her passionate love of France, her adopted homeland. In October 2001, documents released from the archives of MI5 (British counter-intelligence) were used by a Dutch group, the Mata Hari Foundation, to ask the French government to exonerate Zelle as they argued that the MI5 files proved she was not guilty of the charges she was convicted of. A spokesperson from the Mata Hari Foundation argued that, at most, Zelle was a low-level spy who provided no secrets to either side, stating: \"We believe that there are sufficient doubts concerning the dossier of information that was used to convict her to warrant re-opening the case. Maybe she wasn't entirely innocent, but it seems clear she wasn't the master-spy whose information sent thousands of soldiers to their deaths, as has been claimed.\"\nExecution.\nZelle was executed by a firing squad consisting of 12 French soldiers just before dawn on 15 October 1917. She was 41. According to an eyewitness account by British reporter Henry Wales, she was not bound and refused a blindfold. She defiantly blew a kiss to the firing squad.\nA 1934 \"New Yorker\" article reported that at her execution, she wore \"a neat Amazonian tailored suit, especially made for the occasion, and a pair of new white gloves\", though another account indicates she wore the same suit, low-cut blouse, and tricorn hat ensemble which had been picked out by her accusers for her to wear at trial, and which was still the only full, clean outfit which she had in prison. Neither description matches photographic evidence. Wales recorded her death, saying that after the volley of shots rang out, \"Slowly, inertly, she settled to her knees, her head up always, and without the slightest change of expression on her face. For the fraction of a second it seemed she tottered there, on her knees, gazing directly at those who had taken her life. Then she fell backward, bending at the waist, with her legs doubled up beneath her.\" A non-commissioned officer then walked up to her body, pulled out his revolver, and shot her in the head to make sure she was dead.\nRemains and 2017 French declassification.\nMata Hari's body was not claimed by any family members and was accordingly used for medical study. Her head was embalmed and kept in the Museum of Anatomy in Paris. In 2000, archivists discovered that it had disappeared, possibly as early as 1954, according to curator Roger Saban, during the museum's relocation. Her head remains missing. Records dated 1918 show that the museum also received the rest of the body, but none of the remains could later be accounted for.\nMata Hari's sealed trial and other related documents, a total of 1,275 pages, were declassified by the French Army in 2017, one hundred years after her execution.\nLegacy.\nMuseum exhibition.\nThe Frisian museum (Dutch: Fries Museum) in Leeuwarden, Netherlands, contains a \"Mata Hari Room\". Included in the exhibit are two of her personal scrapbooks and an oriental rug embroidered with the footsteps of her fan dance. Located in Mata Hari's native town, the museum is well known for researching the life and career of Leeuwarden's world-famous citizen. The largest-ever Mata Hari exhibition was opened in the Museum of Friesland on 14 October 2017, one hundred years after her death.\nMata Hari's birthplace is located in the building at Kelders 33. The building suffered smoke and water damage during a fire in 2013 but was later restored. Architect Silvester Adema studied old drawings of the storefront to reconstruct it as it appeared when Adam Zelle, the father of Mata Hari, had a hat shop there. In 2016, an information centre (\"belevingscentrum\") was created in the building displaying mementos of Mata Hari.\nIn popular culture.\nThe idea of an exotic dancer working as a lethal double agent using her powers of seduction to extract military secrets from her many lovers made Mata Hari an enduring archetype of the \"femme fatale\".\nReferences.\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45611", "revid": "30292728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45611", "title": "Dr. Feelgood (band)", "text": "British rock band\nDr. Feelgood are an English pub rock band formed in 1971. Hailing from Canvey Island, Essex, they are best known for early singles such as \"She Does It Right\", \"Roxette\", \"Back in the Night\" and \"Milk and Alcohol\". Their original and distinctively British R&amp;B sound was centred on Wilko Johnson's choppy guitar style. Along with Johnson, the initial band line-up included singer Lee Brilleaux and the rhythm section of John B. Sparks, known as \"Sparko\", on bass guitar and John Martin, known as \"The Big Figure\", on drums. Although their most commercially productive years were the mid to late-1970s, and in spite of Brilleaux's death in 1994, a version of the band (featuring none of the original members) continue to tour and record.\nCareer.\nEarly years.\nThe band were formed on Canvey Island in 1971 by Johnson, Brilleaux and Sparks, who had all been members of existing R&amp;B bands, and soon added drummer John Martin. They took their name from a 1962 record by the American blues pianist and singer Willie Perryman (also known as \"Piano Red\") called \"Dr. Feel-Good\", which Perryman recorded under the name of Dr. Feelgood &amp; the Interns. The song was covered by several British beat groups in the 1960s, including Johnny Kidd &amp; the Pirates. The term is also a slang term for heroin or for a physician who is willing to over-prescribe drugs.\nBy late 1973, the band's driving R&amp;B influence had made them one of the most popular bands on the growing London pub rock circuit, which included regular appearances at the Lord Nelson music pub venue. They recorded their debut album, \"Down by the Jetty\", for United Artists in 1974. Like many pub rock acts, Dr. Feelgood built up a dedicated following and were known primarily for their high energy and intense live performances constantly honed through their touring and regular performances. Their studio albums such as \"Down by the Jetty\" and \"Malpractice\" (1975) added significantly to their rising popularity. \nTheir breakthrough 1976 live album, \"Stupidity\", reached number one in the UK Albums Chart (their only chart-topper). The Ramones were the opening act for the group's May 1976 shows at the Bottom Line in New York. \nAfter the 1977 follow-up \"Sneakin' Suspicion\", Johnson left the group because of conflicts with Lee Brilleaux. He was replaced by Gypie Mayo. The band with Mayo were never as popular as when Johnson was in the line-up, yet they went on to enjoy their only top ten hit single in 1979 with \"Milk and Alcohol\". Johnson, who died in 2022, went on to form the group Solid Senders before joining Ian Dury and the Blockheads in 1980. \nLater years.\nDespite Mayo's departure in 1981, and various subsequent line-up changes which left Brilleaux the only remaining original member, Dr. Feelgood continued touring and recording through the 1980s. The band then suffered an almost career-finishing blow when Brilleaux died of lymphoma on 7 April 1994.\nAs Brilleaux had insisted prior to his death, Dr. Feelgood reunited in May 1995, initially with vocalist Pete Gage (not to be confused with guitarist Pete Gage of Geno Washington and Vinegar Joe), and recommenced touring in 1996. Though the band contained no original members at this point, the musicians backing Gage had all previously played as members of Dr. Feelgood for at least five years, and in some cases for over a decade. In 1999, Gage was replaced by Robert Kane, formerly of the Animals II and the Alligators, who celebrated his 1,000th gig as the frontman of Dr. Feelgood in April 2007.\nEvery year after Brilleaux's death, a special concert known as the Lee Brilleaux Birthday Memorial was held on Canvey Island, where former and current Feelgoods celebrated the music of Dr. Feelgood, and raised money for The Fair Havens Hospice in Westcliff-on-Sea. Fans attended from all over the globe, and the 20th and final event was held on 9 May 2014. Still based in the UK, Dr. Feelgood continue to play across the world, with concerts in 2010 in Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Finland, France, the Netherlands, Italy, Spain and Switzerland.\nBand manager Chris Fenwick organises an annual walk around Canvey to commemorate Brilleaux's life, as well as additional walking tours during which he points out landmarks from the band's career. These include the jetty featured in the photograph on the band's first album cover, and venues where they played early in their career, such as The Lobster Smack inn, The Monico Nightclub and The Canvey Club (disguised as 'The Alibi Club' on the sleeve of the album \"Sneakin' Suspicion\").\nA film by Julien Temple about the early days of the band, \"Oil City Confidential\", premiered at the London Film Festival on 22 October 2009, and received a standing ovation. Guest of honour was Lee Brilleaux's mother Joan Collinson, along with his widow Shirley and children Kelly and Nick. All the surviving members of the original band were present along with manager Chris Fenwick, former tour manager and Stiff Records boss Jake Riviera and other friends and colleagues of the band. The film has its own Facebook page.\nReviewing the film for \"The Independent\", Nick Hasted concluded: \"Feelgood are remembered in rock history, if at all, as John the Baptists to punk's messiahs\". On general release from 1 February 2010, the film was critically well received, with Peter Bradshaw of \"The Guardian\" describing it as \"...a vivid study of period, music and place\". The film was first broadcast on BBC Four in April 2010.\nA major exhibition of memorabilia celebrating the band's career ran at The Canvey Club between May and July 2013, having been extended several times.\nOn 16 June 2021, it was announced that Walwyn was \"unavailable to play live shows for the foreseeable future\", due to family holiday commitments and the fact that his son has a possible compromised immune system. Later concerts were played by former guitarist Gordon Russell, whom Walwyn had replaced 32 years before. With Russell back in the band, they recorded \"Damm Right!\" in 2022, the first album with original songs since \"The Feelgood Factor\" in 1993, their last with Brilleaux.\nIn April 2024 the band's van was stolen, leaving them without any instruments and equipment, a week before a forthcoming tour of Germany. The theft took place outside the home of bassist Phil Mitchell in Hockley, Essex, between the night of 15 April and the morning of 16 April.\nIn 2025 John B. Sparks, the original founding member and bass player on all of the hit records, is gigging again with his own band 'Sparko's Going Back Home'. They are playing songs from Dr. Feelgood's first four albums plus many other tracks from later albums.\nMembers.\nCurrent members\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45612", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45612", "title": "Tamerlane", "text": ""}
{"id": "45615", "revid": "452414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45615", "title": "Augustus III", "text": ""}
{"id": "45616", "revid": "16320298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45616", "title": "Standard uniform distribution", "text": ""}
{"id": "45619", "revid": "1535071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45619", "title": "Lagged Fibonacci generator", "text": "Pseudorandom number generator\nA Lagged Fibonacci generator (LFG or sometimes LFib) is an example of a pseudorandom number generator. This class of random number generator is aimed at being an improvement on the 'standard' linear congruential generator. These are based on a generalisation of the Fibonacci sequence.\nThe Fibonacci sequence may be described by the recurrence relation:\nformula_1\nHence, the new term is the sum of the last two terms in the sequence. This can be generalised to the sequence:\nformula_2\nIn which case, the new term is some combination of any two previous terms. \"m\" is usually a power of 2 (\"m\" = 2\"M\"), often 232 or 264. The formula_3 operator denotes a general binary operation. This may be either addition, subtraction, multiplication, or the bitwise exclusive-or operator (XOR). The theory of this type of generator is rather complex, and it may not be sufficient simply to choose random values for j and k. These generators also tend to be very sensitive to initialisation.\nGenerators of this type employ \"k\" words of state (they 'remember' the last \"k\" values).\nIf the operation used is addition, then the generator is described as an \"Additive Lagged Fibonacci Generator\" or ALFG, if multiplication is used, it is a \"Multiplicative Lagged Fibonacci Generator\" or MLFG, and if the XOR operation is used, it is called a \"Two-tap generalised feedback shift register\" or GFSR. The Mersenne Twister algorithm is a variation on a GFSR. The GFSR is also related to the linear-feedback shift register, or LFSR.\nProperties of lagged Fibonacci generators.\nThe maximum period of lagged Fibonacci generators depends on the binary operation formula_3. If addition or subtraction is used, the maximum period is (2\"k\" \u2212 1) \u00d7 2\"M\"\u22121. If multiplication is used, the maximum period is (2\"k\" \u2212 1) \u00d7 2\"M\"\u22123, or 1/4 of period of the additive case. If bitwise xor is used, the maximum period is 2\"k\" \u2212 1.\nFor the generator to achieve this maximum period, the polynomial:\n\"y\" = \"x\"\"k\" + \"x\"\"j\" + 1\nmust be primitive over the integers mod 2. Values of \"j\" and \"k\" satisfying this constraint have been published in the literature. \nAnother list of possible values for \"j\" and \"k\" is on page 29 of volume 2 of \"The Art of Computer Programming\":\n(24, 55), (38, 89), (37, 100), (30, 127), (83, 258), (107, 378), (273, 607), (1029, 2281), (576, 3217), (4187, 9689), (7083, 19937), (9739, 23209)\nNote that the smaller number have short periods (only a few \"random\" numbers are generated before the first \"random\" number is repeated and the sequence restarts).\nIf addition is used, it is required that at least one of the first \"k\" values chosen to initialise the generator be odd. If multiplication is used, instead, it is required that all the first \"k\" values be odd, and further that at least one of them is \u00b13 mod 8.\nIt has been suggested that good ratios between j and k are approximately the golden ratio.\nProblems with LFGs.\nIn a paper on four-tap shift registers, Robert M. Ziff, referring to LFGs that use the XOR operator, states that \"It is now widely known that such generators, in particular with the two-tap rules such as R(103, 250), have serious deficiencies. Marsaglia observed very poor behavior with R(24, 55) and smaller generators, and advised against using generators of this type altogether. ... The basic problem of two-tap generators R(a, b) is that they have a built-in three-point correlation between formula_5, formula_6, and formula_7, simply given by the generator itself ... While these correlations are spread over the size formula_8 of the generator itself, they can evidently still lead to significant errors.\". This only refers to the standard LFG where each new number in the sequence depends on two previous numbers. A three-tap LFG has been shown to eliminate some statistical problems such as failing the Birthday Spacings and Generalized Triple tests.\nExample implementation.\nA simple implementation in the C programming language may look as shown below. This implementation uses 64-bit words and has a period of (2607 -1) \u00d7 263\nuint64_t X[R];\nuint64_t gen_rand()\n static int j = S - 1, k = R - 1;\n uint64_t r;\n r = X[k] = X[k] + X[j--];\n k--;\n if (j &lt; 0)\n j = R - 1;\n else if (k &lt; 0)\n k = R - 1;\n return r;\nSee also.\nWikipedia page 'List of random number generators' lists other PRNGs including some with better statistical qualities:\nhttps://, G.Marsaglia, A.Zaman"}
{"id": "45620", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45620", "title": "Linear Congruential Generators", "text": ""}
{"id": "45621", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45621", "title": "Psychopharmacology", "text": "Study of the effects of psychoactive drugs\nPsychopharmacology (from Greek ; ; and ) is the scientific study of the effects drugs have on mood, sensation, thinking, behavior, judgment and evaluation, and memory. It is distinguished from neuropsychopharmacology, which emphasizes the correlation between drug-induced changes in the functioning of cells in the nervous system and changes in consciousness and behavior.\nThe field of psychopharmacology studies a wide range of substances with various types of psychoactive properties, focusing primarily on the chemical interactions with the brain. The term \"psychopharmacology\" was likely first coined by David Macht in 1920. Psychoactive drugs interact with particular target sites or receptors found in the nervous system to induce widespread changes in physiological or psychological functions. The specific interaction between drugs and their receptors is referred to as \"drug action\", and the widespread changes in physiological or psychological function is referred to as \"drug effect\". These drugs may originate from natural sources such as plants and animals, or from artificial sources such as chemical synthesis in the laboratory.\nHistorical overview.\nEarly psychopharmacology.\nNot often mentioned or included in the field of psychopharmacology today are psychoactive substances not identified as useful in modern mental health settings or references. These substances are naturally occurring, but nonetheless psychoactive, and are compounds identified through the work of ethnobotanists and ethnomycologists (and others who study the native use of naturally occurring psychoactive drugs). However, although these substances have been used throughout history by various cultures, and have a profound effect on mentality and brain function, they have not always attained the degree of scrutinous evaluation that lab-made compounds have. Nevertheless, some, such as psilocybin and mescaline, have provided a basis of study for the compounds that are used and examined in the field today. Hunter-gatherer societies tended to favor hallucinogens, and today their use can still be observed in many surviving tribal cultures. The exact drug used depends on what the particular ecosystem a given tribe lives in can support, and are typically found growing wild. Such drugs include various psychoactive mushrooms containing psilocybin or muscimol and cacti containing mescaline and other chemicals, along with myriad other plants containing psychoactive chemicals. These societies generally attach spiritual significance to such drug use, and often incorporate it into their religious practices.\nWith the dawn of the Neolithic and the proliferation of agriculture, new psychoactives came into use as a natural by-product of farming. Among them were opium, cannabis, and alcohol derived from the fermentation of cereals and fruits. Most societies began developing herblores, lists of herbs which were good for treating various physical and mental ailments. For example, St. John's wort was traditionally prescribed in parts of Europe for depression (in addition to use as a general-purpose tea), and Chinese medicine developed elaborate lists of herbs and preparations. These and various other substances that have an effect on the brain are still used as remedies in many cultures.\nModern psychopharmacology.\nThe dawn of contemporary psychopharmacology marked the beginning of the use of psychiatric drugs to treat psychological illnesses. It brought with it the use of opiates and barbiturates for the management of acute behavioral issues in patients. In the early stages, psychopharmacology was primarily used for sedation. With the 1950s came the establishment of lithium for mania, chlorpromazine for psychoses, and then in rapid succession, the development of tricyclic antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and benzodiazepines, among other antipsychotics and antidepressants. A defining feature of this era includes an evolution of research methods, with the establishment of placebo-controlled, double-blind studies, and the development of methods for analyzing blood levels with respect to clinical outcome and increased sophistication in clinical trials. The early 1960s revealed a revolutionary model by Julius Axelrod describing nerve signals and synaptic transmission, which was followed by a drastic increase of biochemical brain research into the effects of psychotropic agents on brain chemistry. After the 1960s, the field of psychiatry shifted to incorporate the indications for and efficacy of pharmacological treatments, and began to focus on the use and toxicities of these medications. The 1970s and 1980s were further marked by a better understanding of the synaptic aspects of the action mechanisms of drugs. However, the model has its critics, too \u2013 notably Joanna Moncrieff and the Critical Psychiatry Network.\nChemical signaling.\nNeurotransmitters.\nPsychoactive drugs exert their sensory and behavioral effects almost entirely by acting on neurotransmitters and by modifying one or more aspects of synaptic transmission. Neurotransmitters can be viewed as chemicals through which neurons primarily communicate; psychoactive drugs affect the mind by altering this communication. Drugs may act by 1) serving as a precursor to a neurotransmitter; 2) inhibiting neurotransmitter synthesis; 3) preventing storage of neurotransmitters in the presynaptic vesicle; 4) stimulating or inhibiting neurotransmitter release; 5) stimulating or blocking post-synaptic receptors; 6) stimulating autoreceptors, inhibiting neurotransmitter release; 7) blocking autoreceptors, increasing neurotransmitter release; 8) inhibiting neurotransmission breakdown; or 9) blocking neurotransmitter reuptake by the presynaptic neuron.\nHormones.\nThe other central method through which drugs act is by affecting communications between cells through hormones. Neurotransmitters can usually only travel a microscopic distance before reaching their target at the other side of the synaptic cleft, while hormones can travel long distances before reaching target cells anywhere in the body. Thus, the endocrine system is a critical focus of psychopharmacology because 1) drugs can alter the secretion of many hormones; 2) hormones may alter the behavioral responses to drugs; 3) hormones themselves sometimes have psychoactive properties; and 4) the secretion of some hormones, especially those dependent on the pituitary gland, is controlled by neurotransmitter systems in the brain.\nPsychopharmacological substances.\nAlcohol.\nAlcohol is a depressant, the effects of which may vary according to dosage amount, frequency, and chronicity. As a member of the sedative-hypnotic class, at the lowest doses, the individual feels relaxed and less anxious. In quiet settings, the user may feel drowsy, but in settings with increased sensory stimulation, individuals may feel uninhibited and more confident. High doses of alcohol rapidly consumed may produce amnesia for the events that occur during intoxication. Other effects include reduced coordination, which leads to slurred speech, impaired fine-motor skills, and delayed reaction time. The effects of alcohol on the body's neurochemistry are more difficult to examine than some other drugs. This is because the chemical nature of the substance makes it easy to penetrate into the brain, and it also influences the phospholipid bilayer of neurons. This allows alcohol to have a widespread impact on many normal cell functions and modifies the actions of several neurotransmitter systems. Alcohol inhibits glutamate (a major excitatory neurotransmitter in the nervous system) neurotransmission by reducing the effectiveness at the NMDA receptor, which is related to memory loss associated with intoxication. It also modulates the function of GABA, a major inhibitory amino acid neurotransmitter. Abuse of alcohol has also been correlated with thiamine deficiencies within the brain, leading to lasting neurological conditions that affect primarily the ability of the brain to effectively store memories. One such neurological condition is called Korsakoff's syndrome, for which very few effective treatment modalities have been found. The reinforcing qualities of alcohol leading to repeated use \u2013 and thus also the mechanisms of withdrawal from chronic alcohol use \u2013 are partially due to the substance's action on the dopamine system. This is also due to alcohol's effect on the opioid systems, or endorphins, that have opiate-like effects, such as modulating pain, mood, feeding, reinforcement, and response to stress.\nAntidepressants.\nAntidepressants reduce symptoms of mood disorders primarily through the regulation of norepinephrine and serotonin (particularly the 5-HT receptors). After chronic use, neurons adapt to the change in biochemistry, resulting in a change in pre- and postsynaptic receptor density and second messenger function. The Monoamine Theory of Depression and Anxiety, which states that the disruption of the activity of nitrogen containing neurotransmitters (i.e. serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine) is strongly correlated with the presence of depressive symptoms. Despite its longstanding prominence in pharmaceutical advertising, the myth that low serotonin levels cause depression is not supported by scientific evidence.\nMonoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) are the oldest class of antidepressants. They inhibit monoamine oxidase, the enzyme that metabolizes the monoamine neurotransmitters in the presynaptic terminals that are not contained in protective synaptic vesicles. The inhibition of the enzyme increases the amount of neurotransmitter available for release. It increases norepinephrine, dopamine, and 5-HT, thus increasing the action of the transmitters at their receptors. MAOIs have been somewhat disfavored because of their reputation for more serious side effects.\nTricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) work through binding to the presynaptic transporter proteins and blocking the reuptake of norepinephrine or 5-HT into the presynaptic terminal, prolonging the duration of transmitter action at the synapse.\nSelective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) selectively block the reuptake of serotonin (5-HT) through their inhibiting effects on the sodium/potassium ATP-dependent serotonin transporter in presynaptic neurons. This increases the availability of 5-HT in the synaptic cleft. The main parameters to consider in choosing an antidepressant are side effects and safety. Most SSRIs are available generically and are relatively inexpensive. Older antidepressants such as TCAs and MAOIs usually require more visits and monitoring, which may offset the low expense of the drugs. SSRIs are relatively safe in overdoses and better tolerated than TCAs and MAOIs for most patients.\nAntipsychotics.\nAll proven antipsychotics are postsynaptic dopamine receptor blockers (dopamine antagonists). For an antipsychotic to be effective, it generally requires a dopamine antagonism of 60%\u201380% of dopamine D2 receptors.\nFirst generation (typical) antipsychotics: Traditional neuroleptics modify several neurotransmitter systems, but their clinical effectiveness is most likely due to their ability to antagonize dopamine transmission by competitively blocking the receptors or by inhibiting dopamine release. The most serious and troublesome side effects of these classical antipsychotics are movement disorders that resemble the symptoms of Parkinson's disease, because the neuroleptics antagonize dopamine receptors broadly, also reducing the normal dopamine-mediated inhibition of cholinergic cells in the striatum.\nSecond-generation (atypical) antipsychotics: The concept of \"atypicality\" is from the finding that second generation antipsychotics (SGAs) have a greater serotonin/dopamine ratio than earlier drugs, and might be associated with improved efficacy (particularly for the negative symptoms of psychosis) and reduced extrapyramidal side effects. Some of the efficacy of atypical antipsychotics may be due to 5-HT2 antagonism or the blockade of other dopamine receptors. Agents that purely block 5-HT2 or dopamine receptors other than D2 have often failed as effective antipsychotics.\nBenzodiazepines.\nBenzodiazepines are often used to reduce anxiety symptoms, muscle tension, seizure disorders, insomnia, symptoms of alcohol withdrawal, and panic attack symptoms. Their action is primarily on specific benzodiazepine sites on the GABAA receptor. This receptor complex is thought to mediate the anxiolytic, sedative, and anticonvulsant actions of the benzodiazepines. Use of benzodiazepines carries the risk of tolerance (necessitating increased dosage), dependence, and abuse. Taking these drugs for a long period of time can lead to severe withdrawal symptoms upon abrupt discontinuation.\nHallucinogens.\nClassical serotonergic psychedelics.\nPsychedelics cause perceptual and cognitive distortions without delirium. The state of intoxication is often called a \"trip\". Onset is the first stage after an individual ingests (LSD, psilocybin, ayahuasca, and mescaline) or smokes (dimethyltryptamine) the substance. This stage may consist of visual effects, with an intensification of colors and the appearance of geometric patterns that can be seen with one's eyes closed. This is followed by a plateau phase, where the subjective sense of time begins to slow and the visual effects increase in intensity. The user may experience synesthesia, a crossing-over of sensations (for example, one may \"see\" sounds and \"hear\" colors). These outward sensory effects have been referred to as the \"mystical experience\", and current research suggests that this state could be beneficial to the treatment of some mental illnesses, such as depression and possibly addiction. In instances where some patients have seen a lack of improvement from the use of antidepressants, serotonergic hallucinogens have been observed to be rather effective in treatment. In addition to the sensory-perceptual effects, hallucinogenic substances may induce feelings of depersonalization, emotional shifts to a euphoric or anxious/fearful state, and a disruption of logical thought. Hallucinogens are classified chemically as either indolamines (specifically tryptamines), sharing a common structure with serotonin, or as phenethylamines, which share a common structure with norepinephrine. Both classes of these drugs are agonists at the 5-HT2 receptors; this is thought to be the central component of their hallucinogenic properties. Activation of 5-HT2A may be particularly important for hallucinogenic activity. However, repeated exposure to hallucinogens leads to rapid tolerance, likely through down-regulation of these receptors in specific target cells. Research suggests that hallucinogens affect many of these receptor sites around the brain and that through these interactions, hallucinogenic substances may be capable of inducing positive introspective experiences. The current research implies that many of the effects that can be observed occur in the occipital lobe and the frontomedial cortex; however, they also present many secondary global effects in the brain that have not yet been connected to the substance's biochemical mechanism of action.\nDissociative hallucinogens.\nAnother class of hallucinogens, known as dissociatives, includes drugs such as ketamine, phencyclidine (PCP), and \"Salvia divinorum\". Drugs such as these are thought to interact predominantly with glutamate receptors within the brain. Specifically, ketamine is thought to block NMDA receptors that are responsible for signalling in the glutamate pathways. Ketamine's more tranquilizing effects can be seen in the central nervous system through interactions with parts of the thalamus by inhibition of certain functions. Ketamine has become a major drug of research for the treatment of depression. These antidepressant effects are thought to be related to the drug's action on the glutamate receptor system and the relative spike in glutamate levels, as well as its interaction with mTOR, which is an enzymatic protein involved in catabolic processes in the human body. Phencyclidine's biochemical properties are still mostly unknown; however, its use has been associated with dissociation, hallucinations, and in some cases seizures and death. \"Salvia divinorum\", a plant native to Mexico, has strong dissociative and hallucinogenic properties when the dry leaves are smoked or chewed. The qualitative value of these effects, whether negative or positive, has been observed to vary between individuals with many other factors to consider.\nHypnotics.\nHypnotics are often used to treat the symptoms of insomnia or other sleep disorders. Benzodiazepines are still among the most widely prescribed sedative-hypnotics in the United States today. Certain non-benzodiazepine drugs are used as hypnotics as well. Although they lack the chemical structure of the benzodiazepines, their sedative effect is similarly through action on the GABAA receptor. They also have a reputation of being less addictive than benzodiazepines. Melatonin, a naturally occurring hormone, is often used over the counter (OTC) to treat insomnia and jet lag. This hormone appears to be excreted by the pineal gland early during the sleep cycle and may contribute to human circadian rhythms. Because OTC melatonin supplements are not subject to careful and consistent manufacturing, more specific melatonin agonists are sometimes preferred. They are used for their action on melatonin receptors in the suprachiasmatic nucleus, responsible for sleep-wake cycles. Many barbiturates have or had an FDA-approved indication for use as sedative-hypnotics, but have become less widely used because of their limited safety margin in overdose, their potential for dependence, and the degree of central nervous system depression they induce. The amino-acid L-tryptophan is also available OTC, and seems to be free of dependence or abuse liability. However, it is not as powerful as the traditional hypnotics. Because of the possible role of serotonin in sleep patterns, a new generation of 5-HT2 antagonists are in current development as hypnotics.\nCannabis and the cannabinoids.\nCannabis consumption produces a dose-dependent state of intoxication in humans. There is commonly increased blood flow to the skin, which leads to an increased heart rate and sensations of warmth or flushing. It also frequently induces increased hunger. Iversen (2000) categorized the subjective and behavioral effects often associated with cannabis into three stages. The first is the \"buzz\", a brief period of initial responding where the main effects are lightheadedness or slight dizziness, in addition to possible tingling sensations in the extremities or other parts of the body. The \"high\" is characterized by feelings of euphoria and exhilaration characterized by mild psychedelia as well as a sense of disinhibition. If the individual has taken a sufficiently large dose of cannabis, the level of intoxication progresses to the stage of being \"stoned\", and the user may feel calm, relaxed, and possibly in a dreamlike state. Sensory reactions may include the feeling of floating, enhanced visual and auditory perception, visual illusions, or the perception of the slowing of time passage, which are somewhat psychedelic in nature.\nThere exist two primary CNS cannabinoid receptors, on which marijuana and the cannabinoids act. Both the CB1 and CB2 receptor are found in the brain. The CB2 receptor is also found in the immune system. CB1 is expressed at high densities in the basal ganglia, cerebellum, hippocampus, and cerebral cortex. Receptor activation can inhibit cAMP formation, inhibit voltage-sensitive calcium ion channels, and activate potassium ion channels. Many CB1 receptors are located on axon terminals, where they act to inhibit the release of various neurotransmitters. In combination, these chemical actions work to alter various functions of the central nervous system, including the motor system, memory, and various cognitive processes.\nOpioids.\nThe opioid category of drugs \u2013 including drugs such as heroin, morphine, and oxycodone \u2013 belong to the class of narcotic analgesics, which reduce pain without producing unconsciousness but do produce a sense of relaxation and sleep, and at high doses may result in coma and death. The ability of opioids (both endogenous and exogenous) to relieve pain depends on a complex set of neuronal pathways at the spinal cord level, as well as various locations above the spinal cord. Small endorphin neurons in the spinal cord act on receptors to decrease the conduction of pain signals from the spinal cord to higher brain centers. Descending neurons originating in the periaqueductal gray give rise to two pathways that further block pain signals in the spinal cord. The pathways begin in the locus coeruleus (noradrenaline) and the nucleus of raphe (serotonin). Similar to other abused substances, opioid drugs increase dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens. Opioids are more likely to produce physical dependence worse than that of other classes of psychoactive drugs, and can lead to painful withdrawal symptoms if discontinued abruptly after regular use.\nStimulants.\nCocaine is one of the more common stimulants and is a complex drug that interacts with various neurotransmitter systems. It commonly causes heightened alertness, increased confidence, feelings of exhilaration, reduced fatigue, and a generalized sense of well-being. The effects of cocaine are similar to those of amphetamines, though cocaine tends to have a shorter duration of effect. In high doses or with prolonged use, cocaine can result in a number of negative effects, including irritability, anxiety, exhaustion, total insomnia, and even psychotic symptomatology. Most of the behavioral and physiological actions of cocaine can be explained by its ability to block the reuptake of the two catecholamines, dopamine and norepinephrine, as well as serotonin. Cocaine binds to transporters that normally clear these transmitters from the synaptic cleft, inhibiting their function. This leads to increased levels of neurotransmitter in the cleft and transmission at the synapses. Based on in-vitro studies using rat brain tissue, cocaine binds most strongly to the serotonin transporter, followed by the dopamine transporter, and then the norepinephrine transporter.\nAmphetamines tend to cause the same behavioral and subjective effects of cocaine. Various forms of amphetamine are commonly used to treat the symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and narcolepsy, or are used recreationally. Amphetamine and methamphetamine are indirect agonists of the catecholaminergic systems. They block catecholamine reuptake, in addition to releasing catecholamines from nerve terminals. There is evidence that dopamine receptors play a central role in the behavioral responses of animals to cocaine, amphetamines, and other psychostimulant drugs. One action causes the dopamine molecules to be released from inside the vesicles into the cytoplasm of the nerve terminal, which are then transported outside by the mesolimbic dopamine pathway to the nucleus accumbens. This plays a key role in the rewarding and reinforcing effects of cocaine and amphetamine in animals, and is the primary mechanism for amphetamine dependence.\nPsychopharmacological research.\nIn psychopharmacology, researchers are interested in any substance that crosses the blood\u2013brain barrier and thus has an effect on behavior, mood, or cognition. Drugs are researched for their physiochemical properties, physical side effects, and psychological side effects. Researchers in psychopharmacology study a variety of different psychoactive substances, including alcohol, cannabinoids, club drugs, psychedelics, opiates, nicotine, caffeine, psychomotor stimulants, inhalants, and anabolic\u2013androgenic steroids. They also study drugs used in the treatment of affective and anxiety disorders, as well as schizophrenia.\nClinical studies are often very specific, typically beginning with animal testing and ending with human testing. In the human testing phase, there is often a group of subjects: one group is given a placebo, and the other is administered a carefully measured therapeutic dose of the drug in question. After all of the testing is completed, the drug is proposed to the concerned regulatory authority (e.g. the U.S. FDA), and is either commercially introduced to the public via prescription, or deemed safe enough for over-the-counter sale.\nThough particular drugs are prescribed for specific symptoms or syndromes, they are usually not specific to the treatment of any single mental disorder.\nA somewhat controversial application of psychopharmacology is \"cosmetic psychiatry\": persons who do not meet criteria for any psychiatric disorder are nevertheless prescribed psychotropic medication. The antidepressant bupropion is then prescribed to increase perceived energy levels and assertiveness while diminishing the need for sleep. The antihypertensive compound propranolol is sometimes chosen to eliminate the discomfort of day-to-day anxiety. Fluoxetine in nondepressed people can produce a feeling of generalized well-being. Pramipexole, a treatment for restless leg syndrome, can dramatically increase libido in women. These and other off-label lifestyle applications of medications are not uncommon. Although occasionally reported in the medical literature, no guidelines for such usage have been developed. There is also a potential for the misuse of prescription psychoactive drugs by elderly persons, who may have multiple drug prescriptions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45622", "revid": "31382403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45622", "title": "Iranian Green Movement", "text": "Political movement after the 2009 Iranian presidential election\nThe Iranian Green Movement () or Green Wave of Iran (), also referred to as the Persian Awakening or Persian Spring by Western media, refers to a political movement that arose after the 12 June 2009 Iranian presidential election and lasted until early 2010, in which protesters demanded the removal of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad from office. Green was initially used as the symbol of Mir Hossein Mousavi's campaign, but after the election it became the symbol of unity and hope for those asking for annulment of what they regarded as a fraudulent election. Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karroubi are recognized as political leaders of the Green Movement. Grand Ayatollah Hossein-Ali Montazeri was also mentioned as spiritual leader of the movement.\nThe Green Movement protests were a major event in Iran's modern political history and observers claimed that these protests were the largest since the Iranian Revolution of 1978\u201379. While the protests started out as a peaceful, non-violent movement, hundreds of people were arrested and several died as protests turned more violent in the following months. The movement eventually had trouble with retaining its momentum.\nOutcome of 2009\u20132010 Iranian election protests.\nBackground to the protests\nThe office of the President in Iran is considered the second most powerful position in the country, after that of the Supreme Leader, as the President is the head of the executive branch of power. Since 2005, Iran was led by conservative Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who first served as mayor of Tehran before being elected as president. Ahmadinejad's name was associated with human rights violations in the country, particularly with the use of violence. The list of these violations included the increased number of death penalties and problems with LGBT rights. According to Human Rights Watch, \"basic human rights protection in Iran has deteriorated to new lows\" under Ahmadinejad's first presidency as, for example, the number of executions increased by three times. The Iranian president has no power over the judiciary, as it is headed by the chief justice who is in turn appointed by the Supreme Leader.\nDuring the first presidency of Ahmadinejad, the problem was particularly severe with juvenile death penalty. More than 130 juvenile offenders were sentenced to death in Iran as of 2008. Moreover, independent researchers pointed out that the number of political prisoners increased during Ahmadinejad's first presidency. Other problems with human rights involved the absence of basic protection of LGBT rights. The number of criminal convictions for homosexual sex increased between 2005 and 2009, while the President even denied the existence of gay people in Iran.\nIssues with human rights and other problems, such as the alleged voting fraud, led Ahmadinejad's popularity to decline. This was especially the case in urban areas, including the country's capital Tehran, and among the youth, according to \"The Guardian\".\nIn 2009, the Iranian government held a regular presidential election. Former Prime Minister Mir-Hossein Mousavi was the most popular candidate opposing Ahmadinejad.\nThe election took place on 12 June 2009 but the disagreement between the government and the opposition over the results of the election quickly caused a significant controversy. Ahmadinejad was considered to be winning in a landslide victory, but Mousavi and his supporters believed the results were fraudulent. They suggested that the Interior Minister Sadegh Mahsouli, an ally of Ahmadinejad, had interfered with the election and distorted the votes to keep Ahmadinejad in power.\nMousavi claimed the victory and called for his supporters to celebrate it. At the same time, the office of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad almost immediately announced that the sitting president had won the election as he had received approximately two-thirds of votes. It sparked the 2009\u20132010 Iranian election protests, which were organized mostly by Mousavi's supporters and were directed against Ahmadinejad and the government in general.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Previously, he was revolutionary, because everyone inside the system was a revolutionary. But now he's a reformer. Now he knows Gandhi \u2013 before he knew only Che Guevara. If we gain power through aggression we would have to keep it through aggression. That is why we're having a green revolution, defined by peace and democracy.\u2014\u200a\nProtests.\nClashes broke out between police and groups protesting the election results from early morning on Saturday onward. At the beginning, the protests were considered peaceful. However, as time passed, they became increasingly violent. In a stand-off that later took place in north Tehran between supporters of Ahmadinejad and Mousavi, an angry crowd of citizens broke into shops, started fires, and tore down signs. Civil unrest took place as riot police on motorbikes used batons to disperse Mousavi supporters who staged a sit-in near the interior ministry, where the results were announced. Up to 2,000 Mousavi supporters erected barricades of burning tyres and chanted \"Mousavi take back our vote!\".\nThe demonstrations grew bigger and more heated than the 1999 student protests. Al Jazeera English described the 13 June situation as the \"biggest unrest since the 1979 revolution.\" It also reported that protests seemed spontaneous without any formal organization. Two hundred people protested outside Iran's embassy in London on 13 June. Ynet has stated that \"tens of thousands\" protested on 13 June. Demonstrators are chanting phrases such as \"Down with the dictator\", \"Death to the dictator\", and \"Give us our votes back\". Mousavi urged for calm and asked that his supporters refrain from acts of violence.\nYnet reported on 14 June that two people had died in the rioting so far. That day, protests had been organized in front of the Iranian embassies in Turkey, Dubai, Paris, Berlin, London, Rome, Sydney, Vienna and The Hague. In response to the reformist protests, tens of thousands of people rallied in Tehran on 14 June to support the victory of Ahmadinejad.\nOn 15 June, Mousavi rallied, with a number of his supporters ranging anywhere from hundreds of thousands to three million, in Tehran, despite being warned by state officials that any such rally would be illegal. The demonstration, the largest in the Islamic Republic of Iran's 30-year history, was Mousavi's first public appearance after the election. Protests focused around Azadi Tower, around which lines of people stretched for more than nine kilometers. Gunshots were reported to have been fired at the rally, where Mousavi had spoken to his supporters saying, \"The vote of the people is more important than Mousavi or any other person.\" All three opposition candidates made an appearance.\nCompeting rallies for Mousavi and for Ahmadinejad took place on 16 June. The pro-Ahmadinejad protesters, chanting the phrases \"Death to America!\" and \"Death to Israel!\", outnumbered their opponents, but they did not match the numbers of opponents who had protested the day before. Reports from the state media and elsewhere stated on 16 June that seven people have died in all of the protests so far. However, Times Online quoted a Rasoul Akram Hospital nurse that day who asserted that 28 people have suffered from \"bullet wounds\" and eight have died so far. Over half a million reformist Iranians marched silently from Haft-e-Tir Square to Vali Asr Square on 17 June. Huffington Post reported that day that 32 people had died protesting so far.\nOn 14 February 2011, the largest Green demonstrations in Iran in more than a year broke out. In response, pro-government MPs called for the death of opposition leaders Mir Hussein Moussavi and Mehdi Karroubi.\nGovernment actions.\nArrests.\nOn the weekend of 13 and 14 June, the government arrested over 170 people in a series of raids across Tehran. Among them were prominent reformist politicians, including Mojahedin of the Islamic Revolution Organization (MIRO) founder Behzad Nabavi, Islamic Iran Participation Front (IIPF) leader Mohsen Mirdamadi, and former president Mohammad Khatami's brother Mohammad-Reza Khatami, who was later released. Also arrested were Mostafa Tajzadeh and Mohsen Aminzadeh, whom the IRNA said were involved in orchestrating protests on 13 June. Anonymous sources said that the police stormed the headquarters of the IIPF and arrested a number of people. Iranian journalist Mashallah Shamsolvaezin claimed that presidential candidate Mir-Hossein Mousavi was put under house arrest, although officials denied this. An estimated 200 people were detained after clashes with students at Tehran University, although many were later released. The Guardian actively reported those who died or were detained in a spreadsheet listing 1,259 names as victims of Iran\u2019s crackdown. \nActing Police Chief Ahmad-Reza Radan stated via the state press service on the 14th that \"in the interrogation of related rebels, we will try to find the link between the plotters and foreign media\". A judiciary spokesman said they had not been arrested but that they were summoned, \"warned not to increase tension,\" and later released. Intelligence minister Gholam Hossein Mohseni-Ejehei linked some arrests to terrorism supported from outside Iran, stating that \"more than 20 explosive consignments were discovered\". Others, he said, were \"counter-revolutionary groups\" who had \"penetrated election headquarters\" of the election candidates.\nOn 16 June, Reuters reported that former vice-president Mohammad-Ali Abtahi and former presidential advisor Saeed Hajjarian had been arrested. Human rights lawyer Abdolfattah Soltani, who had been demanding a recount of all votes, was also arrested on the Tuesday according to Shirin Ebadi, who said that security officials had posed as clients. Over 100 students were arrested after security forces fired tear gas at protesters at Shiraz University on the same day. Reporters Without Borders reported that 5 of 11 arrested journalists were still detention as of 16 June, and that a further 10 journalists were unaccounted for and may have been arrested.\nOn 17 June, former foreign minister and secretary-general of the Freedom Movement of Iran, Ebrahim Yazdi, was arrested while undergoing tests at Pars hospital in Tehran. He was held overnight in Evin Prison before being released and returning to hospital, where according to Human Rights Watch he remained under guard. In Tabriz, other Freedom Movement activists and eight members of the IIPF were arrested, with reports of at least 100 civic figures' arrests. The total number of arrests across Iran since the election was reported as 500.\nAaron Rhodes, a spokesman for the International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran, stated that \"Iranian intelligence and security forces are using the public protests to engage in what appears to be a major purge of reform-oriented individuals whose situations in detention could be life-threatening\". In Isfahan Province, prosecutor-general Mohammadreza Habibi warned that dissidents could face execution under Islamic law.\nIn 2011, Mir Hossein Mousavi and his wife and Mehdi Karroubi were placed under house arrest by the government. During his election campaigns in 2013 and 2017, then-presidential candidate Hassan Rouhani pledged to release them if he were to be elected as president, but the opposition leaders remain under house arrest to this day.\nWhere is my vote?\n\"Where is my vote?\" ( \"ra'y-e-man koj\u0101st?\") is a motto which was used during the protests. The Iranian government, headed by President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, released results claiming a two-thirds majority. However, Mousavi had already claimed victory before the vote count was done and supporters of Mousavi and Karroubi accused the government of rigging the votes.\nIn the aftermath of the election, protests increased and several massive protests were held around the country by the people. The government arrested a large number of the protesters and several were killed by the police and governmental militia forces.\nEven though the Iranian government didn\u2019t allow any form of gathering by opposition-supporters in Tehran and across the country, significantly slowed down internet access and censored any form of media agreeing with the opposition, hundreds of thousands of Iranians chanted this motto, defying the law and challenging the Islamic Republic.\nDevelopment of the Green Movement.\nThe Green Movement spread throughout Iran as a non-violent protest movement, bringing about hope of more democratization. Protests lasted all through the fall of 2009, with big events happening on national holidays. On Quds Day (18 September), the anniversary of the US Embassy takeover (4 November), National Students Day (7 December) and the day of Grand Ayatollah Montazeri's death (19 December) there were turnouts of thousands of people. On the holy day of Ashura (7 December), the protests turned more violent as hundreds of thousands took to the streets once again, the highest turnout since June, and clashed with state security forces. Hundreds of people were arrested and at least 15 people died. Among them was the 35 year-old nephew of Mir-Hossein Mousavi, Seyed Ali Mousavi.\nWithin a year, the Green Movement had trouble with retaining its relevance. The number of public demonstrations started to decrease because of the harsh oppression by the state. Security forces attacked protesters in the streets and imprisoned activists as well as politicians. Mousavi and Karroubi were placed under house arrest in 2010, which created even more difficulties for the Green Movement to stay organized.\nAccess to the Internet and social media as well as the possibility to send text messages was regularly restricted by the government, making it difficult for further protests to materialize. The movement later became less confrontational in an effort to influence the next presidential elections and several groups linked to the Green Movement supported the campaign of Hassan Rouhani in 2014. Following his victory, slogans and symbols that emerged during the protests in 2009 were used again by his supporters.\nThe Green Path of Hope.\nMousavi and other reformist leaders are now working in peaceful and legal methods to widen the influence of their reforms. They have set up a new coalition named \"The Green Path of Hope\". Iranian political parties and movements need to be authorized by the Interior Ministry. Mousavi neither recognizes the current government as legitimate nor is likely to receive permission; so, the movement was named a \"path\" in order to bypass this law.\nThe Green Path of Hope claims it seeks to continue protests against Ahmadinejad's presidency following lawful and peaceful methods, and the full execution of the constitution, as Mousavi says:\"You can't follow some parts of the constitution and throw the rest into a bin.\" According to organization officials, the movement encompasses numerous political parties, NGO's and social networks. The \"Green Path\" has six main members of the central council, who are connected to reformist parties, NGOs, and social networks. The main body consists of ordinary protesters. The strategy is to connect existent pressures and issues in society in a social network, and to therefore lead protests in a lawful manner. The goals of the organization are stated as follows:\"During the election, our mottos supported and remained in the framework of the constitution; today we are devoted to those slogans. We believe that if the people's demands were treated fairly, instead of being distorted by the media and linked to foreigners, and the government promoted truth by fair criticism, our mottos could satisfy the public.\"\nIran national football team.\nDuring Iran's final game of the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifiers against South Korea in Seoul on 17 June 2009, seven members of the team, Javad Nekounam, Ali Karimi, Hossein Kaebi, Masoud Shojaei, Mohammad Nosrati, Vahid Hashemian, and captain Mehdi Mahdavikia allegedly wore green wristbands in support of the Iranian Green Movement during the 2009 Iranian election protests. However green was one of the colors of their uniform, which also had green shirt logos. Initially it was reported that all seven players were banned for life by the Iranian Football Federation, but state-run media claimed that all seven had \"retired\". On 24 June 2009, FIFA wrote to Iran's Football Federation asking for clarification on the situation. The Iranian Football Federation replied that no disciplinary action has been taken against any player. As of 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification, several of the above-mentioned players have played again for the national team, notably Javad Nekounam, Masoud Shojaei, and Mehdi Mahdavikia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45623", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45623", "title": "Informer (disambiguation)", "text": "An informer, or informant, is a person who provides privileged information to an agency.\nInformer may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45625", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45625", "title": "Lagged fibonacci generator", "text": ""}
{"id": "45627", "revid": "431183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45627", "title": "IIRC", "text": "IIRC may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45630", "revid": "13259281", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45630", "title": "Peter III", "text": "Peter III may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "45631", "revid": "102477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45631", "title": "Telephony Application Programming Interface", "text": "Microsoft Windows API\nThe Telephony Application Programming Interface (TAPI) is a Microsoft Windows API, which provides computer telephony integration and enables PCs running Microsoft Windows to use telephone services. Different versions of TAPI are available on different versions of Windows. TAPI allows applications to control telephony functions between a computer and telephone network for data, fax, and voice calls. It includes basic functions, such as dialing, answering, and hanging up a call. It also supports supplementary functions, such as hold, transfer, conference, and call park found in PBX, ISDN, and other telephone systems. \nTAPI is used primarily to control either modems or, more recently, to control business telephone system (PBX) handsets. When controlling a PBX handset, the driver is provided by the manufacturer of the telephone system. Some manufacturers provide drivers that allow the control of multiple handsets. This is traditionally called \"third-party control\". Other manufacturers provide drivers that allow the control of a single handset. This is called \"first-party control\". Third-party drivers are designed to allow applications to see and/or control multiple extensions at the same time. Some telephone systems only permit one third-party connection at a time. First-party drivers are designed to allow applications to monitor and/or control one extension at a time. Telephone systems naturally permit many of these connections simultaneously. Modem connections are by nature first-party.\nTAPI can also be used to control voice-enabled telephony devices, including voice modems and dedicated hardware such as Dialogic cards.\nHistory.\nTAPI was introduced in 1993 as the result of joint development by Microsoft and Intel. The first publicly available version of TAPI was version 1.3, which was released as a patch on top of Microsoft Windows 3.1. Version 1.3 drivers were 16-bit only. Version 1.3 is no longer supported, although some MSDN development library CDs still contain the files and patches.\nWith Microsoft Windows 95, TAPI was integrated into the operating system. The first version on Windows 95 was TAPI 1.4. TAPI 1.4 had support for 32-bit applications.\nThe TAPI standard supports both connections from individual computers and LAN connections serving any number of computers.\nTAPI 2.0 was introduced with Windows NT 4.0. Version 2.0 was the first version on the Windows NT platform. It made a significant step forward by supporting ACD and PBX-specific functionality.\nIn 1997, Microsoft released TAPI version 2.1. This version of TAPI was available as a downloadable update and was the first version to be supported on both the Microsoft Windows 95 and Windows NT/2000 platforms.\nTAPI 3.0 was released in 1999 together with Windows 2000. This version enables IP telephony (VoIP) by providing simple and generic methods for making connections between two (using H.323) or more (using IP multicast) computers and now also offers the ability to access any media stream (MSP driver) involved in the connection.\nWindows XP included both TAPI 3.1 and TAPI 2.2. TAPI 3.1 supports the Microsoft Component Object Model and provides a set of COM objects to application programmers. This version uses File Terminals which allow applications to record streaming data to a file and play this recorded data back to a stream. A USB Phone TSP (Telephony Service Provider) was also included which allows an application to control a USB phone and use it as a streaming endpoint. TAPI 3.0 or TAPI 3.1 are not available on operating systems earlier than Windows 2000 and Windows XP respectively.\nThe Telephony Server Application Programming Interface (TSAPI) is a similar standard developed by Novell for NetWare servers.\nTelephone address format.\nTAPI uses Microsoft canonical address format for telephone numbers to make phone calls. It is a derivative of E.123 international notation.\nThe canonical address is a text string with the following format: codice_1. Area code, subaddress and name are optional; the latter can carry extension number for direct inward dialing and calling party name, as used by ISDN/E1/T1 telecommunication protocols.\nDialing rules are used to transform the canonical phone number into a dialable calling sequence for the modem, depending on the user's location. The dialing rules include variable-length dialing for area code, trunk access and international access prefixes, as well as central office access and calling card/credit card numbers. \nThe calling sequence can contain dialable numbers such as digits codice_2 and DTMF tones codice_3, formatting characters codice_4, and control characters codice_5 which correspond to the Dial command of the Hayes AT command set. The following control characters are defined: \n! - hookflash, i.e. half second on-hook followed by half second off-hook;\nP - pulse dialing mode;\nT - tone dialing mode;\n, - pause dialing (duration specified by the device);\nW - wait for dial tone;\n@ - wait for \"quiet answer\", i.e. the ringback tone followed by several seconds of silence;\n$ - wait for a billing signal, such as credit card prompt tone;\n? - indicates that the user is to be prompted before continuing (results in an application error since the API has no means to implement a user prompt);\n; - the number is not complete and will be finished later (only valid in a dialable number).\nTAPI 2.x vs TAPI 3.x.\nIt is a common misconception that TAPI 3.0 (or TAPI 3.1) replaces TAPI 2.x.\nTAPI 2.x and earlier versions were written in C; the API uses pointers to structures. Consequently, TAPI 2.x is easy to access from C or C++ applications, but it can be awkward to use from many other programming languages.\nTAPI 3.x was designed with a Component Object Model (COM) interface. This was done with the intent of making it accessible to higher level applications such as developed in VB or other environments that provide easy access to COM but don't deal with C-style pointers. \nTAPI 3.x has a slightly different set of functionality than TAPI 2.x. The addition of integrated media control was the most significant addition. But TAPI 3.x doesn't include all functionality that TAPI 2.x does, like support for the Phone class.\nOne very notable issue with TAPI 3.x is the lack of support for managed code (.NET environment). As documented in Microsoft KB Article http://, Microsoft currently has no plans to support TAPI 3.x directly from .NET programming languages. However, Mark Smith has provided a managed C++ library called ITAPI3 and a 2.x wrapper for .NET. Other developers provide libraries to work indirectly with TAPI enabled PBXs.\nOne often overlooked reason an application developer might choose between TAPI 2.x and TAPI 3.x should be the hardware vendors recommendation. Even though TAPI provides an abstract model of phone lines, telephony applications are still heavily impacted by the specific behavior of the underlying hardware. Troubleshooting behavior issues usually requires both software and hardware vendors to collaborate. Because there is almost a 1:1 relationship between the TAPI Service Provider (TSP) interface and the TAPI 2.x interface, collaboration is often easier if the application is designed using TAPI 2.x. Experience with TAPI 3.x varies significantly between hardware vendors.\nTAPI compliant hardware.\nOn Windows, TAPI support was almost universal in telephony hardware such as voice modems (both internal and external) and computer expansion boards such as Dialogic telephony cards. The only notable exception who never natively supported TAPI was the Avaya Communication Manager, which relied solely on the TSAPI interface for connectivity.\nMany PBX systems provide TAPI-compliant modem interfaces. TAPI compatible PBX solutions include Aastra (400/800), Aastra (MX-ONE), Alcatel (OXO/OXE), Avaya (BCM, IP Office), Cisco (Call Manager), Ericsson-LG (eMG80, iPECS, ipLDK), NEC-Philips (iS3000, IPC100/500), NEC (SL1000, SV8100/9100), Nitsuko (DXE600/328), Panasonic (KX-TDA/TDE/NCP, KX-NS1000), Samsung (OfficeServ), Unify (3000/4000, Openscape Office), ShoreTel, and ZyXEL (X6004/X2002).\nThird party drivers are often available for the telephone systems that don't have drivers made by the manufacturers."}
{"id": "45633", "revid": "50468483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45633", "title": "Economic history", "text": "Economic history is the study of history using methodological tools from economics or with a special attention to economic phenomena. Research is conducted using a combination of historical methods, statistical methods and the application of economic theory to historical situations and institutions. The field can encompass a wide variety of topics, including equality, finance, technology, labour, and business. It emphasizes historicizing the economy itself, analyzing it as a dynamic entity and attempting to provide insights into the way it is structured and conceived.\nUsing both quantitative data and qualitative sources, economic historians emphasize understanding the historical context in which major economic events take place. They often focus on the institutional dynamics of systems of production, labor, and capital, as well as the economy's impact on society, culture, and language. Scholars of the discipline may approach their analysis from the perspective of different schools of economic thought, such as mainstream economics, Austrian economics, Marxian economics, the Chicago school of economics, and Keynesian economics.\nEconomic history has several sub-disciplines. Historical methods are commonly applied in and business history, which overlap with areas of social history such as demographic and labor history. In the sub-discipline of cliometrics, economists use quantitative (econometric) methods. In history of capitalism, historians explain economic historical issues and processes from a historical point of view.\nEarly history of the discipline.\nArnold Toynbee made the case for combining economics and history in his study of the Industrial Revolution, saying, \"I believe economics today is much too dissociated from history. Smith and Malthus had historical minds. However, Ricardo \u2013 who set the pattern of modern textbooks \u2013 had a mind that was entirely unhistorical.\" There were several advantages in combining economics and history according to Toynbee. To begin with, it improved economic understanding. \"We see abstract propositions in a new light when studying them in relation to historical facts. Propositions become more vivid and truthful.\" Meanwhile, studying history with economics makes history easier to understand. Economics teaches us to look out for the right facts in reading history and makes matters such as introducing enclosures, machinery, or new currencies more intelligible. Economics also teaches careful deductive reasoning. \"The habits of mind it instils are even more valuable than the knowledge of principles it gives. Without these habits, the mass of their materials can overwhelm students of historical facts.\"\nIn late-nineteenth-century Germany, scholars at a number of universities, led by Gustav von Schmoller, developed the historical school of economic history. It argued that there were no universal truths in history, emphasizing the importance of historical context without quantitative analysis. This historical approach dominated German and French scholarship for most of the 20th century. The historical school of economics included other economists such as Max Weber and Joseph Schumpeter who reasoned that careful analysis of human actions, cultural norms, historical context, and mathematical support was key to historical analysis. The approach was spread to Great Britain by William Ashley (University of Oxford) and dominated British economic history for much of the 20th century. Britain's first professor in the subject was George Unwin at the University of Manchester. Meanwhile, in France, economic history was heavily influenced by the Annales School from the early 20th century to the present. It exerts a worldwide influence through its journal .\nTreating economic history as a discrete academic discipline has been a contentious issue for many years. Academics at the London School of Economics (LSE) and the University of Cambridge had numerous disputes over the separation of economics and economic history in the interwar era. Cambridge economists believed that pure economics involved a component of economic history and that the two were inseparably entangled. Those at the LSE believed that economic history warranted its own courses, research agenda and academic chair separated from mainstream economics. In the initial period of the subject's development, the LSE position of separating economic history from economics won out. Many universities in the UK developed independent programmes in economic history rooted in the LSE model. Indeed, the Economic History Society had its inauguration at LSE in 1926 and the University of Cambridge eventually established its own economic history programme.\nIn the United States, the field of economic history was largely subsumed into other fields of economics following the cliometric revolution of the 1960s. To many it became seen as a form of applied economics rather than a stand-alone discipline. Cliometrics, also known as the New Economic History, refers to the systematic use of economic theory and econometric techniques to the study of economic history. The term was originally coined by Jonathan R. T. Hughes and Stanley Reiter and refers to Clio, who was the muse of history and heroic poetry in Greek mythology. One of the most famous cliometric economic historians is Douglass North, who argued that it is the task of economic history to elucidate the historical dimensions of economies through time. Cliometricians argue their approach is necessary because the application of theory is crucial in writing solid economic history, while historians generally oppose this view warning against the risk of generating anachronisms.\nEarly cliometrics was a type of counterfactual history. However, counterfactualism was not its distinctive feature; it combined neoclassical economics with quantitative methods in order to explain human choices based on constraints. Some have argued that cliometrics had its heyday in the 1960s and 1970s and that it is now neglected by economists and historians. In response to North and Robert Fogel's Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics in 1993, Harvard University economist (and future Nobel winner) Claudia Goldin argued:Economic history is not a handmaiden of economics but a distinct field of scholarship. Economic history was a scholarly discipline long before it became cliometrics. Its practitioners were economists and historians studying the histories of economies... The new economic history, or cliometrics, formalized economic history in a manner similar to the injection of mathematical models and statistics into the rest of economics.The relationship between economic history, economics and history has long been the subject of intense discussion, and the debates of recent years echo those of early contributors. There has long been a school of thought among economic historians that splits economic history\u2014the study of how economic phenomena evolved in the past\u2014from historical economics\u2014testing the generality of economic theory using historical episodes. US economic historian Charles P. Kindleberger explained this position in his 1990 book \"Historical Economics: Art or Science?\". Economic historian Robert Skidelsky (University of Cambridge) argued that economic theory often employs ahistorical models and methodologies that do not take into account historical context. Yale University economist Irving Fisher already wrote in 1933 on the relationship between economics and economic history in his \"Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions\":\nThe study of dis-equilibrium may proceed in either of two ways. We may take as our unit for study an actual historical case of great dis-equilibrium, such as, say, the panic of 1873; or we may take as our unit for study any constituent tendency, such as, say, deflation, and discover its general laws, relations to, and combinations with, other tendencies. The former study revolves around events, or facts; the latter, around tendencies. The former is primarily economic history; the latter is primarily economic science. Both sorts of studies are proper and important. Each helps the other. The panic of 1873 can only be understood in light of the various tendencies involved\u2014deflation and other; and deflation can only be understood in the light of various historical manifestations\u20141873 and other.\nScope and focus of economic history today.\nThe past three decades have witnessed the widespread closure of separate economic history departments and programmes in the UK and the integration of the discipline into either history or economics departments. Only the London School of Economics (LSE) retains a separate economic history department and stand-alone undergraduate and graduate programme in economic history. Cambridge, Glasgow, LSE, Oxford, Queen's, and Warwick together train the vast majority of economic historians coming through the British higher education system today, but do so as part of economics or history degrees. Meanwhile, there have never been specialist economic history graduate programs at universities anywhere in the US. However, economic history remains a special field component of leading economics PhD programs, including University of California, Berkeley, Harvard University, Northwestern University, Princeton University, the University of Chicago and Yale University.\nDespite the pessimistic view on the state of the discipline espoused by many of its practitioners, economic history remains an active field of social scientific inquiry. Indeed, it has seen something of a resurgence in interest since 2000, perhaps driven by research conducted at universities in continental Europe rather than the UK and the US. The overall number of economic historians in the world is estimated at 10,400, with Japan and China as well as the U.K and the U.S. ranking highest in numbers. Some less developed countries, however, are not sufficiently integrated in the world economic history community, among others, Senegal, Brazil and Vietnam.\nPart of the growth in economic history is driven by the continued interest in big policy-relevant questions on the history of economic growth and development. MIT economist Peter Temin noted that development economics is intricately connected with economic history, as it explores the growth of economies with different technologies, innovations, and institutions. Studying economic growth has been popular for years among economists and historians who have sought to understand why some economies have grown faster than others. Some of the early texts in the field include Walt Whitman Rostow's \"The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto\" (1971) which described how advanced economies grow after overcoming certain hurdles and advancing to the next stage in development. Another economic historian, Alexander Gerschenkron, complicated this theory with works on how economies develop in non-Western countries, as discussed in \"Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective: A Book of Essays\" (1962). A more recent work is Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson's \"\" (2012) which pioneered a new field of persistence studies, emphasizing the path-dependent stages of growth. Other notable books on the topic include Kenneth Pomeranz's \"The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the Modern World Economy\" (2000) and David S. Landes's \"The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some are So Rich and Some So Poor\" (1998).\nSince the 2008 financial crisis, scholars have become more interested in a field which may be called \"new\" 'new economic history'. Scholars have tended to move away from narrowly quantitative studies toward institutional, social, and cultural history affecting the evolution of economies. The focus of these studies is frequently on \"persistence\", as past events are linked to present outcomes. Columbia University economist Charles Calomiris argued that this new field showed 'how historical (path-dependent) processes governed changes in institutions and markets.' However, this trend has been criticized, most forcefully by Francesco Boldizzoni, as a form of economic imperialism \"extending the neoclassical explanatory model to the realm of social relations.\"\nConversely, economists in other specializations have started to write a new kind of economic history which makes use of historical data to understand the present day. A major development in this genre was the publication of Thomas Piketty's \"Capital in the Twenty-First Century\" (2013). The book described the rise in wealth and income inequality since the 18th century, arguing that large concentrations of wealth lead to social and economic instability. Piketty also advocated a system of global progressive wealth taxes to correct rising inequality. The book was selected as a \"New York Times\" best seller and received numerous awards. The book was well received by some of the world's major economists, including Paul Krugman, Robert Solow, and Ben Bernanke. Books in response to Piketty's book include \"After Piketty: The Agenda for Economics and Inequality\", by Heather Boushey, J. Bradford DeLong, and Marshall Steinbaum (eds.) (2017), \"Pocket Piketty\" by Jesper Roine (2017), and \"Anti-Piketty: Capital for the 21st Century\", by Jean-Philippe Delsol, Nicolas Lecaussin, Emmanuel Martin (2017). One economist argued that Piketty's book was \"Nobel-Prize worthy\" and noted that it had changed the global discussion on how economic historians study inequality. It has also sparked new conversations in the disciplines of public policy.\nIn addition to the mainstream in economic history, there is a parallel development in the field influenced by Karl Marx and Marxian economics. Marx used historical analysis to interpret the role of class and class as a central issue in history. He debated with the \"classical\" economists (a term he coined), including Adam Smith and David Ricardo. In turn, Marx's legacy in economic history has been to critique the findings of neoclassical economists. Marxist analysis also confronts economic determinism, the theory that economic relationships are the foundation of political and societal institutions. Marx abstracted the idea of a \"capitalist mode of production\" as a way of identifying the transition from feudalism to capitalism. This has influenced some scholars, such as Maurice Dobb, to argue that feudalism declined because of peasants' struggles for freedom and the growing inefficiency of feudalism as a system of production. In turn, in what was later coined the Brenner debate, Paul Sweezy, a Marxian economist, challenged Dobb's definition of feudalism and its focus only on western Europe.\nHistory of capitalism.\nA new field, called \"history of capitalism\" by researchers engaged in it, has emerged in US history departments since about the year 2000. It includes many topics traditionally associated with the field of economic history, such as insurance, banking and regulation, the political dimension of business, and the impact of capitalism on the middle classes, the poor and women and minorities. The field has particularly focused on the contribution of slavery to the rise of the US economy in the nineteenth century. The field utilizes the existing research of business history, but has sought to make it more relevant to the concerns of history departments in the United States, including by having limited or no discussion of individual business enterprises. Historians of capitalism have countered these critiques, citing the issues with economic history. As University of Chicago professor of history Jonathan Levy states, \"modern economic history began with industrialization and urbanization, and, even then, environmental considerations were subsidiary, if not nonexistent.\"\nScholars have critiqued the history of capitalism because it does not focus on systems of production, circulation, and distribution. Some have criticized its lack of social scientific methods and its ideological biases. As a result, a new academic journal, \"\", was founded at the University of Pennsylvania under the direction of Marc Flandreau (University of Pennsylvania), Julia Ott (The New School, New York) and Francesca Trivellato (Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton) to widen the scope of the field. The journal's goal is to bring together \"historians and social scientists interested in the material and intellectual aspects of modern economic life.\"\nAcademic journals and societies.\nThe first journal specializing in the field of economic history was \"The Economic History Review\", founded in 1927, as the main publication of the Economic History Society. The first journal featured a publication by Professor Sir William Ashley, the first Professor of Economic History in the English-speaking world, who described the emerging field of economic history. The discipline existed alongside long-standing fields such as political history, religious history, and military history as one that focused on humans' interactions with 'visible happenings'. He continued, '[economic history] primarily and unless expressly extended, the history of actual human practice with respect to the material basis of life. The visible happenings with regard-to use the old formula-to \"the production, distribution, and consumption of wealth\" form our wide enough field'.\nLater, the Economic History Association established another academic journal, \"The Journal of Economic History\", in 1941 as a way of expanding the discipline in the United States. The first president of the Economic History Association, Edwin F. Gay, described the aim of economic history as to provide new perspectives in the economics and history disciplines: 'An adequate equipment with two skills, that of the historian and the economist, is not easily acquired, but experience shows that it is both necessary and possible'. Other related academic journals have broadened the lens with which economic history is studied. These interdisciplinary journals include the \"Business History Review\", \"European Review of Economic History\", \"Enterprise and Society\", and \"Financial History Review\".\nThe \"International Economic History Association\", an association of close to 50 member organizations, recognizes some of the major academic organizations dedicated to study of economic history: the Business History Conference, Economic History Association, Economic History Society, European Association of Business Historians, and the International Social History Association.\nNobel Memorial Prize-winning economic historians.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHave a very healthy respect for the study of economic history, because that's the raw material out of which any of your conjectures or testings will come.\n\u2013 Paul Samuelson (2009)\nSeveral economists have won Nobel prizes for contributions to economic history or contributions to economics that are commonly applied in economic history. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45634", "revid": "50589003", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45634", "title": "Thread safety", "text": "Concept in multi-threaded computer programming\nIn multi-threaded computer programming, a function is thread-safe when it can be invoked or accessed concurrently by multiple threads without causing unexpected behavior, race conditions, or data corruption. As in the multi-threaded context where a program executes several threads simultaneously in a shared address space and each of those threads has access to every other thread's memory, thread-safe functions need to ensure that all those threads behave properly and fulfill their design specifications without unintended interaction.\nThere are various strategies for making thread-safe data structures.\nLevels of thread safety.\nDifferent vendors use slightly different terminology for thread-safety, but the most commonly used thread-safety terminology are:\nThread safety guarantees usually also include design steps to prevent or limit the risk of different forms of deadlocks, as well as optimizations to maximize concurrent performance. However, deadlock-free guarantees cannot always be given, since deadlocks can be caused by callbacks and violation of architectural layering independent of the library itself.\nSoftware libraries can provide certain thread-safety guarantees. For example, concurrent reads might be guaranteed to be thread-safe, but concurrent writes might not be. Whether a program using such a library is thread-safe depends on whether it uses the library in a manner consistent with those guarantees.\nImplementation approaches.\nListed are two classes of approaches for avoiding race conditions to achieve thread-safety.\nThe first class of approaches focuses on avoiding shared state and includes:\nThe second class of approaches are synchronization-related, and are used in situations where shared state cannot be avoided:\nExamples.\nIn the following piece of Java code, the Java keyword synchronized makes the method thread-safe:\nclass Counter {\n private int i = 0;\n public synchronized void inc() {\n i++;\nIn the C programming language, each thread has its own stack. However, a static variable is not kept on the stack; all threads share simultaneous access to it. If multiple threads overlap while running the same function, it is possible that a static variable might be changed by one thread while another is midway through checking it. This difficult-to-diagnose logic error, which may compile and run properly most of the time, is called a race condition. One common way to avoid this is to use another shared variable as a \"lock\" or \"mutex\" (from mutual exclusion).\nIn the following piece of C code which calls POSIX headers, the function is thread-safe, but not reentrant:\nint incrementCounter() {\n static int counter = 0;\n static pthread_mutex_t mutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;\n // only allow one thread to increment at a time\n pthread_mutex_lock(&amp;mutex);\n ++counter;\n // store value before any other threads increment it further\n int result = counter;\n pthread_mutex_unlock(&amp;mutex);\n return result;\nIn the above, codice_1 can be called by different threads without any problem since a mutex is used to synchronize all access to the shared codice_2 variable. But if the function is used in a reentrant interrupt handler and a second interrupt arises while the mutex is locked, the second routine will hang forever. As interrupt servicing can disable other interrupts, the whole system could suffer.\nThe same function can be implemented to be both thread-safe and reentrant using the lock-free atomics, which were introduced in C++11:\nimport std;\nusing std::atomic;\nint incrementCounter() {\n static atomic&lt;int&gt; counter(0);\n // increment is guaranteed to be done atomically\n int result = ++counter;\n return result;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45635", "revid": "3016150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45635", "title": "Bottom-up and top-down approaches", "text": "Strategies for composition and decomposition\nBottom-up and top-down are strategies of composition and decomposition in fields as diverse as information processing and ordering knowledge, software, humanistic and scientific theories (see systemics), and management and organization. In practice they can be seen as a style of thinking, teaching, or leadership.\nA top-down approach (also known as \"stepwise design\" and stepwise refinement and in some cases used as a synonym of \"decomposition\") is essentially the breaking down of a system to gain insight into its compositional subsystems in a reverse engineering fashion. In a top-down approach an overview of the system is formulated, specifying, but not detailing, any first-level subsystems. Each subsystem is then refined in yet greater detail, sometimes in many additional subsystem levels, until the entire specification is reduced to base elements. A top-down model is often specified with the assistance of black boxes, which makes it easier to manipulate. However, black boxes may fail to clarify elementary mechanisms or be detailed enough to realistically validate the model. A top-down approach starts with the big picture, then breaks down into smaller segments.\nA bottom-up approach is the piecing together of systems to give rise to more complex systems, thus making the original systems subsystems of the emergent system. Bottom-up processing is a type of information processing based on incoming data from the environment to form a perception. From a cognitive psychology perspective, information enters the eyes in one direction (sensory input, or the \"bottom\"), and is then turned into an image by the brain that can be interpreted and recognized as a perception (output that is \"built up\" from processing to final cognition). In a bottom-up approach the individual base elements of the system are first specified in great detail. These elements are then linked together to form larger subsystems, which then in turn are linked, sometimes in many levels, until a complete top-level system is formed. This strategy often resembles a \"seed\" model, by which the beginnings are small but eventually grow in complexity and completeness. But \"organic strategies\" may result in a tangle of elements and subsystems, developed in isolation and subject to local optimization as opposed to meeting a global purpose.\nComputer science.\nSoftware development.\nIn the software development process, the top-down and bottom-up approaches play a key role.\nTop-down approaches emphasize planning and a complete understanding of the system. It is inherent that no coding can begin until a sufficient level of detail has been reached in the design of at least some part of the system. Top-down approaches are implemented by attaching the stubs in place of the module. But these delay testing of the ultimate functional units of a system until significant design is complete.\nBottom-up emphasizes coding and early testing, which can begin as soon as the first module has been specified. But this approach runs the risk that modules may be coded without having a clear idea of how they link to other parts of the system, and that such linking may not be as easy as first thought. Re-usability of code is one of the main benefits of a bottom-up approach.\nTop-down design was promoted in the 1970s by IBM researchers Harlan Mills and Niklaus Wirth. Mills developed structured programming concepts for practical use and tested them in a 1969 project to automate the \"New York Times\" morgue index. The engineering and management success of this project led to the spread of the top-down approach through IBM and the rest of the computer industry. Among other achievements, Niklaus Wirth, the developer of Pascal programming language, wrote the influential paper \"Program Development by Stepwise Refinement\". Since Niklaus Wirth went on to develop languages such as Modula and Oberon (where one could define a module before knowing about the entire program specification), one can infer that top-down programming was not strictly what he promoted. Top-down methods were favored in software engineering until the late 1980s, and object-oriented programming assisted in demonstrating the idea that both aspects of top-down and bottom-up programming could be used.\nModern software design approaches usually combine top-down and bottom-up approaches. Although an understanding of the complete system is usually considered necessary for good design\u2014leading theoretically to a top-down approach\u2014most software projects attempt to make use of existing code to some degree. Pre-existing modules give designs a bottom-up flavor.\nProgramming.\nTop-down is a programming style, the mainstay of traditional procedural languages, in which design begins by specifying complex pieces and then dividing them into successively smaller pieces. The technique for writing a program using top-down methods is to write a main procedure that names all the major functions it will need. Later, the programming team looks at the requirements of each of those functions and the process is repeated. These compartmentalized subroutines eventually will perform actions so simple they can be easily and concisely coded. When all the various subroutines have been coded the program is ready for testing. By defining how the application comes together at a high level, lower-level work can be self-contained. \nIn a bottom-up approach the individual base elements of the system are first specified in great detail. These elements are then linked together to form larger subsystems, which in turn are linked, sometimes at many levels, until a complete top-level system is formed. This strategy often resembles a \"seed\" model, by which the beginnings are small, but eventually grow in complexity and completeness. Object-oriented programming (OOP) is a paradigm that uses \"objects\" to design applications and computer programs. In mechanical engineering with software programs such as Pro/ENGINEER, Solidworks, and Autodesk Inventor users can design products as pieces not part of the whole and later add those pieces together to form assemblies like building with Lego. Engineers call this \"piece part design\".\nParsing.\nParsing is the process of analyzing an input sequence (such as that read from a file or a keyboard) in order to determine its grammatical structure. This method is used in the analysis of both natural languages and computer languages, as in a compiler. Bottom-up parsing is parsing strategy that recognizes the text's lowest-level small details first, before its mid-level structures, and leaves the highest-level overall structure to last. In top-down parsing, on the other hand, one first looks at the highest level of the parse tree and works down the parse tree by using the rewriting rules of a formal grammar.\nNatural sciences.\nNanotechnology.\nTop-down and bottom-up are two approaches for the manufacture of products. These terms were first applied to the field of nanotechnology by the Foresight Institute in 1989 to distinguish between molecular manufacturing (to mass-produce large atomically precise objects) and conventional manufacturing (which can mass-produce large objects that are not atomically precise). Bottom-up approaches seek to have smaller (usually molecular) components built up into more complex assemblies, while top-down approaches seek to create nanoscale devices by using larger, externally controlled ones to direct their assembly. Certain valuable nanostructures, such as Silicon nanowires, can be fabricated using either approach, with processing methods selected on the basis of targeted applications.\nA top-down approach often uses the traditional workshop or microfabrication methods where externally controlled tools are used to cut, mill, and shape materials into the desired shape and order. Micropatterning techniques, such as photolithography and inkjet printing belong to this category. Vapor treatment can be regarded as a new top-down secondary approaches to engineer nanostructures.\nBottom-up approaches, in contrast, use the chemical properties of single molecules to cause single-molecule components to (a) self-organize or self-assemble into some useful conformation, or (b) rely on positional assembly. These approaches use the concepts of molecular self-assembly and/or molecular recognition. See also Supramolecular chemistry. Such bottom-up approaches should, broadly speaking, be able to produce devices in parallel and much cheaper than top-down methods but could potentially be overwhelmed as the size and complexity of the desired assembly increases.\nNeuroscience and psychology.\nThese terms are also employed in cognitive sciences including neuroscience, cognitive neuroscience and cognitive psychology to discuss the flow of information in processing. Typically, sensory input is considered bottom-up, and higher cognitive processes, which have more information from other sources, are considered top-down. A bottom-up process is characterized by an absence of higher-level direction in sensory processing, whereas a top-down process is characterized by a high level of direction of sensory processing by more cognition, such as goals or targets.\nAccording to college teaching notes written by Charles Ramskov, Irvin Rock, Neiser, and Richard Gregory claim that the top-down approach involves perception that is an active and constructive process. Additionally, it is an approach not directly given by stimulus input, but is the result of stimulus, internal hypotheses, and expectation interactions. According to theoretical synthesis, \"when a stimulus is presented short and clarity is uncertain that gives a vague stimulus, perception becomes a top-down approach.\"\nConversely, psychology defines bottom-up processing as an approach in which there is a progression from the individual elements to the whole. According to Ramskov, one proponent of bottom-up approach, Gibson, claims that it is a process that includes visual perception that needs information available from proximal stimulus produced by the distal stimulus. Theoretical synthesis also claims that bottom-up processing occurs \"when a stimulus is presented long and clearly enough.\"\nCertain cognitive processes, such as fast reactions or quick visual identification, are considered bottom-up processes because they rely primarily on sensory information, whereas processes such as motor control and directed attention are considered top-down because they are goal directed. Neurologically speaking, some areas of the brain, such as area V1 mostly have bottom-up connections. Other areas, such as the fusiform gyrus have inputs from higher brain areas and are considered to have top-down influence.\nThe study of visual attention is an example. If your attention is drawn to a flower in a field, it may be because the color or shape of the flower are visually salient. The information that caused you to attend to the flower came to you in a bottom-up fashion\u2014your attention was not contingent on knowledge of the flower: the outside stimulus was sufficient on its own. Contrast this situation with one in which you are looking for a flower. You have a representation of what you are looking for. When you see the object, you are looking for, it is salient. This is an example of the use of top-down information.\nIn cognition, two thinking approaches are distinguished. \"Top-down\" (or \"big chunk\") is stereotypically the visionary, or the person who sees the larger picture and overview. Such people focus on the big picture and from that derive the details to support it. \"Bottom-up\" (or \"small chunk\") cognition is akin to focusing on the detail primarily, rather than the landscape. The expression \"seeing the wood for the trees\" references the two styles of cognition.\nStudies in task switching and response selection show that there are differences through the two types of processing. Top-down processing primarily focuses on the attention side, such as task repetition.\u00a0Bottom-up processing focuses on item-based learning, such as finding the same object over and over again. \n Implications for understanding attentional control of response selection in conflict situations \nThis also applies to how we structure these processing neurologically. With structuring information interfaces in our neurological processes for procedural learning. These processes were proven effective to work in our interface design. But although both top-down principles were effective in guiding interface design; they were not sufficient. They can be combined with iterative bottom-up methods to produce usable interfaces\u00a0.\nUndergraduate (or bachelor) students are taught the basis of top-down bottom-up processing around their third year in the program. Going through four main parts of the processing when viewing it from a learning perspective. The two main definitions are that bottom-up processing is determined directly by environmental stimuli rather than the individual's knowledge and expectations.\nRelated concepts include field dependence, global precedence and the weak central coherence theory of autism.\nPublic health.\nBoth top-down and bottom-up approaches are used in public health. There are many examples of top-down programs, often run by governments or large inter-governmental organizations; many of these are disease-or issue-specific, such as HIV control or smallpox eradication. Examples of bottom-up programs include many small NGOs set up to improve local access to healthcare. But many programs seek to combine both approaches; for instance, guinea worm eradication, a single-disease international program currently run by the Carter Center has involved the training of many local volunteers, boosting bottom-up capacity, as have international programs for hygiene, sanitation, and access to primary healthcare.\nEcology.\nIn ecology top-down control refers to when a top predator controls the structure or population dynamics of the ecosystem. The interactions between these top predators and their prey are what influences lower trophic levels. Changes in the top level of trophic levels have an inverse effect on the lower trophic levels. Top-down control can have negative effects on the surrounding ecosystem if there is a drastic change in the number of predators. The classic example is of kelp forest ecosystems. In such ecosystems, sea otters are a keystone predator. They prey on urchins, which in turn eat kelp. When otters are removed, urchin populations grow and reduce the kelp forest creating urchin barrens. This reduces the diversity of the ecosystem as a whole and can have detrimental effects on all of the other organisms. In other words, such ecosystems are not controlled by productivity of the kelp, but rather, a top predator. One can see the inverse effect that top-down control has in this example; when the population of otters decreased, the population of the urchins increased.\nBottom-up control in ecosystems refers to ecosystems in which the nutrient supply, productivity, and type of primary producers (plants and phytoplankton) control the ecosystem structure. If there are not enough resources or producers in the ecosystem, there is not enough energy left for the rest of the animals in the food chain because of biomagnification and ecological efficiency. An example would be how plankton populations are controlled by the availability of nutrients. Plankton populations tend to be higher and more complex in areas where upwelling brings nutrients to the surface.\nThere are many different examples of these concepts. It is common for populations to be influenced by both types of control, and there are still debates going on as to which type of control affects food webs in certain ecosystems.\nManagement and organization.\nIn the fields of management and organization, the terms \"top-down\" and \"bottom-up\" are used to describe how decisions are made and/or how change is implemented.\nA \"top-down\" approach is where an executive decision maker or other top person makes the decisions of how something should be done. This approach is disseminated under their authority to lower levels in the hierarchy, who are, to a greater or lesser extent, bound by them. For example, when wanting to make an improvement in a hospital, a hospital administrator might decide that a major change (such as implementing a new program) is needed, and then use a planned approach to drive the changes down to the frontline staff.\nA bottom-up approach to changes is one that works from the grassroots, and originates in a flat structure with people working together, causing a decision to arise from their joint involvement. A decision by a number of activists, students, or victims of some incident to take action is a \"bottom-up\" decision. A bottom-up approach can be thought of as \"an incremental change approach that represents an emergent process cultivated and upheld primarily by frontline workers\".\nPositive aspects of top-down approaches include their efficiency and superb overview of higher levels; and external effects can be internalized. On the negative side, if reforms are perceived to be imposed \"from above\", it can be difficult for lower levels to accept them. Evidence suggests this to be true regardless of the content of reforms. A bottom-up approach allows for more experimentation and a better feeling for what is needed at the bottom. Other evidence suggests that there is a third combination approach to change.\nCorporate environment (Performance management).\nTop-down and bottom-up planning are two fundamental approaches in enterprise performance management (EPM), each offering distinct advantages. Top-down planning begins with senior management setting overarching strategic goals, which are then disseminated throughout the organization. This approach ensures alignment with the company's vision and facilitates uniform implementation across departments.\nConversely, bottom-up planning starts at the departmental or team level, where specific goals and plans are developed based on detailed operational insights. These plans are then aggregated to form the organization's overall strategy, ensuring that ground-level insights inform higher-level decisions.\nMany organizations adopt a hybrid approach, known as the countercurrent or integrated planning method, to leverage the strengths of both top-down and bottom-up planning. In this model, strategic objectives set by leadership are informed by operational data from various departments, creating a dynamic and iterative planning process. This integration enhances collaboration, improves data accuracy, and ensures that strategies are both ambitious and grounded in operational realities.\nFinancial planning &amp; analysis (FP&amp;A) teams play a crucial role in harmonizing these approaches, utilizing tools like driver-based planning and AI-assisted forecasting to create flexible, data-driven plans that adapt to changing business conditions.\nProduct design and development.\nDuring the development of new products, designers and engineers rely on both bottom-up and top-down approaches. The bottom-up approach is being used when off-the-shelf or existing components are selected and integrated into the product. An example includes selecting a particular fastener, such as a bolt, and designing the receiving components such that the fastener will fit properly. In a top-down approach, a custom fastener would be designed such that it would fit properly in the receiving components. For perspective, for a product with more restrictive requirements (such as weight, geometry, safety, environment), such as a spacesuit, a more top-down approach is taken and almost everything is custom designed.\nArchitecture.\nOften the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts school of design is said to have primarily promoted top-down design because it taught that an architectural design should begin with a parti, a basic plan drawing of the overall project.\nBy contrast, the Bauhaus focused on bottom-up design. This method manifested itself in the study of translating small-scale organizational systems to a larger, more architectural scale (as with the wood panel carving and furniture design).\nPhilosophy and ethics.\nTop-down reasoning in ethics is when the reasoner starts from abstract universalizable principles and then reasons down them to particular situations. Bottom-up reasoning occurs when the reasoner starts from intuitive particular situational judgements and then reasons up to principles. Reflective equilibrium occurs when there is interaction between top-down and bottom-up reasoning until both are in harmony. That is to say, when universalizable abstract principles are reflectively found to be in equilibrium with particular intuitive judgements. The process occurs when cognitive dissonance occurs when reasoners try to resolve top-down with bottom-up reasoning, and adjust one or the other, until they are satisfied, they have found the best combinations of principles and situational judgements.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45636", "revid": "47544869", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45636", "title": "Turbo C", "text": "Discontinued C IDE and compiler\nTurbo C is a discontinued integrated development environment (IDE) and compiler for the C programming language from Borland. First introduced in 1987, it was noted for its integrated development environment, small size, fast compile speed, comprehensive manuals and low price.\nIn May 1990, Borland replaced Turbo C with Turbo C++. In 2006, Borland reintroduced the Turbo moniker.\nEarly history.\nIn the early 1980s, Borland enjoyed considerable success with their Turbo Pascal product and it became a popular choice when developing applications for the PC. Borland followed up that success by releasing Turbo Prolog (in 1986), and in 1987, Turbo Basic and Turbo C. Turbo C has similar properties to Turbo Pascal: an integrated development environment, a fast compiler (though not near the speed of Turbo Pascal), a good editor, and a competitive price.\nTurbo C competed with other professional programming tools, such as Microsoft C, Watcom C, and Lattice C, while Turbo Pascal was successful with hobbyists and schools as well as professional programmers.\nVersion history.\nVersion 1.0 (May 13, 1987) offered the first integrated development environment for C on IBM PCs. Like many Borland products of the time, the software was bought from another company (in this case Wizard C compiler by Bob Jervis), and branded with the \"Turbo\" name. It ran in 384 kB of memory. It allowed inline assembly with full access to C symbolic names and structures, supported all memory models, and offered optimizations for speed, size, constant folding, and jump elimination.\nVersion 1.5 (January 1988) was an incremental improvement over version 1.0. It included more sample programs, improved manuals and bug fixes. It was shipped on five 360 KB diskettes of uncompressed files, and came with sample C programs, including a stripped down spreadsheet called mcalc. This version introduced the &lt;conio.h&gt; header file (which provided fast, PC-specific console I/O routines).\nVersion 2.0 (late 1988) featured the first \"blue screen\" version, which would be typical of all future Borland releases for MS-DOS. It was also available bundled with Turbo Assembler and Turbo Debugger. Turbo C 2.0 was also released (in Germany only) for the Atari ST; the program was not maintained by Borland, but sold and renamed PureC. This version introduced the &lt;graphics.h&gt; header file, which provided the Borland Graphics Interface already included in Turbo Pascal. \nWith the release of Turbo C++ 1.0 (in 1990), the two products were folded into one and the name \"Turbo C\" was discontinued. The C++ compiler was developed under contract by a company in San Diego, and was one of the first \"true\" compilers for C++ (until then, it was common to use pre-compilers that generated C code, ref. Cfront).\nFreeware release.\nIn 2006, Borland's successor, Embarcadero Technologies, re-released Turbo C and the MS-DOS versions of the Turbo C++ compilers as freeware.\nReception.\n\"BYTE\" in January 1989 listed Turbo C and Turbo Pascal as among the \"Distinction\" winners of the BYTE Awards. Citing their user interface and continued emphasis on speed, the magazine stated that \"for rapid prototyping there's not much better\". In a February 1989 overview of optimizing C compilers, \"BYTE\" said that Turbo C Professional 2.0 \"is no exception\" to the company's \"well-deserved reputation for pricing good software\". The magazine reported that Turbo C \"compiles faster\u2014\"much\" faster\u2014than any other compiler we reviewed\", and praised the addition of Turbo Debugger (\"the best source debugger\"). \"BYTE\" concluded that Turbo C did not produce the fastest or smallest executable, \"but it's definitely the one that is most fun to use\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45638", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45638", "title": "Undocumented feature", "text": "Aspect of computer hardware or software\nAn undocumented feature is an unintended or undocumented hardware operation, for example an undocumented instruction, or software feature found in computer hardware and software that is considered beneficial or useful. Sometimes the documentation is omitted through oversight, but undocumented features are sometimes not intended for use by end users, but left available for use by the vendor for software support and development. Also, some unintended operation of hardware or software that ends up being of utility to users is simply a bug, flaw or quirk.\nSince the suppliers of the software usually consider the software documentation to constitute a contract for the behavior of the software, undocumented features are generally left unsupported and may be removed or changed at will and without notice to the users.\nUndocumented or unsupported features are sometimes also called \"not manufacturer supported\" (NOMAS), a term coined by \"PPC Journal\" in the early 1980s.\nSome user-reported defects are viewed by software developers as working as expected, leading to the catchphrase \"it's not a bug, it's a feature\" (INABIAF) and its variations.\nHardware.\nUndocumented instructions, known as illegal opcodes, on the MOS Technology 6502 and its variants are sometimes used by programmers. These were removed in the WDC 65C02.\nVideo game and demoscene programmers have taken advantage of the unintended operation of computers' hardware to produce new effects or optimizations.\nIn 2019, researchers discovered that a manufacturer debugging mode, known as VISA, had an undocumented feature on Intel Platform Controller Hubs (PCHs), chipsets included on most Intel-based motherboards, which makes the mode accessible with a normal motherboard. Since the chipset has direct memory access this is problematic for security reasons.\nSoftware.\nUndocumented features (for example, the ability to change the switch character in MS-DOS, usually to a hyphen) can be included for compatibility purposes (in this case with Unix utilities) or for future-expansion reasons. However; if the software provider changes their software strategy to better align with the business, the absence of documentation makes it easier to justify the feature's removal.\nNew versions of software might omit mention of old (possibly superseded) features in documentation but keep them implemented for users who've grown accustomed to them.\nIn some cases, software bugs are referred to by developers either jokingly or conveniently as undocumented features. This usage may have been popularised in some of Microsoft's responses to bug reports for its first Word for Windows product, but does not originate there. The oldest surviving reference on Usenet dates to 5 March 1984. Between 1969 and 1972, Sandy Mathes, a systems programmer for PDP-8 software at Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) in Maynard, MA, used the terms \"bug\" and \"feature\" in her reporting of test results to distinguish between undocumented actions of delivered software products that were \"unacceptable\" and \"tolerable\", respectively. This usage may have been perpetuated.\nUndocumented features themselves have become a major feature of computer games. Developers often include various cheats and other special features (\"easter eggs\") that are not explained in the packaged material, but have become part of the \"buzz\" about the game on the Internet and among gamers. The undocumented features of foreign games are often elements that were not localized from their native language.\nClosed source APIs can also have undocumented functions that are not generally known. These are sometimes used to gain a commercial advantage over third-party software by providing additional information or better performance to the application provider.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45639", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45639", "title": "Bal Gangadhar Tilak", "text": "Indian independence activist (1856\u20131920)\nBal Gangadhar Tilak (; born Keshav Gangadhar Tilak (pronunciation: ]); 23 July 1856 \u2013 1 August 1920), endeared as Lokmanya (IAST: \"Lokam\u0101nya\"), was an Indian nationalist, teacher, and an independence activist. He was one third of the Lal Bal Pal triumvirate. The British colonial authorities called him \"The father of the Indian unrest\". He was also conferred with the title of \"Lokmanya\", which means \"accepted by the people as their leader\". Mahatma Gandhi called him \"The Maker of Modern India\".\nTilak was one of the first and strongest advocates of Swaraj ('self-rule') and a strong radical in Indian consciousness. He is known for his quote in Marathi: \"Swaraj is my birthright and I shall have it!\". He formed a close alliance with many Indian National Congress leaders including Bipin Chandra Pal, Lala Lajpat Rai, Aurobindo Ghose, V. O. Chidambaram Pillai and also Muhammad Ali Jinnah who later oversaw Pakistan's independence from British rule.\nEarly life.\nKeshav Gangadhar Tilak was born on 23 July 1856 in a Marathi Hindu Chitpavan Brahmin family in Ratnagiri, the headquarters of the Ratnagiri district of present-day Maharashtra (then Bombay Presidency). His ancestral village was Chikhali. His father, Gangadhar Tilak was a school teacher and a Sanskrit scholar who died when Tilak was sixteen. In 1871, Tilak was married to Tapibai (N\u00e9e Bal) when he was sixteen, a few months before his father's death. After marriage, her name was changed to Satyabhamabai. He obtained his Bachelor of Arts in first class in Mathematics from Deccan College of Pune in 1877. He left his M.A. course of study midway to join the L.L.B course instead, and in 1879 he obtained his L.L.B degree from Government Law College. After graduating, Tilak started teaching mathematics at a private school in Pune. Later, due to ideological differences with the colleagues in the new school, he withdrew and became a journalist. Tilak actively participated in public affairs. He stated: \"Religion and practical life are not different. The real spirit is to make the country your family instead of working only for your own. The step beyond is to serve humanity and the next step is to serve God.\"\nInspired by Vishnushastri Chiplunkar, he co-founded the New English school for secondary education in 1880 with a few of his college friends, including Gopal Ganesh Agarkar, Mahadev Ballal Namjoshi and Vishnushastri Chiplunkar. Their goal was to improve the quality of education for India's youth. The success of the school led them to set up the Deccan Education Society in 1884 to create a new system of education that taught young Indians nationalist ideas through an emphasis on Indian culture. The Society established the Fergusson College in 1885 for post-secondary studies. Tilak taught mathematics at Fergusson College. In 1890, Tilak left the Deccan Education Society for more openly political work. He began a mass movement towards independence by an emphasis on a religious and cultural revival.\nPolitical career.\nTilak had a long political career agitating for Indian autonomy from British colonial rule. Before Gandhi, he was the most widely known Indian political leader. Unlike his fellow Maharashtrian contemporary, Gokhale, Tilak was considered a radical Nationalist but a Social conservative. He was imprisoned on a number of occasions that included a long stint at Mandalay. At one stage in his political life he was called \"the father of Indian unrest\" by British author Sir Valentine Chirol.\nIndian National Congress.\nTilak joined the Indian National Congress in 1890. He opposed its moderate attitude, especially towards the fight for self-government. He was one of the most-eminent radicals at the time. In fact, it was the Swadeshi movement of 1905\u20131907 that resulted in the split within the Indian National Congress into the Moderates and the Extremists.\nDuring late 1896, a bubonic plague spread from Bombay to Pune, and by January 1897, it reached epidemic proportions. The British Indian Army was brought in to deal with the emergency and strict measures were employed to curb the plague, including the allowance of forced entry into private houses, the examination of the house's occupants, evacuation to hospitals and quarantine camps, removing and destroying personal possessions, and preventing patients from entering or leaving the city. By the end of May, the epidemic was under control. The measures used to curb the pandemic caused widespread resentment among the Indian public. Tilak took up this issue by publishing inflammatory articles in his paper Kesari (Kesari was written in Marathi, and \"Maratha\" was written in English), quoting the Hindu scripture, the Bhagavad Gita, to say that no blame could be attached to anyone who killed an oppressor without any thought of reward. Following this, on 22 June 1897, Commissioner Rand and another British officer, Lt. Ayerst were shot and killed by the Chapekar brothers and their other associates. According to Barbara and Thomas R. Metcalf, Tilak \"almost surely concealed the identities of the perpetrators\". Tilak was charged with incitement to murder and sentenced to 18 months imprisonment. When he emerged from prison in present-day Mumbai, he was revered as a martyr and a national hero. He adopted a new slogan coined by his associate Kaka Baptista: \"Swaraj (self-rule) is my birthright and I shall have it.\"\nFollowing the Partition of Bengal, which was a strategy set out by Lord Curzon to weaken the nationalist movement, Tilak encouraged the Swadeshi movement and the Boycott movement. The movement consisted of the boycott of foreign goods and also the social boycott of any Indian who used foreign goods. The Swadeshi movement consisted of the usage of natively produced goods. Once foreign goods were boycotted, there was a gap which had to be filled by the production of those goods in India itself. Tilak said that the Swadeshi and Boycott movements are two sides of the same coin.\nTilak opposed the moderate views of Gopal Krishna Gokhale, and was supported by fellow Indian nationalists Bipin Chandra Pal in Bengal and Lala Lajpat Rai in Punjab. They were referred to as the \"Lal-Bal-Pal triumvirate\". In 1907, the annual session of the Congress Party was held at Surat, Gujarat. Trouble broke out over the selection of the new president of the Congress between the moderate and the radical sections of the party. The party split into the radicals faction, led by Tilak, Pal and Lajpat Rai, and the moderate faction. Nationalists like Aurobindo Ghose, V. O. Chidambaram Pillai were Tilak supporters.\nWhen asked in Calcutta whether he envisioned a Maratha-type of government for independent India, Tilak answered that the Maratha-dominated governments of 17th and 18th centuries were outmoded in the 20th century, and he wanted a genuine federal system for Free India where everyone was an equal partner. He added that only such a form of government would be able to safeguard India's freedom. He was the first Congress leader to suggest that Hindi written in the Devanagari script be accepted as the sole national language of India.\nSedition Charges.\nDuring his lifetime among other political cases, Tilak had been tried for sedition charges in three times by British India Government\u2014in 1897, 1909, and 1916. In 1897, Tilak was sentenced to 18 months in prison for preaching disaffection against the Raj. In 1909, he was again charged with sedition and intensifying racial animosity between Indians and the British. The Bombay lawyer Muhammad Ali Jinnah appeared in Tilak's defence but he was sentenced to six years in prison in Burma in a controversial judgement. In 1916 when for the third time Tilak was charged for sedition over his lectures on self-rule, Jinnah again was his lawyer and this time led him to acquittal in the case.\nImprisonment in Mandalay.\nOn 30 April 1908, two Bengali youths, Prafulla Chaki and Khudiram Bose, threw a bomb on a carriage at Muzzafarpur, to kill the Chief Presidency Magistrate Douglas Kingsford of Calcutta fame, but erroneously killed two women traveling in it. Chaki committed suicide when caught, and Bose was hanged. Tilak, in his paper \"Kesari\", defended the revolutionaries and called for immediate Swaraj or self-rule. The Government swiftly charged him with sedition. At the conclusion of the trial, a special jury convicted him by 7:2 majority. The judge, Dinshaw D. Davar gave him a six years jail sentence to be served in Mandalay, Burma and a fine of (). On being asked by the judge whether he had anything to say, Tilak said:All that I wish to say is that, in spite of the verdict of the jury, I still maintain that I am innocent. There are higher powers that rule the destinies of men and nations; and I think, it may be the will of Providence that the cause I represent may be benefited more by my suffering than by my pen and tongue.\nMuhammad Ali Jinnah was his lawyer in the case. Justice Davar's judgement came under stern criticism in press and was seen against impartiality of British justice system. Justice Davar himself previously had appeared for Tilak in his first sedition case in 1897. In passing sentence, the judge indulged in some scathing strictures against Tilak's conduct. He threw off the judicial restraint which, to some extent, was observable in his charge to the jury. He condemned the articles as \"seething with sedition\", as preaching violence, speaking of murders with approval. \"You hail the advent of the bomb in India as if something had come to India for its good. I say, such journalism is a curse to the country\". Tilak was sent to Mandalay from 1908 to 1914. While imprisoned, he continued to read and write, further developing his ideas on the Indian nationalist movement. While in the prison he wrote the \"Gita Rahasya\". Many copies of which were sold, and the money was donated for the Indian Independence movement.\nLife after Mandalay.\nTilak developed diabetes during his sentence in Mandalay prison. This and the general ordeal of prison life had mellowed him at his release on 16 June 1914. When World War I started in August of that year, Tilak cabled the King-Emperor George V of his support and turned his oratory to find new recruits for war efforts. He welcomed The Indian Councils Act, popularly known as Minto-Morley Reforms, which had been passed by British Parliament in May 1909, terming it as \"a marked increase of confidence between the Rulers and the Ruled\". It was his conviction that acts of violence actually diminished, rather than hastening, the pace of political reforms. He was eager for reconciliation with Congress and had abandoned his demand for direct action and settled for agitations \"strictly by constitutional means\" \u2013 a line that had long been advocated by his rival Gokhale. Tilak reunited with his fellow nationalists and rejoined the Indian National Congress during the Lucknow pact 1916. .\nTilak tried to convince Mohandas Gandhi to leave the idea of Total non-violence (\"Total Ahimsa\") and try to get self-rule (\"Swarajya\") by all means. Though Gandhi did not entirely concur with Tilak on the means to achieve self-rule and was steadfast in his advocacy of \"satyagraha\", he appreciated Tilak's services to the country and his courage of conviction. After Tilak lost a civil suit against Valentine Chirol and incurred pecuniary loss, Gandhi even called upon Indians to contribute to the Tilak Purse Fund started with the objective of defraying the expenses incurred by Tilak.\nAll India Home Rule League.\nTilak helped found the All India Home Rule League in 1916\u201318, with G. S. Khaparde and Annie Besant. After years of trying to reunite the moderate and radical factions, he gave up and focused on the Home Rule League, which sought self-rule. Tilak travelled from village to village for support from farmers and locals to join the movement towards self-rule. Tilak was impressed by the Russian Revolution, and expressed his admiration for Vladimir Lenin. The league had 1400 members in April 1916, and by 1917 membership had grown to approximately 32,000. Tilak started his Home Rule League in Maharashtra, Central Provinces, and Karnataka and Berar region. Besant's League was active in the rest of India.\nThoughts and views.\nReligio-Political Views.\nTilak sought to unite the Indian population for mass political action throughout his life. For this to happen, he believed there needed to be a comprehensive justification for anti-British pro-Hindu activism. For this end, he sought justification in the supposed original principles of the Ramayana and the Bhagavad Gita. He named this call to activism karma-yoga or the yoga of action. In his interpretation, the Bhagavad Gita reveals this principle in the conversation between Krishna and Arjuna when Krishna exhorts Arjuna to fight his enemies (which in this case included many members of his family) because it is his duty. In Tilak's opinion, the Bhagavad Gita provided a strong justification of activism. However, this conflicted with the mainstream exegesis of the text at the time which was dominated by renunciate views and the idea of acts purely for God. This was represented by the two mainstream views at the time by Ramanuja and Adi Shankara. To find support for this philosophy, Tilak wrote his own interpretations of the relevant passages of the Gita and backed his views using Jnanadeva's commentary on the Gita, Ramanuja's critical commentary and his own translation of the Gita.\nSocial views against women.\nTilak was strongly opposed to liberal trends emerging in Pune such as women's rights and social reforms against untouchability. Tilak vehemently opposed the establishment of the first Native girls High school (now called Huzurpaga) in Pune in 1885 and its curriculum using his newspapers, the Mahratta and Kesari. Tilak was also opposed to intercaste marriage, particularly the match where an upper caste woman married a lower caste man. In the case of Deshasthas, Chitpawans and Karhades, he encouraged these three Maharashtrian Brahmin groups to give up \"caste exclusiveness\" and intermarry. Tilak officially opposed the age of consent bill which raised the age of marriage from ten to twelve for girls, however he was willing to sign a circular that increased age of marriage for girls to sixteen and twenty for boys.\nChild bride Rukhmabai was married at the age of eleven but refused to go and live with her husband. The husband sued for restitution of conjugal rights, initially lost but appealed the decision. On 4 March 1887, Justice Farran, using interpretations of Hindu laws, ordered Rukhmabai to \"go live with her husband or face six months of imprisonment\". Tilak approved of this decision of the court and said that the court was following Hindu Dharma\u015b\u0101stras. Rukhmabai responded that she would rather face imprisonment than obey the verdict. Her marriage was later dissolved by Queen Victoria. Later, she went on to receive her Doctor of Medicine degree from the London School of Medicine for Women.\nIn 1890, when an eleven-year-old Phulamani Bai died while having sexual intercourse with her much older husband, the Parsi social reformer Behramji Malabari supported the Age of Consent Act, 1891 to raise the age of a girl's eligibility for marriage. Tilak opposed the Bill and said that the Parsis as well as the English had no jurisdiction over the (Hindu) religious matters. He blamed the girl for having \"defective female organs\" and questioned how the husband could be \"persecuted diabolically for doing a harmless act\". He called the girl one of those \"dangerous freaks of nature\". Tilak did not have a progressive view when it came to gender relations. He did not believe that Hindu women should get a modern education. Rather, he had a more conservative view, believing that women were meant to be homemakers who had to subordinate themselves to the needs of their husbands and children. Tilak refused to sign a petition for the abolition of untouchability in 1918, two years before his death, although he had spoken against it earlier in a meeting.\nThe Phules established additional schools in Pune specifically for girls, Shudras, and Ati-Shudras, who were vulnerable groups. This initiative, however, sparked outrage from some upper caste Indian nationalists, notably Bal Gangadhar Tilak. Tilak voiced disapproval of schools for girls and non-Brahmins, expressing concerns that such endeavors would lead to a \"loss of nationality,\" as they equated adherence to caste rules with national identity. Consequently, the social pressure exerted on Jyotirao's father, Govindrao, compelled him to evict Jyotirao and Savitribai Phule from their home.\nEsteem for Swami Vivekananda.\nTilak and Swami Vivekananda had great mutual respect and esteem for each other. They met accidentally while travelling by train in 1892 and Tilak had Vivekananda as a guest in his house. A person who was present there(Basukaka), heard that it was agreed between Vivekananda and Tilak that Tilak would work towards nationalism in the \"political\" arena, while Vivekananda would work for nationalism in the \"religious\" arena. When Vivekananda died at a young age, Tilak expressed great sorrow and paid tributes to him in the Kesari. Tilak said about Vivekananda: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"No Hindu who has the interests of Hinduism at his heart, could help feeling grieved over Vivekananda's samadhi. Vivekananda, in short, had taken the work of keeping the banner of Advaita philosophy forever flying among all the nations of the world and made them realize the true greatness of Hindu religion and of the Hindu people. He had hoped that he would crown his achievement with the fulfillment of this task by virtue of his learning, eloquence, enthusiasm and sincerity, just as he had laid a secure foundation for it; but with Swami's samadhi, these hopes have gone. Thousands of years ago, another saint, Shankaracharya, who showed to the world the glory and greatness of Hinduism. At the fag of the 19th century, the second Shankaracharya is Vivekananda, who showed to the world the glory of Hinduism. His work has yet to be completed. We have lost our glory, our independence, everything.\"\nCaste issues.\nShahu, the ruler of the princely state of Kolhapur, had several conflicts with Tilak as the latter agreed with the Brahmins decision of Puranic rituals for the Marathas that were intended for Shudras. Tilak even suggested that the Marathas should be \"content\" with the Shudra status assigned to them by the Brahmins. Tilak's newspapers, as well as the press in Kolhapur, criticised Shahu for his caste prejudice and his unreasoned hostility towards Brahmins. These included serious allegations such as sexual assaults by Shahu against four Brahmin women. An English woman named Lady Minto was petitioned to help them. The agent of Shahu had blamed these allegations on the \"troublesome brahmins\". Tilak and another Brahmin suffered from the confiscation of estates by Shahu, the first during a quarrel between Shahu and the Shankaracharya of Sankareshwar and later in another issue.\nBal Gangadhar Tilak was released from prison on 16 June 1914. He commented: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSocial contributions.\nTilak started two weeklies, \"Kesari\" (\"The Lion\") in Marathi and \"Mahratta\" in English (sometimes referred as 'Maratha' in Academic Study Books) in 1880\u20131881 with Gopal Ganesh Agarkar as the first editor. By this he was recognised as 'awakener of India', as Kesari later became a daily and continues publication to this day. In 1894, Tilak transformed the household worshipping of Ganesha into a grand public event (Sarvajanik Ganeshotsav). The celebrations consisted of several days of processions, music, and food. They were organised by the means of subscriptions by neighbourhood, caste, or occupation. Students often would celebrate Hindu and national glory and address political issues; including patronage of \"Swadeshi\" goods. In 1895, Tilak founded the Shri Shivaji Fund Committee for the celebration of \"Shiv Jayanti\", the birth anniversary of Shivaji, the founder of the Maratha Empire. The project also had the objective of funding the reconstruction of the tomb (Samadhi) of Shivaji at Raigad Fort. For this second objective, Tilak established the Shri Shivaji Raigad Smarak Mandal along with Senapati Khanderao Dabhade II of Talegaon Dabhade, who became the founder President of the Mandal.\nThe events like the Ganapati festival and Shiv Jayanti were used by Tilak to build a national spirit beyond the circle of the educated elite in opposition to colonial rule. But it also exacerbated Hindu-Muslim differences. The festival organisers would urge Hindus to protect cows and boycott the Muharram celebrations organised by Shi'a Muslims, in which Hindus had formerly often participated. Thus, although the celebrations were meant to be a way to oppose colonial rule, they also contributed to religious tensions. Contemporary Marathi Hindu nationalist parties like the Shiv Sena took up his reverence for Shivaji. However, Indian Historian, Uma Chakravarti cites Professor Gordon Johnson and states \"It is significant that even at the time when Tilak was making political use of Shivaji the question of conceding Kshatriya status to him as Maratha was resisted by the conservative Brahmins including Tilak. While Shivaji was a Brave man, all his bravery, it was argued, did not give him the right to a status that very nearly approached that of a Brahmin. Further, the fact that Shivaji worshiped the Brahmanas in no way altered social relations, 'since it was as a Shudra he did it \u2013 as a Shudra the servant, if not the slave, of the Brahmin'\".\nThe Deccan Education Society that Tilak founded with others in the 1880s still runs Institutions in Pune like the Fergusson College. The Swadeshi movement started by Tilak at the beginning of the 20th century became part of the Independence movement until that goal was achieved in 1947. One can even say Swadeshi remained part of Indian Government policy until the 1990s when the Congress Government liberalised the economy. Tilak said, \"I regard India as my Motherland and my Goddess, the people in India are my kith and kin, and loyal and steadfast work for their political and social emancipation is my highest religion and duty\".\nHe commented:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"He who does what is beneficial to the people of this country, be he a Mohammedan or an Englishman, is not alien. \u2018Alienness\u2019 has to do with interests. Alienness is certainly not concerned with white or black skin . . . or religion.\"\nBooks.\nIn 1903, Tilak wrote the book \"The Arctic Home in the Vedas\". In it, he argued that the Vedas could only have been composed in the Arctics, and the Aryan bards brought them south after the onset of the last ice age. He proposed a new way to determine the exact time of the Vedas. In \"The Orion\", he tried to calculate the time of the Vedas by using the position of different Nakshatras. The positions of the Nakshtras were described in different Vedas. Tilak wrote \"Shrimadh Bhagvad Gita Rahasya\" in prison at Mandalay \u2013 the analysis of \"Karma Yoga\" in the \"Bhagavad Gita\", which is known to be a gift of the Vedas and the \"Upanishads\".\nTranslation.\nTwo books by B.G. Tilak were translated and published in French in 1979 and 1989 :\n (This second title was published in French after \"L'Origine Polaire de la Tradition v\u00e9dique\" (the translation of Tilak's work \"The Arctic Home in the Vedas\"), but is in fact the introduction to it, as confirmed by the original English editions).\nDescendants.\nTilak's son, Shridhar Tilak campaigned for removal of untouchability in late 1920s with dalit leader, Dr. Ambedkar. Both were leaders of the multi-caste Samata sangh. He was inspired by his philosophy and social reforms and communicated and discuss with him in methods to get rid of upper-caste hegemony. Given his liberal and rational thoughts, Shridhar Tilak was subjected to a lot of harassment by conservatives in Maharashtra region of that period. Unable to tolerate it, he committed suicide on 25 May 1928. Before that he sent three suicide notes: one to the collector of Pune, another to newspapers and a third one to Dr. Ambedkar. Later Dr. Ambedkar wrote \u2013 \u201cIf anyone who is worthy of the title Lokamanya, it is Shridharpant Tilak.\u201d\nShridhar's son, Jayantrao Tilak (1921\u20132001) was editor of the Kesari newspaper for many years. Jayantrao was also a politician from the Congress party. He was a member of the Parliament of India representing Maharashtra in the Rajya Sabha, the upper house of the Indian Parliament. He was also a member of the Maharashtra Legislative Council.\nRohit Tilak, a descendant of Bal Gangadhar Tilak, is a Pune-based Congress party politician. In 2017, a woman with whom he had an extra-marital affair accused him of rape and other crimes. He was released on bail in connection with these charges.\nLegacy.\nOn 28 July 1956, a portrait of B. G. Tilak was put in the Central Hall of Parliament House, New Delhi. The portrait of Tilak, painted by Gopal Deuskar, was unveiled by the then Prime Minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru.\nTilak Smarak Ranga Mandir, a theatre auditorium in Pune is dedicated to him. In 2007, the Government of India released a coin to commemorate the 150th birth anniversary of Tilak. The formal approval of the government of Burma was received for the construction of clafs-cum-lecture hall in the Mandalay prison as a memorial to Lokmanya Tilak. () were given by the Indian Government and () by the local Indian community in Burma. In 1920, the Lokmanya Tilak Smarak Trust was founded. Between 1995 and 2004, the trust installed several commemorative plaques across Pune under their Pune Aitihasik Vastu Smriti society.\nSeveral Indian films have been made on his life, including: the documentary films \"Lokmanya Bal Gangadhar Tilak\" (1951) and \"Lokmanya Tilak\" (1957) both by Vishram Bedekar, \"\" (2015) by Om Raut, and \"The Great Freedom Fighter Lokmanya Bal Gangadhar Tilak \u2013 Swaraj My Birthright\" (2018) by Vinay Dhumale. \"Lokmanya\", a Marathi-language television series about him, aired in India in 2022.\nBalmohan Vidyamandir, a prominent secondary school in the neighbourhood of Shivaji Park in Mumbai, is jointly named in honour of Bal Gangadhar Tilak and Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (Bal-Mohan).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45640", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45640", "title": "Uninterruptible Power Supply", "text": ""}
{"id": "45641", "revid": "29278485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45641", "title": "UPS", "text": "UPS most commonly refers to:\nUPS or ups may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45642", "revid": "43263260", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45642", "title": "Demography", "text": "Science that deals with populations and their structures, statistically and theoretically\nDemography (from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'people, society' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'writing, drawing, description') is the statistical study of human populations: their size, composition (e.g., ethnic group, age), and how they change through the interplay of fertility (births), mortality (deaths), and migration.\nDemographic analysis examines and measures the dimensions and dynamics of populations; it can cover whole societies or groups defined by criteria such as education, nationality, religion, and ethnicity. Educational institutions usually treat demography as a field of sociology, though there are a number of independent demography departments. These methods have primarily been developed to study human populations, but are extended to a variety of areas where researchers want to know how populations of social actors can change across time through processes of birth, death, and migration. In the context of human biological populations, demographic analysis uses administrative records to develop an independent estimate of the population. Demographic analysis estimates are often considered a reliable standard for judging the accuracy of the census information gathered at any time. In the labor force, demographic analysis is used to estimate sizes and flows of populations of workers; in population ecology the focus is on the birth, death, migration and immigration of individuals in a population of living organisms, alternatively, in social human sciences could involve movement of firms and institutional forms. Demographic analysis is used in a wide variety of contexts. For example, it is often used in business plans, to describe the population connected to the geographic location of the business. Demographic analysis is usually abbreviated as DA. For the 2010 U.S. Census, The U.S. Census Bureau has expanded its DA categories. Also as part of the 2010 U.S. Census, DA now also includes comparative analysis between independent housing estimates, and census address lists at different key time points.\nPatient demographics form the core of the data for any medical institution, such as patient and emergency contact information and patient medical record data. They allow for the identification of a patient and their categorization into categories for the purpose of statistical analysis. Patient demographics include: date of birth, gender, date of death, postal code, ethnicity, blood type, emergency contact information, family doctor, insurance provider data, allergies, major diagnoses and major medical history.\nFormal demography limits its object of study to the measurement of population processes, while the broader field of social demography or population studies also analyses the relationships between economic, social, institutional, cultural, and biological processes influencing a population.\nHistory.\nDemographic thoughts traced back to antiquity, and were present in many civilisations and cultures, like Ancient Greece, Ancient Rome, China and India. Made up of the prefix \"demo-\" and the suffix \"-graphy\", the term \"demography\" refers to the overall study of population.\nIn ancient Greece, this can be found in the writings of Herodotus, Thucydides, Hippocrates, Epicurus, Protagoras, Polus, Plato and Aristotle. In Rome, writers and philosophers like Cicero, Seneca, Pliny the Elder, Marcus Aurelius, Epictetus, Cato, and Columella also expressed important ideas on this ground.\nIn the Middle Ages, Christian thinkers devoted much time in refuting the Classical ideas on demography. Important contributors to the field were William of Conches, Bartholomew of Lucca, William of Auvergne, William of Pagula, and Muslim sociologists like Ibn Khaldun.\nOne of the earliest demographic studies in the modern period was \"Natural and Political Observations Made upon the Bills of Mortality\" (1662) by John Graunt, which contains a primitive form of life table. Among the study's findings were that one-third of the children in London died before their sixteenth birthday. Mathematicians, such as Edmond Halley, developed the life table as the basis for life insurance mathematics. Richard Price was credited with the first textbook on life contingencies published in 1771, followed later by Augustus De Morgan, \"On the Application of Probabilities to Life Contingencies\" (1838).\nIn 1755, Benjamin Franklin published his essay \"Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc.\", projecting exponential growth in British colonies. His work influenced Thomas Robert Malthus, who, writing at the end of the 18th century, feared that, if unchecked, population growth would tend to outstrip growth in food production, leading to ever-increasing famine and poverty (see Malthusian catastrophe). Malthus is seen as the intellectual father of ideas of overpopulation and the limits to growth. Later, more sophisticated and realistic models were presented by Benjamin Gompertz and Verhulst.\nIn 1855, a Belgian scholar Achille Guillard defined demography as the natural and social history of human species or the mathematical knowledge of populations, of their general changes, and of their physical, civil, intellectual, and moral condition.\nNewell (1988, p. 4-5) claims that the first major developments in the 20th century, in what was to become formal demography, were made in three papers by Alfred J. Lotka (1907, 1911 (with F.R. Sharpe) and 1922 where a Stable Population Model was developed. This model was similar to Leonhard Euler's earlier but overlooked modelling which showed how a population with constant fertility and mortality might grow geometrically using a difference equation. Under this geometric growth Euler also examined relationships among various demographic indices showing how they might be used to produce estimates when data was missing. Lotka (and Sharpe) showed that a closed population (assuming constant both age-specific mortality and fertility) developed along a path leading to a fixed age structure - The Stable Population.\nMethods.\nDemography is the statistical and mathematical study of the size, composition, and spatial distribution of human populations and how these features change over time. Data are obtained from a census of the population and from registries: records of events like birth, deaths, migrations, marriages, divorces, diseases, and employment. To do this, there needs to be an understanding of how they are calculated and the questions they answer which are included in these four concepts: population change, standardization of population numbers, the demographic bookkeeping equation, and population composition.\nThere are two types of data collection\u2014direct and indirect\u2014with several methods of each type.\nDirect methods.\nDirect data comes from vital statistics registries that track all births and deaths as well as certain changes in legal status such as marriage, divorce, and migration (registration of place of residence). In developed countries with good registration systems (such as the United States and much of Europe), registry statistics are the best method for estimating the number of births and deaths.\nA census is the other common direct method of collecting demographic data. A census is usually conducted by a national government and attempts to enumerate every person in a country. In contrast to vital statistics data, which are typically collected continuously and summarized on an annual basis, censuses typically occur only every 10 years or so, and thus are not usually the best source of data on births and deaths. Analyses are conducted after a census to estimate how much over or undercounting took place. These compare the sex ratios from the census data to those estimated from natural values and mortality data.\nCensuses do more than just count people. They typically collect information about families or households in addition to individual characteristics such as age, sex, marital status, literacy/education, employment status, and occupation, and geographical location. They may also collect data on migration (or place of birth or of previous residence), language, religion, nationality (or ethnicity or race), and citizenship. In countries in which the vital registration system may be incomplete, the censuses are also used as a direct source of information about fertility and mortality; for example, the censuses of the People's Republic of China gather information on births and deaths that occurred in the 18 months immediately preceding the census.\nIndirect methods.\nIndirect methods of collecting data are required in countries and periods where full data are not available, such as is the case in much of the developing world, and most of historical demography. One of these techniques in contemporary demography is the sister method, where survey researchers ask women how many of their sisters have died or had children and at what age. With these surveys, researchers can then indirectly estimate birth or death rates for the entire population. Other indirect methods in contemporary demography include asking people about siblings, parents, and children. Other indirect methods are necessary in historical demography.\nThere are a variety of demographic methods for modelling population processes. They include models of mortality (including the life table, Gompertz models, hazards models, Cox proportional hazards models, multiple decrement life tables, Brass relational logits), fertility (Hermes model, Coale-Trussell models, parity progression ratios), marriage (Singulate Mean at Marriage, Page model), disability (Sullivan's method, multistate life tables), population projections (Lee-Carter model, the Leslie Matrix), and population momentum (Keyfitz).\nThe United Kingdom has a series of four national birth cohort studies, the first three spaced apart by 12 years: the 1946 National Survey of Health and Development, the 1958 National Child Development Study, the 1970 British Cohort Study, and the Millennium Cohort Study, begun much more recently in 2000. These have followed the lives of samples of people (typically beginning with around 17,000 in each study) for many years, and are still continuing. As the samples have been drawn in a nationally representative way, inferences can be drawn from these studies about the differences between four distinct generations of British people in terms of their health, education, attitudes, childbearing and employment patterns.\nIndirect standardization is used when a population is small enough that the number of events (births, deaths, etc.) are also small. In this case, methods must be used to produce a standardized mortality rate (SMR) or standardized incidence rate (SIR).\nPopulation change.\nPopulation change is analyzed by measuring the change between one population size to another. Global population continues to rise, which makes population change an essential component to demographics. This is calculated by taking one population size minus the population size in an earlier census. The best way of measuring population change is using the intercensal percentage change. The intercensal percentage change is the absolute change in population between the censuses divided by the population size in the earlier census. Next, multiply this a hundredfold to receive a percentage. When this statistic is achieved, the population growth between two or more nations that differ in size, can be accurately measured and examined.\nStandardization of population numbers.\nFor there to be a significant comparison, numbers must be altered for the size of the population that is under study. For example, the fertility rate is calculated as the ratio of the number of births to women of childbearing age to the total number of women in this age range. If these adjustments were not made, we would not know if a nation with a higher rate of births or deaths has a population with more women of childbearing age or more births per eligible woman.\nWithin the category of standardization, there are two major approaches: direct standardization and indirect standardization.\nCommon rates and ratios.\nA stable population does not necessarily remain fixed in size. It can be expanding or shrinking.\nThe crude death rate as defined above and applied to a whole population can give a misleading impression. For example, the number of deaths per 1,000 people can be higher in developed nations than in less-developed countries, despite standards of health being better in developed countries. This is because developed countries have proportionally more older people, who are more likely to die in a given year, so that the overall mortality rate can be higher even if the mortality rate at any given age is lower. A more complete picture of mortality is given by a life table, which summarizes mortality separately at each age. A life table is necessary to give a good estimate of life expectancy.\nBasic equation regarding development of a population.\nSuppose that a country (or other entity) contains \"Populationt\" persons at time \"t\".\nWhat is the size of the population at time \"t\" + 1 ?\nformula_1\nNatural increase from time \"t\" to \"t\" + 1:\nformula_2\nNet migration from time \"t\" to \"t\" + 1:\nformula_3\nThese basic equations can also be applied to subpopulations. For example, the population size of ethnic groups or nationalities within a given society or country is subject to the same sources of change. When dealing with ethnic groups, however, \"net migration\" might have to be subdivided into physical migration and ethnic reidentification (assimilation). Individuals who change their ethnic self-labels or whose ethnic classification in government statistics changes over time may be thought of as migrating or moving from one population subcategory to another.\nMore generally, while the basic demographic equation holds true by definition, in practice the recording and counting of events (births, deaths, immigration, emigration) and the enumeration of the total population size are subject to error. So allowance needs to be made for error in the underlying statistics when any accounting of population size or change is made.\nThe figure in this section shows the latest (2004) UN (United Nations) WHO projections of world population out to the year 2150 (red = high, orange = medium, green = low). The UN \"medium\" projection shows world population reaching an approximate equilibrium at 9\u00a0billion by 2075. Working independently, demographers at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis in Austria expect world population to peak at 9\u00a0billion by 2070. Throughout the 21st century, the average age of the population is likely to continue to rise.\nScience of population.\nPopulations can change through three processes: fertility, mortality, and migration. Fertility involves the number of children that women have and is to be contrasted with fecundity (a woman's childbearing potential). Mortality is the study of the causes, consequences, and measurement of processes affecting death to members of the population. Demographers most commonly study mortality using the life table, a statistical device that provides information about the mortality conditions (most notably the life expectancy) in the population.\nMigration refers to the movement of persons from a locality of origin to a destination place across some predefined, political boundary. Migration researchers do not designate movements 'migrations' unless they are somewhat permanent. Thus, demographers do not consider tourists and travellers to be migrating. While demographers who study migration typically do so through census data on place of residence, indirect sources of data including tax forms and labour force surveys are also important.\nDemography is today widely taught in many universities across the world, attracting students with initial training in social sciences, statistics or health studies. Being at the crossroads of several disciplines such as sociology, economics, epidemiology, geography, anthropology and history, demography offers tools to approach a large range of population issues by combining a more technical quantitative approach that represents the core of the discipline with many other methods borrowed from social or other sciences. Demographic research is conducted in universities, in research institutes, as well as in statistical departments and in several international agencies. Population institutions are part of the CICRED (International Committee for Coordination of Demographic Research) network while most individual scientists engaged in demographic research are members of the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population, or a national association such as the Population Association of America in the United States, or affiliates of the Federation of Canadian Demographers in Canada.\nPopulation composition.\nPopulation composition is the description of population defined by characteristics such as age, race, sex or marital status. These descriptions can be necessary for understanding the social dynamics from historical and comparative research. This data is often compared using a population pyramid.\nPopulation composition is also a very important part of historical research. Information ranging back hundreds of years is not always worthwhile, because the numbers of people for which data are available may not provide the information that is important (such as population size). Lack of information on the original data-collection procedures may prevent accurate evaluation of data quality.\nDemographic analysis in institutions and organizations.\nLabor market.\nThe demographic analysis of labor markets can be used to show slow population growth, population ageing, and the increased importance of immigration. The U.S. Census Bureau projects that in the next 100 years, the United States will face some dramatic demographic changes. The population is expected to grow more slowly and age more rapidly than ever before and the nation will become a nation of immigrants. This influx is projected to rise over the next century as new immigrants and their children will account for over half the U.S. population. These demographic shifts could ignite major adjustments in the economy, more specifically, in labor markets.\nTurnover and in internal labor markets.\nPeople decide to exit organizations for many reasons, such as, better jobs, dissatisfaction, and concerns within the family. The causes of turnover can be split into two separate factors, one linked with the culture of the organization, and the other relating to all other factors. People who do not fully accept a culture might leave voluntarily. Or, some individuals might leave because they fail to fit in and fail to change within a particular organization.\nPopulation ecology of organizations.\nA basic definition of population ecology is a study of the distribution and abundance of organisms. As it relates to organizations and demography, organizations go through various liabilities to their continued survival. Hospitals, like all other large and complex organizations are impacted in the environment they work. For example, a study was done on the closure of acute care hospitals in Florida between a particular time. The study examined effect size, age, and niche density of these particular hospitals. A population theory says that organizational outcomes are mostly determined by environmental factors. Among several factors of the theory, there are four that apply to the hospital closure example: size, age, density of niches in which organizations operate, and density of niches in which organizations are established.\nBusiness organizations.\nProblems in which demographers may be called upon to assist business organizations are when determining the best prospective location in an area of a branch store or service outlet, predicting the demand for a new product, and to analyze certain dynamics of a company's workforce. Choosing a new location for a branch of a bank, choosing the area in which to start a new supermarket, consulting a bank loan officer that a particular location would be a beneficial site to start a car wash, and determining what shopping area would be best to buy and be redeveloped in metropolis area are types of problems in which demographers can be called upon.\nStandardization is a useful demographic technique used in the analysis of a business. It can be used as an interpretive and analytic tool for the comparison of different markets.\nNonprofit organizations.\nThese organizations have interests about the number and characteristics of their clients so they can maximize the sale of their products, their outlook on their influence, or the ends of their power, services, and beneficial works.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45645", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45645", "title": "Krishna Chandra Bhattacharya", "text": "Indian philosopher\nKrishnachandra Bhattacharyya, commonly referred to as K. C. Bhattacharyya, (12 May 1875 \u2013 11 December 1949), was a modern Indian philosopher affiliated with the University of Calcutta. He gained renown for his method of \"constructive interpretation,\" a scholarly approach employed to elucidate and elaborate upon the interrelationships and intricacies inherent in ancient Indian philosophical systems. This method facilitated an examination of these systems akin to the scrutiny applied to contemporary philosophical problems. Bhattacharyya dedicated particular attention to the inquiry into the manner in which the mind (or consciousness) engenders what appears to be a material universe. Notably, Bhattacharyya advocated for an immersive cosmopolitanism, wherein Indian philosophical frameworks were contemporised through a process of assimilation and immersion, eschewing a mere replication of European ideas in favour of a more nuanced integration.\nEarly life.\nBhattacharyya, born on 12 May 1875 in Serampore into a family distinguished for its Sanskrit scholarship, received his early education in a local school. Subsequently, having successfully completed the matriculation examination in 1891, he matriculated to the Presidency College, an institution then associated with the University of Calcutta.\nIt is noteworthy that Bhattacharya was the father of Kalidas Bhattacharyya, a prominent philosopher.\nSwaraj in Ideas.\nDuring a period marked by escalating demands for India's political emancipation from British colonial dominance, Bhattacharyya articulated a fervent appeal for liberation from what he termed \"cultural subjection\" \u2013 a subtle and nearly imperceptible form of intellectual servitude. This entreaty is encapsulated in \"Svar\u0101j in Ideas,\" an oration delivered in Candranagar in October 1931, although it remained unpublished during Bhattacharyya's lifetime. In elucidating the concept, Bhattacharyya posits that \"cultural subjection is ordinarily of an unconscious character and it implies slavery from the very start... There is cultural subjection only when one's traditional cast of ideas and sentiments is superseded without comparison or competition by a new cast representing an alien culture which possesses one like a ghost.\"\nSubject as Freedom.\nSubject as Freedom was published in 1930. It is almost universally regarded by those who study modern Indian philosophy as the most important philosophical treatise composed in India during the period of British rule. It is a meticulous analysis of the structure of human subjectivity. K. C. Bhattacharyya achieves a remarkable synthesis of neo-Vedantin, Kantian, and Husserlian insights, exploring the role of embodiment, of language, and of introspective consciousness in the achievement of self-knowledge. \nNalini Bhushan and Jay Garfield have translated Bhattacharyya's technical work into a more accessible idiom.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45646", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45646", "title": "Peter the Great and the Russian Empire", "text": ""}
{"id": "45648", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45648", "title": "Nightjar", "text": "Family of birds\nNightjars are medium-sized nocturnal or crepuscular birds in the family Caprimulgidae and order Caprimulgiformes, characterised by long wings, short legs, and very short bills. They are sometimes called bugeaters, their primary source of food being insects. Some New World species are called nighthawks. The English word \"nightjar\" originally referred to the European nightjar.\nNightjars are found all around the world, with the exception of Antarctica, and certain island groups such as the Seychelles. They can be found in a variety of habitats, most commonly the open country with some vegetation. They usually nest on the ground, with a habit of resting and roosting on roads.\nNightjars have similar characteristics, including small feet, of little use for walking, and long, pointed wings. Typical nightjars have rictal bristles, longer bills, and softer plumage. The colour of their plumage and their unusual perching habits help conceal them during the day, but they often possess contrasting pale patches or spots that likely serve in intraspecific communication.\nSystematics.\nCaprimulgiformes.\nPreviously, all members of the orders Apodiformes, Aegotheliformes, Nyctibiiformes, Podargiformes, and Steatornithiformes were lumped alongside nightjars in the Caprimulgiformes. In 2021, the International Ornithological Congress redefined the Caprimulgiformes as only applying to nightjars, with potoos, frogmouths, oilbirds, and owlet-nightjars all being reclassified into their own orders. See Strisores for more info about the disputes over the taxonomy of Caprimulgiformes. A phylogenetic analysis found that the extinct family Archaeotrogonidae, known from the Eocene and Oligocene of Europe, are the closest known relatives of nightjars.\nCaprimulgidae.\nTraditionally, nightjars have been divided into two subfamilies: the Caprimulginae, or typical nightjars and the Chordeilinae. The Chordeilinae included species with short bills and lack of elongated rictal bristles in the genera \"Nyctiprogne\", \"Lurocalis\" and \"Chordeiles\". Molecular phylogenetic studies have shown that the two subfamilies are not monophyletic. In addition, the subfamily Eurostopodinae was introduced for species in the genera \"Eurostopodus\" and \"Lyncornis\" but these two genera are now known not to be closely related.\nThe common poorwill, \"Phalaenoptilus nuttallii\", is unique as a bird that undergoes a form of hibernation, becoming torpid and with a much reduced body temperature for weeks or months, although other nightjars can enter a state of torpor for shorter periods.\nThe cladogram shown below is based on a 2014 phylogenetic study by Snorri Sigur\u00f0sson and Joel Cracraft that analysed two mitochondrial and two nuclei loci. The African brown nightjar (\"Veles binotatus\"), was not included in the study. The division of the species into genera is based on the 2025 version of AviList taxonomy. In 2023 Thiago Vernaschi Costa and collaborators proposed that the non-monophyly could be resolved by the introduction of three monotypic genera. They resurrected the genus \"Antiurus\" for the spot-tailed nightjar and erected two new genera: \"Quechuavis\" for Tschudi's nightjar and \"Tepuiornis\" for the Roraiman nightjar.\nThe family contains 22 genera.\nIn addition, a fossil species, \"Ventivorus ragei\" has been described in 1988 from southwest France by C\u00e9cile Mourer-Chauvir\u00e9 based on two partial coracoids.\nAlso see a list of nightjars, sortable by common and binomial names.\nDistribution and habitat.\nNightjars inhabit all continents other than Antarctica, as well as some island groups such as Madagascar, the Seychelles, New Caledonia and the islands of Caribbean. They are not known to live in extremely arid desert regions. Nightjars can occupy all elevations from sea level to , and a number of species are montane specialists. Nightjars occupy a wide range of habitats, from deserts to rainforests but are most common in open country with some vegetation.\nThe nighthawks are confined to the New World, and the eared nightjars to Asia and Australia.\nA number of species undertake migrations, although the secretive nature of the family may account for the incomplete understanding of their migratory habits. Species that live in the far north, such as the European nightjar or the common nighthawk, migrate southward with the onset of winter. Geolocators placed on European nightjars in southern England found they wintered in the south of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Other species make shorter migrations.\nConservation and status.\nSome species of nightjars are threatened with extinction. Road-kills of this species by cars are thought to be a major cause of mortality for many members of the family because of their habit of resting and roosting on roads.\nThey also usually nest on the ground, laying one or two patterned eggs directly onto bare ground. Nightjars possibly move their eggs and chicks from the nesting site in the event of danger by carrying them in their mouths. This suggestion has been repeated many times in ornithology books, but surveys of nightjar research have found very little evidence to support this idea.\nDeveloping conservation strategies for some species presents a particular challenge in that scientists do not have enough data to determine whether or not a species is endangered due to the difficulty in locating, identifying, or categorizing their limited number (e.g. 10,000) known to exist, a good example being the Vaurie's nightjar in China's south-western Xinjiang Province (as seen only once in-hand). Surveys in the 1970s and 1990s failed to find the species, implying that the species has become extinct, endangered, or found only in a few small areas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45651", "revid": "49969429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45651", "title": "Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan", "text": "President of India from 1962 to 1967\nSarvepalli Radhakrishnan (; 5 September 1888\u00a0\u2013 17 April 1975) was an Indian academician, philosopher and statesman who served as the Vice President of India from 1952 to 1962 and President of India from 1962 to 1967. He was the ambassador of India to the Soviet Union from 1949 to 1952. He was also the vice-chancellor of Banaras Hindu University from 1939 to 1948 and the vice-chancellor of Andhra University from 1931 to 1936. Radhakrishnan is considered one of the most influential and distinguished 20th century scholars of comparative religion and philosophy, he held the King George V Chair of Mental and Moral Science at the University of Calcutta from 1921 to 1932 and Spalding Chair of Eastern Religion and Ethics at University of Oxford from 1936 to 1952.\nRadhakrishnan's philosophy was grounded in Advaita Vedanta, reinterpreting this tradition for a contemporary understanding. He defended Hinduism against what he called \"uninformed Western criticism\", contributing to the formation of contemporary Hindu identity. He has been influential in shaping the understanding of Hinduism, in both India and the west, and earned a reputation as a bridge-builder between India and the West.\nRadhakrishnan was awarded several high awards during his life, including a knighthood in 1931, the Bharat Ratna, the highest civilian award in India, in 1954, and honorary membership of the British Royal Order of Merit in 1963. He was also one of the founders of HelpAge India, a non-profit organisation for elderly underprivileged in India. Radhakrishnan believed that \"teachers should be the best minds in the country.\"\nEarly life and education.\nRadhakrishnan was born as Sarvepalli Radhakrishnayya in a Telugu speaking Niyogi Brahmin familyof Sarvepalli Veeraswami and Sithamma. He was the fourth born of six siblings (five brothers and one sister), in Tiruttani of North Arcot district in the erstwhile Madras Presidency (now in Tiruvallur district of Tamil Nadu). His family hails from Sarvepalli village in Nellore district of Andhra Pradesh. His early years were spent in Thiruttani and Tirupati. His father was a subordinate revenue official in the service of a local \"Zamindar\" (local landlord). His primary education was at K. V. High School at Thiruttani. In 1896 he moved to the Hermansburg Evangelical Lutheran Mission School in Tirupati and Government High Secondary School, Walajapet.\nEducation.\n Radhakrishnan was awarded scholarships throughout his academic life. He joined Voorhees College in Vellore for his high school education. After his F.A. (First of Arts) class, he joined the Madras Christian College (affiliated to the University of Madras) at the age of 16. He graduated from there in 1907, and also finished his master's degree from the same college.\nRadhakrishnan studied philosophy by chance rather than choice. He had wished to study mathematics. Being a financially constrained student, when a cousin who graduated from the same college passed on his philosophy textbooks to Radhakrishnan, it automatically decided his academics course.\nSarvepalli wrote his bachelor's degree thesis on \"The Ethics of the Vedanta and its Metaphysical Presuppositions\". It \"was intended to be a reply to the charge that the Vedanta system had no room for ethics.\" Two of his professors, William Meston and Alfred George Hogg, commended Radhakrishnan's dissertation. Radhakrishnan's thesis was published when he was only twenty. According to Radhakrishnan himself, the criticism of Hogg and other Christian teachers of Indian culture \"disturbed my faith and shook the traditional props on which I leaned.\" Radhakrishnan himself describes how, as a student,&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis led him to his critical study of Indian philosophy and religion and a lifelong defence of Hinduism against \"uninformed Western criticism\". At the same time, Radhakrishnan commended Professor Hogg as 'My distinguished teacher,' and as \"one of the greatest Christian thinkers we had in India.' Besides, Professor William Skinner, who was acting Principal of the College, gave a testimonial saying \"he is one of the best men we have had in the recent years\", which enabled him to get the first job in Presidency College. In reciprocation, Radhakrishnan dedicated one of his early books to William Skinner.\nThe Spirit of \"Abheda\"\nRadhakrishnan expresses his anguish, against the British critics, in The Ethics of the Vedanta. Here he wrote, \"it has become philosophic fashion of the present day to consider the Vedanta system a non-ethical one.\" He quotes a German-born philologist and Orientalist, who lived and studied in Britain for most of his life, Max Muller as stating, \"The Vedanta philosophy has not neglected the important sphere of ethics; but on the contrary, we find ethics in the beginning, ethics in the middle, and ethics in the end, to say nothing of the fact that minds, so engrossed with divine things as Vedanta philosophers, are not likely to fall victims to the ordinary temptations of the world, the flesh, and other powers.\"\nRadhakrishnan then explains how this philosophy requires us (people) to look upon all creations as one. As non-different. This is where he introduces \"The Spirit of Abheda\". He quotes, \"In morals, the individual is enjoined to cultivate a Spirit of \"Abheda\", or non-difference.\" Thus he mentions how this \"naturally leads to the ethics of love and brotherhood\".\n\"Every other individual is to be regarded as your co-equal, and treated as an end, not a means.\"\n\"The Vedanta requires us to respect human dignity and demands the recognition of man as man.\"\nPersonal life.\nRadhakrishnan was married to Sivakamu (1893\u20131956) in May 1903, a distant cousin, at the age of 14, when she was aged 10. As per tradition the marriage was arranged by the family. The couple had five daughters named Padmavati, Rukmini, Sushila, Sundari and Shakuntala. They also had a son named Sarvepalli Gopal who went on to a notable career as a historian. Many of Radhakrishnan's family members including his grandchildren and great-grandchildren have pursued a wide range of careers in academia, public policy, medicine, law, banking, business, publishing and other fields across the world. Former India cricketer &amp; NCA director VVS Laxman is his great-grandnephew. Sivakamu died on 26 November 1956. They were married for about 52 years.\nAcademic career.\nIn April 1909, Radhakrishnan was appointed to the Department of Philosophy at the Madras Presidency College. Thereafter, in 1918, he was selected as Professor of Philosophy by the University of Mysore, where he taught at its Maharaja's College, Mysore. Here, Radhakrishnan along with M. Hiriyanna and A. R. Wadia groomed M. Yamunacharya, who would later hold post of Professor in Philosophy in the Department of Philosophy at Maharaja College, Mysore. By that time he had written many articles for journals of repute like \"The Quest\", \"Journal of Philosophy\" and the \"International Journal of Ethics\". He also completed his first book The book was published in 1918. \"The Philosophy of Rabindranath Tagore\". He believed Tagore's philosophy to be the \"genuine manifestation of the Indian spirit\". His second book, \"The Reign of Religion in Contemporary Philosophy\" was published in 1920.\nIn 1921 he was appointed as a professor in philosophy to occupy the King George V Chair of Mental and Moral Science at the University of Calcutta. He represented the University of Calcutta at the Congress of the Universities of the British Empire in June 1926 and the International Congress of Philosophy at Harvard University in September 1926. Another important academic event during this period was the invitation to deliver the Hibbert Lecture on the ideals of life which he delivered at Manchester College, Oxford in 1929 and which was subsequently published in book form as \"An Idealist View of Life\".\nIn 1929 Radhakrishnan was invited to take the post vacated by Principal J. Estlin Carpenter at Manchester College. This gave him the opportunity to lecture to the students of the University of Oxford on Comparative Religion. For his services to education he was knighted by George V in the June 1931 Birthday Honours, and formally invested with his honour by the Governor-General of India, the Earl of Willingdon, in March 1932. However, he ceased to use the title after Indian independence, preferring instead his academic title of 'Doctor'.\nHe was the vice-chancellor of Andhra University from 1931 to 1936. During his first convocation address, he spoke about his native Andhra as, \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We, the Andhras, are fortunately situated in some respects. I firmly believe that if any part of India is capable of developing an effective sense of unity it is in Andhra. The hold of conservatism is not strong. Our generosity of spirit and openness of mind are well -known. Our social instinct and suggestibility are still active. Our moral sense and sympathetic imagination are not much warped by dogmas. Our women are relatively more free. Love of the mother-tongue binds us all.\nIn 1936 Radhakrishnan was named Spalding Professor of Eastern Religion and Ethics at the University of Oxford, and was elected a Fellow of All Souls College. That same year, and again in 1937, he was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature, although this nomination process, as for all laureates, was not public at the time. Further nominations for the awards continued steadily throughout the 1960s. In 1939 Pt. Madan Mohan Malaviya invited him to succeed him as the Vice-Chancellor of Banaras Hindu University (BHU). He served as its Vice-Chancellor till January 1948.\nPolitical career.\nRadhakrishnan started his political career \"rather late in life\", after his successful academic career. His international authority preceded his political career. He was one of those stalwarts who attended Andhra Mahasabha in 1928 where he seconded the idea of renaming Ceded Districts division of Madras Presidency as Rayalaseema. In 1931 he was nominated to the League of Nations Committee for Intellectual Cooperation, where after \"in Western eyes he was the recognized Hindu authority on Indian ideas and a persuasive interpreter of the role of Eastern institutions in contemporary society.\"\nWhen India became independent in 1947, Radhakrishnan represented India at UNESCO (1946\u201352) and was later Ambassador of India to the Soviet Union, from 1949 to 1952. He was also elected to the Constituent Assembly of India. Radhakrishnan was elected as the first Vice President of India in 1952, and elected as the second President of India (1962\u20131967). Radhakrishnan did not have a background in the Congress Party, nor was he active in the Indian independence movement. He was the \"politician in shadow\". His motivation lay in his pride of Hindu culture, and the defence of Hinduism against \"uninformed Western criticism\". According to the historian Donald Mackenzie Brown,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Teacher's Day\".\nWhen Radhakrishnan became the President of India, some of his students and friends requested him to allow them to celebrate his birthday, on 5 September. He replied,Instead of celebrating my birthday, it would be my proud privilege if September 5th is observed as Teachers' Day.\nHis birthday has since been celebrated as Teachers' Day in India.\nDeath.\nDr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan died of natural causes on April 17, 1975, at the age of 86 , in Madras (now Chennai), India. \nCharity.\nAlong with G. D. Birla and some other social workers in the pre-independence era, Radhakrishnan formed the Krishnarpan Charity Trust.\nRole in Constituent Assembly.\nHe was against State institutions imparting denominational religious instruction as it was against the secular vision of the Indian State.\nGlobal policy.\nAlong with Albert Einstein, Radhakrishnan, the second president of India and the first vice president of India, was one of the sponsors of the Peoples' World Convention (PWC), also known as Peoples' World Constituent Assembly (PWCA), which took place in 1950\u201351 at Palais Electoral, Geneva, Switzerland. \nPhilosophy.\nRadhakrishnan tried to bridge eastern and western thought, defending Hinduism against \"uninformed Western criticism\", but also incorporating Western philosophical and religious thought.\nAdvaita Vedanta.\nRadhakrishnan was one of the most prominent spokesmen of Neo-Vedanta. His metaphysics was grounded in Advaita Vedanta, but he reinterpreted Advaita Vedanta for a contemporary understanding. He acknowledged the reality and diversity of the world of experience, which he saw as grounded in and supported by the absolute or Brahman. Radhakrishnan also reinterpreted Shankara's notion of \"maya\". According to Radhakrishnan, maya is not a strict absolute idealism, but \"a subjective misperception of the world as ultimately real.\"\nIntuition and religious experience.\n\"Intuition\", synonymously called \"religious experience\", has a central place in Radhakrishnan's philosophy as a source of knowledge which is not mediated by conscious thought. His specific interest in experience can be traced back to the works of William James (1842\u20131910), F. H. Bradley (1846\u20131924), Henri Bergson (1859\u20131941), and Friedrich von H\u00fcgel (1852\u20131925), and to Vivekananda (1863\u20131902), who had a strong influence on Sarvepalli's thought. According to Radhakrishnan, intuition is of a self-certifying character (\"svatassiddha\"), self-evidencing (\"sv\u0101sa\u1e43vedya\") and self-luminous (\"svayam-prak\u0101sa\"). In his book \"An Idealist View of Life\", he made a case for the importance of intuitive thinking as opposed to purely intellectual forms of thought. According to Radhakrishnan, \"intuition\" plays a specific role in all kinds of experience.\nRadhakrishnan discernes eight sorts of experience:\nClassification of religions.\nFor Radhakrishnan, theology and creeds are intellectual formulations, and symbols of religious experience or \"religious intuitions\". Radhakrishnan qualified the variety of religions hierarchically according to their apprehension of \"religious experience\", giving Advaita Vedanta the highest place:\nRadhakrishnan saw Hinduism as a scientific religion based on facts, apprehended via intuition or religious experience. According to Radhakrishnan, \"if philosophy of religion is to become scientific, it must become empirical and found itself on religious experience\". He saw this empiricism exemplified in the Vedas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFrom his writings collected as The Hindu View of Life, Upton Lectures, Delivered at Manchester College, Oxford, 1926: \"Hinduism insists on our working steadily upwards in improving our knowledge of God. The worshippers of the absolute are of the highest rank; second to them are the worshippers of the personal God; then come the worshippers of the incarnations of Rama, Krishna, Buddha; below them are those who worship deities, ancestors, and sages, and lowest of all are the worshippers of petty forces and spirits. The deities of some men are in water (i.e., bathing places), those of the most advanced are in the heavens, those of the children (in religion) are in the images of wood and stone, but the sage finds his God in his deeper self. The man of action finds his God in fire, the man of feeling in the heart, and the feeble minded in the idol, but the strong in spirit find God everywhere\". The seers see the supreme in the self, and not the images.\"\nTo Radhakrishnan, Advaita Vedanta was the best representative of Hinduism, as being grounded in intuition, in contrast to the \"intellectually mediated interpretations\" of other religions. He objected against charges of \"quietism\" and \"world denial\", instead stressing the need and ethic of social service, giving a modern interpretation of classical terms as \"tat-tvam-asi\". According to Radhakrishnan, Vedanta offers the most direct intuitive experience and inner realisation, which makes it the highest form of religion:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRadhakrishnan saw other religions, \"including what Dr. S. Radhakrishnan understands as lower forms of Hinduism,\" as interpretations of Advaita Vedanta, thereby Hinduising all religions.\nAlthough Radhakrishnan was well-acquainted with western culture and philosophy, he was also critical of them. He stated that Western philosophers, despite all claims to objectivity, were influenced by theological influences of their own culture.\nInfluence.\nRadhakrishnan was one of world's best and most influential twentieth-century scholars of comparative religion and philosophy.\nRadhakrishnan's defence of the Hindu traditions has been highly influential, both in India and the western world. In India, Radhakrishnan's ideas contributed to the formation of India as a nation-state. Radhakrishnan's writings contributed to the hegemonic status of Vedanta as \"the essential world view of Hinduism\". In the western world, Radhakrishnan's interpretations of the Hindu tradition, and his emphasis on \"spiritual experience\", made Hinduism more readily accessible for a western audience, and contributed to the influence Hinduism has on modern spirituality:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In figures such as Vivekananda and Radhakrishnan we witness Vedanta traveling to the West, where it nourished the spiritual hunger of Europeans and Americans in the early decades of the twentieth century.\nAppraisal.\nRadhakrishnan has been highly appraised. According to Paul Artur Schillp:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnd according to Hawley:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Radhakrishnan's concern for experience and his extensive knowledge of the Western philosophical and literary traditions has earned him the reputation of being a bridge-builder between India and the West. He often appears to feel at home in the Indian as well as the Western philosophical contexts, and draws from both Western and Indian sources throughout his writing. Because of this, Radhakrishnan has been held up in academic circles as a representative of Hinduism to the West. His lengthy writing career and his many published works have been influential in shaping the West's understanding of Hinduism, India, and the East.\nCriticism and context.\nRadhakrishnan's ideas have also received criticism and challenges, for their perennialist and universalist claims, and the use of an east\u2013west dichotomy.\nPerennialism.\nAccording to Radhakrishnan, there is not only an underlying \"divine unity\" from the seers of the Upanishads up to modern Hindus like Tagore and Gandhi, but also \"an essential commonality between philosophical and religious traditions from widely disparate cultures.\" This is also a major theme in the works of Rene Guenon, the Theosophical Society, and the contemporary popularity of eastern religions in modern spirituality. Since the 1970s, the Perennialist position has been criticised for its essentialism. Social-constructionists give an alternative approach to religious experience, in which such \"experiences\" are seen as being determined and mediated by cultural determinants:\nAs Michaels notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Religions, too, rely not so much on individual experiences or on innate feelings \u2013 like a \"sensus numinosus\" (Rudolf Otto) \u2013 but rather on behavioral patterns acquired and learned in childhood.\nRinehart also points out that \"perennialist claims notwithstanding, modern Hindu thought is a product of history\", which \"has been worked out and expressed in a variety of historical contexts over the preceding two hundreds years.\" This is also true for Radhakrishan, who was educated by missionaries and, like other neo-Vedantins, used the prevalent western understanding of India and its culture to present an alternative to the western critique.\nUniversalism, communalism and Hindu nationalism.\nAccording to Richard King, the elevation of Vedanta as the essence of Hinduism, and Advaita Vedanta as the \"paradigmatic example of the mystical nature of the Hindu religion\" by colonial Indologists but also neo-Vedantins served well for the Hindu nationalists, who further popularised this notion of Advaita Vedanta as the pinnacle of Indian religions. It\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...provided an opportunity for the construction of a nationalist ideology that could unite Hindus in their struggle against colonial oppression.\nThis \"opportunity\" has been criticised. According to Sucheta Mazumdar and Vasant Kaiwar,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... Indian nationalist leaders continued to operate within the categorical field generated by politicized religion [...] Extravagant claims were made on behalf of Oriental civilization. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan's statement \u2013 \"[t]he Vedanta is not a religion but religion itself in its \"most universal and deepest significance\" \u2013 is fairly typical.\nRinehart also criticises the inclusivity of Radhakrishnan's approach, since it provides \"a theological scheme for subsuming religious difference under the aegis of Vedantic truth.\" According to Rinehart, the consequence of this line of reasoning is communalism, the idea that \"all people belonging to one religion have common economic, social and political interests and these interests are contrary to the interests of those belonging to another religion.\" Rinehart notes that Hindu religiosity plays an important role in the nationalist movement, and that \"the neo-Hindu discourse is the unintended consequence of the initial moves made by thinkers like Rammohan Roy and Vivekananda.\" Yet Rinehart also points out that it is\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...clear that there isn't a neat line of causation that leads from the philosophies of Rammohan Roy, Vivekananda and Radhakrishnan to the agenda of [...] militant Hindus.\nPost-colonialism.\nColonialism left deep traces in the hearts and minds of the Indian people, influencing the way they understood and represented themselves. The influences of \"colonialist forms of knowledge\" can also be found in the works of Radhakrishnan. According to Hawley, Radhakrishnan's division between East and West, the East being spiritual and mystical, and the West being rationalist and logical in its forms of knowledge, was constructed during the 18th and 19th centuries. Arguably, these characterisations are \"imagined\" in the sense that they reflect the philosophical and religious realities of neither \"East' nor West.\"\nSince the 1990s, the colonial influences on the 'construction' and 'representation' of Hinduism have been the topic of debate among scholars of Hinduism. Western Indologists are trying to come to more neutral and better-informed representations of India and its culture, while Indian scholars are trying to establish forms of knowledge and understanding which are grounded in and informed by Indian traditions, instead of being dominated by western forms of knowledge and understanding.\nFeud with \"The Modern Review\".\nRadhakrishnan's appointment, as a southerner, to \"the most important chair of philosophy in India\" in the north, was resented by a number of people from the Bengali intellectual elite, and \"The Modern Review\", which was critical of the appointment of non-Bengalis, became the main vehicle of criticism. Soon after his arrival in Calcutta in 1921, Radhakrishnan's writings were regularly criticised in \"The Modern Review\". When Radhakrishnan published his \"Indian Philosophy\" in two volumes (1923 and 1927), \"The Modern Review\" questioned his use of sources, criticising the lack of references to Bengali scholars. Yet, in an editor's note, \"The Modern Review\" acknowledged that \"As professor's Radhakrishnan's book has not been received for review in this Journal, \"The Modern Review\" is not in a position to form any opinion on it.\"\nIn the January 1929 issue of \"The Modern Review\", the Bengali philosopher Jadunath Sinha made the claim that parts of his 1922 doctoral thesis, \"Indian Psychology of Perception\", published in 1925, were copied by his teacher Radhakrishnan into the chapter on \"The Yoga system of Patanjali\" in his book \"Indian Philosophy II\", published in 1927. Sinha and Radhakrishnan exchanged several letters in the \"Modern Review\", in which Sinha compared parts of his thesis with Radhakrishnan's publication, presenting altogether 110 instances of \"borrowings.\" Radhakrishnan felt compelled to respond, stating that Sinha and he had both used the same classical texts, that his translations were standard translations, and that similarities in translations were therefore unavoidable. He further argued that he was lecturing on the subject before publishing his book, and that his book was ready for publication in 1924, before Sinha's thesis was published.\nScholars such as Kuppuswami Sastri, Ganganath Jha, and Nalini Ganguli confirmed that Radhakrishnan was distributing the notes in question since 1922. Ramananda Chatterjee, the editor of \"The Modern Review\", refused to publish a letter by Nalini Ganguli confirming this fact, while continuing publishing Sinha's letters. The General Editor of Radhakrishnan's publisher, professor Muirhead, further confirmed that the publication was delayed for three years, due to his stay in the United States.\nIn Summer 1929, the dispute escalated into a juristic fight. Responding to the alleged \"systematic effort [...] to destroy Radhakrishnan's reputation as a scholar and a public figure,\" Radhakrishnan filed a suit for defamation of character against Sinha and Chatterjee, demanding Rs. 100,000 for the damage done, and Sinha filed a case against Radhakrishnan for copyright infringement, demanding Rs. 20,000. The suits were settled in May 1933, the terms of the settlement were not disclosed, and \"all the allegations made in the pleadings and in the columns of the \"Modern Review\" were withdrawn.\"\nAwards and honours.\nOther awards.\nCommemorative stamps released by India Post (by year):\nIn popular culture.\n\"Sarvepalli Radhakrishna\" (1988) is a documentary film about Radhakrishnan, directed by N. S. Thapa, produced by the Government of India's Films Division.\nNotable Works.\nBiographies and monographs on Radhakrishnan.\nSeveral books have been published on Radhakrishnan:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrinted sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOnline sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\"\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45652", "revid": "50601524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45652", "title": "Raja Ram Mohan Roy", "text": "Indian reformer and writer (1772\u20131833)\nRaja Ram Mohan Roy (22 May 1772 \u2013 27 September 1833) was an Indian reformer and writer who was one of the founders of the Brahmo Sabha in 1828, the precursor of the Brahmo Samaj, a socio-religious reform movement in the Indian subcontinent. He has been dubbed the \"Father of Indian Renaissance.\" He was given the title of Raja by Mughal emperor Akbar II (r.\u20091806\u00a0\u2013\u00a01837).\nHis influence was apparent in the fields of politics, public administration, education and religion. He was known for his efforts to abolish the practices of sati and child marriage. Roy wrote \"Gaudiya Vyakaran\" which was the first complete Bangla grammar written book.\nEarly life (1772\u20131796).\nRam Mohan Roy was born in Radhanagar, Hooghly District, Bengal Presidency. His great-grandfather Krishnakanta Bandyopadhyay was a Rarhi Kulin (noble) Brahmin. Among Kulin Brahmins\u00a0\u2013 descendants of the five families of Brahmins, migrated from Kannauj by Ballal Sen in the 12th century as per popular myth\u00a0\u2013 those from the Rarhi district of West Bengal were notorious in the 19th century for living off dowries by marrying several women. Kulinism was a synonym for polygamy and the dowry system, both of which Ram Mohan campaigned against. His father, Ramkanta, was a Vaishnavite, while his mother, Tarini Devi, was from a Shaivite family. He was a great scholar of Sanskrit, Persian and English languages and also knew Arabic, Latin and Greek. One parent prepared him for the occupation of a scholar, the \"Shastri\", while the other secured for him all the worldly advantages needed to launch a career in the \"laukik\" or worldly sphere of public administration. Torn between these two parental ideals from early childhood, Ram Mohan vacillated between the two for the rest of his life.\nDuring his childhood Ram Mohan Roy witnessed the death of his sister-in-law through sati. The seventeen-year-old girl was dragged towards the pyre where Ram Mohan Roy witnessed her terrified state. He tried to protest but to no avail. She was burned alive. The people chanted \"Maha Sati! Maha Sati! Maha Sati!\" (great wife) over her painful screams.\nRam Mohan Roy was married three times. His first wife died early. He had two sons, Radhaprasad in 1800, and Ramaprasad in 1812 with his second wife, who died in 1824. Roy's third wife outlived him.\nThe nature and content of Ram Mohan Roy's early education is disputed. One view is that Ram Mohan started his formal education in the village \"pathshala\" where he learned Bengali and some Sanskrit and Persian. Later he is said to have studied Persian and Arabic in a \"madrasa\" in Patna and after that he was sent to Benares to learn the intricacies of Sanskrit and Hindu scripture, including the Vedas and Upanishads. The dates of his time in both these places are uncertain. However, it is believed that he was sent to Patna when he was nine years old and two years later he went to Benares.\nRam Mohan Roy's impact on modern Indian history was his revival of the pure and ethical principles of the Vedanta school of philosophy as found in the Upanishads. He preached the unity of God, made early translations of Vedic scriptures into English, co-founded the Calcutta Unitarian Society and founded the Brahmo Sabha, precursor to Brahmo Samaj. The Brahmo Samaj played a major role in reforming and modernising the Indian society. He successfully campaigned against sati, the practice of burning widows. He sought to integrate Western culture with the best features of his own country's traditions. He established a number of schools to popularise a modern system of education in India. He promoted a rational, ethical, non-authoritarian, this-worldly views and social reforms in Hinduism. His writings also sparked interest among British and American Unitarians.\nChristianity and the early rule of the East India Company (1795\u20131828).\nDuring the early years of East India Company rule, Ram Mohan Roy acted as a political agitator while employed by the company.\nIn 1792, the British Baptist shoemaker William Carey published his influential missionary tract, \"An Enquiry of the Obligations of Christians to Use Means for the Conversion of Heathens\".\nIn 1793, William Carey landed in India to settle. His objective was to translate, publish and distribute the Bible in Indian languages and propagate Christianity to the Indian people. He realised the \"mobile\" (i.e. service classes) Brahmins and Pandits were most able to help him in this endeavour, and he began gathering them. He learnt the Buddhist and Jain religious works to better argue the case for Christianity in a cultural context.\nIn 1795, Carey made contact with a Sanskrit scholar, the Tantric Saihardana Vidyavagish, who later introduced him to Ram Mohan Roy, who wished to learn English.\nWhile there are rumors that between 1796 and 1797, the trio of Carey, Vidyavagish, and Roy created a religious work known as the \"Maha Nirvana Tantra\" (or \"Book of the Great Liberation\"). Scholars like John Duncan Derrett are skeptical of this claim calling it \"highly improbable\" and Hugh Urban argues that \"It is probable that we will never know the true author and date of the Maha Nirvana Tantra\". Carey's involvement is not recorded in his very detailed records and he reports only learning to read Sanskrit in 1796 and only completed a grammar in 1797, the same year he translated part of The Bible (from Joshua to Job), a massive task. For the next two decades Maha Nirvana Tantra was regularly augmented. Its judicial sections were used in the law courts of the English Settlement in Bengal as Hindu Law for adjudicating upon property disputes of the zamindars. However, a few British magistrates and collectors began to suspect and its usage (as well as the reliance on pandits as sources of Hindu Law) was quickly deprecated. Vidyavagish had a brief falling out with Carey and separated from the group, but maintained ties to Ram Mohan Roy.\nIn 1797, Raja Ram Mohan reached Calcutta and became a bania (moneylender), mainly to lend to the Englishmen of the Company living beyond their means. Ram Mohan also continued his vocation as pandit in the English courts and started to make a living for himself. He began learning Greek and Latin.\nIn 1799, Carey was joined by missionary Joshua Marshman and the printer William Ward at the Danish settlement of Serampore.\nFrom 1803 until 1815, Ram Mohan served the East India Company's \"Writing Service\", commencing as private clerk (\"Munshi\") to Thomas Woodroffe, Registrar of the Appellate Court at Murshidabad (whose distant nephew, John Woodroffe\u2014also a magistrate\u2014and later lived off the Maha Nirvana Tantra under the pseudonym Arthur Avalon). Roy resigned from Woodroffe's service and later secured employment with John Digby, a Company collector, and Ram Mohan spent many years at Rangpur and elsewhere with Digby, where he renewed his contacts with Hariharananda. William Carey had by this time settled at Serampore and the old trio renewed their profitable association. William Carey was also aligned now with the English Company, then head-quartered at Fort William, and his religious and political ambitions were increasingly intertwined.\nWhile in Murshidabad, in 1804 Raja Ram Mohan Roy wrote \"Tuhfat-ul-Muwahhidin\" (A Gift to Monotheists) in Persian with an introduction in Arabic. Bengali had not yet become the language of intellectual discourse. The importance of \"Tuhfat-ul-muwahhidin\" lies only in its being the first known theological statement of one who achieved later fame and notoriety as a Vedantin. On its own, it is unremarkable, perhaps of interest only to a social historian because of its amateurish eclecticism. \"Tuhfat\" was, after all, available as early as 1884 in the English translation of Maulavi Obaidullah EI Obaid, published by the Adi Brahmo Samaj. Raja Ram Mohan Roy did not know the Upanishad at this stage in his intellectual development.\nIn 1814, he started Atmiya Sabha (i.e. Society of Friends) a philosophical discussion circle in Kolkata (then Calcutta) to propagate the monotheistic ideals of the vedanta and to campaign against idolatry, caste rigidities, meaningless rituals and other social ills.\nThe East India Company was draining money from India at a rate of three million pounds a year by 1838. Ram Mohan Roy was one of the first to try to estimate how much money was being taken out of India and to where it was disappearing. He estimated that around one-half of all total revenue collected in India was sent out to England, leaving India, with a considerably larger population, to use the remaining money to maintain social well-being. Ram Mohan Roy saw this and believed that the unrestricted settlement of Europeans in India governing under free trade would help ease the economic drain crisis.\nDuring the next two decades, Ram Mohan along with William Carey, launched his attack against the bastions of Hinduism of Bengal, namely his own Kulin Brahmin priestly clan (then in control of the many temples of Bengal) and their priestly excesses. The Kulin excesses targeted include sati (the co-cremation of widows), polygamy, child marriage and dowry.\nFrom 1819, Ram Mohan's battery increasingly turned against William Carey, a Baptist Missionary settled in Serampore, and the Serampore missionaries. With Dwarkanath's munificence, he launched a series of attacks against Trinitarian Christianity and was now considerably assisted in his theological debates by the Unitarian faction of Christianity.\nHe wrote \"Gaudiya Vyakaran\" which was the first complete Bangla grammar written book. It was published in 1826.\nIn 1828, he launched Brahmo Sabha with Debendranath Tagore. By 1828, he had become a well known figure in India. In 1830, he had gone to England as an envoy of the Mughal Emperor, Akbar Shah II, who invested him with the title of Raja to the court of King William IV.\nMiddle \"Brahmo\" period (1820\u20131830).\nThis was Ram Mohan's most controversial period. Commenting on his published works Sivanath Sastri writes:\n\"The period between 1820 and 1830 was also eventful from a literary point of view, as will be manifest from the following list of his publications during that period:\n* Second Appeal to the Christian Public, \"Brahmanical Magazine\" \u2013 Parts I, II and III, with Bengali translation and a new Bengali newspaper called Sambad Kaumudi in 1821;\n* A Persian paper called \"Mirat-ul-Akbar\" contained a tract entitled Brief Remarks on Ancient Female Rights and a book in Bengali called Answers to Four Questions in 1822;\n* Third and final appeal to the Christian public, a memorial to the King of England on the subject of the liberty of the press, Ramdoss papers relating to Christian controversy, \"Brahmanical Magazine\", No. IV, letter to Lord Arnherst on the subject of English education, a tract called \"Humble Suggestions\" and a book in Bengali called \"Pathyapradan or Medicine for the Sick,\" all in 1823;\n* A letter to Rev. H. Ware on the \"Prospects of Christianity in India\" and an \"Appeal for Famine-smitten Natives in Southern India\" in 1824;\n* A tract on the different modes of worship, in 1825;\n* A Bengali tract on the qualifications of a God-loving householder, a tract in Bengali on a controversy with a Kayastha and a grammar of the Bengali language in English in 1826;\n* A Sanskrit tract on \"Divine Worship by Gayatri\" with an English translation of the same, the edition of a Sanskrit treatise against caste and the previously noticed tract called \"Answer of a Hindu to the Question &amp;c.\" in 1827;\n* A form of divine worship and a collection of hymns composed by him and his friends, in 1828;\n* \"Religious Instructions Founded on Sacred Authorities\" in English and Sanskrit, a Bengali tract called \"Anusthan\", and a petition against sati, in 1829.\nHe publicly declared that he would emigrate from the British Empire if Parliament failed to pass the Reform Bill.\nIn 1830, Ram Mohan Roy travelled to the United Kingdom as an ambassador of the Mughal Empire to ensure that Lord William Bentinck's Bengal Sati Regulation, 1829 banning the practice of sati was not overturned. In addition, Roy petitioned the King to increase the Mughal Emperor's allowance and perquisites. He was successful in persuading the British government to increase the stipend of the Mughal Emperor by \u00a330,000. While in England, he embarked on cultural exchanges, meeting with members of parliament and publishing books on Indian economics and law. Sophia Dobson Collet was his biographer at that time.\nReligious reforms.\nThe religious reforms of Roy contained in some beliefs of the Brahmo Samaj expounded by Rajnarayan Basu are:\nHaving studied the Qur\u2019an, the Vedas and the Upanishads, Roy's beliefs were derived from a combination of monastic elements of Hinduism, Islam, eighteenth-century Deism, Unitarianism, and the ideas of the Freemasons.\nSocial reforms.\nRaja Ram Mohan Roy founded the Atmiya Sabha and the Unitarian Community to fight the social evils, and to propagate social and educational reforms in India. He was the man who fought against superstitions, a pioneer in Indian education, and a trend setter in Bengali prose and Indian press.\nRoy's political background and Devandra's Christian influence helped shape his social and religious views regarding reforms of Hinduism. He writes,\nThe present system of Hindus is not well calculated to promote their political interests\u2026 It is necessary that some change should take place in their religion, at least for the sake of their political advantage and social comfort.\nRoy's experience working with the British government taught him that Hindu traditions were often not credible or respected by western standards and this no doubt affected his religious reforms. He wanted to legitimise Hindu traditions to his European acquaintances by proving that \"superstitious practices which deform the Hindu religion have nothing to do with the pure spirit it dictates!\" The \"superstitious practices\", to which Ram Mohan Roy objected, included sati, caste rigidity, polygamy and child marriages. These practices were often the reasons British officials claimed moral superiority over the Indian nation. Ram Mohan Roy's ideas of religion actively sought to create a fair and just society by implementing humanitarian practices similar to the Christian ideals professed by the British and thus seeking to legitimise Hinduism in the eyes of the Christian world.\nDeath.\nIn early September 1833, Roy came to Bristol to visit his Unitarian friend, Dr Lant Carpenter, where he made a deep impression on Lant's daughter and future social reformer, Mary Carpenter. While in Bristol, Roy preached at the Lewins Mead Meeting House. In mid-September, he became ill and was diagnosed with meningitis. He died at Stapleton, then a village to the north-east of Bristol (now a suburb), on 27 September 1833 of meningitis or a chronic respiratory ailment.\nMausoleum at Arnos Vale.\nRam Mohan Roy was originally buried on 18 October 1833, in the grounds of Stapleton Grove, where he had lived as an ambassador of the Mughal Empire and died of meningitis on 27 September 1833. Nine years later, he was reburied on 29 May 1843 in a grave at the new Arnos Vale Cemetery, in Brislington, East Bristol. William Carr and William Prinsep had bought a large plot on The Ceremonial Way there, and the body in its lac and a lead coffin was placed later in a deep brick-built vault, over seven feet underground. Two years after this, Dwarkanath Tagore helped pay for the chhatri raised above this vault, although there is no record of him ever visiting Bristol. The chhatri was designed by the artist William Prinsep, who had known Ram Mohan in Calcutta.\nBristol Arnos Vale cemetery have been holding remembrance services for Raja Ram Mohan Roy every year on a Sunday close to his death anniversary date of 27 September. The Indian High Commission at London often come to Raja's annual commemoration and Bristol's Lord Mayor is also regularly in attendance. The commemoration is a joint Brahmo-Unitarian service, in which, prayers and hymns are sung, flowers laid at the tomb, and the life of the Raja is celebrated via talks and visual presentations. In 2013, a recently discovered ivory bust of Ram Mohan was displayed. In 2014, his original death mask at Edinburgh was filmed and its history was discussed. In 2017, Raja's commemoration was held on 24 September.\nLegacy.\nRoy's commitment to English education and thought sparked debate between Mahatma Gandhi and Rabindranath Tagore. Gandhi objected to Roy's devotion to English education and thought and disallowing independent thinking by being overly supportive of the Western philosophical discourses. Tagore wrote a letter rejecting Gandhi's view, saying \"[Roy] had the full inheritance of Indian wisdom. He was never a school boy of the West, and therefore had the dignity to be a friend of the West.\"\nIn 1983, a full-scale Exhibition on Ram Mohan Roy was held in Bristol's Museum and Art Gallery. His enormous 1831 portrait by Henry Perronet Briggs still hangs there and was the subject of a talk by Max Muller in 1873. At Bristol's centre, on College Green, there is a full-size bronze statue of Raja by a modern Kolkata sculptor Niranjan Pradhan. Another bust by Pradhan, gifted to Bristol by Jyoti Basu, sits inside the main foyer of Bristol's City Hall.\nA pedestrian path at Stapleton has been named \"Rajah Rammohun Walk\". There is a 1933 Brahmo plaque on the outside west wall of Stapleton Grove, and railings and a granite memorial stone mark his first burial place in the garden. His tomb and chhatri at Arnos Vale are listed as a Grade II historic site by English Heritage.\nIn popular culture.\nA 1965 Indian Bengali-language film \"Raja Rammohan\" about Roy's reforms, directed by Bijoy Bose and starring Basanta Chowdhury in the title role.\nIn 1988, Doordarshan Serial Bharat Ek Khoj produced and directed by Shyam Benegal also picturised a full one episode on Raja Ram Mohan Roy. The title role was played by noted TV actor Anang Desai with Urmila Bhatt, Tom Alter and Ravi Jhankal as supporting cast.\nIn 1984 Films Division of India created a documentary \"Raja Rammohan Roy\" directed by P. C. Sharma.\nIn 2004, Roy was ranked number 10 in BBC's poll of the Greatest Bengali of All Time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45654", "revid": "51045860", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45654", "title": "Dayananda Saraswati", "text": "Indian philosopher and socio-religious reformer (1824\u20131883)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nQuotation\nThere are undoubtedly many learned men among the followers of every religion. They should free themselves from prejudice, accept the universal truths \u2013 that is those truths that are to be found alike in all religions and are of universal application, reject all things in which the various religions differ and treat each other lovingly, it will be greatly to the advantage of the world.\nDayanand Saraswati () born Mool Shankar Tiwari (12 February 1824 \u2013 30 October 1883), was a Hindu philosopher, social leader and founder of the Arya Samaj, a reform movement of Hinduism. His book \"Satyarth Prakash\" has remained one of the influential texts on the philosophy of the Vedas and clarifications of various ideas and duties of human beings. He was the first to give the call for \"Swaraj\" as \"India for Indians\" in 1876, a call later taken up by Lokmanya Tilak. Denouncing the idolatry and ritualistic worship, he worked towards reviving Vedic religion. Subsequently, the philosopher and President of India, Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, called him one of the \"makers of Modern India\", as did Sri Aurobindo.\nThose who were influenced by and followed Dayananda included Chaudhary Charan Singh, Madam Cama, Pandit Lekh Ram, Swami Shraddhanand, Shyamji Krishna Varma, Kishan Singh, Bhagat Singh, Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, Bhai Parmanand, Lala Hardayal, Madan Lal Dhingra, Ram Prasad Bismil, Mahadev Govind Ranade, Ashfaqullah Khan, Mahatma Hansraj, Lala Lajpat Rai, Yogmaya Neupane, Vallabhbhai Patel and others.\nHe was a sannyasi (ascetic) from boyhood and a scholar. He believed in the infallible authority of the Vedas. Dayananda advocated the doctrines of karma and reincarnation. He emphasised the Vedic ideals of brahmacharya, including celibacy and devotion to God.\nAmong Dayananda's contributions were his opposition to untouchability, promotion of the equal rights for women and his commentary on the Vedas from Vedic Sanskrit in Sanskrit as well as in Hindi.\nEarly life.\nDayananda Saraswati was born on the 10th day of waning moon in the month of Purnimanta Phalguna (12 February 1824) on the tithi to an Indian Hindu Brahmin family in Tankara, Kathiawar region (now Morbi district of Gujarat). He belonged to the Audichya Brahmin sub-division. His original name was Mool Shankar Tiwari, because he was born in Dhanu Rashi and Mul Nakshatra. His father was Karshanji Lalji Tiwari, and his mother was Yashodabai.\nWhen he was eight years old, his Yajnopavita Sanskara ceremony was performed, marking his entry into formal education. His father was a follower of Shiva and taught him the ways to worship Shiva. He was also taught the importance of keeping fasts. On the occasion of Shivratri, Dayananda sat awake the whole night in obedience to Shiva. During one of these fasts, he saw a mouse eating the offerings and running over the idol's body. After seeing this, he questioned that if Shiva could not defend himself against a mouse, then how could he be the saviour of the world.\nThe deaths of his younger sister and his uncle from cholera led Dayananda to ponder the meaning of life and death. He began asking questions which worried his parents. He was engaged in his early teens, but he decided marriage was not for him and ran away from home in 1846.\nDayanand Saraswati spent nearly twenty-five years, from 1845 to 1869, as a wandering ascetic, searching for religious truth. He found out that the joy from material goods was not enough, therefore he decided to devote himself to spiritual pursuits in forests, retreats in the Himalayans, and pilgrimage sites in North India. During these years he practised various forms of yoga and became a disciple of a teacher named Virajanand Dandeesha. Virajanand believed that Hinduism had strayed from its historical roots and that many of its practices had become impure. Dayananda Sarasvati promised Virajanand that he would devote his life to restoring the rightful place of the Vedas in the Hindu faith.\nTeachings of Dayananda.\nMaharshi Dayanand advocated that all human beings are equally capable of achieving anything. He said all the creatures are the eternal Praja or citizens of the Supreme Lord. He said the four Vedas which are Rigveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda, and Atharvaveda are the only true uncorrupted sources of Dharma, revealed by the Supreme Lord, at the beginning of every creation, also because they are the only perfectly preserved knowledge without alterations using Sanskrit prosody or Chandas and different techniques of counting the number of verses with different Vedic chanting techniques. He says that confusion regarding the Vedas arose due to the misinterpretations of the Vedas, and the Vedas promote science and ask humans to discover the Ultimate Truth, which he has emphasised throughout his Commentary on the Vedas.\nHe accepted the teachings of the first ten Principal Upanishads also with Shvetashvatara Upanishad, which explains the Adhyatma part of the Vedas. He further said that any source, including Upanishads, should be considered and accepted to only that extent as they conform with the teachings of the Vedas.\nHe accepted the six Vedanga texts, which include grammar and the like required for the correct interpretation of the Vedas. Among Sanskrit grammatical texts, he says, P\u0101\u1e47ini's A\u1e63\u1e6d\u0101dhy\u0101y\u012b and its commentary, Mahabhashya by Maharshi Patanjali are the current surviving valid texts, and all other surviving modern-grammatical texts should not be accepted as they are confusing, dishonest, and will not help people in learning the Vedas.\nHe accepted the six Darshana Shastras which includes Samkhya, Vaisheshika, Nyaya, Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, Purva Mimamsa Sutras, Vedanta Sutras. Unlike medieval Sanskrit scholars, Dayanand said that all six Darshanas are not opponents, but each throws light on different aspects required by the creation. Hence, they are all independent in their own right, and all of them conform to the teachings of the Vedas. He says Acharya Kapila of Sankhya Darshan was not an atheist, but it is the scholars who misinterpreted his sutras.\nHe said the books called Brahamanas, such as Aitareya Brahmana, Shatapatha Brahmana, S\u0101ma Brahmana, Gopatha Brahmana, etc., which are authored by the seers to explain the meaning of the Vedas, are also valid, but again only to that extent as they agree with the four Vedas, because these texts are prone to interpolations by others. He said it is these books which are called by the names \"Itihasa, Purana, Narashamsa, Kalpa, Gatha\" since they contain information about the life of seers and incidents, they inform about the creation of the World, etc...\nHe stated that the eighteen Puranas and the eighteen Upapuranas are not the authentic Puranas and are not authored by sage Vyasa, and they violate the teachings of the Vedas and therefore should not be accepted. The eighteen Puranas and Upapuranas are filled with contradictions, idol worship, incarnations, and personification of God, temples, rituals, and practices that are against the Vedas. In his book \"Satyarth Prakash, he says whatever 'good' is present in these eighteen Puranas and Upapuranas is already present in the Vedas, and since they contain too many false pieces of information that can mislead people, they should be rejected.\nHe points out that the sage Vyasa was called so not because he divided the Vedas, but the name indicates the \"diameter or breadth,\" which means sage Vyasa had studied the Vedas in great depth.\nHe lists out various texts that should not be treated as honest texts to develop one's understanding of the World and the Lord. He rejected all of the Tantric texts, including Pancharatra. He said that these texts are not valid as they teach different customs, rituals, and practices which are against the Vedas.\nDayanand based his teachings on the Vedas, which can be summarised as follows:\nHe opposed caste system, Sati practice, child marriage, etc. which are against the spirit of the Vedas and advocated that all evils of society should be thoroughly investigated and should be removed. The Varna should be based on education and profession, and in his book \"Satyarth Prakash\", he quotes passages from Manusmriti, Grihya Sutras, and Vedas which support his claims. He advocated the notion of \"Chakradhipatya\" (One Government Throughout the World).\nDayanand's mission.\n He believed that Hinduism had been corrupted by divergence from the founding principles of the Vedas and that Hindus had been misled by the priesthood for the priests' self-aggrandisement. For this mission, he founded the Arya Samaj, enunciating the Ten Universal Principles called \"Krinvanto Vishwaryam\". With these principles, he intended the whole world to be an abode for Aryas (Nobles).\nHis next step was to reform Hinduism with a new dedication to God. He travelled the country challenging religious scholars and priests to discussions, winning repeatedly through the strength of his arguments and knowledge of Sanskrit and Vedas. Hindu priests discouraged the laity from reading Vedic scriptures, and encouraged rituals, such as bathing in the Ganges and feeding of priests on anniversaries, which Dayananda pronounced as superstitions or self-serving practices. By exhorting the nation to reject such superstitious notions, his aim was to educate the nation to return to the teachings of the Vedas, and to follow the Vedic way of life. He also exhorted Hindus to accept social reforms, including the importance of cows for national prosperity as well as the adoption of Hindi as the national language for national integration. Through his daily life and practice of yoga and asanas, teachings, preaching, sermons and writings, he inspired Hindus to aspire for \"Swarajya\" (self-governance), nationalism, and spiritualism. He advocated the equal rights and respects to women and advocated for the education of all children, regardless of sex.\nDayanand also made critical analyses of faiths including Christianity and Islam, as well as of other Indian faiths like Jainism, Buddhism and Sikhism. In addition to discouraging idolatry in Hinduism, he was also against what he considered to be the corruption of the true and pure faith in his own country. Unlike many other reform movements of his times within Hinduism, the Arya Samaj's appeal was addressed not only to the educated few in India, but to the world as a whole as evidenced in the sixth principle of the Arya Samaj. As a result, his teachings professed universalism for all the living beings and not for any particular sect, faith, community or nation.\nArya Samaj allows and encourages converts to Hinduism. Dayananda's concept of Dharma is stated in the \"Beliefs and Disbeliefs\" section of \"Satyartha Prakash,\" he says:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I accept as Dharma whatever is in full conformity with impartial justice, truthfulness and the like; that which is not opposed to the teachings of God as embodied in the Vedas. Whatever is not free from partiality and is unjust, partaking of untruth and the like, and opposed to the teachings of God as embodied in the Vedas\u2014that I hold as Adharma.\"&lt;br&gt;\n\"He, who after careful thinking, is ever ready to accept truth and reject falsehood; who counts the happiness of others as he does that of his own self, him I call just.\"\u2014\u200aDayananda's Vedic message emphasised respect and reverence for other human beings, supported by the Vedic notion of the divine nature of the individual. In the Ten Universal Principles of the Arya Samaj, he enshrined the idea that \"All actions should be performed with the prime objective of benefiting mankind\", as opposed to following dogmatic rituals or revering idols and symbols. The first five principles speak of Truth, while the last five speak of a society with nobility, civics, co-living, and disciplined life. In his own life, he interpreted Moksha to be a lower calling, as it argued for benefits to the individual, rather than calling to emancipate others.\nDayananda's \"Back to the Vedas\" message influenced many thinkers and philosophers the world over.\nActivities.\nDayanand Saraswati is recorded to have been active since he was 14, which time he was able to recite religious verses and teach about them. He was respected at the time for taking part in religious debates. His debates were attended by large crowds.\nOn 22 October 1869 in Varanasi he debated against 27 scholars and 12 expert pandits. The debate was said to have been attended by over 50,000 people. The main topic was \"Do the Vedas uphold deity worship?\"\nCreation of Arya Samaj.\nDayananda Saraswati's creation, the Arya Samaj, condemned practices of several different religions and communities, including such practices as animal sacrifice, pilgrimages, priest craft, offerings made in temples, the castes, child marriage, meat eating and discrimination against women. He argued that all of these practices ran contrary to good sense and the wisdom of the Vedas.\nViews on superstitions.\nHe severely criticised practices which he considered to be superstitions, including sorcery, and astrology, which were prevalent in India at the time. Below are several quotes from his book, \"Satyarth Prakash\":&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"All alchemists, magicians, sorcerers, wizards, spiritists, etc. are cheats and all their practices should be looked upon as nothing but downright fraud. Young people should be well counseled against all these frauds, in their very childhood, so that they may not suffer through being duped by any unprincipled person.\"\u2014\u200a\nOn astrology, he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When these ignorant people go to an astrologer and say \"O Sir! What is wrong with this person?\" He replies \"The sun and other stars are maleficent to him. If you were to perform a propitiatory ceremony or have magic formulas chanted, or prayers said, or specific acts of charity done, he will recover. Otherwise, I should not be surprised, even if he were to lose his life after a long period of suffering.\"\nInquirer \u2013 Well, Mr. Astrologer, you know, the sun and other stars are but inanimate things like this earth of ours. They can do nothing but give light, heat, etc. Do you take them for conscious being possessed of human passions, of pleasure and anger, that when offended, bring on pain and misery, and when propitiated, bestow happiness on human beings?\nAstrologer \u2013 Is it not through the influence of stars, then, that some people are rich and others poor, some are rulers, whilst others are their subjects?\nInq. \u2013 No, it is all the result of their deeds ... good or bad.\nAst. \u2013 Is the science of stars untrue then?\nInq. \u2013 No, that part of it which comprises Arithmetic, Algebra, Geometry, etc., and which goes by the name of Astronomy is true; but the other part that treats of the influence of stars on human beings and their actions and goes by the name of Astrology is all false.\u2014\u200a\nHe makes a clear distinction between Jyoti\u1e25\u015b\u0101stra and astrology, calling astrology a fraud.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Thereafter, they should thoroughly study the Jyoti\u1e25\u015b\u0101stra \u2013 which includes Arithmetic, Algebra, Geometry, Geography, Geology, and Astronomy \u2013 in two years. They should also have practical training in these Sciences, learn the proper handling of instruments, master their mechanism, and know how to use them. But they should regard Astrology \u2013 which treats of the influence of stars and constellation on the destinies of man, of auspiciousness and inauspiciousness of time, of horoscopes, etc. \u2013 as a fraud, and never learn or teach any books on this subject.\u2014\u200a\nViews on other religions.\nHe considered the prevalent religions to have either immoral stories, or badly practised, or some of them have sufficiently moved away from the Vedas. In his book \"Satyarth Prakash\", Maharshi Dayanand has analysed critically current form of Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism, Christianity and Islam.\nIslam.\nHe viewed Islam to be waging wars and immorality. He doubted that Islam had anything to do with the God, and questioned why a God would hate every non-believer, allowing the slaughter of animals, and command Muhammad to slaughter innocent people.\nHe further described Muhammad as \"imposter\", and one who held out \"a bait to men and women, in the name of God, to compass his own selfish needs.\" He regarded Qur'an as \"Not the Word of God. It is a human work. Hence it cannot be believed in.\"\nChristianity.\nHis analysis of the Bible was based on an attempt to compare it with scientific evidence, morality, and other properties. His analysis claimed that the Bible contains many stories and precepts that are immoral, praising cruelty, deceit and that encourage sin. One commentary notes many alleged discrepancies and fallacies of logic in the Bible e.g. that God fearing Adam eating the fruit of life and becoming his equal displays jealousy. His critique attempts to show logical fallacies in the Bible, and throughout he asserts that the events depicted in the Bible portray God as a man rather than an omniscient, omnipotent or complete being.\nHe opposed the perpetual virginity of Mary, adding that such doctrines are simply against the law of nature, and that God would never break his own law because God is omniscient and infallible.\nSikhism.\nHe regarded Guru Nanak as \"rogue\", who was quite ignorant about Vedas and Sanskrit otherwise Nanak wouldn't be mistaken with words. He further said that followers of Sikhism are to be blamed for making up stories that Nanak possessed miraculous powers and met God. He criticised Guru Gobind Singh and other Sikh Gurus, saying they \"invented fictitious stories\", although he also recognised Gobind Singh to be \"indeed a very brave man.\"\nJainism.\nHe regarded Jainism as \"a most dreadful religion\", writing that Jains were intolerant and hostile towards the non-Jains.\nBuddhism.\nDayanand described Buddhism as \"anti-Vedic\" and \"atheistic.\" He noted that the type of \"salvation\" Buddhism prescribes, is attainable even to dogs and donkeys. He further criticised the Buddhist cosmology which says that Earth was not created.\nAssassination attempts.\nDayananda was subjected to many unsuccessful assassination attempts on his life.\nAccording to his supporters, he was poisoned on a few occasions, but due to his regular practice of Hatha Yoga he survived all such attempts. One story tells that attackers once attempted to drown him in a river, but Dayananda dragged the assailants into the river instead, though he released them before they drowned.\nAnother account claims that he was attacked by Muslims who were offended by his criticism of Islam while meditating on the Ganges. They threw him into the water but he is claimed to have saved himself because his Pranayama practice allowed him to stay under water until the attackers left.\nAssassination.\nRaja Nahar Singh was one of the devotees of Swami Dayanand Saraswati and he welcomed him with open heart when visited Shahpura on 9th March 1883. While Swami was in Shahpura, he received invitation to come to Jodhpur but Nahar Singhji had warned him against going to Jodhpur. In 1883, the Maharaja of Jodhpur, Jaswant Singh II, invited Dayananda to stay at his palace. The Maharaja was eager to become Dayananda's disciple and to learn his teachings. Dayananda went to the Maharaja's restroom during his stay and saw him with a dancing girl named Nanhi Jaan. Dayananda asked the Maharaja to forsake the girl and all unethical acts and to follow the Dharma like a true Arya (Noble). Dayananda's suggestion offended Nanhi, who decided to take revenge.\nOn 29 September 1883, Nanhi Jaan bribed Dayananda's cook, Jagannath, to mix small pieces of glass in his nightly milk. Dayananda was served glass-laden milk before bed, which he promptly drank, becoming bedridden for several days, and suffering excruciating pain. The Maharaja quickly arranged doctor's services for him. However, by the time doctors arrived, his condition had worsened, and he had developed large bleeding sores. Upon seeing Dayananda's suffering, Jagannath was overwhelmed with guilt and confessed his crime to Dayananda. On his deathbed, Dayananda forgave him, and gave him a bag of money, telling him to flee the kingdom before he was found and executed by the Maharaja's men.\nLater, the Maharaja arranged for him to be sent to Mount Abu, however, after staying for some time in Abu, on 26 October 1883, he was sent to Ajmer for better medical care. There was no improvement in the Swami's health, no medical aid was given and he died on the morning of the Hindu festival of Diwali on 30 October 1883 chanting Mantras.\nCremation and commemoration.\nHe died at \"Bhinai Kothi\" at Bhinai 54\u00a0km south of Ajmer, and his ashes were scattered at Ajmer in Rishi Udyan as per his wishes. Rishi Udyan, which has a functional Arya Samaj Mandir with daily morning and evening Yajna Homa, is located on the banks of Ana Sagar Lake off the NH58 Ajmer-Pushkar Highway. An annual three day \"Arya Samaj Mela\" is held every year at \"Rishi Udyan\" on Swami Dayanand's death anniversary at the end of October, which also entails Vedic seminars, Vedas memorisation competition, Yajna, and Dhavaja Rohan flag march. It is organised by the \"Paropkarini Sabha\", which was founded by Swami Dayanand Saraswati on 16 August 1880 in Meerut, registered in Ajmer on 27 February 1883, and since 1893 has been operating from its office in Ajmer.\nEvery year on Maha Shivaratri, Arya Samajis celebrate Rishi Bodh Utsav during the 2 days Mela at Tankara organised by Tankara Trust, during which Shobha Yatra procession and Maha Yajna is held; event is also attended by the Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi and Chief Minister of Gujarat Vijay Rupani.\nNavlakha Mahal inside Gulab Bagh and Zoo at Udaipur is also associated with him where he wrote the second edition of his seminal work, Satyarth Prakash, in Samvat 1939 (1882-83 CE).\nLegacy.\nMaharshi Dayanand University in Rohtak, Maharshi Dayanand Saraswati University in Ajmer, DAV University (Dayanand Anglo-Vedic Schools System) in Jalandhar are named after him. So are over 800 schools and colleges under D.A.V. College Managing Committee, including Dayanand College at Ajmer. Industrialist Nanji Kalidas Mehta built the Maharshi Dayanand Science College and donated it to the Education Society of Porbandar, after naming it after Dayananda Saraswati.\nDayananda Saraswati is most notable for influencing the freedom movement of India. His views and writings have been used by various individuals, including Shyamji Krishna Varma, Subhas Chandra Bose, Lala Lajpat Rai, Madam Cama, Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, Lala Hardayal, Madan Lal Dhingra, Ram Prasad Bismil, Mahadev Govind Ranade, Swami Shraddhanand, S. Satyamurti, Pandit Lekh Ram, Mahatma Hansraj and others.\nHe also had a notable influence on Bhagat Singh. Singh, after finishing primary school, had joined the Dayanand Anglo-Vedic Middle School, of Mohan Lal Road, in Lahore. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, on Shivratri, 24 February 1964, wrote about Dayananda:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe places Dayanand visited during his life were often changed culturally as a result. Jodhpur adopted Hindi as main language, and later the present day Rajasthan did the same. Other admirers included Swami Vivekananda, Ramakrishna, Bipin Chandra Pal, Vallabhbhai Patel, Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, and Romain Rolland, who regarded Dayananda as a remarkable and unique figure.\nAmerican Spiritualist Andrew Jackson Davis described Dayanand's influence on him, calling Dayanand a \"Son of God\", and applauding him for restoring the status of the Nation. Sten Konow, a Swedish scholar noted that Dayanand revived the history of India.\nOthers who were notably influenced by him include Ninian Smart, and Benjamin Walker.\nAchievements.\nDayananda Saraswati wrote more than 60 works. This includes a 16-volume explanation of the Vedangas, an incomplete commentary on the Ashtadhyayi (Panini's grammar), several small tracts on ethics and morality, Vedic rituals and sacraments, and a piece on the analysis of rival doctrines (such as Advaita Vedanta, Islam and Christianity). Some of his major works include the Satyarth Prakash, Satyarth Bhumika, Sanskarvidhi, Rigvedadi Bhashya Bhumika, Rigved Bhashyam (up to 7/61/2) and Yajurved Bhashyam. The Paropakarini Sabha located in the city of Ajmer was founded by Saraswati to publish and preach his works and Vedic texts.\nComplete list of works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45655", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45655", "title": "The Era of Russian Palace Revolutions", "text": ""}
{"id": "45660", "revid": "9696476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45660", "title": "Swami Vivekananda", "text": "Indian Hindu monk and philosopher (1863\u20131902)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nQuotation\n\"Arise, awake, and stop not till the goal is reached\"( on Wikiquote)\nSwami Vivekananda () (12 January 1863 \u2013 4 July 1902), born Narendranath Datta, was an Indian Hindu monk, philosopher, author, religious teacher, and the chief disciple of the Indian mystic Ramakrishna. Vivekananda was a major figure in the introduction of Vedanta and Yoga to the Western world, and is credited with raising interfaith awareness and elevating Hinduism to the status of a major world religion.\nVivekananda showed an early inclination towards religion and spirituality. At the age of 18, he met Ramakrishna and became his devoted disciple, and later took up the vows of a \"sannyasin\" (renunciate). Following Ramakrishna\u2019s death, Vivekananda travelled extensively across the Indian subcontinent as a wandering monk, gaining first-hand knowledge of the often harsh living conditions endured by the Indian masses under then British India, he sought a way to alleviate their suffering by establishing social services but lacked capital. In 1893, he travelled to the United States to participate in the Parliament of the World's Religions in Chicago, where he delivered a landmark speech beginning with the words \"Sisters and brothers of America...\". His powerful message introduced Hindu spiritual thought and advocated for both religious tolerance and universal acceptance. The speech made a profound impression; an American newspaper described him as \"an orator by divine right and undoubtedly the greatest figure at the Parliament\".\nFollowing his success in Chicago, Vivekananda lectured widely across the United States, the United Kingdom, and continental Europe, disseminating the essential principles of Hindu philosophy. He established the Vedanta Society of New York and the Vedanta Society of San Francisco (now the Vedanta Society of Northern California), both of which became the foundations for later Vedanta Societies in the West. In India, he founded the Ramakrishna Math, a monastic order for spiritual training, and the Ramakrishna Mission, dedicated to social services, education, and humanitarian work.\nVivekananda is widely regarded as one of the greatest modern Indian thinkers. He was a prominent philosopher, social reformer, and the most successful proponent of Vedanta philosophy abroad. He played a crucial role in the Hindu revivalist movement and contributed significantly to the rise and development of Indian nationalism in colonial India. Celebrated as a patriotic saint, his birth anniversary is observed in India as National Youth Day.\nEarly life (1863\u20131888).\nBirth and childhood.\nVivekananda was born as Narendranath Datta (name shortened to Narendra or Naren) in an aristocratic Bengali Kayastha family in his ancestral home at 3 Gourmohan Mukherjee Street in Calcutta, the capital of British India, on 12 January 1863 during the Makar Sankranti festival. He was one of nine siblings. His father, Vishwanath Datta, was an attorney at the Calcutta High Court. Durgacharan Datta, Narendra's grandfather was a Sanskrit and Persian scholar who left his family and became a monk at age twenty-five. His mother, Bhubaneswari Devi, was a devout housewife. The progressive, rational attitude of Narendra's father and the religious temperament of his mother helped shape his thinking and personality. Narendranath was interested in spirituality from a young age and used to meditate before the images of deities such as Shiva, Rama, Sita, and Hanuman. He was fascinated by wandering ascetics and monks. Narendra was mischievous and restless as a child, and his parents often had difficulty controlling him. His mother said, \"I prayed to Shiva for a son and he has sent me one of his demons\".\nEducation.\nIn 1871, at the age of eight, Narendranath enrolled at Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's Metropolitan Institution, where he went to school until his family moved to Raipur in 1877. In 1879, after his family's return to Calcutta, he was the only student to receive first-division marks in the Presidency College entrance examination. He was an avid reader in a wide range of subjects, including philosophy, religion, history, social science, art and literature. He was also interested in Hindu scriptures, including the Vedas, the Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita, the \"Ramayana\", the \"Mahabharata\" and the Puranas. Narendra was trained in Indian classical music, and regularly participated in physical exercise, sports and organised activities. He studied Western logic, Western philosophy and European history at the General Assembly's Institution (now known as the Scottish Church College). In 1881, he passed the Fine Arts examination, and completed a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1884. Narendra studied the works of David Hume, Immanuel Kant, Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Baruch Spinoza, Georg W. F. Hegel, Arthur Schopenhauer, Auguste Comte, John Stuart Mill and Charles Darwin. He became fascinated with the evolutionism of Herbert Spencer and corresponded with him. He translated Spencer's book \"\" (1861) into Bengali. While studying Western philosophers, he also learned Sanskrit scriptures and Bengali literature.\nWilliam Hastie (the principal of Christian College, Calcutta, from where Narendra graduated) wrote of him: \"Narendra is really a genius. I have travelled far and wide but I have never come across a lad of his talents and possibilities, even in German universities, among philosophical students. He is bound to make his mark in life\". He was known for his prodigious memory and speed reading ability, and a number of anecdotes attest to this. Some accounts have called Narendra a \"shrutidhara\" (a person with a prodigious memory).\nInitial spiritual forays.\nIn 1880, Narendra joined Keshab Chandra Sen's \"Nava Vidhan\", which was established by Sen after meeting Ramakrishna Paramahamsa and reconverting from Christianity to Hinduism. Narendra became a member of a Freemasonry lodge \"at some point before 1884\" and of the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj in his twenties, a breakaway faction of the Brahmo Samaj led by Keshab Chandra Sen and Debendranath Tagore. From 1881 to 1884, he was also active in Sen's Band of Hope, which tried to discourage youths from smoking and drinking.\nIt was in this cultic milieu that Narendra became acquainted with Western esotericism. His initial beliefs were shaped by Brahmo concepts, which denounced polytheism and caste restrictions, and proposed a \"streamlined, rationalized, monotheistic theology strongly coloured by a selective and modernistic reading of the \"Upanisads\" and of the Vedanta.\" Rammohan Roy, the founder of the Brahmo Samaj who was strongly influenced by unitarianism, strove towards a universalistic interpretation of Hinduism. His ideas were \"altered [...] considerably\" by Debendranath Tagore, who had a romantic approach to the development of these new doctrines, and questioned central Hindu beliefs like reincarnation and karma, and rejected the authority of the \"Vedas\". Tagore, and later Sen, also brought this \"neo-Hinduism\" closer in line with western esotericism. Sen was influenced by transcendentalism, an American philosophical-religious movement strongly connected with unitarianism, which emphasised personal religious experience over mere reasoning and theology. Sen's focus on creating \"an accessible, non-renunciatory, everyman type of spirituality\" that introduced \"lay systems of spiritual practice\" was an influence on the teachings Vivekananda later popularised in the west.\nNot satisfied with his knowledge of philosophy, Narendra came to \"the question which marked the real beginning of his intellectual quest for God.\" He asked several prominent Calcutta residents if they had come \"face to face with God\", but none of their answers satisfied him. At this time, Narendra met Debendranath Tagore (the leader of Brahmo Samaj) and asked if he had seen God. Instead of answering his question, Tagore said, \"My boy, you have the \"Yogi\"'s eyes.\" According to Banhatti, it was Ramakrishna who first truly answered Narendra's question, by saying \"Yes, I see Him as I see you, only in an infinitely intenser sense.\" De Michelis, however, suggests that Vivekananda was more influenced by the Brahmo Samaj and its new ideas than by Ramakrishna. According to De Michelis, it was Sen's influence that brought Vivekananda fully into contact with western esotericism, and it was via Sen that he met Ramakrishna. Swami Medhananda agrees that the Brahmo Samaj was a formative influence, but affirms that \"it was Narendra's momentous encounter with Ramakrishna that changed the course of his life by turning him away from Brahmoism.\"\nMeeting Ramakrishna.\nNarendra first met Ramakrishna in 1881. When Narendra's father died in 1884, Ramakrishna became his primary spiritual focus.\nNarendra's introduction to Ramakrishna occurred in a literature class at General Assembly's Institution, when Professor William Hastie was lecturing on William Wordsworth's poem, \"The Excursion\". While explaining the word \"trance\" in the poem, Hastie suggested that his students visit Ramakrishna of Dakshineswar to understand the true meaning of trance. This prompted Narendra, among others in the class, to visit Ramakrishna.\nThey probably first met personally in November 1881, though Narendra did not consider this their first meeting, and neither man mentioned this meeting later. At the time, Narendra was preparing for his upcoming F. A. examination. Ram Chandra Datta accompanied him to Surendra Nath Mitra's house where Ramakrishna had been invited to deliver a lecture. According to Makarand Paranjape, at this meeting Ramakrishna asked Narendra to sing. Impressed by his talent, he asked Narendra to come to Dakshineshwar.\nNarendra went to Dakshineswar in late 1881 or early 1882 and met Ramakrishna. This meeting proved to be a turning point in his life. Although he did not initially accept Ramakrishna as his teacher and rebelled against his ideas, he was attracted by his personality and frequently visited him. He initially saw Ramakrishna's ecstasies and visions as \"mere figments of imagination\" and \"hallucinations\". As a member of Brahmo Samaj, he opposed idol worship, polytheism, and Ramakrishna's worship of Kali. He even rejected the Advaita Vedanta teaching of \"identity with the absolute\" as blasphemy and madness, and often ridiculed the idea. Ramakrishna was unperturbed and advised him: \"Try to see the truth from all angles\".\nNarendra's father's sudden death in 1884 left the family bankrupt; creditors began demanding the repayment of loans, and relatives threatened to evict the family from their ancestral home. Once the son of a well-to-do family, Narendra became one of the poorest students in his college. His attempts to find work were unsuccessful. He questioned God's existence, but found solace in Ramakrishna, and his visits to Dakshineswar increased.\nOne day, Narendra asked Ramakrishna to pray to the goddess Kali for his family's financial welfare. Ramakrishna instead suggested he go to the temple himself and pray. Narendra went to the temple three times, but did not pray for any kind of worldly necessities. He ultimately prayed for true knowledge and devotion from the goddess. He gradually became ready to renounce everything for the sake of realising God, and accepted Ramakrishna as his Guru.\nIn 1885, Ramakrishna developed throat cancer. He was transferred to Calcutta and then to a garden house in Cossipore. Narendra and Ramakrishna's other disciples took care of him during his last days, and Narendra's spiritual education continued. At Cossipore, he experienced \"Nirvikalpa samadhi\". Narendra and several other disciples received ochre robes from Ramakrishna, forming his first monastic order. He was taught that service to men was the most effective worship of God. Ramakrishna asked him to take care of the other monastic disciples, and likewise asked them to see Narendra as their leader. Ramakrishna died in the early morning hours of 16 August 1886 in Cossipore.\nFounding of Ramakrishna Math.\nAfter Ramakrishna's death, support from devotees and admirers diminished. Unpaid rent accumulated, forcing Narendra and the other disciples to look for a new place to live. Many returned home, adopting a \"Grihastha\" (family-oriented) way of life. Narendra decided to convert a dilapidated house at Baranagar into a new \"math\" (monastery) for the remaining disciples. Rent for the Baranagar Math was low, and was raised by \"m\u0101dhukar\u012b\" (holy begging). It became the first building of the Ramakrishna Math, the monastery of the monastic order of Ramakrishna. Narendra and other disciples used to spend many hours practicing meditation and religious austerities every day. Narendra recalled the early days of practice in the monastery:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We used to get up at 3:00\u00a0am and become absorbed in \"japa\" and meditation. What a strong spirit of detachment we had in those days! We had no thought even as to whether the world existed or not.\nIn 1887, Narendra compiled a Bengali song anthology named \"Sangeet Kalpataru\" with Vaishnav Charan Basak. Narendra collected and arranged most of the songs in this compilation, but unfavourable circumstances prevented its completion.\nMonastic vows.\nIn December 1886, the mother of one of the monks, Baburam, invited Narendra and his brother monks to Antpur village. In Antpur, on the Christmas Eve of 1886, the 23 year old Narendra and eight other disciples took formal monastic vows at the . They decided to live their lives as their master lived.\nTravels in India (1888\u20131893).\nIn 1888, Narendra left the monastery as a \"Parivr\u00e2jaka\" \u2013 a wandering monk, \"without fixed abode, without ties, independent and strangers wherever they go\". His sole possessions were a kamandalu (water pot), staff and his two favourite books: the \"Bhagavad Gita\" and \"The Imitation of Christ\". Narendra travelled extensively in India for five years, visiting centres of learning and acquainting himself with diverse religious traditions and social patterns. He developed sympathy for the suffering and poverty of the people, and resolved to uplift the nation. Living primarily on bhiksha (alms), he travelled on foot and by railway. During his travels he met and stayed with Indians from all religions and walks of life: scholars, \"dewans\", rajas, Hindus, Muslims, Christians, \"paraiyars\" (low-caste workers) and government officials. On the suggestion of his patron, friend and disciple Raja Ajit Singh of Khetri, he adopted the name \"Vivekananda\"\u2013a conglomerate of the Sanskrit words: \"viveka\" and \"\u0101nanda\", meaning \"the bliss of discerning wisdom\". As Vivekananda he departed Bombay for Chicago, on 31 May 1893, intending to participate in the World's Parliament of Religions.\nFirst visit to the West (1893\u20131897).\nVivekananda visited several cities in Japan (including Nagasaki, Kobe, Yokohama, Osaka, Kyoto and Tokyo), China and Canada en route to the United States, reaching Chicago on 30 July 1893. The \"Parliament of Religions\" took place in September 1893. An initiative of the Swedenborgian layman and Illinois Supreme Court judge Charles C. Bonney, the Congress sought to gather all the religions of the world, with the aim of showing \"the substantial unity of many religions in the good deeds of the religious life.\" The Brahmo Samaj and the Theosophical Society were invited as representative of Hinduism.\nVivekananda wished to participate, but learned that only individuals with credentials from a \"bona fide\" organisation would be accepted as delegates. Disappointed, he contacted Professor John Henry Wright of Harvard University, who had invited him to speak at Harvard. Vivekananda wrote of the professor: \"He urged upon me the necessity of going to the Parliament of Religions, which he thought would give an introduction to the nation\". On hearing that Vivekananda lacked the credentials to speak at the Parliament, Wright said: \"To ask for your credentials is like asking the sun to state its right to shine in the heavens\". Vivekananda submitted an application introducing himself as a monk \"of the oldest order of \"sanny\u0101sis\" ... founded by Sankara\". The application was supported by the Brahmo Samaj representative Protap Chandra Mozoomdar, who was also a member of the Parliament's selection committee.\nParliament of the World's Religions.\nThe Parliament of the World's Religions opened on 11 September 1893 at the Art Institute of Chicago, as part of the World's Columbian Exposition. On this day, Vivekananda gave a brief speech representing India and Hinduism. He bowed to Saraswati (the Hindu goddess of learning) and began his with \"Sisters and brothers of America!\". At these words, Vivekananda received a two-minute standing ovation from the crowd of seven thousand. When silence was restored he began his address, greeting the youngest of the nations on behalf of \"the most ancient order of monks in the world, the Vedic order of sannyasins, a religion which has taught the world both tolerance and universal acceptance\". Vivekananda quoted one illustrative passage from the \"Shiva mahimna stotram\" (Verse 7): \"As the different streams having their sources in different places all mingle their water in the sea, so, O Lord, the different paths which men take, through different tendencies, various though they appear, crooked or straight, all lead to Thee!\" and another from the Bhagavad Gita (4.11) \"Whosoever comes to Me, through whatsoever form, I reach him; all men are struggling through paths that in the end lead to Me.\" According to Sailendra Nath Dhar, \"it was only a short speech, but it voiced the spirit of the Parliament.\"\nParliament President John Henry Barrows said, \"India, the Mother of religions was represented by Swami Vivekananda, the Orange-monk who exercised the most wonderful influence over his auditors\". Vivekananda attracted widespread attention in the press, which called him the \"cyclonic monk from India\". The \"New York Critique\" wrote, \"He is an orator by divine right, and his strong, intelligent face in its picturesque setting of yellow and orange was hardly less interesting than those earnest words, and the rich, rhythmical utterance he gave them\". The \"New York Herald\" noted, \"Vivekananda is undoubtedly the greatest figure in the Parliament of Religions. After hearing him we feel how foolish it is to send missionaries to this learned nation\". American newspapers reported Vivekananda as \"the greatest figure in the parliament of religions\" and \"the most popular and influential man in the parliament\".\nThe \"Boston Evening Transcript\" reported that Vivekananda was \"a great favourite at the parliament... if he merely crosses the platform, he is applauded\". He spoke \"at receptions, the scientific section, and private homes\" on topics related to Hinduism, Buddhism and harmony among religions. Vivekananda's speeches at the Parliament had the common theme of universality, emphasising religious tolerance. He soon became known as a \"handsome oriental\" and made a huge impression as an orator. Hearing Vivekananda speak, Harvard psychology professor William James said, \"that man is simply a wonder for oratorical power. He is an honor to humanity.\"\nLecture tours in the UK and US.\nAfter the Parliament of Religions, Vivekananda toured many parts of the US as a guest. His popularity gave him an unprecedented opportunity to communicate his views on life and religion to great numbers of people. During a question-answer session at Brooklyn Ethical Society, he remarked, \"I have a message to the West as Buddha had a message to the East.\" On another occasion he described his mission thus:I do not come to convert you to a new belief. I want you to keep your own belief; I want to make the Methodist a better Methodist; the Presbyterian a better Presbyterian; the Unitarian a better Unitarian. I want to teach you to live the truth, to reveal the light within your own soul.\nVivekananda spent nearly two years lecturing in the eastern and central United States, primarily in Chicago, Detroit, Boston, and New York. He founded the Vedanta Society of New York in 1894. His demanding schedule eventually began to affect his health, and in Spring 1895 he ended his lecture tours and began giving free, private classes in Vedanta and yoga. Beginning in June 1895, he gave private lectures to a dozen of his disciples at Thousand Island Park, New York for two months. Vivekananda was offered academic positions in two American universities (one the chair in Eastern Philosophy at Harvard University and a similar position at Columbia University); he declined both, since his duties would conflict with his commitment as a monk.\nVivekananda travelled to the United Kingdom in 1895 and again in 1896. In November 1895 he met an Irish woman, Margaret Elizabeth Noble, who would become one of his closest disciples, known as Sister Nivedita (a name given her by the Swami, meaning \"dedicated to God\"). On his second visit, in May 1896, Vivekananda met Max M\u00fcller, a noted Indologist from Oxford University who wrote Ramakrishna's first biography in the West. From the UK, he visited other European countries. In Germany, he met Paul Deussen, another renowned Indologist.\nVivekananda's success led to a change in mission, namely the establishment of Vedanta centres in the West. He adapted traditional Hindu ideas and religiosity to suit the needs and understandings of his western audiences, who were more familiar with western esoteric traditions and movements. An important element in his adaptation of Hindu religiosity was the introduction of his \"four yogas\" model, based in Raja yoga, which offered a practical means to realise the divine force within, a central goal of modern western esotericism. In 1896, his book \"Raja Yoga\", an interpretation and adaptation of Patanjali's Yoga Sutras, was published, becoming an instant success; it became highly influential in the western understanding of yoga, in Elizabeth de Michelis's view marking the beginning of modern yoga.\nVivekananda attracted followers and admirers in the US and Europe, including Josephine MacLeod, Betty Leggett, Lady Sandwich, William James, Josiah Royce, Robert G. Ingersoll, Lord Kelvin, Harriet Monroe, Ella Wheeler Wilcox, Sarah Bernhardt, Nikola Tesla, Emma Calv\u00e9 and Hermann Ludwig Ferdinand von Helmholtz. He initiated several followers, including Marie Louise (a French woman) who became Swami Abhayananda, and Leon Landsberg who became Swami Kripananda, so that they could serve the mission of the Vedanta Society. He also initiated Christina Greenstidel of Detroit, who became Sister Christine, with whom he developed a close father\u2013daughter relationship.\nWhile in America, Vivekananda was given land to establish a retreat for Vedanta students, in the mountains to the southeast of San Jose, California. He called it \"Peace retreat\", or \"Shanti Asrama\". There were twelve main centres established in America, the largest being the Vedanta Society of Southern California in Hollywood. There is also a Vedanta Press in Hollywood which publishes books about Vedanta and English translations of Hindu scriptures and texts.\nFrom the West, Vivekananda revived his work in India. He regularly corresponded with his followers and brother monks, offering advice and financial support. His letters from this period reflect his campaign of social service, and were strongly worded. He wrote to Akhandananda, \"Go from door to door amongst the poor and lower classes of the town of Khetri and teach them religion. Also, let them have oral lessons on geography and such other subjects. No good will come of sitting idle and having princely dishes, and saying \"Ramakrishna, O Lord!\"\u2014unless you can do some good to the poor\". In 1895, Vivekananda founded the periodical \"Brahmavadin\". His translation of the first six chapters of \"The Imitation of Christ\" was published in \"Brahmavadin\" in 1899. Vivekananda left for India from England on 16 December 1896, accompanied by his disciples Captain and Mrs. Sevier and J.J. Goodwin. On the way, they visited France and Italy, and set sail for India from Naples on 30 December 1896. He was followed to India by Sister Nivedita, who devoted the rest of her life to the education of Indian women and the goal of India's independence.\nBack in India (1897\u20131899).\nVivekananda arrived in Colombo, British Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) on 15 January 1897, and received a warm welcome. In Colombo, he gave his . He travelled from Colombo to Pamban, Rameswaram, Ramnad, Madurai, Kumbakonam and Madras, delivering lectures. Common people and rajas gave him an enthusiastic reception. During his train travels, people often sat on the rails to force the train to stop, so they could hear him. From Madras (now Chennai), he continued his journey to Calcutta and Almora. While in the West, Vivekananda spoke about India's great spiritual heritage; in India, he repeatedly addressed social issues: uplifting the people, eliminating the caste system, promoting science and industrialisation, addressing widespread poverty, and ending colonial rule. The lectures, published as \"Lectures from Colombo to Almora\", demonstrated his fervent nationalism and spiritual ideology.\nOn 1 May 1897 in Calcutta, Vivekananda founded the Ramakrishna Mission, an institution dedicated to social service, with ideals based on \"\". Its governing body consists of the trustees of the Ramakrishna Math (which conducts religious work). Both Ramakrishna Math and Ramakrishna Mission have their headquarters at Belur Math. Vivekananda founded two other monasteries: one in Mayavati in the Himalayas (near Almora), the \"Advaita Ashrama\" and another in Madras (now Chennai). Two journals were founded: \"Prabuddha Bharata\" in English and \"Udbhodan\" in Bengali. That year, famine-relief work was begun by Swami Akhandananda in the Murshidabad district.\nVivekananda earlier inspired Jamsetji Tata to set up a research and educational institution when they travelled together from Yokohama to Chicago on Vivekananda's first visit to the West in 1893. Tata now asked him to head his Research Institute of Science; Vivekananda declined the offer, citing a conflict with his \"spiritual interests\". He visited Punjab, attempting to mediate an ideological conflict between Arya Samaj (a reformist Hindu movement) and \"sanatan\" (orthodox Hindus). After brief visits to Lahore, Delhi and Khetri, Vivekananda returned to Calcutta in January 1898. He consolidated the work of the math and trained disciples for several months. Vivekananda composed \"Khandana Bhava\u2013Bandhana\", a prayer song dedicated to Ramakrishna, in 1898.\nSecond visit to the West and final years (1899\u20131902).\nDespite declining health, Vivekananda left for the West for a second time in June 1899. On this occasion, he was accompanied by Sister Nivedita and Swami Turiyananda. After a brief stay in England, he went to the United States where he established Vedanta Societies in San Francisco and New York and founded a \"shanti ashrama\" (peace retreat) in California. He travelled to Paris for the Congress of Religions in 1900. His lectures at the Congress concerned the worship of the \"lingam\" and the authenticity of the Bhagavad Gita. Vivekananda then visited Brittany, Vienna, Istanbul, Athens and Egypt. The French philosopher Jules Bois was his host for most of this period. Vivekananda returned to Calcutta on 9 December 1900.\nAfter a brief visit to the Advaita Ashrama in Mayavati, Vivekananda settled at Belur Math, where he continued co-ordinating the works of the Ramakrishna Mission, the math, and the initiatives in England and the US. He had many visitors, including royalty and politicians. Due to deteriorating health, Vivekananda was unable to attend the Congress of Religions in Japan in 1901, but he made pilgrimages to Bodhgaya and Varanasi. His health problems, including asthma, diabetes and chronic insomnia, restricted his activity.\nDeath.\nOn 4 July 1902 (the day of his death), Vivekananda awoke early, went to the monastery at Belur Math and meditated for three hours. He taught \"Shukla-Yajur-Veda\", Sanskrit grammar and the philosophy of yoga to pupils, later discussing with colleagues a planned Vedic college in the Ramakrishna Math. At 7:00\u00a0pm Vivekananda went to his room, asking not to be disturbed; he died at 9:20\u00a0p.m. while meditating. The rupture of a blood vessel in his brain was reported as a possible cause of death. According to his disciples, the rupture was due to his \"brahmarandhra\" (an opening in the crown of his head) being pierced when he attained \"mahasam\u0101dhi\". Vivekananda fulfilled his prophecy that he would not live forty years. He was cremated on a sandalwood funeral pyre on the bank of the Ganga in Belur, opposite where Ramakrishna was cremated sixteen years earlier.\nTeachings and philosophy.\nVivekananda synthesised and popularised various strands of Hindu thought, most notably classical yoga and Advaita Vedanta. As a young man, he had been influenced by western ideas such as Universalism, via Unitarian missionaries who collaborated with the Brahmo Samaj. His initial beliefs were shaped by Brahmo concepts, which included belief in a formless God, the deprecation of idolatry, and, according to Michelis, a \"streamlined, rationalized, monotheistic theology strongly coloured by a selective and modernistic reading of the \"Upanisads\" and of the Vedanta\".\nInfluenced by Ramakrishna, he came to see the Vedanta as providing the ontological basis for \"\u015bivaj\u00f1\u0101ne j\u012bver sev\u0101\" \u2013 the spiritual practice of serving human beings as actual manifestations of the divine. For Vivekananda, the practice of remembering the presence of the divine in all people, regardless of social status, promoted social harmony and helped develop the capacity for love.\nVedanta and yoga.\nVivekananda thought that the essence of Hinduism was best expressed in Adi Shankara's Advaita Vedanta philosophy. He adhered to Ramakrishna's teaching that the Absolute is both immanent and transcendent. According to Anil Sooklal, Vivekananda's neo-Vedanta \"reconciles Dvaita or dualism and Advaita or non-dualism,\" viewing Brahman as \"one without a second\" yet both \"saguna\" (qualified) and \"nirguna\" (qualityless). According to Jackson, the Vedanta acquires a modern and Universalistic form in Vivekananda's summary, showing also the influence of classical yoga:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Each soul is potentially divine. The goal is to manifest this Divinity within by controlling nature, external and internal. Do this either by work, or worship, or mental discipline, or philosophy\u2014by one, or more, or all of these\u2014and be free. This is the whole of religion. Doctrines, or dogmas, or rituals, or books, or temples, or forms, are but secondary details.\nVivekananda's emphasis on \"nirvikalpa samadhi\" was preceded by medieval yogic influences on Advaita Vedanta. In line with Advaita Vedanta texts like \"D\u0157g-D\u0157\u015bya-Viveka\" (14th century) and \"Vedantasara (of Sadananda)\" (15th century), Vivekananda saw samadhi as a means to attain liberation.\nAn important element in his adaptation of Hindu religiosity was the introduction of his four yogas model, which includes Raja yoga, his interpretation of Patanjali's \"Yoga Sutras\". This offered a practical means to realise the divine force within, a central idea in modern Western esotericism. His book \"Raja Yoga\" was highly influential in the Western understanding of yoga.\nWestern esotericism.\nVia his affiliations with Keshub Chandra Sen's \"Nava Vidhan\", the Freemasonry lodge, the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj, and Sen's Band of Hope, Vivekananda became acquainted with Western esotericism. His knowledge of Western esotericism aided his success in Western esoteric circles, beginning with his speech in 1893 at the Parliament of Religions. He adapted traditional Hindu ideas and religiosity to suit the needs and understandings of his Western audiences, particularly those familiar with Western esoteric traditions and movements such as Transcendentalism and New Thought.\nVivekananda's notion of involution was probably influenced by western Theosophists, Darwin's notion of evolution, and possibly also the Samkhya term \"s\u0101tkarya\". According to Meera Nanda, \"Vivekananda uses the word involution exactly how it appears in Theosophy: the descent, or the involvement, of divine consciousness into matter.\" Theosophic ideas on involution have \"much in common\" with \"theories of the descent of God in Gnosticism, Kabbalah, and other esoteric schools\". With spirit, Vivekananda refers to \"prana\" or \"purusha\", derived from Samkhya and classical yoga as presented by Patanjali in the Yoga Sutras.\nMoral and social philosophy.\nVivekananda linked morality with control of the mind, seeing truth, purity and unselfishness as traits which strengthened it. He advised his followers to be holy, unselfish and to have \"shraddh\u0101\" (faith). Vivekananda supported \"brahmacharya\", believing it the source of his physical and mental stamina and eloquence.\nNationalism was a prominent theme in Vivekananda's thought. He believed that a country's future depends on its people, and his teachings focused on human development. He wanted \"to set in motion a machinery which will bring noblest ideas to the doorstep of even the poorest and the meanest\".\nInfluence and legacy.\nSwami Vivekananda was one of the most influential philosophers and social reformers in his contemporary India. He is considered to be the most successful and influential missionary of Vedanta to the Western world.\nNeo-Vedanta.\nVivekananda is considered to be a representative of Neo-Vedanta \u2013 a modern interpretation of certain aspects of Hinduism that are thought to be compatible with western esoteric traditions, such as Transcendentalism, New Thought and Theosophy. His reinterpretation created a new understanding and appreciation of Hinduism inside and outside India, and paved the way for the enthusiastic reception of other forms of Indian spiritual self-improvement in the West, such as yoga and Transcendental Meditation. According to Agehananda Bharati: \"...modern Hindus derive their knowledge of Hinduism from Vivekananda, directly or indirectly\". Vivekananda espoused the idea that all sects within Hinduism (and all religions) are different paths to the same goal.\nIndian nationalism.\nVivekananda's nationalism gave unprecedented substance to the emerging nationalist ideal of British-ruled India. According to social reformer Charles Freer Andrews, \"The Swami's intrepid patriotism gave a new colour to the national movement throughout India. More than any other single individual of that period Vivekananda had made his contribution to the new awakening of India\". Vivekananda drew attention to the extent of poverty in the country, and maintained that addressing such poverty was a prerequisite for national awakening. His nationalistic ideas influenced many Indian thinkers and leaders. Sri Aurobindo regarded Vivekananda as the one who awakened India spiritually. Mahatma Gandhi counted him among the few Hindu reformers \"who have maintained this Hindu religion in a state of splendor by cutting down the dead wood of tradition\".\nName-giving.\nIn September 2010, the then Union Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee, who later became President of India, approved in principle the Swami Vivekananda Values Education Project at a cost of (). The project's objectives included publishing Vivekananda's works in a number of languages, and involving youth with competitions, essays, discussions and study circles. In 2011, the West Bengal Police Training College was renamed the Swami Vivekananda State Police Academy, West Bengal. The state technical university in Chhattisgarh has been named the Chhattisgarh Swami Vivekanand Technical University. In 2012, the Raipur airport was renamed Swami Vivekananda Airport.\nCelebrations.\nNational Youth Day in India is observed on Vivekananda's birthday (12 January). The day he delivered his speech at the Parliament of Religions (11 September) is observed as \"World Brotherhood Day\". The 150th birth anniversary of Swami Vivekananda was celebrated in India and abroad. The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports in India, officially observed 2013 as the occasion in a declaration.\nFilms.\nIndian film director Utpal Sinha's 2013, \"\", was a tribute for his 150th birth anniversary. Other Indian films about his life include: \"Swamiji\" (1949) by Amar Mullick, \"Swami Vivekananda\" (1955) by Amar Mullick, \"Birieswar Vivekananda\" (1964) by Modhu Bose, \"Life and Message of Swami Vivekananda\" (1964) documentary film by Bimal Roy, \"Swami Vivekananda\" (1998) by G. V. Iyer, \"Swamiji\" (2012) laser light film by Manick Sorcar. \"Sound of Joy\", an Indian 3D-animated short film directed by Sukankan Roy depicts the spiritual journey of Vivekananda. It won the National Film Award for Best Non-Feature Animation Film in 2014.\nWorks.\nAlthough Vivekananda was a powerful writer in English and Bengali, most of his published works were based on lectures given at various places around the world. Since most of these lectures were delivered spontaneously and with minimal preparation, his written style often retained the variability characteristic of his speech, and could be \"in turn discursive or expository, conversational or declamatory.\" His main work, \"Raja Yoga\", consists of his own reworking of a series of talks delivered in New York.\n\"Bartaman Bharat\", meaning \"Present-day India\", is a Bengali-language essay, first published in the March 1899 issue of \"Udbodhan\", the Bengali-language magazine of Ramakrishna Math and Ramakrishna Mission. The essay was reprinted as a book in 1905 and later included in the fourth volume of \"The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda\". In this essay, Vivekananda's refrain to the readers is to honour every Indian as a brother, regardless of poverty, social status or caste.\nPublications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBibliography\nOther sources"}
{"id": "45661", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45661", "title": "World Parliament of Religions", "text": ""}
{"id": "45663", "revid": "24043204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45663", "title": "Panthera Pardus", "text": ""}
{"id": "45664", "revid": "25152539", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45664", "title": "Panthera Leo", "text": ""}
{"id": "45665", "revid": "17163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45665", "title": "Thread-safety", "text": ""}
{"id": "45667", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45667", "title": "A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada", "text": "Indian spiritual teacher (1896\u20131977)\nAbhay Charanaravinda Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (IAST: ; ) (1 September 1896 \u2013 14 November 1977) was a spiritual, philosophical, and religious teacher from India who spread the Hare Krishna mantra and the teachings of \"Krishna consciousness\" to the world. Born as Abhay Charan De and later legally named Abhay Charanaravinda Bhaktivedanta Swami, he is often referred to as \"Bhaktivedanta Swami\", \"Srila Prabhupada\", or simply \"Prabhupada\".\nTo carry out an order received in his youth from his spiritual teacher to spread \"Krishna consciousness\" in English, he journeyed from Kolkata to New York City in 1965 at the age of 69, on a cargo ship with little more than a few trunks of books. He knew no one in America, but he chanted Hare Krishna in a park in New York City, gave classes, and in 1966, with the help of some early students, established the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON), which now has centers around the world.\nHe taught a path in which one aims at realizing oneself to be an eternal spiritual being, distinct from one's temporary material body, and seeks to revive one's dormant relationship with the supreme living being, known by the Sanskrit name Krishna. One does this through various practices, especially through hearing about Krishna from standard texts, chanting mantras consisting of names of Krishna, and adopting a life of devotional service to Krishna. As part of these practices, Prabhupada required that his initiated students strictly refrain from non-vegetarian food (such as meat, fish, or eggs), gambling, intoxicants (including coffee, tea, or cigarettes), and extramarital sex. In contrast to earlier Indian teachers who promoted the idea of an impersonal ultimate truth in the West, he taught that the Absolute is ultimately personal.\nHe held that the duty of a guru was to convey intact the message of Krishna as found in core spiritual texts such as the . To this end, he wrote and published a translation and commentary called \"Bhagavad-G\u012bt\u0101 As It Is.\" He also wrote and published translations and commentaries for texts celebrated in India but hardly known elsewhere, such as the () and the , thereby making these texts accessible in English for the first time. In all, he wrote more than eighty books.\nIn the late 1970s and the 1980s, ISKCON came to be labeled a destructive cult by critics in America and some European countries. Although scholars and courts rejected claims of cultic brainwashing and recognized ISKCON as representing an authentic branch of Hinduism, the \"cult\" label and image have persisted in some places. Some of Prabhupada's views or statements have been perceived as racist towards Black people, discriminatory against lower castes, or misogynistic. Decades after his death, Prabhupada's teachings and the Society he established continue to be influential, with some scholars and Indian political leaders calling him one of the most successful propagators of Hinduism abroad.\nEarly life (1896\u20131922).\nAbhay Charan De was born in Calcutta (now Kolkata), India, on 1 September 1896, the day after Janmashtami (the birth anniversary of Krishna). His parents, Gour Mohan De and Rajani De, named him Abhay Charan, meaning \"one who is fearless, having taken shelter of Lord Krishna's lotus feet\". Following Indian tradition, Abhay's father invited an astrologer, who predicted that at the age of seventy, Abhay would cross the ocean, become a famous religious teacher, and open 108 temples around the world.\nAbhay was raised in a religious family belonging to the mercantile community. His parents were Gaudiya Vaishnavas, or followers of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, who taught that Krishna is the Supreme Personality and that pure love for Krishna is the highest attainment.\nGour Mohan was a middle-income merchant and had his own fabric and clothing store. He was related to the rich and aristocratic Mullik mercantile family, who had been trading in gold and salt for centuries.\nOpposite the De house was a temple of Radha-Krishna that for a century and a half had been supported by the Mullik family. Every day, young Abhay, accompanied by his parents or servants, attended temple services.\nAt the age of six, Abhay organized a likeness of the \"chariot festival\", or Ratha-yatra, an annual \"Vaishnava\" festival in the city of Puri, Odisha. For this purpose, Abhay persuaded his father to obtain for him a scaled-down copy of the massive chariot on which the form of Jagannatha (Krishna as \"Lord of the universe\") rides in procession in Puri. Decades later, after going to America, Abhay would bring Ratha-yatra festivals to the West.\nThough Abhay's mother wanted him to go to London to study law, his father rejected the idea, fearing Abhay would be negatively influenced by Western society and acquire bad habits. In 1916, Abhay began his studies at the Scottish Church College, a prestigious school in Calcutta founded by Alexander Duff, a Christian missionary.\nIn 1918, while in college, Abhay, as arranged by his father, married Radharani Datta, also from an aristocratic family. They had five children over the course of their marriage. After graduation from college, Abhay began a career in pharmaceuticals and later opened his own pharmaceutical company in Allahabad.\nAbhay grew up while India was under British rule, and like many other youth of his age he was attracted to Mahatma Gandhi's non-cooperation movement. In 1920, Abhay graduated from college with a specialization in English, philosophy, and economics. He successfully passed the final exams, but as a sign of opposition to British rule he refused to take part in the graduation ceremony and receive a diploma.\nMidlife (1922\u20131965).\nIn 1922, while still in college, Abhay was persuaded by a friend, Narendranath Mullik, to meet with Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati (1874\u20131937), a Vaishnava scholar and teacher and the founder of the Gaudiya Math, a spiritual institution for spreading the teachings of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. The word \"math\" denotes a monastic or missionary center. Bhaktisiddhanta was continuing the work of his father, Bhaktivinoda Thakur (1838\u20131914), who regarded Chaitanya's teachings as the highest form of theism, intended not for any one religion or nation but for all of humanity.\nWhen the meeting took place, Bhaktisiddhanta said to Abhay, \"You are an educated young man. Why don't you take the message of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and spread it in English?\" However, Abhay, according to his own later account, argued that India first needed to become independent before anyone would take Chaitanya's message seriously, an argument that Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati effectively countered. Convinced by Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, Abhay accepted the instruction to spread the message of Chaitanya in English, and it was in pursuing this order from Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati that he later traveled to New York. Many years later he recalled: \"I immediately accepted him as spiritual master. Not formally, but in my heart\".\nThe Gaudiya Math and initiation (1933).\nAfter meeting Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati in 1922, Abhay had little contact with the Gaudiya Math until 1928, when (renounced, itinerant preachers) from the Math came to open a center in Allahabad, where Abhay and his family were living. Abhay became a regular visitor, contributed funds, and brought important people to the lectures of the Math's . In 1932, he visited Bhaktisiddhanta in the holy town of Vrindavan, and in 1933, when Bhaktisiddhanta came to Allahabad to lay the cornerstone for a new temple, Abhay received (spiritual initiation) from him and was given the name Abhay Charanaravinda.\nOver the next three years, whenever Abhay was able to visit Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati in Calcutta or Vrindavan, he would carefully listen to his spiritual master. In 1935, Abhay moved for business reasons to Bombay; then, in 1937, he moved back to Calcutta. In both places, he assisted other members of the Gaudiya Math by donating money, leading , lecturing, writing, and bringing others to the Math. At the end of 1936, he visited Vrindavan, where he again met Bhaktisiddhanta, who told him, \"If you ever get money, print books\", an instruction that would inform his life's work.\nTwo weeks before his death on 1 January 1937, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati wrote a letter to Abhay urging him to teach Gaudiya Vaishnavism in English. After Bhaktisiddhanta died, the unified mission of the Gaudiya Math broke down as a battle for power broke out between his senior disciples. Although Abhay continued to serve with other disciples of his spiritual master and wrote articles for their publications, he kept clear of the political struggles.\n\"Bhaktivedanta\" title (1939).\nIn 1939, elders in the Gaudiya community honored Abhay Charanaravinda (A.C.) with the title \"Bhaktivedanta\". In the title, means \"devotion\", and means \"the culmination of Vedic knowledge\". Thus the honorary title acknowledged his scholarship and devotion.\n\"Back to Godhead\" magazine (1944).\nIn an effort to fulfill the order of his guru, in 1944, A.C. Bhaktivedanta began publishing \"Back to Godhead\", an English fortnightly magazine presenting the teachings of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. He single-handedly wrote, edited, financed, published, and distributed the magazine, which is still published and distributed by his followers.\nAccepting.\nIn 1950, A.C. Bhaktivedanta accepted the (the traditional retired order of life), and went to live in Vrindavan, regarded as the site of Krishna's \"Lila\" (divine pastimes), although he occasionally commuted to Delhi. In Mathura, adjoining Vrindavan, he wrote for and edited the magazine published by his godbrother Bhakti Prajnan Keshava.\nForming \"The League of Devotees\" (1952).\nIn 1952, A.C. Bhaktivedanta attempted to set up organized spiritual activities in the central Indian city of Jhansi, where he started \"The League of Devotees\", only to see the organization collapse two years later.\nTaking (1959).\nOn 17 September 1959, prompted by a dream of Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati calling on him to accept (renounced order of life), A.C. Bhaktivedanta formally entered from Bhakti Prajnan Keshava at his Keshavaji Gaudiya Math in Mathura and was given the name Bhaktivedanta Swami. Wishing to preserve the initiatory name given him by Bhaktisiddhanta, as a sign of humility and connection to his spiritual master he kept the initials \"A.C.\" before his name, becoming A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami.\nStaying at the Radha Damodar temple (1962\u20131965).\nFrom 1962 to 1965, Bhaktivedanta Swami stayed in Vrindavan at the Radha-Damodar temple. There he began the task of translating from Sanskrit into English and commenting on the 1800-verse (Bhagavata Purana), the foundational text of Gaudiya Vaishnavism. With great effort and struggle, he finally succeeded to translate, produce, raise funds for, and print the first of its twelve cantos, in three volumes.\nJourney to the United States (1965).\nAfter accepting \"sannyasa\", Bhaktivedanta Swami began planning to travel to America to fulfill his spiritual master's desire to spread Chaitanya's teachings in the West.\nTo leave India, Bhaktivedanta Swami had many hurdles to overcome. He needed a sponsor in America, official approvals in India, and a ticket for his travel. After significant difficulties he managed to secure the needed sponsorship and approvals. He then approached one of his well-wishers, Sumati Morarjee, the head of the Scindia Steam Navigation Company, to ask for free passage to America on one of her cargo ships. Because of his age, she at first tried to dissuade him. Finally she relented and granted him a ticket on a freighter, the \"Jaladuta.\" Bhaktivedanta Swami began the 35-day journey to America on 13 August 1965, at the age of 69.\nBhaktivedanta took with him little more than a suitcase, an umbrella, some dry cereal, forty Indian rupees (about seven US dollars), and two hundred three-volume sets of his translation of the first canto of \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\".\nAfter surviving two heart attacks during his maritime journey, Bhaktivedanta Swami finally arrived at the Boston Harbor on 17 September 1965, and then continued on to New York City.\nLater years (1965-1977).\nBeginnings in New York City.\nBhaktivedanta Swami had no support or acquaintances in the United States except the Agarwals, an Indian-American family, who, although strangers to him, had agreed to sponsor his visa. Upon reaching New York, he took a bus to the town of Butler, Pennsylvania, where the Agarwals lived. In Butler he delivered lectures to different groups at venues such as the local YMCA.\nAfter a month in Butler, he returned by bus to New York City. He stayed at various places \u2014 sometimes in a windowless room, sometimes a Bowery loft \u2014 until with the help of early followers he found a place to stay on the Lower East Side, where he converted a store-front curiosity shop at 26 Second Avenue with the serendipitous name \"Matchless Gifts\" into a small temple. There he offered classes on the \"Bhagavad-gita\" and other Vaishnava texts and held kirtan (group chanting) of the \"Hare Krishna mantra\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare HareHare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.\"\nAfter he and his followers held Hare Krishna kirtan one Sunday under a tree in nearby Tompkins Square Park, \"The New York Times\" reported the event: \"Swami's Flock Chants in Park to Find Ecstasy; 50 Followers Clap and Sway to Hypnotic Music at East Side Ceremony\". He slowly gained a following, mainly from young people of the 1960s counterculture.\nIn contrast to the 1960s countercultural lifestyle, he required that in order to receive spiritual initiation his followers had to vow to follow four \"regulative principles\": no illicit sex (that is, sex outside of marriage), no eating of meat, fish, or eggs, no intoxicants (including drugs, alcohol, cigarettes, and even coffee and tea), and no gambling. New initiates also vowed to daily chant sixteen meditative \"rounds\" of the Hare Krishna 'mantra' (that is, to complete sixteen circuits of chanting the mantra on a 108-bead strand). During the first year in New York, he initiated nineteen people.\nIn July 1966, he incorporated the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON).\nIn December 1966, he made a recording of Krishna kirtan (along with a brief explanatory talk) that took the form of an album entitled \"Krishna Consciousness\", released under the \"Happening\" record label. The record helped the early spread of what he called \"the Hare Krishna movement\".\nWith his small band of followers in a little storefront, he was already sharing a vision of spreading \"Krishna consciousness\" around the world. He asked them to help, for example, by typing his manuscripts for the second canto of the \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\". After he completed his \"Bhagavad-gita As It Is\" (by mid-January 1967), he asked a new disciple to find a publisher for it.\nBhaktivedanta Swami personally taught his first followers to spread Krishna's message, prepare food to offer to Krishna, collect donations, and chant the Hare Krishna \"maha-mantra\" (\"great mantra\") on the streets.\nSan Francisco.\nIn 1967, Bhaktivedanta Swami established a second center, in San Francisco. The opening of the temple in the heart of the booming hippie community of Haight-Ashbury attracted many new adherents and was a turning point in his movement's history, marking the beginning of rapid growth. To gain attention and raise funds, his disciples organized a two-hour concert with kirtan led by Bhaktivedanta Swami and rock performances by the Grateful Dead and other famous rock groups of the day. This \"Mantra Rock Dance\", held at the popular Avalon Ballroom, attracted some three thousand people and brought attention to the local Hare Krishna temple. One commentator dubbed it the \"ultimate high of that era\".\nLater that year, Bhaktivedanta Swami's followers organized San Francisco's first Ratha Yatra, the festival he had celebrated as a child in imitation of the massive parade held annually in the Indian city of Puri. For this first San Francisco version, a flatbed truck with four pillars holding a canopy took the place of Puri's three huge ornate wooden vehicles. He would later establish this annual festival in major cities around the world, with big vehicles \u2014\"chariots\" \u2014 and thousands of people taking part.\nAt first, Bhaktivedanta Swami's followers referred to him as \"the Swami\" or \"Swamiji\". From mid-1968 onwards they called him \"Prabhupada\", a respectful epithet that \"enjoys currency with devotees and an increasing number of scholars\".\nGreat Britain and Europe.\nIn 1968, Prabhupada asked three married couples among his disciples to open a temple in London, England. Following his instructions, the disciples, dressed in their robes and \"saris\", began singing Hare Krishna regularly on London streets and at once attracted attention. Soon newspapers carried headlines like \"Krishna Chant Startles London\" and \"Happiness is Hare Krishna\".\nA further breakthrough came in December 1969 when the disciples managed to meet with members of the rock band the Beatles, who were at the peak of their global fame. Even before then, George Harrison and John Lennon had obtained a copy of the maha-mantra recording released by Prabhupada and his students in New York and had begun singing Hare Krishna.\nIn August 1969, Harrison produced a single of the Hare Krishna mantra, sung by the London disciples, and released it on Apple Records. For the recording, the disciples called themselves \"The Radha Krishna Temple\". Harrison told a press conference convened by Apple that the Hare Krishna mantra was not a pop song but an ancient mantra that awakened spiritual bliss in the hearts of people listening to and repeating it. Seventy thousand copies of the record sold on the first day. It rose to number 11 on the British charts, and Prabhupada's students performed live four times on the BBC's popular TV show \"Top of the Pops\". The record was also a success in Germany, Holland, France, Sweden, Yugoslavia, and Czechoslovakia (as well as South Africa and Japan), and so the group was invited to perform in a number of European countries.The next year, 1970, Harrison produced with Prabhupada's disciples another hit single, \"Govinda\", and in May 1971 the album \"The Radha Krishna Temple\". Also in 1970, Harrison sponsored the publishing of the first volume of Prabhupada's book \"K\u1e5b\u1e63\u1e47a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead\", which related the activities of Krishna's life as told in the tenth canto of the \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\". In 1973 Harrison donated a seventeen-acre estate known as Piggots Manor, fifteen miles northwest of London. The Hare Krishna devotees converted this into a rural temple-ashram and renamed it Bhaktivedanta Manor in Prabhupada's honor.\nOnce Prabhupada's disciples had made a start in England, over the years Prabhupada visited England many times and from there traveled to Germany, France, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, and the Netherlands, leading kirtans, installing forms of Krishna in ISKCON temples, meeting religious and intellectual leaders and others keen to meet him, and guiding and encouraging his disciples.\nAfrica.\nIn 1970, Prabhupada made the first of several visits to Kenya. Although the disciples he had sent there had settled into doing spiritual programs for the local Indian people, Prabhupada insisted on doing programs meant for Africans. On one notable occasion in Nairobi, when he was scheduled to do a program at an Indian Radha-Krishna temple in a mainly African area downtown, he ordered the doors opened to invite the local residents. Soon the hall was flooded with African people. Then he held \"kirtan\" and gave a talk. Prabhupada told his local leaders that they should spread Krishna consciousness among the local African people. Prabhupada also later visited Mauritius and South Africa and sent his disciples to Nigeria and Zambia.\nThe Soviet Union.\nPrabhupada's visit to Moscow from 20 to 25 June 1971 marked the beginning of Krishna consciousness in the Soviet Union. During his five days in Moscow, Prabhupada managed to meet only two Soviet citizens: , a professor of Indian and South Asian studies, and , a twenty-three-year-old Muscovite. Pinyaev, who went on to become the first Soviet Hare Krishna devotee, met Prabhupada through the son of an Indian diplomat stationed in Moscow. Prabhupada's assistant gave Pinyaev a copy of Prabhupada's \"Bhagavad-gita\", which Pinyaev was able to translate into Russian, copy, and then distribute underground in the Soviet Union. Pinyaev showed a great interest in Gaudiya Vaishnavism, accepted initiation from Prabhupada, and did much to ignite interest in Krishna consciousness in the Soviet Union. Pinyaev was later imprisoned in Smolensk Special Psychiatric Hospital and forcibly treated with drugs for his practice of Krishna consciousness.\nIndia.\nHaving achieved some success in the West, in 1970 Prabhupada directed his attention especially to India, with the hope of turning India back toward its original spiritual sensibilities. He came back to India with a party of Western disciples \u2014 ten American \"sannyasis\" and twenty other devotees \u2014 and for the next seven years focused much of his effort on establishing temples in Bombay, Vrindavan, Hyderabad, and a planned international headquarters in Mayapur, West Bengal (the birthplace of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu).\nBy that time, Prabhupada saw that India had set a course towards Europeanization and sought to imitate the West. Therefore, the appearance on Indian soil of American and European Hare Krishna devotees who had rejected Western materialism and embraced Indian spiritual culture \"caused nothing less than a sensation among the modernizing (i.e. Westernizing) Indians, planting seeds for an authentic religious revival there\".By the early 1970s, Prabhupada had established his movement's American headquarters in Los Angeles and its world headquarters in Mayapur.\nAround the world.\nIn Latin America, Prabhupada visited Mexico and Venezuela. In Asia he visited Hong Kong, Japan, Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines. He also spent time in Australia, New Zealand, and Fiji. In the Middle East he visited Iran. Among the places he sent disciples to spread Krishna consciousness was China.\nEarly in the movement, Prabhupada had guided his students personally, but later, as the movement rapidly expanded, he relied more on letters and his secretaries. By giving his students instructions, advice, and encouragement, he ensured a \"strong paternal presence\" in their lives. He wrote more than six thousand letters, many now collected and kept in the Bhaktivedanta Archives. Besides receiving reports of accomplishments, he also had to deal through correspondence with almost daily setbacks, perplexities, quarrels, and failures. He tried to correct or resolve these as much as he could and kept on advancing his movement.\nWherever he was, he took an hour-long early-morning walk, which became a time for disciples to ask questions and receive personal guidance. On returning from his walk, he lectured daily on the \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\", often reading from the portion of the manuscript he was working on. Every afternoon he met with disciples or with dignitaries and leaders from various parts of his mission.\nTraveling constantly to lecture and tend to his disciples, Prabhupada circled the world fourteen times in ten years. He opened more than one hundred temples and dozens of farm communities and restaurants, as well as \"gurukulas\" (boarding schools) for ISKCON's children. He initiated nearly five thousand disciples.\nDeath (1977).\nOn 14 November 1977, at the age of 81, after a long illness, Prabhupada died in his room at the Krishna Balaram Mandir, the temple he had established in Vrindavan, India. His burial site is located in the courtyard of the temple beneath a \"samadhi\" (memorial shrine) built by his followers.\nSuccession.\nIn 1970, Prabhupada established a Governing Body Commission (GBC), then consisting of twelve leading disciples, to oversee ISKCON's activities around the world and to serve as ISKCON's ultimate managing authority. In 1977, four months before his death, he appointed eleven senior disciples to perform spiritual initiations on his behalf while he was ill.\nDespite the measures Prabhupada took to organize the management of his movement, his death caused a crisis of authority in ISKCON that destabilized the organization and became a turning point in its development. The succession process was beset by conflicts, with disagreements persisting for decades. Nonetheless, by 2023 nearly one hundred disciples and grand-disciples in succession from Prabhupada were serving as initiating gurus in his branch of the Gaudiya Vaishnava lineage.\nPhilosophy and teachings.\nWithin Eastern systems, spiritual lineages are integral to each tradition, and a teacher is mandated to maintain theological fidelity by transmitting knowledge as given in the lineage. Prabhupada comes in the Brahma-Madhva-Gaudiya lineage, which traces back to Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and Madhvacharya, and further back, its teachings say, to the beginnings of creation. This lineage (\"sampradaya\") follows such texts as \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\", the \"Bhagavad-gita\", and the writings of Chaitanya's disciples and their followers. Prabhupada's extensive commentaries on the sacred texts follow those of Bhaktisiddhanta, Bhaktivinoda, and other traditional teachers, such as Baladeva Vidyabhushana, Vishvanatha Chakravarti, Jiva Goswami, Madhvacharya, and Ramanujacharya.\nThe Absolute Truth.\nIn accordance with the teachings of the \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\", Prabhupada taught that the supreme truth, or Absolute Truth, is the one unlimited, undivided spiritual entity that is the source of all. That Absolute Truth, he taught, is realized in three phases: as \"Brahman\" (all-pervading impersonal oneness), as \"Paramatma\" (the aspect of God present within the heart of every living being), and as \"Bhagavan\", the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Though the Absolute Truth is one, he taught, that one Absolute is progressively realized in these three features according to one's level of spiritual advancement. In the initial stage the Absolute is realized as Brahman, in a more advanced stage as Paramatma, and at the most advanced stage as \"Bhagavan\".\nKrishna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.\nIn the \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\", and so in Prabhupada's teachings, Krishna is seen as the original and supreme manifestation of Bhagavan \u2013 in Sanskrit, \"svayam-bhagavan\", or the Supreme Personality of Godhead himself. No one is equal to or greater than Krishna. Brahman and Paramatma are partial realizations of Krishna. The various Vishnu forms, such as Rama and Narasimha, are \"nondifferent\" from Krishna; they are the same Personality of Godhead, appearing in different roles. The form of Krishna is the original and the most complete form. In the Hindu pantheon, he taught the gods other than the Vishnu forms are demigods \u2014 that is, assistants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.\nThe energies of the Absolute.\nIf the Absolute Truth is one, this raises the question of how diversity can exist. If, as the \"Upanishads\" say, there is only the Absolute Truth and nothing else, we need some way to account for the existence of living beings, with all their differences, and the world, with all its many colors, forms, sounds, aromas, and so on. Prabhupada responds by referencing a statement from the \"Upanishads\" that the Absolute Truth has varied energies. As a fire located in one place gives off heat and light throughout a room, the Absolute Truth fills the world with every sort of variety.\nOneness and difference.\nPrabhupada taught Chaitanya's doctrine of \"achintya bheda-abheda-tattva\", in which everything is seen as simultaneously, inconceivably one with the Absolute \u2014 that is, with Krishna \u2014 and yet different. By way of analogy, Prabhupada gives the example that heat is in one sense identical with the fire from which it emerges and yet the two are different \u2014 when sitting in a fire's warmth, we are not burning in the fire itself. This \"oneness and difference\" accounts for the oneness of an Absolute Truth that includes limitless varieties.\nThe inferior and superior energies.\nAmong Krishna's energies, Prabhupada taught, the ingredients of this world collectively belong to Krishna's \"inferior energy\" \u2014 inferior in that, being inert matter, it lacks consciousness. But superior to inert matter are the conscious living beings (\"jivas\") that belong to Krishna's \"superior energy\".\nThe predicament of the living being.\nBecause the living beings belong to Krishna's \"superior energy\", Prabhupada taught, they share in Krishna's divine qualities, including knowledge, bliss, and eternality (\"sat\", \"cit\", and \"ananda\"). But because of contact with the \"inferior energy\" since time immemorial, the divine nature of the living beings has been covered, and subjecting the living beings in this world to ignorance, suffering, and repeated birth and death. Living beings struggle against birth and death, disease, and old age in each life. While trying to control and enjoy the resources of nature, living beings increasingly suffer from entanglement in nature's complexities.\nAs spiritual beings belonging to the \"superior energy\", the living beings are different from their material bodies: the body may be male or female, young or old, white or black, American or Indian, but the living being within the body is beyond what he called these \"material designations\". Prabhupada phrased this understanding in a maxim he often used: \"I am not this body\".\nHe taught that when we falsely identify with these bodies, we are under the influence of Maya, or illusion. Only when this illusion is dispelled can the soul become liberated from material existence.\n\"Bhakti\".\nPrabhupada taught that living beings can be freed from illusion and from their entire material predicament by recognizing that they are tiny but eternal parts of Krishna and that their natural engagement lies in serving Krishna, just as a hand serves the body. Dormant within every living being, Prabhupada taught, is an eternal loving relationship with that Absolute, or Krishna, and when that loving relationship is revived, the living being resumes its natural eternal and joyful life. This eternal service in devotion to Krishna, rendered by one freed from all material designation, is called \"bhakti\".One can begin practicing \"bhakti\", Prabhupada taught, even while in the earliest stages of spiritual life. In this way, \"bhakti\" is both the end and how to achieve it. As a spiritual practice, \"bhakti\" is a powerful, transformative process that purifies the soul and enables it to see God directly.\nImpersonalism.\nPrabhupada crusaded against what he called \"impersonalism\"\u2014the idea that the Supreme has no form, qualities, activities, or personal attributes. In this way, he stood opposed to the teachings of Shankara (AD 788\u2013820), who held that everything except Brahman is illusory, including the soul, the world, and God. Before Prabhupada, Shankara's system of thought, known as \"Advaita Vedanta\", had generally provided the framework for Western understandings of Hinduism, and the \"steady procession of Hindu swamis\" who came to America generally aligned themselves with Shankara's monistic views and the idea of \"the ultimate absorption of the self into an impersonal Reality or Brahman\".\nBut prominent Vaishnava philosophers from the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, like Madhva and Ramanuja, had opposed Shankara's views with personalistic understandings of Vedanta. Those teachers presented strong philosophical arguments criticizing Shankara's \"illusionism\" (\"mayavada\"), his view that personal individuality, indeed all individuality, is illusory. Philosophers in the Gaudiya line such as, in the sixteenth century, Jiva Goswami had continued to argue formidably against impersonalism, which they regarded as \"the\" essential metaphysical misconception\". So Prabhupada strongly opposed impersonalistic views wherever he encountered them and asserted the eternal personal existence of the Absolute and of all living beings. Where Buddhism shares ground with Shankara's views by teaching that ultimately personality disintegrates, leaving nothing but a void \"nirvana\", Buddhism too came in for Prabhupada's strong personalistic critique.\nSocietal organization.\nPrabhupada taught that society should ideally be organized in such a way that people have specific duties according to their occupation (\"varna\") and stage of life (\"ashrama\"). The four \"varnas\" are intellectual work; administrative and military work; agriculture and business; and ordinary labor and assistance. The four \"ashramas\" are student life, married life, retired life, and renounced life. In accordance with the \"Bhagavad-gita\" and in opposition to the modern Hindu caste system, Prabhupada taught that one's \"varna\", or occupational standing, should be understood in terms of one's qualities and the work one actually does, not by one's birth.\nMoreover, devotional qualifications always supersede material ones. Following Chaitanya, who challenged the caste system and undercut hierarchical power structures, Prabhupada taught that anyone could take to the practice of \"bhakti-yoga\" and become self-realized through the chanting of God's holy names, as found in the \"Hare Krishna maha-mantra\".\nPrabhupada also emphasized the importance of self-sufficient farming communities as places where one could live simply and cultivate Krishna consciousness.\nSpiritual practices.\n\"Kirtan\".\nThe primary spiritual practice Prabhupada taught was \"Krishna sankirtana\" (also called \"kirtan\" or \"kirtana\"), in which people musically chant together names of Krishna, especially in the form of the \"maha-mantra\": &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare HareHare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.\"\"Kirtan\" literally means \"description\" hence \"praise\", and \"sankirtana\" indicates \"kirtan\" performed by people together.\nOn the authority of traditional Sanskrit texts, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu had taught that Krishna \"kirtan\" is the most effective method for spiritual realization in the present age (\"Kali-yuga\") \u2013 more effective than silent meditation (\"dhyana\"), speculative study (\"jnana\"), worship in temples (\"puja\"), or performing the various physical or mental disciplines of \"yoga\". \"Krishna kirtan\", he had taught, can be done by anyone, anywhere, at any time, and without hard-and-fast rules. Because the names of Krishna are \"transcendental sounds\", identical with Krishna himself, the chanting is spiritually uplifting.\nWhen Prabhupada began his efforts to spread Krishna consciousness in the United States, he held \"kirtans\" in a Bowery loft, in his early storefront temples, in Tompkins Square Park in New York and Golden Gate Park in San Francisco, and wherever else he went. Following Prabhupada, his disciples soon began holding \"kirtans\" regularly in streets, parks, temples, and other venues in major cities in North America and Europe and then in Latin America, Australia, Africa, and Asia. Because of Hare Krishna \"kirtan\", Prabhupada's movement itself came to be referred to simply as \"Hare Krishna\" and its followers as \"Hare Krishnas\".\nTheologically speaking, the term \"sankirtana\" can extend from the public chanting of Hare Krishna to the distribution of books spoken by or about Krishna. \"Kirtan\" in the sense of public chanting is traditionally accompanied by \"kartals\" (hand cymbals) and mridangas (drums), and Prabhupada's spiritual master and grand spiritual master had said that distribution of Krishna literature was the \"great \"mridanga\"\" because such distribution spreads Krishna consciousness still further. Prabhupada therefore gave great importance to such distribution.\nAssociation with devotees.\nPrabhupada's tradition constantly makes the point that \"association with saints inspires saintliness, association with devotees inspires devotion. The association of genuine devotees can exert a powerful effect upon one's consciousness\". And so when Prabhupada incorporated ISKCON, its founding document included as one of the Society's purposes \"To bring the members of the Society together with each other and nearer to Krishna\".\nInitiation vows.\nPrabhupada required of his followers, as a prerequisite for spiritual initiation, that they promise to follow four \"regulative principles\": no illicit sex (that is, no sex outside of marriage), no eating of meat, fish, or eggs, no intoxicants (including drugs, alcohol, cigarettes, and even coffee and tea), and no gambling. New initiates also vowed to daily chant sixteen meditative \"rounds\" of the \"Hare Krishna mantra\" (that is, to complete sixteen circuits of chanting the mantra on a 108-bead strand).\nHearing of \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\".\nFor at least the last millennium, the \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\" has been \"by far the most important work in the Krishna tradition\" and \"the scripture \"par excellence\" of the Krishnaite schools\". It is sometimes described as \"the ripened fruit of the Vedic tree\". Accordingly, Prabhupada instituted daily classes on the \"Bhagavatam\" in all his centers, and he spoke on \"Bhagavatam\" daily, wherever he went.\nDeity worship.\nIn accordance with Vaishnava teachings, Prabhupada introduced the worship of Krishna in the form of a \"murti\": figures cast in metal or carved in stone or wood to match descriptions of Krishna given in Vaishnava texts. Scholar of religion Kenneth Valpey writes: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Prabhup\u0101da explained that although omnipresent, K\u1e5b\u1e63\u1e47a makes himself perceivable and hence worshipable through material elements which are, after all, his own 'energies.' Based on this reasoning one should understand the image of K\u1e5b\u1e63\u1e47a to be 'K\u1e5b\u1e63\u1e47a personally,' appearing in a way quite suitable for our vision,' that is, perceivable by ordinary persons with ordinary powers of sight\".\nPrabhupada taught that because Krishna is personally present as the deity (the term Prabhupada used for such a form), worshiping the deity helps one develop loving exchanges with Krishna. Prabhupada installed deities in ISKCON temples worldwide.\nFood prepared and offered to the deity of Krishna with devotion becomes sanctified as \"krishna-prasadam\" (\"mercy of Krishna\"). Prabhupada taught that eating only \"prasadam\" purifies one's existence and helps one develop in \"bhakti\". From the beginning of his mission, Prabhupada distributed \"prasadam\" to visitors and soon made it into the movement's primary outreach vehicle. A weekly \"prasadam\" feast for the public has always been a program at all of ISKCON centers. Prabhupada wrote, \"The Hare Krishna Movement is based on the principle: chant Hare Krishna mantra at every moment, both inside and outside of the temples, and, as far as possible, distribute prasadam\".\nLiving in Vrindavan.\nPrabhupada's predecessors such as Rupa Goswami had taught the value of living in Vrindavan (sometimes spelled \"Vrindaban\"), the sacred town between Agra and New Delhi that is held to be the site of Krishna's rural \"pastimes\" on earth and therefore conducive to constant remembrance of Krishna. Prabhupada accordingly brought his disciples on pilgrimage to Vrindavan, and there, he established the Krishna-Balaram temple. Yet with a broader outlook, he wrote one disciple, \"[W]herever you remain, if you are fully absorbed in your transcendental work in Krishna consciousness, that place is eternally Vrindaban. It is the consciousness that creates Vrindaban\".\nPrincipal writings.\nBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, who had specifically encouraged writing and publishing, at one meeting told Prabhupada: If you ever get money, print books. So regardless of how busy or sometimes unwell Prabhupada might have been, he remained focused on producing books. Prabhupada slept little, waking at 1:00 am every night to translate and comment on the \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\" and other texts. During the day he would give attention to guiding disciples and seeing to the affairs of his international society and its temples, and very early in the morning, while most people were asleep, he did most of his writing \"because even with his age and uncertain health, he was unwilling to sacrifice his writing time for extra rest\".\nBy 1970, he had translated the \"Bhagavad-gita\", two cantos of the \"Bhagavatam\", a summary study of its tenth canto, and a summary volume drawn from the expansive Caitanya-caritamrta. Starting in 1970, his literary output slowed only slightly due to the demands of his expanding Hare Krishna movement. His task, as scholars have observed, was not merely to translate the text but to translate an entire tradition.\nHistorian of religion Thomas Hopkins relates that Prabhupada told him in a conversation in Philadelphia in 1975 that \"the \"Gita\" provided the basic education on Krishna devotion, the \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\" was like graduate study, and the \"Caitanya-caritamrita\" was like postgraduate education for the most advanced devotees\".\nHopkins says that by presenting in English such works as the \"Bhagavatam\" and \"Caitanya-caritamrta\", Prabhupada made important texts accessible to the Western world that were simply not accessible before. Hopkins says, \"[W]hat few English translations there were of the \"Bhagavata\" \"Purana\" and \"Caitanya-caritamrta\" were barely adequate and very hard to get hold of\". Prabhupada, Hopkins says, \"made these and other texts available in a way that they never were before\" and \"made the tradition itself accessible to the West\".\n\"Bhagavad-gita As It Is\".\nIn 1966\u201367, Prabhupada wrote a translation and commentary on the \"Bhagavad-gita\" he entitled \"Bhagavad-gita As It Is\". It was first published by the Macmillan Company in 1968 in an abridged edition and later, in 1972, in full. For each verse he first gives the Sanskrit Devanagari script, then a roman transliteration and word-for-word gloss, followed by his translation and a commentary, or \"purport\". Scholar of religion Richard H. Davis comments that this was \"the first English translation of the \"Gita\" to supply an authentic interpretation from an Indian devotional tradition\". It is \"by far the most widely distributed of all English Gita translations\". In 2015 Davis wrote, \"The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust estimates that twenty-three million copies of Prabhupada's translation have been sold, including the English original and secondary translations into fifty-six other languages\". For Prabhupada, Davis says, \"the essential fact about the \"Bhagavad-gita\" is its speaker. The \"Gita\" contains the words of Krishna, and Krishna is the 'Supreme Personality of Godhead.'\" In Prabhupada's view, other translations lack authority because the translators use them to express their own opinions rather than the message of Krishna. In contrast, Prabhupada saw his task in presenting what Krishna wanted to say, and so he claimed to present the \"Bhagavad-gita\" \"as it is\".\n\"Srimad-Bhagavatam\".\nAt once a sacred history, a theological treatise, and a philosophical text, the \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\" \"stands out by reason of its literary excellence, the organization that it brings to its vast material, and the effect that it has had on later writers\". Praising the poetry of the \"Bhagavatam\", scholar of religion Edwin Bryant says, \"[S]cholars of the text have every right to say that 'the \"Bhagavata\" can be ranked with the best of the literary works produced by mankind.'\"\nIt was this great work that Prabhupada, after taking \"sannyasa\", set out to present in English, with, once again, the original Sanskrit text, its word-for-word meanings, a translation, and an in-depth commentary. Also known as \"Srimad-Bhagavata\" \"Purana\", \"Bhagavata\" \"Purana\", or just the \"Bhagavata\" \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\" is a work of twelve books (\"cantos\" was the word Prabhupada used) comprising more than fourteen thousand verse couplets. \"Srimad\" means \"beautiful\" or \"glorious\".\nPrabhupada began his translation and commentary on the \"Bhagavatam\" after accepting \"sannyasa\" in 1959, and by 1965 he had completed and published the first canto. He worked on translating the \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\" into English for the rest of his life.\nThe cantos were published one by one, as he finished them. He completed nine cantos and thirteen chapters of the tenth. The rest of the \"Bhagavatam\" was completed by his disciples.\n\"Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead\".\nConsidering his old age and the vast size of the \"Bhagavatam\", Prabhupada knew he might not live to finish it. So in 1968 he undertook to present the \"Bhagavatam\"'s tenth canto \u2014 the essence of the work \u2014 in summary form as \"Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead\".\nThis summary study is \"Prabhupada's own exposition of the story of Krishna as it is told in the Tenth Canto\". It \"laid out the account of Krishna from the \"Bhagavata Purana\" that provides the images and stories central to Krishna devotion\".\nAs Bryant says: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The tenth book of the \"Bh\u0101gavata\" has inspired generations of artists, dramatists, musicians, poets, singers, writers, dancers, sculptors, architects and temple-patrons across the centuries. Its stories are well known to every Hindu household across the length and breadth of the Indian subcontinent, and celebrated in regional festivals all year round\". Prabhupada himself inspired artists among his disciples to provide the text with profuse full-color illustrations. Such illustrations became a feature of nearly all his books.\nA related work is \"Light of the Bhagavat\", written by Prabhupada in Vrindavan in 1961, before he went to the West, but published only after his death. The book is a treatment of one chapter (chapter twenty) of the tenth canto. Prabhupada composed forty-eight commentaries for the chapter's verses. The book is accordingly illustrated with forty-eight paintings.\n\"Ishopanishad\".\nIn 1969 Prabhupada published, again in his full verse-by-verse format, his translation and commentary for the \"Ishopanishad\" \u2014 also known as the \"\u012a\u015ba Upani\u1e63ad\" or \"\u012a\u015b\u0101v\u0101sya Upani\u1e63ad\", which in 1960 he had partially serialized in his \"Back to Godhead\" magazine. The \"Ishopanishad\", consisting of only eighteen \"mantras\", is considered one of the principal \"Upanishads\". In all indigenous collections of the \"Upanishads\", the \"I\u015bopani\u1e63ad\" comes first. Its first verse, \"highly regarded as a capsule of Vedic theology\", presents a god-centered view of the universe. The celebrated traditional commentator Shankara wrote, \"One who is eager to rid himself of the suffering and delusion of sa\u1e41s\u0101ra, created by ignorance, and attain Supreme Bliss is entitled to read this \"Upani\u1e63ad\"\".\n\"The Nectar of Devotion\".\nBegun in 1968, \"The Nectar of Devotion\" is a summary study of Rupa Goswami's \"Bhakti-rasamrita-sindhu\", his \"famous exposition of the principles of devotion\". Scholar-practitioner Shrivatsa Goswami has described \"Bhakti-rasamrita-sindhu\" as \"a textbook of devotional practice, an exposition on the philosophy of devotion, and a study of devotional psychology\". \"The Nectar of Devotion\" \"gave access to Gaudiya Vaisnavism's most important theological treatise on devotion\".\n\"Caitanya-caritamrta\".\n\"Caitanya-caritamrta\" is the seventeenth-century account of the life and teachings of Chaitanya, who founded the Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition. Written in the Bengali language, it runs to more than 15,000 verses and \"is regarded as the most authoritative work on \u015ar\u012b Caitanya\", a work of \"rare merit\", with \"no parallel in the whole of Bengali literature\". Scholar of religion Hugh Urban calls it \"one of the greatest works in all of Indian vernacular literature\".\nPrabhupada completed his translation in 1974, within two years, and it was published in seventeen volumes, again with verse-by-verse text, transliteration, word meanings, translation and commentary. He based his commentary on the Bengali commentaries of his predecessors Bhaktivinoda Thakura and Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati.\nBefore Srila Prabhupada's translation, the work in English was simply unavailable. After Prabhupada's edition came out, scholar J. Bruce Long wrote, \"The appearance of an English translation of K\u1e5b\u1e63\u1e47ad\u0101sa Kavir\u0101ja Gosv\u0101m\u012b's \"\u015ari Caitanya-carit\u0101m\u1e5bta\" by A.C. Bhaktived\u0101nta, Founder-\u0100c\u0101rya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, is a cause for celebration among both scholars in Indian Studies and lay-people seeking to enrich their knowledge of Indian spirituality\".\nSeveral years earlier, in 1968, Prabhupada published \"Teachings of Lord Caitanya\". The book offers a summary of selected portions of \"Caitanya-caritamrita\".\n\"The Nectar of Instruction\".\nPrabhupada also wrote a verse-by-verse commentated translation of Rupa Goswami's eleven-verse \"Upadeshamrita\", one of Rupa Goswami's shortest works, which provides concise directions on how to carry out devotional service.\nBhaktivedanta Book Trust.\nIn 1972 Prabhupada founded the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust (BBT), which manages the international publishing and distribution of his writings. Apart from his major works, the BBT publishes various paperbacks derived from his lectures. The BBT also publishes \"Back to Godhead\", the magazine Prabhupada founded, in multiple languages. Between 1973 and 1977, Prabhupada's followers distributed several million books and other pieces of Krishna conscious literature every year in shopping malls, airports, and other public locations in the United States and worldwide. As of 2023, his books had been translated into eighty-seven languages. In 2022, the BBT printed more than two million pieces of literature.\nCritical assessments of Prabhupada's writings.\nShrivatsa Goswami has said, \"Making these Vai\u1e63\u1e47ava texts available is one of \u015ar\u012bla Prabhup\u0101da's greatest contributions. Apart from the masses, his books have also reached well into academic circles and have spurred academic interest in the Caitanya tradition\". Further, he says, \"The significance of making these texts available is not merely academic or cultural; it is spiritual. \"J\u00f1\u0101na\", knowledge, is spread, proper doctrines are made known, people come closer to reality\". Other academics, too, have applauded Prabhupada's publications as his most significant legacy.\nBut his edition of \"Bhagavad-gita\", in particular, has come in for criticism as well. Eric Sharpe, scholar of religion, considers Prabhupada's reading of \"Bhagavad-gita\" single-minded and fundamentalist. Sanskrit scholar A.L. Herman concurs. Another scholar, K. P. Sinha, takes exception to Prabhupada's \"misinterpretations and unkind remarks\" directed toward Advaita Vedanta, the philosophy of absolute monism.\nThe most detailed critical analysis by a Western, non-Hindu scholar comes from historian of religion Robert D. Baird. Baird takes upon himself the task of not merely seeing Prabhupada as \"an authentic proponent of Vaishnavism\" but of examining as an academic scholar the way Prabhupada reads the \"Bhagavad-gita\".\nWhereas many scholars, Baird writes, see \"some degree of progression\" in the \"Gita\", with different themes emphasized in different parts of the book, Prabhupada \"reads the complete teaching of the book, indeed of Vedic literature generally, into any passage\". It appears \"that he considers it legitimate to interpret any verse in the light of the whole system found in the \"G\u012bt\u0101\" whether it is explicitly mentioned in that verse of the G\u012bt\u0101 or not\". In this way, he reads \"Krishna consciousness\" even into portions of the text where Krishna is not explicitly mentioned. Prabhupada cites later passages in the \"Gita\" to explain earlier passages. Indeed, he even quotes from other texts in the canon (whether written before the \"Gita\" or after) to indicate the intention of the \"Gita\", \"as though they have the same authority as the \"Gita\" itself\". And so: \"In all, a wide range of texts are used to serve as authorities for understanding the \"G\u012bt\u0101\". Swami Bhaktivedanta not only treats specific texts in a way that would be unusual among Western scholars, but he sees specific texts in the light of the Vedas in general\".\nWhereas other scholars, Baird writes, would give great attention to the overall structure of the \"Gita\", Prabhupada gives the structure scant notice, preferring instead to make this point: \"In every chapter of \"Bhagavad-g\u012bt\u0101\", Lord K\u1e5b\u1e63\u1e47a stresses that devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate goal of life\".\nPrabhupada uses the text of the \"Gita\" to present various aspects of Krishna theology. And \"he also goes beyond specific texts and the \"G\u012bt\u0101\" itself when he makes it the occasion for the inculcation of a Vaishnava lifestyle,\" typified by chanting the \"maha-mantra\", regulating one's sexual activity, offering food to Krishna, and following a vegetarian diet. And so: \"Swami Bhaktivedanta is more interested in expounding the principles of Krishna consciousness than in merely explicating the text at hand\". In one instance cited, \"the text recommends one thing [\"astanga-yoga\"] and Bhaktivedanta Swami cancels that and offers the \"mah\u0101mantra\"\".\nAs for competing interpretations: \"Bhaktivedanta often seeks to show the superiority of the Vaishnava position and the error of other positions\". \"The position that is attacked with the most regularity and vigor is that of Advaita Vedanta,\" \"the system of thought that is commonly used to provide the structure for Western understandings of 'Hinduism'\", whose advocates Prabhupada calls Mayavadins, impersonalists, or monists. For Advaita Vedanta he reserves his strongest condemnations.\nNor does Prabhupada only criticize \"impersonalists\". Rather, \"Scholars in particular come under Swami Bhaktivedanta's condemnation because they are merely 'mental speculators'\". In Prabhupada's view, Baird says, \"Since these scholars are not surrendered to Krishna, they are not Krishna conscious; they are merely offering their own ideas rather than the truth within the \"parampar\u0101\" system [the lineage of masters and disciples]\". Prabhupada \"seldom engages in the kind of argumentation that scholars are accustomed to when deciding between alternative positions\". Instead he takes a position as a spiritual master within the disciplic succession and \"merely declares\" what is true. And so, Baird says, \"The gulf between Swami Bhaktivedanta's presentation and that of the scholarly exegete is simply unbridgeable, for their purposes operate on different levels\".\nBut what some scholars might see as faults, others see as virtues. Thomas Hopkins sees Prabhupada's translations and purports as successfully conveying the meaning of the text precisely because Prabhupada draws upon the commentaries of his predecessors and brings to his work the understandings of his entire tradition. Moreover, Hopkins says, Prabhupada does this in such a way that the entire text becomes comprehensible to a modern reader, not only theoretically but practically. Translations of such texts as the \"Gita\", Hopkins says, cannot be done mechanically. The translator has to understand the spirit and the experience that lie behind the text. Where Prabhupada's translations expand the text, they do so \"for the sake of making the meaning more clear, rather than obscuring it\". Hopkins says, \"Writing a commentary is not a merely intellectual or academic exercise\u2014it has a practical goal: to engage people with a living spiritual tradition\". Prabhupada, he says, brings the meaning of the text out of the past and into the present, giving it meaning in terms of people's lives.\nChallenges and controversies.\nPrabhupada's efforts to establish and expand Krishna consciousness included some difficulties internal to his new and growing movement. He had to train disciples unaccustomed to Vaishnava culture and philosophy and engage them in furthering his Hare Krishna movement; he had to set up and then guide his Governing Body Commission to see to ISKCON's global management. He often had to intervene when clashes and controversies within ISKCON grew out of hand. He had to sort out difficulties faced by individual disciples, ensure a proper understanding of his teachings, and, more broadly, transplant an entire cultural movement. He also faced challenges from the outside world.\nCult image and \"brainwashing\".\nUntil the mid-1970s, the attitude of the Western public towards Prabhupada and his movement was cordial. News reports described Hare Krishna devotees, their beliefs, and their religious practices in a spirit of curiosity. By the mid-1970s, this changed. The rapidly expanding Hare Krishna movement \u2014 distinctive, foreign, highly visible, and vigorous (often over-vigorous) in spreading its message \u2014 became an early target for a nascent anti-cult movement. The Hare Krishna movement no longer represented an authentic spiritual tradition. Instead, it was now one of a myriad of \"destructive cults\" that won converts and took over their lives by \"mind control\" and \"brainwashing\". When young adults, supposedly robbed of free will and \"programmed\" by mind control, became Hare Krishna devotees, some parents hired \"deprogrammers\" to kidnap them and \"free them from the cult\". \"Deprogrammings\" typically involved days or weeks of isolation, browbeating, and intense verbal haranguing and harassment.\nAfter one such deprogramming failed, the New York City District Attorney's Office charged two local Hare Krishna leaders with illegally imprisoning two Hare Krishna followers by brainwashing them.\nPrabhupada instructed his disciples to fight these charges, among other ways, by entering his books into evidence. Meanwhile, two hundred scholars signed a document defending ISKCON as an authentic Indian missionary movement.\nIn March of 1977, a New York State Supreme Court justice threw out the charges and recognized ISKCON as a bona fide religious tradition. Nonetheless, in America and Europe the \"cult\" label and image persisted for the rest of Prabhupada's lifetime and beyond.\nAs scholar James Beckford notes, in the 1970s, Hare Krishna devotees became increasingly active in selling their literature and collecting donations from the public, so they were sharply criticized for what was seen as harassing people for money at airports and other public places. As Bryant and Ekstrand comment, \"Questionable fund-raising tactics, confrontational attitudes to mainstream authorities, and an isolationist mentality, coupled with the excesses of neophyte proselytizing zeal, brought public disapproval\" \u2014 something that Prabhupada had to deal with too.\nInstitutionalization.\nAs ISKCON evolved towards being a worldwide organization, it suffered from the inevitable travails of institutionalization. Young disciples, mostly from an anti-establishment, anti-authoritarian background, became members of the GBC and found themselves running a worldwide institution. Preaching sometimes started giving way to revenue production; gender issues arose; leaders sometimes fell, and scandals broke out. Bureaucracy intruded on spontaneity, and many members left. As much as Prabhupada tried to leave management to the GBC, much of this he too had to deal with personally.\nChild abuse.\nPrabhupada directed his disciples to train children in boarding schools called \"gurukulas\", where they would receive education from spiritual teachers. However, as reported by sociologist of religion E. Burke Rochford, through mismanagement, these schools became like orphanages. After Prabhupada's departure, it came to light that physical and sexual abuse occurred within these schools due to lack of oversight.\nObstacles in India.\nIn India, Prabhupada faced a special set of challenges. He had much to accomplish there, but his American and European disciples were inexperienced in how to get things done in India and even how to live there.\nWhen Prabhupada's young American followers came to India in the early 1970s and began holding festivals, including public \"sankirtana\", many Indians were surprised to see Westerners adopting Indian modes of worship and devotion. Some local people, including even some Indian officials, suspected that the American devotees must be undercover operatives of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).\nOutspoken and uncompromising as he was in the way he presented Krishna's teachings in India, as elsewhere, Prabhupada found himself battling with opposing views of all sorts. Therefore, another challenge came from Prabhupada's consistent rejection of the common Hindu notion of caste by birth. Since Prabhupada, like his predecessors, insisted that anyone, from any race or nation, could become spiritually purified and fit to perform the duties of priests, he faced opposition from Hindu brahmins who held that performing such duties was an exclusive birthright of their caste.\nWhen Prabhupada resolved to build a temple on land in Juhu, Bombay (now Mumbai), the man who had sold ISKCON the land tried to swindle the devotees and take it back. The man had deep political connections in the Bombay municipality and employed lawyers and even thugs to drive the devotees off, but Prabhupada persisted and eventually won.\nDeviations.\nWhile working to establish his movement, Prabhupada had to deal with problems caused even by leading disciples, who, monks or not, could still hold on to intellectual baggage, disdain for authority, and ambitions for power. In 1968 Prabhupada's first \"sannyasi\" disciple openly disregarded Prabhupada's instructions to him and twisted core tenets of Prabhupada's teachings. This foreshadowed succession problems and issues of authority that Prabhupada's movement would face both during Prabhupada's presence and after.\nUnlike Indian gurus who declared themselves \"avatars\", divine appearances of God, Prabhupada, from the very beginning of his preaching, called himself only a servant or representative of God. But in 1970 four of Prabhupada's early \"sannyasis\" announced at a large ISKCON gathering that Prabhupada's followers had failed to recognize that Prabhupada was Krishna: God himself. Prabhupada expelled those \"sannyasis\" from his Society (he eventually readmitted them after they recanted their claim).\nIn 1972, without consulting Prabhupada, eight of the twelve members of the GBC held a meeting in New York aimed at centralizing control of ISKCON's activities and finances. Their plans would have lessened Prabhupada's own oversight and set aside his emphasis on the autonomy of each ISKCON center. This prompted Prabhupada to suspend the entire GBC \"until further notice\", establish direct lines of communication with each temple's leaders, and re-emphasize spiritual purity, the selfless and voluntary nature of devotional life, and the exemplary conduct befitting ISKCON leaders. He said he wanted this, not corporate bureaucracy and excessive centralization. (He later unsuspended the GBC).\nIn 1975, a clash broke out when a team of ten parties of itinerant \"sannyasis\", assisted by two hundred \"brahmacharis\", crisscrossed America, visiting ISKCON temples to extoll renunciation and a missionary spirit \u2014 and urge \"brahmacharis\" to abandon the temples and join the \"sannyasi\" parties. The temples, the team argued, were led by presidents who were \"grihasthas\" (married men), and grihasthas had a propensity for enjoyment that undermined what should be an austere temple atmosphere.\nThe conflict reached its peak in 1976 in Mayapur at ISKCON's annual global gathering when a \"sannyasi\"-dominated GBC passed resolutions severely restricting the role of women and families in ISKCON. After hearing from both sides, Prabhupada came down against this type of discrimination, calling it \"fanaticism\", and had the GBC undo the resolutions. Prabhupada said, \"I cannot discriminate \u2014 man, woman, child, rich, poor, educated, or foolish. Let them all come, and let them take Krishna consciousness\".\nControversial views and statements.\nIn the course of his preaching work in the West, Prabhupada made controversial statements that criticized various ideals of modern society or spoke offensively of certain groups.\n\"In a traditional Hindu vein\", Prabhupada spoke favorably of the myth of Aryan bloodlines and compared darker races to \"shudras\" [people of low caste], thus implying them being inferior to the lighter-complexioned humans. In a recorded room conversation with disciples in 1977, he calls African Americans \"uncultured and drunkards\", further stating that after being given freedom and equal rights, they caused a disturbance in the society.\nPrabhupada called democracy \"the government of the asses\", \"nonsense\", and \"farce\", at the same time praising the monarchial form of government and speaking favorably of dictatorship. While comparing Napoleon and Hitler to great demons of Hindu mythology Hiranyakashipu and Kamsa, he called their activities \"very great\". On other occasions, he made \"generally approving remarks about Hitler\" and said that Hitler and his regime carried out the Holocaust because Jews \"were financing against Germany\". He also expressed some misogynistic views, asserting that \"women cannot properly utilize freedom and it is better for them to be dependent\", stating that they are \"generally not very intelligent\", and \"in general should not be trusted\".\nScholars have commented, however, on the contrast between such controversial pronouncements and the full picture of what Prabhupada actually taught and did. Kim Knott, a religious studies scholar, extensively discusses Prabhupada's statements about women. Describing her perspective about ISKCON as that of an \"outsider\" and a \"western feminist\", she highlights Prabhupada's firm belief that \"bhakti-yoga\", the path of Krishna Consciousness, allows transcendence beyond gender distinctions. Knott emphasizes that, according to Prabhupada, women devotees, regardless of their gender, possess equal potential for spiritual advancement and service to Krishna. She further commends Prabhupada for opening up the Hare Krishna movement to women despite cultural norms and traditional prescriptions. In this way, she writes, Prabhupada took time, place, and circumstance into account and acted in the spirit of Krishna consciousness, \"in the manner of Chaitanya\".\nCommenting on the role and degree of responsibility that Prabhupada's statements about women played in their abuse in ISKCON, E. Burke Rochford notes that Prabhupada's personal example in dealings with his earliest women disciples was \"far more important\". Their collective personal experiences, Rochford observes, portray Prabhupada's \"respectful attitude and behavior toward his women disciples\" and his empowerment for the same rights and duties as his male disciples. Prabhupada encouraged and engaged women in conducting public scriptural discourses, \"kirtans\" and temple worship, writing for ISKCON magazines and publications, personally accompanying and assisting him, and assuming \"significant institutional positions in ISKCON\".\nSimilarly, scholar of religion Akshay Gupta observes that Prabhupada did not regard his black disciples as lower or \"untouchables\", displaying to some of them the same or even greater degree of affection than to his followers of other ethnicities. Another scholar of religion Mans Broo adds that when Prabhupada speaks about castes, he referred to an envisioned \"ideal society\" in which people would be divided into different occupational groups \"based not on hereditary but on individual qualifications\".\nBroo also notes that scholarly analyses attribute some of such statements to Prabhupada's \"flair for drama and overstatement\" \u2014 particularly noting his penchant for making politically incorrect remarks to reporters and adding, \"It is difficult to decide how seriously any single remark is meant to be taken from a transcript\". However, Broo concludes that this behavior does not clear Prabhupada from responsibility for his more radical, politically incorrect statements.\nAnother scholar of religion, Fred Smith, suggests that some of Prabhupada's statements (such as those concerning Hitler) \"must be understood in the context of the intellectual and political culture in which he matured\" \u2014 specifically that of mid-twentieth-century Bengal, brewing with anti-colonialist Indian nationalism championed by such figures as Subhash Chandra Bose, and therefore more favorably disposed to Nazi Germany than to Britain.\nBroo notes that Prabhupada's followers continue to grapple with his controversial statements \u2014 which paint \"a picture of a not very pleasant man, one far removed from the Gaudiya Vaishnava ideals described in the classical texts of the tradition\" \u2014 and respond to them in different ways: Some remain silent, while others invoke context or argue that Prabhupada is being unfairly quoted due to negative biases. Still, others are willing to differentiate between his statements they deem \"absolute\" and those they consider \"relative\", acknowledging that some teachings may be contingent on the circumstances of Prabhupada's life before coming to the US. However, some followers view this approach as \"exceedingly risky\", questioning who has the authority to determine which teachings are relative and which are not. Therefore, Broo concludes, this issue is \"not likely to be resolved soon\".\nCommenting on the underlying causes for such controversies, scholar of religion Larry Shinn attributes the conflict between Prabhupada's teachings and Western cultural values to \"[Prabhupada]'s insistence on the infallibility of the Krishna scriptures and (...) the authenticity of Prabhupada's Krishna faith and practice\".\nInfluence.\nBy explaining the teachings of bhakti yoga and Gaudiya Vaishnavism and arousing interest in them worldwide, Prabhupada made a lasting contribution. Through his writings and his movement, many Westerners have become aware of \"bhakti\" for the first time. He translated and commented on important spiritual texts, particularly the \"Bhagavad-gita\", the \"Srimad-Bhagavatam\", and the \"Caitanya-caritamrta\", making these texts accessible to a global audience. His commentaries brought the traditional wisdom of these writings into a contemporary context, making possible a deeper comprehension of their spiritual meaning and its practical application in one's life. Within Gaudiya Vaishnavism, Prabhupada's preaching achievements are viewed as the fulfillment of a mission to introduce Caitanya Mahaprabhu's teachings to the world.\nAlthough the \"steady procession of Hindu swamis\" who had come to America before Prabhupada had generally aligned their views with the monistic Advaita Vedanta of Shankara (AD 788\u2012820) and the idea of \"the ultimate absorption of the self into an impersonal Reality or Brahman\", Prabhupada rejected Advaita Vedanta and coherently argued that the Absolute is ultimately the Personality of Godhead.\nSardella has written that in the twelve years between Prabhupada's arrival in America and his demise, Prabhupada \"managed to build ISKCON into an institution comprising thousands of dedicated members, establish Caitanya Vaishnava temples in most of the world's major cities, and publish numerous volumes of Caitanya Vaishnava texts (in twenty-eight languages), tens of millions of which were distributed throughout the world\". Prabhupada also spread the chanting of the \"Hare Krishna mantra\" worldwide.\nIn 2013, Rochford wrote, \"[T]he fact that ISKCON has survived for nearly 50 years, despite significant change, is a testament to the devotees' resilience and to the power of Prabhupada's teachings and vision for ISKCON\".\nIn India, Prabhupada's movement has become a well-respected institution, with recognition at all levels of Hindu society. ISKCON has large temple complexes active in cities like Mumbai, New Delhi, Bengaluru, Chennai, and Kolkata. ISKCON's center in Mayapur has become an Eastern Indian place of pilgrimage for millions every year. Thousands of middle-class Hindus, both in India and elsewhere, have joined ISKCON. And Hindus both in India and in the Hindu diaspora have provided ISKCON vast support.\nBut Prabhupada's legacy also faces scrutiny on various fronts. Criticisms have emerged regarding the movement's organizational structure, controversies have arisen surrounding continuity of leadership after his death,\u00a0and misdeeds and even criminal acts have been committed by some ISKCON members, including once-respected former leaders. Concerns have been expressed about the movement's adaptability to modern values, especially concerning gender roles and societal norms. And although ISKCON has benefited from the support and participation of a large and growing number of Indian families in its congregations outside India, the \"Hinduization\" of ISKCON has in many places tended to diminish the involvement of other audiences.\nNonetheless, Prabhupada's influence endures through his writings and ISKCON's ongoing activities. Despite significant setbacks, the movement he started continues to grow.\nRecognition.\nFrom scholars.\nKim Knott writes that scholars describe Prabhupada as a charismatic spiritual leader and emphasize his \"humanity\" and \"uniqueness\". Prabhupada's missionary successes in such a short period, and at such an advanced age, she writes, are extolled by scholars using terms such as \"stunning\", \"remarkable\", and \"extraordinary\". In the same vein, Klaus Klostermaier, scholar of Hinduism and Indian history, refers to Prabhupada as \"probably, the most successful propagator of Hinduism abroad\".\nRepresenting such thoughts, Harvey Cox, American theologian and Professor of Divinity Emeritus at Harvard University, said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There aren't many people you can think of who successfully implant a whole religious tradition in a completely alien culture. That's a rare achievement in the history of religion. In his case it's even all the more remarkable for his having done this at such an advanced age. When most people would have already retired, he began a whole new phase of his life by coming to the United States and initiating this movement. He began simply, with only a handful of disciples. Eventually he planted this movement deeply in the North American soil, throughout other parts of the European-dominated world, and beyond. Although I didn't know him personally, the fact that we now have in the West a vigorous, disciplined, and seemingly well-organized movement\u2013not merely a philosophical movement or a yoga or meditation movement, but a genuinely religious movement--introducing the form of devotion to God that he taught, is a stunning accomplishment. So when I say [he's] \"one in a million,\" I think that's in some ways an underestimate. Perhaps he was one in a hundred million.\nFrom officials.\nPrabhupada's success in spreading Indian spirituality among non-Indians across the world brought him acclaim from Indian political leaders.\nIndian Prime Ministers Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Deve Gowda, Narendra Modi, and Indian Presidents Shankar Dayal Sharma, Pranab Mukherjee, and Pratibha Patil have praised Prabhupada, his work and mission.In 1998, speaking at the opening ceremony of an ISKCON temple in New Delhi, Prime Minister Vajpayee credited Prabhupada's movement with publishing the \"Bhagavad Gita\" \"in millions of copies in scores of Indian languages\" and distributing it \"in all nooks and corners of the world\", calling Prabhupada's journey to the West and the rapid global propagation of his movement \"one of the greatest spiritual events of the century\".\nReleasing a 125-rupee commemorative coin on the occasion of Prabhupada's 125th birth anniversary, Prime Minister Modi also praised Prabhupada for his efforts \"to give India's most priceless treasure to the world\", describing Prabhupada's accomplishments in spreading the thought and philosophy of India to the world as \"nothing less than a miracle.\"\nOn the fiftieth anniversary of Prabhupada's voyage to the West, US Congresswoman Tulsi Gabbard praised the \"compassion that drove Srila Prabhupada to attempt something so brave and so daring to deliver the message of Lord Chaitanya and the Holy Name to all of mankind\".\nPrabhupada was conferred with the title \"Vishwa Guru\" by the Akhil Bharatiya Akhara Parishad during the 2025 Prayag Maha Kumbh Mela in Uttar Pradesh in recognition of his contributions to humanity and his efforts in spreading Indian culture, traditions and \"spiritual wisdom to every corner of the world\".\nCommemoration.\nShrines, memorials, museums.\nIn keeping with \"Gaudiya-Vaisnava\" rites, after Prabhupada's death at the Krishna-Balarama temple in Vrindavan (Uttar Pradesh, India), his disciples interred his body on the temple premises and erected a marble \"samadhi\", or shrine, over his burial site. In Mayapur (West Bengal), they built a much larger \"pushpa-samadhi\" \u2014 a shrine sanctified with flowers from Prabhupada's burial ceremony. Daily \"puja\" (traditional worship) is offered to larger-than-life statues of Prabhupada at both sites.\nAnother shrine is dedicated to Prabhupada in New Vrindaban (West Virginia, USA), where a residence built to host Prabhupada during his occasional visits evolved into the elaborate Prabhupada's Palace of Gold. After opening to the public in 1979, two years after Prabhupada's death, the memorial site is now a place of worship and an attraction for pilgrims and tourists, listed in America's National Register of Historic Places. Other rooms \u200cin which Prabhupada stayed while in Vrindavan, Mumbai, Los Angeles, London, Melbourne and several other places around the world have been preserved as museums.\nPrabhupada's birthplace, in the Tollygunge neighborhood of Kolkata, was inaugurated as a memorial site in 2021, on the 125th anniversary of Prabhupada's birth, by West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee. In the Ultadanga neighborhood of Kolkata, the building, known as Bhaktivinode Asan where Prabhupada first met his guru, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, has also been restored as a heritage site.\nOn August 13, 2015, the fiftieth anniversary of Prabhupada's departure from Kolkata to the United States, a two-meter-high bronze monument, created by Ukrainian sculptor , was unveiled in Kolkata by the Governor of West Bengal Keshari Nath Tripathi and Lieutenant Governor of Pondicherry Kiran Bedi. The monument was created in two parts \u2014 one depicting Prabhupada's departure for America, the other his arrival. After the monument was unveiled, the \"departure\" part was installed at the ISKCON temple in Kolkata, the \"arrival\" part in front of the ISKCON temple in Boston.\nIn November 2024, Scottish Church College inaugurated the \"Abhay Charan Seminar Hall\", honoring A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada. The hall was constructed with support from the Bhaktivedanta Research Centre.\nBiographies, memoirs, diaries.\nIn 2008, Ketola wrote that there were more than thirty historical, biographical, and autobiographical works centering on Prabhupada. Since then they have increased.\nSatsvarupa Dasa Goswami's official six-volume biography \"Srila Prabhupada-lilamrta\" (\"carefully researched\", Ketola reports) has more recently been joined by a shorter biography, \"Swami in a Strange Land\", by Joshua Greene. Both authors are Prabhupada's disciples. Among memoirs that focus on specific times or places, Ketola mentions several, including Hayagriva Dasa's \"The Hare Krishna Explosion\".)\nKetola also notes two published diaries kept by direct assistants of Prabhupada: Tamal Krishna Goswami's \"TKG's Diary\" and Hari Sauri Dasa's multi-volume \"Transcendental Diary\".\nFilm, and filmed memoir collections.\nIn 1996 Gaurav Seth produced the fifty-five-minute biographical film \"Prabhupada: A Lifetime in Preparation\". In 2017 John Griesser, a Prabhupada disciple, produced an uncritical 91-minute film: \"Hare Krishna! The Mantra, the Movement, and the Swami who started it All\".\nDisciples have also undertaken two video projects collecting memories of Srila Prabhupada, one entitled \"Remembering Srila Prabhupada\", the other \"Following Srila Prabhupada\".\nThe Bhaktivedanta Archives, in North Carolina, serves as a repository for Srila Prabhupada's manuscripts and letters, for photographs of Srila Prabhupada, and for audio recordings.\nStamps, coin, and plaque.\nIn 1996, the Government of India issued a commemorative stamp in Prabhupada's honor and in 2021 a 125-rupee commemorative coin.\nIn 2001, the City of New York installed a plaque in Tompkins Square Park to mark the \"Hare Krishna tree\", the elm under which Prabhupada and his early followers first began chanting the \"Hare Krishna mantra\" in 1966.\nSchools.\nVarious ISKCON-related schools and other institutions have been named after Srila Prabhupada, including the Bhaktivedanta Research Centre in Kolkata, which holds a full collection of the works of Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati as well as publications from the first twenty years of the Gaudiya Math.\nIn 2023, Scottish Church College and the Bhaktivedanta Research Center jointly established the \"A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada Memorial Award\" to commemorate Prabhupada's student years at the college, meant to recognize both the most meritorious student for outstanding academic achievements and a faculty member for exceptional community service.\nRoads.\nIn 1978, a prominent entrance road into Vrindavan was named Bhaktivedanta Swami Marg after Prabhupada.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nAcademic and documentary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedia.\nNews.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOfficials.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVideos.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nISKCON-related.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks by Prabhupada's followers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45675", "revid": "48931986", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45675", "title": "Primary Chronicle", "text": "12th-century chronicle of Kievan Rus'\nThe Primary Chronicle, shortened from the common Russian Primary Chronicle (, commonly transcribed Povest' vremennykh let (PVL), lit.\u2009'Tale of Bygone Years'), is a chronicle of Kievan Rus' from about 850 to 1110. It is believed to have been originally compiled in the Kiev area in the 1110s. Tradition ascribed its compilation to the monk Nestor (Nestor's Chronicle) beginning in the 12th century, but this is no longer believed to have been the case.\nThe title of the work, (\"Tale of Bygone Years\") comes from the opening sentence of the \"Laurentian\" text: \"These are the narratives of bygone years regarding the origin of the land of Rus', the first princes of Kiev, and from what source the land of Rus' had its beginning\". The work is considered a fundamental source for the earliest history of the East Slavs.\nThe contents of the Chronicle are known today from several surviving versions and codices, whose separate chronological and other variations have led historians to be critical of its use as a reliable document. (See .)\nAuthorship and composition.\nAuthorship.\nThe Chronicle was long regarded as the first compilation of the work of a monk named Nestor (c. 1056 \u2013 c. 1114), who was also known to have written the \"Life of the Venerable Theodosius\". Writers of the time spoke of the \"Chronicle of Nestor\", and of the author as Nestor \"the Chronicler.\" Based on the 1661 \"Paterik\" of the Kyiv Monastery of the Caves, late 17th-century writers began to assert that Nestor \"the Chronicler\" wrote many of the surviving Rus' chronicles, including the \"Primary Chronicle\", the \"Kievan Chronicle\" and the \"Galician\u2013Volhynian Chronicle\", even though many of the events they described took place in the 12th and 13th century, long after Nestor's death c. 1114. Another reason given for belief in Nestorian authorship was the word \u043d\u0435\u0441\u0442\u0435\u0440\u0430 in the opening lines of the \"Khlebnikov Codex\" (discovered in 1809), which some readers took to refer to Nestor \"the Chronicler\". But as Ostrowski (1981) pointed out: \"The word \u043d\u0435\u0441\u0442\u0435\u0440\u0430 was added in the \"Khlebnikov Codex\", and thus cannot be used as evidence for the name of the compiler of the PVL.\" The word is not found in any of the other five main versions of the PVL, and is thus an interpolation inserted into the text by an editor, perhaps guessing at the author's name. From the 1830s to around 1900, there was fierce academic debate about Nestor's authorship, but the question remains unresolved, and belief in Nestorian authorship persists. The internal evidence of the PVL and the known works of Nestor often contradict one another, while the contents barely coincide in places where they seemingly should, so modern scholars have concluded that Nestor was not the author.\nA more likely candidate for the author of the Chronicle is Sylvester of Kiev, hegumen (abbot) of the St. Michael's Monastery in Vydubychi (a village near Kyiv), who may have compiled several sources in the year 1116. This attribution is based on the fact that the \"Laurentian\" text ends on page 286, lines 1 to 7, with the colophon \"I wrote down (\"napisakh\") this chronicle\", after which he requests the readers to remember him in their prayers. Alternately, the real author may have been some other unnamed monk from the Kyiv Monastery of the Caves mentioned in the title, and Sylvester completed his work, or was a very early editor or copyist of the PVL.\nEditions.\n (2004) argued that one of the central aims of the \"Chronicle's\" narrative is to 'give an explanation how the Rurikids came to power in the lands of the Slavs, why the dynasty was the only legitimate one, and why all the princes should end their infighting and rule in peace and brotherly love.'\nIn the year 1116, Nestor's text was extensively edited by the hegumen Sylvester who appended his name at the end of the chronicle. As Vladimir II Monomakh was the patron of the village of Vydubychi (now a neighborhood of Kyiv) where Sylvester's monastery was situated, the new edition glorified Monomakh and made him the central figure of later narrative. This second version of Nestor's work is preserved in the Laurentian Codex (see ).\nA third edition followed two years later, centered on Monomakh's son and heir, Mstislav the Great. The author of this revision could have been Greek, for he corrected and updated much data on Byzantine affairs. This revision of Nestor's work is preserved in the Hypatian Codex (see ).\nComposition.\nThe organization, style, and narrative flow of the \"Primary Chronicle\" shows signs of compilation, different historical elements are brought together into a single cohesive historical account. Studies by Russian philologist Aleksey Shakhmatov and his followers have demonstrated that the \"PVL\" is not a single literary work but an amalgamation of a number of ancestors accounts and documents. In compiling the \"Chronicle\", some of Nestor's original sources definitely included but were not limited to:\nThere probably were no \"earlier local chronicles\". The hypothesis that a local chronicle was written before the late 980s at the St Elias church in Kiev \"has to remain an unproven speculation\".\nLinguistically speaking, the \"Primary Chronicle\" is written in Old East Slavic, with strong Old Church Slavonic (early South Slavic) elements. Although these two languages were quite similar up to the early 12th century, with few phonological, morphological and lexical differences at that point, scholars have noted a general pattern of religious passages and moral teachings featuring strong Old Church Slavonic elements, whereas entries on events in specific years are dominated by Old East Slavic elements. Nevertheless, there are no clear linguistic boundaries between the two, as profane (secular) passages sometimes feature Old Church Slavonicisms, while devotional passages sometimes feature Old East Slavicisms. In the view of many modern linguistics, the authors (and editors) of the \"Primary Chronicle\" probably considered the language they wrote in to be one single language. However, this literary language likely differed significantly from the Old East Slavic spoken lingua franca in contemporary Kiev, which appears to have been an amalgamation of several Old East Slavic dialects, with relatively few Old Church Slavonic influences.\nSurviving manuscripts.\nBecause the original of the chronicle as well as the earliest known copies are lost, it is difficult to establish the original content of the chronicle. The six main manuscripts preserving the \"Primary Chronicle\" which scholars study for the purpose of textual criticism are:\nLaurentian Codex.\nThe \"Laurentian Codex\" was compiled in Nizhny Novgorod-Suzdal by the Nizhegorodian monk Laurentius for the Prince Dmitry Konstantinovich in 1377. The original text he used was a codex (since lost) compiled in 1305 for the Grand Prince of Vladimir, Mikhail of Tver. The account continues until 1305, but the years 898\u2013922, 1263\u201383 and 1288\u201394 are missing for reasons unknown. The manuscript was acquired by the famous Count Musin-Pushkin in 1792 and subsequently presented to the National Library of Russia in Saint Petersburg.\nHypatian Codex.\nThe Hypatian Codex dates to the 15th century. It incorporates much information from the lost 12th-century \"Kievan Chronicle\" and 13th-century \"Galician\u2013Volhynian Chronicle\". The language of this work is the East Slavic version of Church Slavonic language with many additional irregular east-slavisms (like other east-Slavic codices of the time). Whereas the Laurentian (Muscovite) text traces the Kievan legacy through to the Muscovite princes, the Hypatian text traces the Kievan legacy through the rulers of the Halych principality. The Hypatian codex was rediscovered in Kiev in the 1620s, and a copy was made for Prince Kostiantyn Ostrozhsky. A copy was found in Russia in the 18th century at the Ipatiev Monastery of Kostroma by the Russian historian Nikolai Karamzin.\nNumerous monographs and published versions of the chronicle have been made, the earliest known being in 1767. Aleksey Shakhmatov published a pioneering textological analysis of the narrative in 1908. Dmitry Likhachev and other Soviet scholars partly revisited his findings. Their versions attempted to reconstruct the pre-Nestorian chronicle, compiled at the court of Yaroslav the Wise in the mid-11th century.\nContents.\nStories.\nThe early part of the \"PVL\" features many anecdotal stories, among them:\nWomen play a relatively minor role in the \"Primary Chronicle\", usually only as the unnamed wife or daughter of a named man. There are very few women mentioned by their full personal (Christian) names in the PVL, including: Princess Olga of Kiev, abbess Ianka or Anna Vsevolodovna of Kiev, her sister Eupraxia Vsevolodovna of Kiev (alias Holy Roman Empress Adelheid), Predslava Volodimerovna, Predslava Sviatopolkovna of Kiev, and Catherine (Katerina) Vsevolodovna (died 1108).\nChronology.\nThe chronology offered by the \"Primary Chronicle\" (\"PVL\") is sometimes at odds with that of other documents such as the \"Novgorod First Chronicle\" (\"NPL\") and Byzantine literature. Sometimes the \"Primary Chronicle\" also contradicts itself, especially between narrative and chronological parts, which appear to have been written by two different authors. Several scholars including Aleksey Shakhmatov (1897), Mikhail Tikhomirov (1960), Ia. S. Lur\u2019e (1970), and Constantin Zuckerman (1995) have concluded that the 9th- and 10th-century dates mentioned in the \"PVL\" were not added to the text until the 11th century, unless directly copied from the \"Chronicle\" of George the Monk.\nOpening date error.\nThe historical period covered in the \"Tale of Bygone Years\" begins with biblical times, in the introductory portion of the text, and concludes with the year 1117 in the chronicle's third edition. Russian philologist Aleksey Shakhmatov was the first one to discover early on that the chronology of the \"Primary Chronicle\" opens with an error. The \"Laurentian\" text of the \"Chronicle\" says: \"In the year 6360 (852), the fifteenth of the indiction, at the accession of the Emperor Michael, the land of Rus' was first named\". It is thus claimed that the reign of Byzantine emperor Michael III began in this year, but Byzantine sources (such as 11th-century Greek historian John Skylitzes' account ) point out that it began on 21 January 842. Shakhmatov (1897) demonstrated that an editor based himself on a miscalculation found in the \"Short History\" of Nikephoros I of Constantinople. Moreover, a few sentences later, the text states: 'from the birth of Christ to Constantine, 318 years; and from Constantine to Michael, 542 years. Twenty-nine years passed between the first year of Michael's reign and the accession of Oleg, Prince of Rus'.' However, Constantine the Great acceded in 313, not 318, and the resulting sum of 318+542 years leads to another erroneous accession of Michael III, this time in 860. This then leads to an internal contradiction, when \"Michael the Emperor\" is said to have mounted a campaign against the Bulgars in 853\u2013858 (6361\u20136366), which could not have happened before he became Byzantine emperor in 860 according to the latter accession date.\nMajor events.\nChronology of major events:\nChristian elements.\nThe \"Primary Chronicle\" is vibrant with Christian themes and biblical allusions, which are often said to reflect the text\u2019s monastic authorship. Aleksandr Koptev remarks that the \"Chronicle\" belongs to the genre of Christian literature. In the introduction, the chronicler explores the biblical origin of the Slavic people, and traces their heritage back to Noah. On numerous occasions throughout the text, the chronicler discusses the pagan Slavs in a condescending manner, saying \"for they were but pagans, and therefore ignorant.\" Later in the \"Chronicle\", one of the most pivotal moments of the narrative is Vladimir the Great's conversion to Orthodox Christianity, which ignited extensive Christianization of Kievan Rus'.\nBiblical origin.\nThe \"Primary Chronicle\" traces the history of the Slavic people all the way back to the times of Noah, whose three sons inherited the Earth:\nThe Varangians, the Swedes, the Normans, the Rus, and others were named as descendants of Japheth. In the very beginning, humanity was united into a single nation, but after the fall of the Tower of Babel, the Slavic race was derived from the line of Japheth, \"since they are the Noricians, who are identified with the Slavs.\"\nKorsun legend.\nAccording to the so-called \"Korsun legend\", presented in the \"Chronicle\" just preceding the conversion of Volodimer, the Prince took possession of the Greek city of Korsun (Chersonesus) in the Crimean Peninsula, in an attempt to gain certain benefits from Emperor Basil. Following Vladimir's successful conquest of the city, he demanded that the Emperor's 'unwedded' sister be given up for marriage with him. Upon hearing the news from Korsun, emperor Basil responded that \"It is not meet for Christians to be given in marriage to pagans. If you are baptized, you shall have her to wife, inherit the kingdom of God, and be our companion in faith.\" The legend concludes with Vladimir's embrace of Christianity at the church of St. Basil in Korsun and his marriage to the Emperor's sister, Anna Porphyrogenita.\nArchaeological findings.\nFor centuries after the \"Chronicle\u2019s\" creation, the legend's factuality was subject to extensive debate. Many historians, antiquarians, and archaeologists had attempted to determine the actual location of Vladimir's conversion by synthesizing textual evidence of the \"Chronicle\" with material evidence from Crimea. Their efforts became known in the realms of historical discipline as the \"archaeology of the Korsun legend.\" This search culminated under Archbishop Innokentii's diocesan administration (1848\u201357), when in the ruins of Chersonesos, archaeologists unearthed the foundations of three churches and determined that the one containing the richest findings was allegedly used for the baptism of the Kievan Prince. The unearthed material evidence proved sufficient to pinpoint the real location of the legend's events with reasonable accuracy.\nIn the early 1860s, the Eastern Orthodox Church began construction of The Saint Vladimir Cathedral in Chersonesos, which has been destroyed on three separate occasions after first being erected and was renovated each time thereafter. The cathedral last faced destruction during the October Revolution and was not restored until the fall of the Soviet Union. It has been argued that by honoring Vladimir the Great and his contribution to the Eastern Orthodoxy, the cathedral serves the purpose of validating Russia's historical ties with the Crimean Peninsula, the accounts of which are preserved by the \"Chronicle\".\nAssessment and critique.\nUnlike many other medieval chronicles written by European monks, the \"Tale of Bygone Years\" is unique as the only written testimony on the earliest history of East Slavic people. Its comprehensive account of the history of Rus' is unmatched in other sources, but important correctives are provided by the \"Novgorod First Chronicle\". It is also valuable as a prime example of the Old East Slavonic literature.\nHowever, its reliability has been widely called into question and placed under careful examination by contemporary specialists in the field of the Old East Slavonic history. The first doubts about trustworthiness of the narratives were voiced by Nikolay Karamzin in his \"History of the Russian State\" (1816\u201326), which brought attention to Nestor's questionable chronology and style of prose. Building upon Karamzin's observations, further inquiries into the philology of the \"Rus Primary Chronicle\" shined more light on various weaknesses in the text's composition. According to Dmitry Likhachov (1950), the chronicle exhibits the presence of plentiful \"fillers\" that were added \"post factum\" and, in effect, \"destroyed the narrative's logical progression.\"\nAccording to Aleksey Shakhmatov (1916), some of the incongruities are a direct result of the fact that \"the ruling Princes of Kiev had their own propagandists who rewrote the annals to make political claims that best suited their own purposes.\" Shakhmatov further described the \"Tale of Bygone Years\" as a literary creation that fell under heavy influence of the Church and the State. \nDmitry Likhachov famously wrote in his 1950 critique of the \"Rus Primary Chronicle\", \"No other country in the world is cloaked in such contradictory myths about its history as Russia, and no other nation in the world interprets its history as variously as do the Russian people.\" The need to interpret the \"Chronicle\", mentioned by Likhachov as essential to making sense of its narrative, stems from the facts that the text was initially compiled and edited by multiple authors with different agendas and that it had to be translated from Old East Slavic language, which proved to be an arduous task.\nHarvard linguist Horace G. Lunt (1988) found it important to \"admit freely that we are speculating\" when tales \u2013 such as Yaroslav the Wise being more than just \"a patron of Slavonic books\" \u2013 are reconstructed and the logical incongruities of the text are faced.\nPolish historian Wladyslaw Duczko (2004) concluded that the compiler of the \"Primary Chronicle\" 'manipulated his sources in the usual way: information that was not compatible was left aside, while the elements that should be there but did not exist, were invented.' Russian historian and author Igor Danilevsky mentioned that the \"Rus Primary Chronicle\" was more concerned with exploring the religious significance of the events rather than conveying to the reader the information about how it actually happened. As a result, a sizable portion of the text was directly borrowed from earlier works that contained a religious undertone like some Byzantine sources, and most notably, the Bible. The protagonists are frequently identified with biblical personages and so are ascribed certain relevant qualities and deeds that did not necessarily match the reality.\nUkrainian historian Oleksiy Tolochko in 2015 upheld the conclusion reached by his many predecessors that the \"Chronicle\u2019s\" contents are more or less fictional. Tolochko argued that some of the tales, like the story of the Rurikid clan's entry into Kiev, were invented \"so as to produce a meaningful reconstruction of past events and include these well-known names\" in the author's \"historical scenario.\" Tolochko called the \"Rus Primary Chronicle\" an outstanding work of literature with an untrustworthy story and concluded that \"there is absolutely no reason to continue basing our knowledge of the past on its content.\"\nPaul Bushkovitch (2012) from Yale University writes \"the author was serving his rulers, identifying princes and people and leaving historians with a muddle virtually impossible to sort out.\" He also mentions that there are discrepancies when overlapping Scandinavian history with the narrative of the \"Primary Chronicle\". For example, \"archeological evidence does not fit the legends of the \"Primary Chronicle\"\" such as: \"in Scandinavia itself, there were no sagas of Viking triumphs and wars in Russia to match those recounting the conquest of Iceland and the British Isles\". The credibility of the \"Primary Chronicle\" should be taken with a grain of salt for its undertone of being a political tool to justify rule.\nTranslations.\nAugust Ludwig von Schl\u00f6zer produced a German translation with commentary of the \"Povest' vremennykh let\" through 980 in five volumes (\"Hec\u0442op\u044a. Russische Annalen in ihrer Slavonischen Grund\u2013Sprache\". G\u00f6ttingen, 1802\u20131809).\nIn 1930, Harvard professor Samuel Hazzard Cross published an English translation of the Laurentian Codex's version of the PVL under the title \"The Russian Primary Chronicle. Laurentian Text.\", which became very influential among American readers. Cross was working on a revised edition when he died; it was completed and published by Georgetown University professor Olgerd P. Sherbowitz-Wetzor in 1953. By the early 21st century, \"Primary Chronicle\" had become the common shortened English name for the text shared by the surviving five main manuscripts of the PVL. Nevertheless, Cross' translation was often found inaccurate, with Waugh (1974) writing that Perfecky (1973) had produced a more reliable English translation of the \"Galician\u2013Volhynian Chronicle\" than how Cross translated the PVL.\nThe 2001 German translation by Ludolf M\u00fcller has been called 'without doubt the best available rendering of the PVL into a modern language'. The 2015 Dutch translation by Hans Thuis (begun with Victoria van Aalst since 2000) was based on the main six textual witnesses, scholarly publications by M\u00fcller, Likhachev and Ostrowski, and by comparison to the German translation of Trautmann (1931), the English translation of Cross &amp; Sherbowitz-Wetzor (1930, 1953), the Russian translation of Likhachev (1950), and the German translation of M\u00fcller (2001).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45678", "revid": "38758555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45678", "title": "Atonality", "text": "Music that lacks a tonal center or key\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt;\n\\new PianoStaff \u00ab\n \\new Staff \\fixed c' { r2 2~ Ending of Schoenberg's \"George Lieder\" Op. 15/1 presents what would be an \"extraordinary\" chord in tonal music, without the harmonic-contrapuntal constraints of tonal music.\nAtonality in its broadest sense is music that lacks a tonal center, or key. \"Atonality\", in this sense, usually describes compositions written from about the early 20th century to the present day, where a hierarchy of harmonies focusing on a single, central triad is not used, and the notes of the chromatic scale function independently of one another. More narrowly, the term \"atonality\" describes music that does not conform to the system of tonal hierarchies that characterized European classical music between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries. \"The repertory of atonal music is characterized by the occurrence of pitches in novel combinations, as well as by the occurrence of familiar pitch combinations in unfamiliar environments\".\nThe term is also occasionally used to describe music that is neither tonal nor serial, especially the pre-twelve-tone music of the Second Viennese School, principally Alban Berg, Arnold Schoenberg, and Anton Webern. However, \"as a categorical label, 'atonal' generally means only that the piece is in the Western tradition and is not 'tonal'\", although there are longer periods, e.g., medieval, renaissance, and modern modal music to which this definition does not apply. \"Serialism arose partly as a means of organizing more coherently the relations used in the pre-serial 'free atonal' music.\u00a0... Thus, many useful and crucial insights about even strictly serial music depend only on such basic atonal theory\".\nLate 19th- and early 20th-century composers such as Alexander Scriabin, Claude Debussy, Paul Hindemith, B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k, Sergei Prokofiev, Igor Stravinsky, and Edgard Var\u00e8se, have written music that has been described, in full or in part, as atonal.\nHistory.\nWhile music without a tonal center had been previously written, for example Franz Liszt's \"Bagatelle sans tonalit\u00e9\" of 1885, it is with the coming of the twentieth century that the term \"atonality\" began to be applied to pieces, particularly those written by Arnold Schoenberg and The Second Viennese School. The term \"atonality\" was coined in 1907 by Joseph Marx in a scholarly study of tonality, which was later expanded into his doctoral thesis.\nTheir music arose from what was described as the \"crisis of tonality\" between the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century in classical music. This situation had arisen over the course of the nineteenth century due to the increasing use of ambiguous chords, improbable harmonic inflections, and more unusual melodic and rhythmic inflections than what was possible within the styles of tonal music. The distinction between the exceptional and the normal became more and more blurred. As a result, there was a \"concomitant loosening\" of the synthetic bonds through which tones and harmonies had been related to one another. The connections between harmonies were uncertain even on the lowest chord-to-chord level. On higher levels, long-range harmonic relationships and implications became so tenuous, that they hardly functioned at all. At best, the felt probabilities of the style system had become obscure. At worst, they were approaching a uniformity, which provided few guides for either composition or listening.\nThe first phase, known as \"free atonality\" or \"free chromaticism\", involved a conscious attempt to avoid traditional diatonic harmony. Works of this period include the opera \"Wozzeck\" (1917\u20131922) by Alban Berg and \"Pierrot lunaire\" (1912) by Schoenberg.\nThe second phase, begun after World War I, was exemplified by attempts to create a systematic means of composing without tonality, most famously the method of composing with 12 tones or the twelve-tone technique. This period included Berg's \"Lulu\" and \"Lyric Suite\", Schoenberg's \"Piano Concerto\", his oratorio \"Die Jakobsleiter\" and numerous smaller pieces, as well as his last two string quartets. Schoenberg was the major innovator of the system. His student, Anton Webern, however, is anecdotally claimed to have begun linking dynamics and tone color to the primary row, making rows not only of pitches but of other aspects of music as well. However, actual analysis of Webern's twelve-tone works has so far failed to demonstrate the truth of this assertion. One analyst concluded, following a minute examination of the Piano Variations, op. 27, that while the texture of this music may superficially resemble that of some serial music\u00a0... its structure does not. None of the patterns within separate nonpitch characteristics makes audible (or even numerical) sense \"in itself\". The point is that these characteristics are still playing their traditional role of differentiation. Twelve-tone technique, combined with the parametrization (separate organization of four aspects of music: pitch, attack character, intensity, and duration) of Olivier Messiaen, would be taken as the inspiration for serialism.\nAtonality emerged as a pejorative term to condemn music in which chords were organized seemingly with no apparent coherence. In Nazi Germany, atonal music was attacked as \"Bolshevik\" and labeled as degenerate (\"Entartete Musik\") along with other music produced by enemies of the Nazi regime. Many composers had their works banned by the regime, not to be played until after its collapse at the end of World War II.\nAfter Schoenberg's death, Igor Stravinsky used the twelve-tone technique. Iannis Xenakis generated pitch sets from mathematical formulae, and also saw the expansion of tonal possibilities as part of a synthesis between the hierarchical principle and the theory of numbers, principles which have dominated music since at least the time of Parmenides.\nFree atonality.\nThe twelve-tone technique was preceded by Schoenberg's freely atonal pieces of 1908 to 1923, which, though free, often have as an \"integrative element...a minute intervallic cell\" that in addition to expansion may be transformed as with a tone row, and in which individual notes may \"function as pivotal elements, to permit overlapping statements of a basic cell or the linking of two or more basic cells\". The decay of the sense of tonality and the subsequent distribution into individual elements brought three concepts into play: 1. Musical elements that had since been secondary to tonal form groups now became autonomous. 2. The absence of tonal coherence prompted the search for a unity that could connect the disjointed musical language in an alternative way. 3. Due to the replacement of diatonic principles, new concepts of form arose.\nThe twelve-tone technique was also preceded by nondodecaphonic serial composition used independently in the works of Alexander Scriabin, Igor Stravinsky, B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k, Carl Ruggles, Elizabeth Lutyens and others. \"Essentially, Schoenberg and Hauer systematized and defined for their own dodecaphonic purposes a pervasive technical feature of 'modern' musical practice, the ostinato.\"\nComposing atonal music.\nSetting out to compose atonal music may seem complicated because of both the vagueness and generality of the term. Additionally George Perle explains that, \"the 'free' atonality that preceded dodecaphony precludes by definition the possibility of self-consistent, generally applicable compositional procedures\". However, he provides one example as a way to compose atonal pieces, a pre-twelve-tone technique piece by Anton Webern, which rigorously avoids anything that suggests tonality, to choose pitches that do not imply tonality. In other words, reverse the rules of the common practice period so that what was not allowed is required and what was required is not allowed. This is what was done by Charles Seeger in his explanation of dissonant counterpoint, which is a way to write atonal counterpoint.\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt;\n\\midi {\n\\new PianoStaff \u00ab\n \\new Staff \\fixed c' {\n \\dynamicUp\n r4 b( gis Opening of Schoenberg's \"Klavierst\u00fcck\", Op. 11, No. 1, exemplifying his four procedures as listed by \nKostka and Payne list four procedures as operational in the atonal music of Schoenberg, all of which may be taken as negative rules. Avoidance of melodic or harmonic octaves, avoidance of traditional pitch collections such as major or minor triads, avoidance of more than three successive pitches from the same diatonic scale, and use of disjunct melodies (avoidance of conjunct melodies).\nFurther, Perle agrees with Oster and Katz that, \"the abandonment of the concept of a root-generator of the individual chord is a radical development that renders futile any attempt at a systematic formulation of chord structure and progression in atonal music along the lines of traditional harmonic theory\". Atonal compositional techniques and results \"are not reducible to a set of foundational assumptions in terms of which the compositions that are collectively designated by the expression 'atonal music' can be said to represent 'a system' of composition\". Equal-interval chords are often of indeterminate root, mixed-interval chords are often best characterized by their interval content, while both lend themselves to atonal contexts.\nPerle also points out that structural coherence is most often achieved through operations on intervallic cells. A cell \"may operate as a kind of microcosmic set of fixed intervallic content, statable either as a chord or as a melodic figure or as a combination of both. Its components may be fixed with regard to order, in which event it may be employed, like the twelve-tone set, in its literal transformations. \u2026 Individual tones may function as pivotal elements, to permit overlapping statements of a basic cell or the linking of two or more basic cells\".\nRegarding the post-tonal music of Perle, one theorist wrote: \"While\u00a0... montages of discrete-seeming elements tend to accumulate global rhythms other than those of tonal progressions and their rhythms, there is a similarity between the two sorts of accumulates spatial and temporal relationships: a similarity consisting of generalized arching tone-centers linked together by shared background referential materials\".\nAnother approach of composition techniques for atonal music is given by Allen Forte who developed the theory behind atonal music. Forte describes two main operations: transposition and inversion. Transposition can be seen as a rotation of \"t\" either clockwise or anti-clockwise on a circle, where each note of the chord is rotated equally. For example, if \"t\" = 2 and the chord is [0 3 6], transposition (clockwise) will be [2 5 8]. Inversion can be seen as a symmetry with respect to the axis formed by 0 and 6. If we carry on with our example [0 3 6] becomes [0 9 6].\nAn important characteristic are the invariants, which are the notes which stay identical after a transformation. No difference is made between the octave in which the note is played so that, for example, all C\u266fs are equivalent, no matter the octave in which they actually occur. This is why the 12-note scale is represented by a circle. This leads us to the definition of the similarity between two chords which considers the subsets and the interval content of each chord.\nReception and legacy.\nControversy over the term itself.\nThe term \"atonality\" itself has been controversial. Arnold Schoenberg, whose music is generally used to define the term, was vehemently opposed to it, arguing that \"The word 'atonal' could only signify something entirely inconsistent with the nature of tone... to call any relation of tones atonal is just as farfetched as it would be to designate a relation of colors aspectral or acomplementary. There is no such antithesis\".\nComposer and theorist Milton Babbitt also disparaged the term, saying \"The works that followed, many of them now familiar, include the \"Five Pieces for Orchestra\", \"Erwartung\", \"Pierrot Lunaire\", and they and a few yet to follow soon were termed 'atonal,' by I know not whom, and I prefer not to know, for in no sense does the term make sense. Not only does the music employ 'tones,' but it employs precisely the same 'tones,' the same physical materials, that music had employed for some two centuries. In all generosity, 'atonal' may have been intended as a mildly analytically derived term to suggest 'atonic' or to signify 'a-triadic tonality', but, even so there were infinitely many things the music was not\".\n\"Atonal\" developed a certain vagueness in meaning as a result of its use to describe a wide variety of compositional approaches that deviated from traditional chords and chord progressions. Attempts to solve these problems by using terms such as \"pan-tonal\", \"non-tonal\", \"multi-tonal\", \"free-tonal\" and \"without tonal center\" instead of \"atonal\" have not gained broad acceptance.\nCriticism of the concept of atonality.\nComposer Anton Webern held that \"new laws asserted themselves that made it impossible to designate a piece as being in one key or another\". Composer Walter Piston, on the other hand, said that, out of long habit, whenever performers \"play any little phrase they will hear it in some key\u2014it may not be the right one, but the point is they will play it with a tonal sense.\u00a0... [T]he more I feel I know Schoenberg's music the more I believe he thought that way himself.\u00a0... And it isn't only the players; it's also the listeners. They will hear tonality in everything\".\nDonald Jay Grout similarly doubted whether atonality is really possible, because \"any combination of sounds can be referred to as a fundamental root\". He defined it as a fundamentally subjective category: \"atonal music is music in which the person who is using the word cannot hear tonal centers\".\nOne difficulty is that even an otherwise \"atonal\" work, tonality \"by assertion\" is normally heard on the thematic or linear level. That is, centricity may be established through the repetition of a central pitch or from emphasis by means of instrumentation, register, rhythmic elongation, or metric accent.\nCriticism of atonal music.\nSwiss conductor, composer, and musical philosopher Ernest Ansermet, a critic of atonal music, wrote extensively on this in the book \"Les fondements de la musique dans la conscience humaine\" (The Foundations of Music in Human Consciousness), where he argued that the classical musical language was a precondition for musical expression with its clear, harmonious structures. Ansermet argued that a tone system can only lead to a uniform perception of music if it is deduced from just a single interval. For Ansermet this interval is the fifth.\nIn France, on December 20, 2012, French pianist J\u00e9r\u00f4me Ducros gave a conference at the Coll\u00e8ge de France entitled \"Atonalism. And after?\" as part of Karol Beffa's chair of artistic creation. He compares the discursive properties of tonal language and non-tonal languages, largely giving the advantage to the former, and considers the return of tonality as inevitable. This conference sparked a heated controversy in the French musical world.\nExamples.\nAn example of atonal music would be Arnold Schoenberg's \"Pierrot Lunaire\", which is a song cycle composed in 1912. The work uses a technique called \"Sprechstimme\" or spoken singing, and the music is atonal, meaning that there is no clear tonal center or key. Instead, the notes of the chromatic scale function independently of each other, and the harmonies do not follow the traditional tonal hierarchy found in classical music. The result is a dissonant and jarring sound that is quite different from the harmonies found in tonal music.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "45705", "revid": "253225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45705", "title": "Inverse transform sampling", "text": "Basic method for pseudo-random number sampling\nInverse transform sampling (also known as inversion sampling, the inverse probability integral transform, the inverse transformation method, or the Smirnov transform) is a basic method for pseudo-random number sampling, i.e., for generating sample numbers at random from any probability distribution given its cumulative distribution function.\nInverse transformation sampling takes uniform samples of a number formula_1 between 0 and 1, interpreted as a probability, and then returns the smallest number formula_2 such that formula_3 for the cumulative distribution function formula_4 of a random variable. For example, imagine that formula_4 is the standard normal distribution with mean zero and standard deviation one. The table below shows samples taken from the uniform distribution and their representation on the standard normal distribution.\nWe are randomly choosing a proportion of the area under the curve and returning the number in the domain such that exactly this proportion of the area occurs to the left of that number. Intuitively, we are unlikely to choose a number in the far end of tails because there is very little area in them which would require choosing a number very close to zero or one.\nComputationally, this method involves computing the quantile function of the distribution \u2014 in other words, computing the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the distribution (which maps a number in the domain to a probability between 0 and 1) and then inverting that function. This is the source of the term \"inverse\" or \"inversion\" in most of the names for this method. Note that for a discrete distribution, computing the CDF is not in general too difficult: we simply add up the individual probabilities for the various points of the distribution. For a continuous distribution, however, we need to integrate the probability density function (PDF) of the distribution, which is impossible to do analytically for most distributions (including the normal distribution). As a result, this method may be computationally inefficient for many distributions and other methods are preferred; however, it is a useful method for building more generally applicable samplers such as those based on rejection sampling.\nFor the normal distribution, the lack of an analytical expression for the corresponding quantile function means that other methods (e.g. the Box\u2013Muller transform) may be preferred computationally. It is often the case that, even for simple distributions, the inverse transform sampling method can be improved on: see, for example, the ziggurat algorithm and rejection sampling. On the other hand, it is possible to approximate the quantile function of the normal distribution extremely accurately using moderate-degree polynomials, and in fact the method of doing this is fast enough that inversion sampling is now the default method for sampling from a normal distribution in the statistical package R.\nFormal statement.\nFor any random variable formula_6, the random variable formula_7 has the same distribution as formula_8, where formula_9 is the generalized inverse of the cumulative distribution function formula_10 of formula_8 and formula_12 is uniform on formula_13.\nFor continuous random variables, the inverse probability integral transform is indeed the inverse of the probability integral transform, which states that for a continuous random variable formula_8 with cumulative distribution function formula_10, the random variable formula_16 is uniform on formula_13.\nIntuition.\nFrom formula_18, we want to generate formula_8 with CDF formula_20 We assume formula_21 to be a continuous, strictly increasing function, which provides good intuition.\nWe want to see if we can find some strictly monotone transformation formula_22, such that formula_23. We will have\nformula_24\nwhere the last step used that formula_25 when formula_12 is uniform on formula_13.\nSo we got formula_10 to be the inverse function of formula_29, or, equivalently formula_30\nTherefore, we can generate formula_31 from formula_32\nThe method.\nThe problem that the inverse transform sampling method solves is as follows:\nThe inverse transform sampling method works as follows:\nExpressed differently, given a cumulative distribution function formula_10 and a uniform variable formula_45, the random variable formula_46 has the distribution formula_10.\nIn the continuous case, a treatment of such inverse functions as objects satisfying differential equations can be given. Some such differential equations admit explicit power series solutions, despite their non-linearity.\n formula_49\n In order to perform an inversion we want to solve for formula_50\n formula_51\n From here we would perform steps one, two and three.\n formula_53\nIt means that if we draw some formula_54from a formula_48 and compute formula_56 This formula_57 has exponential distribution.\n The idea is illustrated in the following graph:\n Note that the distribution does not change if we start with 1-y instead of y. For computational purposes, it therefore suffices to generate random numbers y in [0, 1] and then simply calculate\n formula_58\nProof of correctness.\nLet formula_4 be a cumulative distribution function, and let formula_60 be its generalized inverse function (using the infimum because CDFs are weakly monotonic and right-continuous):\n&lt;math&gt;F^{-1}(u) = \\inf\\;\\{x \\mid F(x)\\geq u\\} \\qquad (0\n\"Claim:\" If formula_12 is a uniform random variable on formula_13 then formula_63 has formula_4 as its CDF.\n\"Proof:\"\nformula_65\nTruncated distribution.\nInverse transform sampling can be simply extended to cases of truncated distributions on the interval formula_66 without the cost of rejection sampling: the same algorithm can be followed, but instead of generating a random number formula_1 uniformly distributed between 0 and 1, generate formula_1 uniformly distributed between formula_69 and formula_70, and then again take formula_71.\nReduction of the number of inversions.\nIn order to obtain a large number of samples, one needs to perform the same number of inversions of the distribution. \nOne possible way to reduce the number of inversions while obtaining a large number of samples is the application of the so-called Stochastic Collocation Monte Carlo sampler (SCMC sampler) within a polynomial chaos expansion framework. This allows us to generate any number of Monte Carlo samples with only a few inversions of the original distribution with independent samples of a variable for which the inversions are analytically available, for example the standard normal variable.\nSoftware implementations.\nThere are software implementations available for applying the inverse sampling method by using numerical approximations of the inverse in the case that it is not available in closed form. For example, an approximation of the inverse can be computed if the user provides some information about the distributions such as the PDF or the CDF."}
{"id": "45707", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45707", "title": "Nevi'im", "text": "Second major division of the Hebrew Bible\nThe (; ) is the second major division of the Hebrew Bible (the \"Tanakh\"), lying between the (lit.\u2009'instruction') and (lit.\u2009'writings'). The Nevi'im are divided into two groups. The Former Prophets ( ) consists of the narrative books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings; while the Latter Prophets ( ) include the books of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the Twelve Minor Prophets.\nSynopsis.\nThe Jewish tradition counts eight books in \"Nevi'im\" out of twenty-four books in the Hebrew Bible. There are four books of the Former Prophets, including Joshua and Judges, and the collected \"Books of Samuel\" and \"Books of Kings\" are each counted as one book. Among the four books of the Latter Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel account for three books, followed by the \"Twelve\" (: Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi), which is counted as a single book.\nThe development of the Hebrew Bible canon placed the Book of Daniel as part of the \"Writings,\" or \"Ketuvim\", rather than \"Nevi'im\", in distinction to the later approach of the various Christian Bibles for Protestants, Roman Catholics, and Eastern Orthodox, in which Daniel is found among the Prophets, due to its prophetic nature according to common Christian theology.\nIn the Jewish liturgy, a series of selections from the Nevi'im is publicly read or sung aloud inside the synagogue as part of Jewish religious practice. The haftara follows the Torah reading on Shabbat and on Jewish holidays and fast days. The haftara readings do not contain the whole text of the Nevi\u2018im; they are selections.\nFormer Prophets.\nThe Former Prophets are the books Joshua, Judges, 1st &amp; 2nd Samuel, and 1st &amp; 2nd Kings. They contain historical narratives that begin immediately after the death of Moses with the divine appointment of Joshua as his successor, who then leads the people of Israel into the Promised Land, and end with the release from imprisonment of the last king of Judah. Treating Samuel and Kings as single books, they cover:\nThe reference to the \"former prophets\" or \"earlier prophets\" in :4 probably includes \"the whole body of prophets\" prior to the post-exilic period when Haggai and Zechariah were active.\nJoshua.\nThe Book of Joshua contains a history of the Israelites from the death of Moses to that of Joshua. After Moses' death, Joshua, as appointed by God to succeed him, receives the command to cross the Jordan River. In execution of this order, Joshua issues the requisite instructions to the stewards of the people for the crossing of the Jordan; and he reminds the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half of Manasseh of their pledge given to Moses to help their brethren. He also performs miracles, or magic, such as stopping the sun and moon, and stopping the Jordan.\nThe book essentially consists of three parts:\nJudges.\nThe Book of Judges (\"shophetim\") consists of three distinct parts:\nSamuel.\nThe Books of Samuel (\"Shmu'el\" \u05e9\u05de\u05d5\u05d0\u05dc) consists of five parts:\nA conclusion of sorts appears at 1 Kings 1\u20132, concerning Solomon enacting a final revenge on those who did what David perceived as wrongdoing, and having a similar narrative style. While the subject matter in the Book(s) of Samuel is also covered by the narrative in Chronicles, it is noticeable that the section (2 Sam. 11:2\u201312:29) containing an account of the matter of Bathsheba is omitted in the corresponding passage in 1 Chr. 20.\nKings.\nThe Books of Kings (\"Melakhim\" ) contain accounts of the kings of the ancient Kingdom of Israel and the Kingdom of Judah, and the annals of the Jewish commonwealth from the accession of Solomon until the subjugation of the kingdom by Nebuchadnezzar II and the Neo-Babylonian Empire.\nLatter Prophets.\nThe Latter Prophets are divided into two groups: the major prophets (Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel) and the Twelve Minor Prophets (Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah and Malachi) collected into a single book. Again, although Daniel is considered a major prophet, his book is not in the category of the Nevi'im.\nIsaiah.\nThe 66 chapters of the Book of Isaiah consist primarily of prophecies of the judgments awaiting nations that are persecuting Judah. These nations include Babylon, Neo-Assyrian Empire, Philistia, Moab, Syria, The Northern Kingdom of Israel, Ethiopia, Egypt, Arabia, and Phoenicia. The prophecies concerning them can be summarized as saying that God is the God of the whole earth and that nations which think of themselves as secure in their power might well be conquered by other nations, at God's command.\nChapter 6 describes Isaiah's call to be a prophet of God. Chapters 36\u201339 provide historical material about King Hezekiah and his triumph of faith in God. Chapters 24\u201335, while too complex to characterize in brief, are primarily concerned with prophecies of a Messiah, a person anointed or given power by God, and of the Messiah's kingdom, where justice and righteousness will reign. Jews see this section as describing an actual king, a descendant of their great king, David, who will make Judah a great kingdom and Jerusalem a genuinely holy city.\nThe prophecy continues with what some scholars have called \"The Book of Comfort\", which begins in chapter 40 and completes the writing. In the first eight chapters of this book of comfort, Isaiah prophesies the deliverance of the Jews from the hands of the Babylonians and the restoration of Israel as a unified nation in the land God promised them. Isaiah reaffirms that the Jews are indeed the chosen people of God in chapter 44 and that Yahweh is the only God for the Jews, as he will show his power over the gods of Babylon in due time in chapter 46. In chapter 45:1, the Persian ruler Cyrus the Great is named as the Messiah who will overthrow the Neo-Babylonian Empire and allow the return of Israel to their original land. The remaining chapters of the book contain prophecies of the future glory of Zion under the rule of a righteous servant (52 and 54). Chapter 53 includes a very poetic prophecy about this servant, which is generally considered by Christians to refer to the crucifixion of Jesus. However, Jews typically interpret it as a reference to God's people. Although there is still the mention of judgment of false worshippers and idolaters (65 and 66), the book ends with a message of hope of a righteous ruler who extends salvation to his righteous subjects living in the Lord's kingdom on earth.\nJeremiah.\nThe Book of Jeremiah can be divided into twenty-three chapters, which are organized into five sub-sections or books:\nIn Egypt, after an interval, Jeremiah is supposed to have added three sections, viz., ch. 37\u201339; 40\u201343; and 44. The main Messianic prophecies are in 23:1\u20138; 31:31\u201340; and 33:14\u201326.\nJeremiah's prophecies are noted for the frequent repetitions of the exact words, phrases, and imagery found in them. They cover about 30 years. They are not in chronological order. Modern scholars do not believe they have reliable theories about when, where, and how the text was edited into its present form.\nEzekiel.\nThe Book of Ezekiel contains three distinct sections:\nThe Twelve.\nThe Twelve are:\nLiturgical use.\nA Haftara is an excerpt from the books of \"Nevi'im\" that is read publicly in the synagogue after the reading of the Torah on each Shabbat, as well as on Jewish festivals and fast days. Each Shabbat of the year, and each holiday, has its own excerpt designated as that day's haftarah.\nCantillation.\nThere is a special cantillation melody for the haftarah, distinct from that of the Torah portion. In some earlier authorities there are references to a tune for the \"prophets\" generally, distinct from that for the haftarah: this may have been a simplified melody for learning purposes.\nCertain cantillation marks and combinations appear in Nevi'im but not within any of the Haftarah selections, and most communities therefore do not have a musical tradition for those marks. J.L. Neeman suggested that \"those who recite Nevi'im privately with the cantillation melody may read the words accented by those rare notes by using a \"metaphor\" based on the melody of those notes in the five books of the Torah, while adhering to the musical scale of the melody for Nevi'im.\" Neeman includes a reconstruction of the musical scale for the lost melodies of the rare cantillation notes. In the Ashkenazi tradition, the resemblance between the Torah and Haftarah melodies is obvious and it is easy to transpose motifs between the two as suggested by Neeman. In the Sephardi traditions the haftarah melody is considerably more florid than the Torah melody, and usually in a different musical mode, and there are only isolated points of contact between the two.\nExtraliturgical public reading.\nIn some Near and Middle Eastern traditions, the whole of Nevi'im (as well as the rest of the Hebrew Bible and the Mishnah) is read each year on a weekly rota, usually on Shabbat afternoons. These reading sessions often take place in the synagogue courtyard but are not considered to be synagogue services.\nAramaic translation.\nA targum is an Aramaic translation of the scriptures that was compiled or written in the Palestinian (Western) or in Babylonian (Eastern, Iraqi) Talmudic academies between the Second Temple period and the early Middle Ages (late first millennium). According to the Talmud, the targum on Nevi'im was composed by Jonathan ben Uzziel. Like Targum Onkelos on the Torah, Targum Jonathan is an eastern targum with early origins in the west.\nLike the targum to the Torah, Targum Jonathan to Nevi'im served a formal liturgical purpose: it was read alternately, verse by verse, or in blocks of up to three verses, in the public reading of the Haftara and in the study of Nevi'im. Yemenite Jews continue the above tradition to this day and have thus preserved a living tradition of the vocalisation of the Jewish Babylonian Aramaic for the Targum to Nevi'im.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45708", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45708", "title": "Coordinate covalent bond", "text": "Two-electron chemical bond where both electrons derive from the same atom\nIn coordination chemistry, a coordinate covalent bond, also known as a dative bond, dipolar bond, or coordinate bond is a kind of two-center, two-electron covalent bond in which the two electrons derive from the same atom. The bonding of metal ions to ligands involves this kind of interaction. This type of interaction is central to Lewis acid\u2013base theory.\nCoordinate bonds are commonly found in coordination compounds.\nExamples.\nCoordinate covalent bonding is ubiquitous. In all metal aquo-complexes [M(H2O)\"n\"]\"m\"+, the bonding between water and the metal cation is described as a coordinate covalent bond. Metal-ligand interactions in most organometallic compounds and most coordination compounds are described similarly.\nThe term \"dipolar bond\" is used in organic chemistry for compounds such as amine oxides for which the electronic structure can be described in terms of the basic amine donating two electrons to an oxygen atom.\nR3N \u2192 O\nThe arrow \u2192 indicates that both electrons in the bond originate from the amine moiety. In a standard covalent bond each atom contributes one electron. Therefore, an alternative description is that the amine gives away one electron to the oxygen atom, which is then used, with the remaining unpaired electron on the nitrogen atom, to form a standard covalent bond. The process of transferring the electron from nitrogen to oxygen creates formal charges, so the electronic structure may also be depicted as\nR3N+O-\nThis electronic structure has an electric dipole, hence the name polar bond. In reality, the atoms carry partial charges; the more electronegative atom of the two involved in the bond will usually carry a partial negative charge. One exception to this is carbon monoxide. In this case, the carbon atom carries the partial negative charge although it is less electronegative than oxygen.\nAn example of a dative covalent bond is provided by the interaction between a molecule of ammonia, a Lewis base with a lone pair of electrons on the nitrogen atom, and boron trifluoride, a Lewis acid by virtue of the boron atom having an incomplete octet of electrons. In forming the adduct, the boron atom attains an octet configuration.\nThe electronic structure of a coordination complex can be described in terms of the set of ligands each donating a pair of electrons to a metal centre. For example, in hexamminecobalt(III) chloride, each ammonia ligand donates its lone pair of electrons to the cobalt(III) ion. In this case, the bonds formed are described as coordinate bonds. In the Covalent Bond Classification (CBC) method, ligands that form coordinate covalent bonds with a central atom are classed as L-type, while those that form normal covalent bonds are classed as X-type. \nComparison with other electron-sharing modes.\nIn all cases, the bond, whether dative or \"normal\" electron-sharing, is a covalent bond. In common usage, the prefix dipolar, dative or coordinate merely serves to indicate the origin of the electrons used in creating the bond. For example, F3B \u2190 O(C2H5)2 (\"boron trifluoride (diethyl) etherate\") is prepared from BF3 and :O(C2H5)2, as opposed to the radical species [\u2022BF3]\u2013 and [\u2022O(C2H5)2]+. The dative bond is also a convenience in terms of notation, as formal charges are avoided: we can write D: + []A \u21cc D \u2192 A rather than D+\u2013A\u2013 (here : and [] represent the lone-pair and empty orbital on the electron-pair donor D and acceptor A, respectively). The notation is sometimes used even when the Lewis acid-base reaction involved is only notional (e.g., the sulfoxide R2S \u2192 O is rarely if ever made by reacting the sulfide R2S with atomic oxygen O). Thus, most chemists \"do not\" make any claim with respect to the properties of the bond when choosing one notation over the other (formal charges vs. arrow bond).\nIt is generally true, however, that bonds depicted this way are polar covalent, sometimes strongly so, and some authors claim that there are genuine differences in the properties of a dative bond and electron-sharing bond and suggest that showing a dative bond is more appropriate in particular situations. As far back as 1989, Haaland characterized dative bonds as bonds that are (i) weak and long; (ii) with only a small degree of charge-transfer taking place during bond formation; and (iii) whose preferred mode of dissociation in the gas phase (or low \u03b5 inert solvent) is heterolytic rather than homolytic. The ammonia-borane adduct (H3N \u2192 BH3) is given as a classic example: the bond is weak, with a dissociation energy of 31 kcal/mol (cf. 90 kcal/mol for ethane), and long, at 166 pm (cf. 153 pm for ethane), and the molecule possesses a dipole moment of 5.2 D that implies a transfer of only 0.2 \"e\"\u2013 from nitrogen to boron. The heterolytic dissociation of H3N \u2192 BH3 is estimated to require 27 kcal/mol, confirming that heterolysis into ammonia and borane is more favorable than homolysis into radical cation and radical anion. However, aside from clear-cut examples, there is considerable dispute as to when a particular compound qualifies and, thus, the overall prevalence of dative bonding (with respect to an author's preferred definition). Computational chemists have suggested quantitative criteria to distinguish between the two \"types\" of bonding.\nSome non-obvious examples where dative bonding is claimed to be important include carbon suboxide (O\u2261C \u2192 C0 \u2190 C\u2261O), tetraaminoallenes (described using dative bond language as \"carbodicarbenes\"; (R2N)2C \u2192 C0 \u2190 C(NR2)2), the Ramirez carbodiphosphorane (Ph3P \u2192 C0 \u2190 PPh3), and bis(triphenylphosphine)iminium cation (Ph3P \u2192 N+ \u2190 PPh3), all of which exhibit considerably bent equilibrium geometries, though with a shallow barrier to bending. Simple application of the normal rules for drawing Lewis structures by maximizing bonding (using electron-sharing bonds) and minimizing formal charges would predict heterocumulene structures, and therefore linear geometries, for each of these compounds. Thus, these molecules are claimed to be better modeled as coordination complexes of :C: (carbon(0) or carbone) or :N:+ (mononitrogen cation) with CO, PPh3, or \"N-\"heterocycliccarbenes as ligands, the lone-pairs on the central atom accounting for the bent geometry. However, the usefulness of this view is disputed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45710", "revid": "11104410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45710", "title": "Forensic science", "text": "Application of science to criminal and civil laws\nForensic science, often confused with criminalistics, is the application of science principles and methods to support decision-making related to rules or law, generally specifically criminal and civil law.\nDuring criminal investigation in particular, it is governed by the legal standards of admissible evidence and criminal procedure. It is a broad field utilizing numerous practices such as the analysis of DNA, fingerprints, bloodstain patterns, firearms, ballistics, toxicology, microscopy, and fire debris analysis.\nForensic scientists collect, preserve, and analyze evidence during the course of an investigation. While some forensic scientists travel to the scene of the crime to collect the evidence themselves, others occupy a laboratory role, performing analysis on objects brought to them by other individuals. Others are involved in analysis of financial, banking, or other numerical data for use in financial crime investigation, and can be employed as consultants from private firms, academia, or as government employees.\nIn addition to their laboratory role, forensic scientists testify as expert witnesses in both criminal and civil cases and can work for either the prosecution or the defense. While any field could technically be \"forensic\", certain sections have developed over time to encompass the majority of forensically related cases.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"forensic\" stems from the Latin word, \"for\u0113nsis\" (3rd declension, adjective), meaning \"of a forum, place of assembly\". The history of the term originates in Roman times, where many judicial processes, such as trials and preliminary hearings, were held in the forum. This origin is the source of the two modern usages of the word \"forensic\"\u2014as a form of legal evidence; and as a category of public presentation.\nIn modern use, the term \"forensics\" is often used in place of \"forensic science.\"\nThe word \"science\", is derived from the Latin word for 'knowledge' and is today closely tied to the scientific method, a systematic way of acquiring knowledge. Taken together, forensic science means the use of scientific methods and processes for crime solving.\nHistory.\nOrigins of forensic science and early methods.\nThe ancient world lacked standardized forensic practices, which enabled criminals to escape punishment. Criminal investigations and trials relied heavily on forced confessions and witness testimony. However, ancient sources do contain several accounts of techniques that foreshadow concepts in forensic science developed centuries later.\nThe first written account of using medicine and entomology to solve criminal cases is attributed to the book of \"Xi Yuan Lu\" (translated as \"Washing Away of Wrongs\"), written in China in 1248 by Song Ci (, 1186\u20131249), a director of justice, jail and supervision, during the Song dynasty.\nSong Ci introduced regulations concerning autopsy reports to court, how to protect the evidence in the examining process, and explained why forensic workers must demonstrate impartiality to the public. He devised methods for making antiseptic and for promoting the reappearance of hidden injuries to dead bodies and bones (using sunlight and vinegar under a red-oil umbrella); for calculating the time of death (allowing for weather and insect activity); described how to wash and examine the dead body to ascertain the reason for death. At that time the book had described methods for distinguishing between suicide and faked suicide. He wrote the book on forensics stating that all wounds or dead bodies should be examined, not avoided. The book became the first form of literature to help determine the cause of death.\nIn one of Song Ci's accounts (\"Washing Away of Wrongs\"), the case of a person murdered with a sickle was solved by an investigator who instructed each suspect to bring his sickle to one location. (He realized it was a sickle by testing various blades on an animal carcass and comparing the wounds.) Flies, attracted by the smell of blood, eventually gathered on a single sickle. In light of this, the owner of that sickle confessed to the murder. The book also described how to distinguish between a drowning (water in the lungs) and strangulation (broken neck cartilage), and described evidence from examining corpses to determine if a death was caused by murder, suicide or accident.\nMethods from around the world involved saliva and examination of the mouth and tongue to determine innocence or guilt, as a precursor to the Polygraph test. In ancient India, some suspects were made to fill their mouths with dried rice and spit it back out. Similarly, in ancient China, those accused of a crime would have rice powder placed in their mouths. In ancient middle-eastern cultures, the accused were made to lick hot metal rods briefly. It is thought that these tests had some validity since a guilty person would produce less saliva and thus have a drier mouth; the accused would be considered guilty if rice was sticking to their mouths in abundance or if their tongues were severely burned due to lack of shielding from saliva.\nEducation and training.\nInitial glance, forensic intelligence may appear as a nascent facet of forensic science facilitated by advancements in information technologies such as computers, databases, and data-flow management software. However, a more profound examination reveals that forensic intelligence represents a genuine and emerging inclination among forensic practitioners to actively participate in investigative and policing strategies. In doing so, it elucidates existing practices within scientific literature, advocating for a paradigm shift from the prevailing conception of forensic science as a conglomerate of disciplines merely aiding the criminal justice system. Instead, it urges a perspective that views forensic science as a discipline studying the informative potential of traces\u2014remnants of criminal activity. Embracing this transformative shift poses a significant challenge for education, necessitating a shift in learners' mindset to accept concepts and methodologies in forensic intelligence.\nRecent calls advocating for the integration of forensic scientists into the criminal justice system, as well as policing and intelligence missions, underscore the necessity for the establishment of educational and training initiatives in the field of forensic intelligence. This article contends that a discernible gap exists between the perceived and actual comprehension of forensic intelligence among law enforcement and forensic science managers, positing that this asymmetry can be rectified only through educational interventions.\nThe primary challenge in forensic intelligence education and training is identified as the formulation of programs aimed at heightening awareness, particularly among managers, to mitigate the risk of making suboptimal decisions in information processing. The paper highlights two recent European courses as exemplars of educational endeavors, elucidating lessons learned and proposing future directions.\nThe overarching conclusion is that the heightened focus on forensic intelligence has the potential to rejuvenate a proactive approach to forensic science, enhance quantifiable efficiency, and foster greater involvement in investigative and managerial decision-making. A novel educational challenge is articulated for forensic science university programs worldwide: a shift in emphasis from a fragmented criminal trace analysis to a more comprehensive security problem-solving approach.\nDevelopment of forensic science.\nIn 16th-century Europe, medical practitioners in army and university settings began to gather information on the cause and manner of death. Ambroise Par\u00e9, a French army surgeon, systematically studied the effects of violent death on internal organs. Two Italian surgeons, Fortunato Fidelis and Paolo Zacchia, laid the foundation of modern pathology by studying changes that occurred in the structure of the body as the result of disease. In the late 18th century, writings on these topics began to appear. These included \"A Treatise on Forensic Medicine and Public Health\" by the French physician Fran\u00e7ois-Emmanuel Fod\u00e9r\u00e9 and \"The Complete System of Police Medicine\" by the German medical expert Johann Peter Frank.\nAs the rational values of the Enlightenment era increasingly permeated society in the 18th century, criminal investigation became a more evidence-based, rational procedure \u2212 the use of torture to force confessions was curtailed, and belief in witchcraft and other powers of the occult largely ceased to influence the court's decisions. Two examples of English forensic science in individual legal proceedings demonstrate the increasing use of logic and procedure in criminal investigations at the time. In 1784, in Lancaster, John Toms was tried and convicted for murdering Edward Culshaw with a pistol. When the dead body of Culshaw was examined, a pistol wad (crushed paper used to secure powder and balls in the muzzle) found in his head wound matched perfectly with a torn newspaper found in Toms's pocket, leading to the conviction.\nIn Warwick 1816, a farm laborer was tried and convicted of the murder of a young maidservant. She had been drowned in a shallow pool and bore the marks of violent assault. The police found footprints and an impression from corduroy cloth with a sewn patch in the damp earth near the pool. There were also scattered grains of wheat and chaff. The breeches of a farm labourer who had been threshing wheat nearby were examined and corresponded exactly to the impression in the earth near the pool.\nAn article appearing in Scientific American in 1885 describes the use of microscopy to distinguish between the blood of two persons in a criminal case in Chicago.\nChromatography.\nChromatography is a common technique used in the field of Forensic Science. Chromatography is a method of separating the components of a mixture from a mobile phase. Chromatography is an essential tool used in forensic science, helping analysts identify and compare trace amounts of samples including ignitable liquids, drugs, and biological samples. Many laboratories utilize gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) to examine these kinds of samples; this analysis provides rapid and reliant data to identify samples in question.\nToxicology.\nA method for detecting arsenious oxide, simple arsenic, in corpses was devised in 1773 by the Swedish chemist, Carl Wilhelm Scheele. His work was expanded upon, in 1806, by German chemist Valentin Ross, who learned to detect the poison in the walls of a victim's stomach. Toxicology, a subfield of forensic chemistry, focuses on detecting and identifying drugs, poisons, and other toxic substances in biological samples. Forensic toxicologists work on cases involving drug overdoses, poisoning, and substance abuse. Their work is critical in determining whether harmful substances play a role in a person's death or impairment. https://\nJames Marsh was the first to apply this new science to the art of forensics. He was called by the prosecution in a murder trial to give evidence as a chemist in 1832. The defendant, John Bodle, was accused of poisoning his grandfather with arsenic-laced coffee. Marsh performed the standard test by mixing a suspected sample with hydrogen sulfide and hydrochloric acid. While he was able to detect arsenic as yellow arsenic trisulfide, when it was shown to the jury it had deteriorated, allowing the suspect to be acquitted due to reasonable doubt.\nAnnoyed by that, Marsh developed a much better test. He combined a sample containing arsenic with sulfuric acid and arsenic-free zinc, resulting in arsine gas. The gas was ignited, and it decomposed to pure metallic arsenic, which, when passed to a cold surface, would appear as a silvery-black deposit. So sensitive was the test, known formally as the Marsh test, that it could detect as little as one-fiftieth of a milligram of arsenic. He first described this test in \"The Edinburgh Philosophical Journal\" in 1836.\nBallistics and firearms.\nBallistics is \"the science of the motion of projectiles in flight\". In forensic science, analysts examine the patterns left on bullets and cartridge casings after being ejected from a weapon. When fired, a bullet is left with indentations and markings that are unique to the barrel and firing pin of the firearm that ejected the bullet. This examination can help scientists identify possible makes and models of weapons connected to a crime.\nHenry Goddard at Scotland Yard pioneered the use of bullet comparison in 1835. He noticed a flaw in the bullet that killed the victim and was able to trace this back to the mold that was used in the manufacturing process.\nAnthropometry.\nThe French police officer Alphonse Bertillon was the first to apply the anthropological technique of anthropometry to law enforcement, thereby creating an identification system based on physical measurements. Before that time, criminals could be identified only by name or photograph. Dissatisfied with the \"ad hoc\" methods used to identify captured criminals in France in the 1870s, he began his work on developing a reliable system of anthropometrics for human classification.\nBertillon created many other forensics techniques, including forensic document examination, the use of galvanoplastic compounds to preserve footprints, ballistics, and the dynamometer, used to determine the degree of force used in breaking and entering. Although his central methods were soon to be supplanted by fingerprinting, \"his other contributions like the mug shot and the systematization of crime-scene photography remain in place to this day.\"\nFingerprints.\nSir William Herschel was one of the first to advocate the use of fingerprinting in the identification of criminal suspects. While working for the Indian Civil Service, he began to use thumbprints on documents as a security measure to prevent the then-rampant repudiation of signatures in 1858.\nIn 1877 at Hooghly (near Kolkata), Herschel instituted the use of fingerprints on contracts and deeds, and he registered government pensioners' fingerprints to prevent the collection of money by relatives after a pensioner's death.\nIn 1880, Henry Faulds, a Scottish surgeon in a Tokyo hospital, published his first paper on the subject in the scientific journal \"Nature\", discussing the usefulness of fingerprints for identification and proposing a method to record them with printing ink. He established their first classification and was also the first to identify fingerprints left on a vial. Returning to the UK in 1886, he offered the concept to the Metropolitan Police in London, but it was dismissed at that time.\nFaulds wrote to Charles Darwin with a description of his method, but, too old and ill to work on it, Darwin gave the information to his cousin, Francis Galton, who was interested in anthropology. Having been thus inspired to study fingerprints for ten years, Galton published a detailed statistical model of fingerprint analysis and identification and encouraged its use in forensic science in his book \"Finger Prints\". He had calculated that the chance of a \"false positive\" (two different individuals having the same fingerprints) was about 1 in 64 billion.\nJuan Vucetich, an Argentine chief police officer, created the first method of recording the fingerprints of individuals on file. In 1892, after studying Galton's pattern types, Vucetich set up the world's first fingerprint bureau. In that same year, Francisca Rojas of Necochea was found in a house with neck injuries whilst her two sons were found dead with their throats cut. Rojas accused a neighbour, but despite brutal interrogation, this neighbour would not confess to the crimes. Inspector Alvarez, a colleague of Vucetich, went to the scene and found a bloody thumb mark on a door. When it was compared with Rojas' prints, it was found to be identical with her right thumb. She then confessed to the murder of her sons.\nA Fingerprint Bureau was established in Calcutta (Kolkata), India, in 1897, after the Council of the Governor General approved a committee report that fingerprints should be used for the classification of criminal records. Working in the Calcutta Anthropometric Bureau, before it became the Fingerprint Bureau, were Azizul Haque and Hem Chandra Bose. Haque and Bose were Indian fingerprint experts who have been credited with the primary development of a fingerprint classification system eventually named after their supervisor, Sir Edward Richard Henry. The Henry Classification System, co-devised by Haque and Bose, was accepted in England and Wales when the first United Kingdom Fingerprint Bureau was founded in Scotland Yard, the Metropolitan Police headquarters, London, in 1901. Sir Edward Richard Henry subsequently achieved improvements in dactyloscopy.\nIn the United States, Henry P. DeForrest used fingerprinting in the New York Civil Service in 1902, and by December 1905, New York City Police Department Deputy Commissioner Joseph A. Faurot, an expert in the Bertillon system and a fingerprint advocate at Police Headquarters, introduced the fingerprinting of criminals to the United States.\nUhlenhuth test.\nThe Uhlenhuth test, or the antigen\u2013antibody precipitin test for species, was invented by Paul Uhlenhuth in 1901 and could distinguish human blood from animal blood, based on the discovery that the blood of different species had one or more characteristic proteins. The test represented a major breakthrough and came to have tremendous importance in forensic science. The test was further refined for forensic use by the Swiss chemist Maurice M\u00fcller in the year 1960s.\nDNA.\nForensic DNA analysis was first used in 1984. It was developed by Sir Alec Jeffreys, who realized that variation in the genetic sequence could be used to identify individuals and to tell individuals apart from one another. The first application of DNA profiles was used by Jeffreys in a double murder mystery in the small English town of Narborough, Leicestershire, in 1985. A 15-year-old school girl by the name of Lynda Mann was raped and murdered in Carlton Hayes psychiatric hospital. The police did not find a suspect but were able to obtain a semen sample.\nIn 1986, Dawn Ashworth, 15 years old, was also raped and strangled in the nearby village of Enderby. Forensic evidence showed that both killers had the same blood type. Richard Buckland became the suspect because he worked at Carlton Hayes psychiatric hospital, had been spotted near Dawn Ashworth's murder scene and knew unreleased details about the body. He later confessed to Dawn's murder but not Lynda's. Jefferys was brought into the case to analyze the semen samples. He concluded that there was no match between the samples and Buckland, who became the first person to be exonerated using DNA. Jefferys confirmed that the DNA profiles were identical for the two murder semen samples. To find the perpetrator, DNA samples from the entire male population, more than 4,000 aged from 17 to 34, of the town were collected. They all were compared to semen samples from the crime. A friend of Colin Pitchfork was heard saying that he had given his sample to the police claiming to be Colin. Colin Pitchfork was arrested in 1987 and it was found that his DNA profile matched the semen samples from the murder.\nBecause of this case, DNA databases were developed. There is the national (FBI) and international databases as well as the European countries (ENFSI: European Network of Forensic Science Institutes). These searchable databases are used to match crime scene DNA profiles to those already in a database.\nMaturation.\nBy the turn of the 20th century, the science of forensics had become largely established in the sphere of criminal investigation. Scientific and surgical investigation was widely employed by the Metropolitan Police during their pursuit of the mysterious Jack the Ripper, who had killed a number of women in the 1880s. This case is a watershed in the application of forensic science. Large teams of policemen conducted house-to-house inquiries throughout Whitechapel. Forensic material was collected and examined. Suspects were identified, traced and either examined more closely or eliminated from the inquiry. Police work follows the same pattern today. Over 2000 people were interviewed, \"upwards of 300\" people were investigated, and 80 people were detained.\nThe investigation was initially conducted by the Criminal Investigation Department (CID), headed by Detective Inspector Edmund Reid. Later, Detective Inspectors Frederick Abberline, Henry Moore, and Walter Andrews were sent from Central Office at Scotland Yard to assist. Initially, butchers, surgeons and physicians were suspected because of the manner of the mutilations. The alibis of local butchers and slaughterers were investigated, with the result that they were eliminated from the inquiry. Some contemporary figures thought the pattern of the murders indicated that the culprit was a butcher or cattle drover on one of the cattle boats that plied between London and mainland Europe. Whitechapel was close to the London Docks, and usually such boats docked on Thursday or Friday and departed on Saturday or Sunday. The cattle boats were examined, but the dates of the murders did not coincide with a single boat's movements, and the transfer of a crewman between boats was also ruled out.\nAt the end of October, Robert Anderson asked police surgeon Thomas Bond to give his opinion on the extent of the murderer's surgical skill and knowledge. The opinion offered by Bond on the character of the \"Whitechapel murderer\" is the earliest surviving offender profile. Bond's assessment was based on his own examination of the most extensively mutilated victim and the post mortem notes from the four previous canonical murders. In his opinion the killer must have been a man of solitary habits, subject to \"periodical attacks of homicidal and erotic mania\", with the character of the mutilations possibly indicating \"satyriasis\". Bond also stated that \"the homicidal impulse may have developed from a revengeful or brooding condition of the mind, or that religious mania may have been the original disease but I do not think either hypothesis is likely\".\n\"Handbook for Coroners, police officials, military policemen\" was written by the Austrian criminal jurist Hans Gross in 1893, and is generally acknowledged as the birth of the field of criminalistics. The work combined in one system fields of knowledge that had not been previously integrated, such as psychology and physical science, and which could be successfully used against crime. Gross adapted some fields to the needs of criminal investigation, such as crime scene photography. He went on to found the Institute of Criminalistics in 1912, as part of the University of Graz' Law School. This Institute was followed by many similar institutes all over the world.\nIn 1909, Archibald Reiss founded the \"Institut de police scientifique\" of the University of Lausanne (UNIL), the first school of forensic science in the world. Dr. Edmond Locard, became known as the \"Sherlock Holmes of France\". He formulated the basic principle of forensic science: \"Every contact leaves a trace\", which became known as Locard's exchange principle. In 1910, he founded what may have been the first criminal laboratory in the world, after persuading the Police Department of Lyon (France) to give him two attic rooms and two assistants.\nSymbolic of the newfound prestige of forensics and the use of reasoning in detective work was the popularity of the fictional character Sherlock Holmes, written by Arthur Conan Doyle in the late 19th century. He remains a great inspiration for forensic science, especially for the way his acute study of a crime scene yielded small clues as to the precise sequence of events. He made great use of trace evidence such as shoe and tire impressions, as well as fingerprints, ballistics and handwriting analysis, now known as questioned document examination. Such evidence is used to test theories conceived by the police, for example, or by the investigator himself. All of the techniques advocated by Holmes later became reality, but were generally in their infancy at the time Conan Doyle was writing. In many of his reported cases, Holmes frequently complains of the way the crime scene has been contaminated by others, especially by the police, emphasising the critical importance of maintaining its integrity, a now well-known feature of crime scene examination. He used analytical chemistry for blood residue analysis as well as toxicology examination and determination for poisons. He used ballistics by measuring bullet calibres and matching them with a suspected murder weapon.\nLate 19th \u2013 early 20th century figures.\nHans Gross applied scientific methods to crime scenes and was responsible for the birth of criminalistics.\nEdmond Locard expanded on Gross' work with Locard's exchange principle which stated \"whenever two objects come into contact with one another, materials are exchanged between them\". This means that every contact by a criminal leaves a trace.\nAlexandre Lacassagne, who taught Locard, produced autopsy standards on actual forensic cases.\nAlphonse Bertillon was a French criminologist and founder of Anthropometry (scientific study of measurements and proportions of the human body). He used anthropometry for identification, stating that, since each individual is unique, by measuring aspects of physical difference there could be a personal identification system. He created the Bertillon System around 1879, a way of identifying criminals and citizens by measuring 20 parts of the body. In 1884, over 240 repeat offenders were caught using the Bertillon system, but the system was largely superseded by fingerprinting.\nJoseph Thomas Walker, known for his work at Massachusetts State Police Chemical Laboratory, for developing many modern forensic techniques which he frequently published in academic journals, and for teaching at the Department of Legal Medicine, Harvard University.\nFrances Glessner Lee, known as \"the mother of forensic science\", was instrumental in the development of forensic science in the US. She lobbied to have coroners replaced by medical professionals, endowed the Harvard Associates in Police Science, and conducted many seminars to educate homicide investigators. She also created the Nutshell Studies of Unexplained Death, intricate crime scene dioramas used to train investigators, which are still in use today.\n20th century.\nLater in the 20th century several British pathologists, Mikey Rochman, Francis Camps, Sydney Smith and Keith Simpson pioneered new forensic science methods. Alec Jeffreys pioneered the use of DNA profiling in forensic science in 1984. He realized the scope of DNA fingerprinting, which uses variations in the genetic code to identify individuals. The method has since become important in forensic science to assist police detective work, and it has also proved useful in resolving paternity and immigration disputes. DNA fingerprinting was first used as a police forensic test to identify the rapist and killer of two teenagers, Lynda Mann and Dawn Ashworth, who were both murdered in Narborough, Leicestershire, in 1983 and 1986 respectively. Colin Pitchfork was identified and convicted of murder after samples taken from him matched semen samples taken from the two dead girls.\nForensic science has been fostered by a number of national and international forensic science learned bodies including the American Academy of Forensic Sciences (founded 1948), publishers of the \"Journal of Forensic Sciences\"; the Canadian Society of Forensic Science (founded 1953), publishers of the \"Journal of the Canadian Society of Forensic Science\"; the Chartered Society of Forensic Sciences, (founded 1959), then known as the Forensic Science Society, publisher of \"Science &amp; Justice\"; the British Academy of Forensic Sciences (founded 1960), publishers of \"Medicine, Science and the Law\"; the Australian Academy of Forensic Sciences (founded 1967), publishers of the \"Australian Journal of Forensic Sciences\"; and the European Network of Forensic Science Institutes (founded 1995).\n21st century.\nIn the past decade, documenting forensics scenes has become more efficient. Forensic scientists have started using laser scanners, drones and photogrammetry to obtain 3D point clouds of accidents or crime scenes. Reconstruction of an accident scene on a highway using drones involves data acquisition time of only 10\u201320 minutes and can be performed without shutting down traffic. The results are not just accurate, in centimeters, for measurement to be presented in court but also easy to digitally preserve in the long term.\nNow, in the 21st century, much of forensic science's future is up for discussion. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has several forensic science-related programs: CSAFE, a NIST Center of Excellence in Forensic Science, the National Commission on Forensic Science (now concluded), and administration of the Organization of Scientific Area Committees for Forensic Science (OSAC). One of the more recent additions by NIST is a document called NISTIR-7941, titled \"Forensic Science Laboratories: Handbook for Facility Planning, Design, Construction, and Relocation\". The handbook provides a clear blueprint for approaching forensic science. The details even include what type of staff should be hired for certain positions.\nQuestionable techniques.\nSome forensic techniques, believed to be scientifically sound at the time they were used, have turned out later to have much less scientific merit or none. Some such techniques include:\nLitigation science.\n\"Litigation science\" describes analysis or data developed or produced \"expressly\" for use in a trial versus those produced in the course of independent research. This distinction was made by the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals when evaluating the admissibility of experts.\nThis uses demonstrative evidence, which is evidence created in preparation of trial by attorneys or paralegals.\nDemographics.\nAs of 2025, there are currently an estimated 18,500 forensic science technicians in the United States.\nMedia impact.\nReal-life crime scene investigators and forensic scientists warn that popular television shows do not give a realistic picture of the work, often wildly distorting its nature, and exaggerating the ease, speed, effectiveness, drama, glamour, influence and comfort level of their jobs\u2014which they describe as far more mundane, tedious and boring.\nSome claim these modern TV shows have changed individuals' expectations of forensic science, sometimes unrealistically\u2014an influence termed the \"CSI effect\".\nFurther, research has suggested that public misperceptions about criminal forensics can create, in the mind of a juror, unrealistic expectations of forensic evidence\u2014which they expect to see before convicting\u2014implicitly biasing the juror towards the defendant. Citing the \"CSI effect,\" at least one researcher has suggested screening jurors for their level of influence from such TV programs.\nFurther, https:// has shown that newspaper media has been found to shape readers general knowledge and perceptions of science and technology in a rather positive way. It could lead to support of it due to the interest readers may obtain and seek further knowledge on the topic.\nControversies.\nQuestions about certain areas of forensic science, such as fingerprint evidence and the assumptions behind these disciplines have been brought to light in some publications including the \"New York Post\". The article stated that \"No one has proved even the basic assumption: That everyone's fingerprint is unique.\" The article also stated that \"Now such assumptions are being questioned\u2014and with it may come a radical change in how forensic science is used by police departments and prosecutors.\" Law professor Jessica Gabel said on NOVA that forensic science \"lacks the rigors, the standards, the quality controls and procedures that we find, usually, in science\".\nThe National Institute of Standards and Technology has reviewed the scientific foundations of bite-mark analysis used in forensic science. Bite mark analysis is a forensic science technique that analyzes the marks on the victim's skin compared to the suspects teeth. NIST reviewed the findings of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2009 study. The National Academics of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine conducted research to address the issues of reliability, accuracy, and reliability of bitemark analysis, where they concluded that there is a lack of sufficient scientific foundation to support the data. Yet the technique is still legal to use in court as evidence. NIST funded a 2019 meeting that consisted of dentists, lawyers, researchers and others to address the gaps in this field.\nIn the US, on 25 June 2009, the Supreme Court issued a 5-to-4 decision in \"Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts\" stating that crime laboratory reports may not be used against criminal defendants at trial unless the analysts responsible for creating them give testimony and subject themselves to cross-examination. The Supreme Court cited the National Academies of Sciences report \"Strengthening Forensic Science in the United States\" in their decision. Writing for the majority, Justice Antonin Scalia referred to the National Research Council report in his assertion that \"Forensic evidence is not uniquely immune from the risk of manipulation.\"\nIn the US, another area of forensic science that has come under question in recent years is the lack of laws requiring the accreditation of forensic labs. Some states require accreditation, but some states do not. Because of this, many labs have been caught performing very poor work resulting in false convictions or acquittals. For example, it was discovered after an audit of the Houston Police Department in 2002 that the lab had fabricated evidence which led George Rodriguez being convicted of raping a fourteen-year-old girl. The former director of the lab, when asked, said that the total number of cases that could have been contaminated by improper work could be in the range of 5,000 to 10,000.\nThe Innocence Project database of DNA exonerations shows that many wrongful convictions contained forensic science errors. According to the Innocence project and the US Department of Justice, forensic science has contributed to about 39 percent to 46 percent of wrongful convictions. As indicated by the National Academy of Sciences report \"Strengthening Forensic Sciences in the United States\", part of the problem is that many traditional forensic sciences have never been empirically validated; and part of the problem is that all examiners are subject to forensic confirmation biases and should be shielded from contextual information not relevant to the judgment they make.\nMany studies have discovered a difference in rape-related injuries reporting based on race, with white victims reporting a higher frequency of injuries than black victims. However, since current forensic examination techniques may not be sensitive to all injuries across a range of skin colors, more research needs to be conducted to understand if this trend is due to skin confounding healthcare providers when examining injuries or if darker skin extends a protective element. In clinical practice, for patients with darker skin, one study recommends that attention must be paid to the thighs, labia majora, posterior fourchette and fossa navicularis, so that no rape-related injuries are missed upon close examination.\nForensic science and humanitarian work.\nThe International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) uses forensic science for humanitarian purposes to clarify the fate of missing persons after armed conflict, disasters or migration, and is one of the services related to Restoring Family Links and Missing Persons. Knowing what has happened to a missing relative can often make it easier to proceed with the grieving process and move on with life for families of missing persons.\nForensic science is used by various other organizations to clarify the fate and whereabouts of persons who have gone missing. Examples include the NGO Argentine Forensic Anthropology Team, working to clarify the fate of people who disappeared during the period of the 1976\u20131983 military dictatorship. The International Commission on Missing Persons (ICMP) used forensic science to find missing persons, for example after the conflicts in the Balkans.\nRecognising the role of forensic science for humanitarian purposes, as well as the importance of forensic investigations in fulfilling the state's responsibilities to investigate human rights violations, a group of experts in the late-1980s devised a UN Manual on the Prevention and Investigation of Extra-Legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, which became known as the Minnesota Protocol. This document was revised and re-published by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in 2016.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "45712", "revid": "2153309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45712", "title": "Eggplant", "text": "Plant species\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEggplant (in North American, Australian, and Philippine English), aubergine (in British, Irish, and New Zealand English), brinjal (in Bangladeshi, Indian, Singapore, Malaysian, South African, and Sri Lankan English), or baigan (in Caribbean English) is a plant species in the nightshade family Solanaceae. Solanum melongena is grown worldwide for its edible fruit, typically used as a vegetable in cooking.\nMost commonly purple, the spongy, absorbent fruit is used in several cuisines. It is a berry by botanical definition. As a member of the genus \"Solanum\", it is related to the tomato, chili pepper, and potato, although those are of the Americas region while the eggplant is of the Eurasia region. Like the tomato, its skin and seeds can be eaten, but it is usually eaten cooked. Eggplant is nutritionally low in macronutrient and micronutrient content, but the capability of the fruit to absorb oils and flavors into its flesh through cooking expands its use in the culinary arts.\nIt was originally domesticated from the wild nightshade species \"thorn\" or \"bitter apple\", \"S. incanum\", probably with two independent domestications: one in South Asia, and one in East Asia. In 2023, world production of eggplants was 61 million tonnes, with China and India combining for 85% of the total.\nDescription.\nThe eggplant is a delicate, tropical perennial plant often cultivated as a tender or half-hardy annual in temperate climates. The stem is often spiny. It grows tall, with large, coarsely lobed leaves that are long and broad. Semiwild types can grow much larger, to , with large leaves over long and broad. \nThe flowers are white to purple in color, with a five-lobed corolla and yellow stamens.\nBotanically classified as a berry, the fruit contains numerous small, soft, edible seeds that taste bitter because they contain or are covered in nicotinoid alkaloids, like the related tobacco. Some common cultivars have fruit that is egg-shaped, glossy, and purple with white flesh and a spongy, \"meaty\" texture. Some other cultivars are white and longer in shape. Wild eggplants fruits measure less than in diameter. The fruit flesh rapidly turns brown when in contact with the oxygen in the air.\nGenetics.\nThe eggplant genome has 12 chromosomes.\nEtymology and regional names.\nThe plant and fruit have a profusion of English names.\n\"Eggplant\"-type names.\nThe name \"eggplant\" is usual in North American English and Australian English. First recorded in 1763, the word \"eggplant\" was originally applied to white cultivars, which look very much like hen's eggs (see image). Similar names are widespread in other languages, such as the Icelandic term \"eggaldin\" or the Welsh \"planhigyn \u0175y\".\nThe white, egg-shaped varieties of the eggplant's fruits are also known as \"garden eggs\", a term first attested in 1811. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" records that between 1797 and 1888, the name \"vegetable egg\" was also used.\n\"Aubergine\"-type names.\nWhereas \"eggplant\" was coined in some variations English, any other European names for the plant derive from the \"b\u0101\u1e0finj\u0101n\" . \"B\u0101\u1e0finj\u0101n\" is itself a loan-word in Arabic, whose earliest traceable origins lie in the Dravidian languages. The \"Hobson-Jobson\" dictionary comments that \"probably there is no word of the kind which has undergone such extraordinary variety of modifications, whilst retaining the same meaning, as this\".\nIn English usage, modern names deriving from Arabic \"b\u0101\u1e0finj\u0101n\" include:\nFrom Dravidian to Arabic.\nAll the \"aubergine\"-type names have the same origin, in the Dravidian languages. Modern descendants of this ancient Dravidian word include Malayalam \"va\u1e5futina\" and Tamil \"va\u1e5futu\u1e47ai\".\nThe Dravidian word was borrowed into the Indo-Aryan languages, giving ancient forms such as Sanskrit and Pali \"v\u0101ti\u1e45-ga\u1e47a\" (alongside Sanskrit \"v\u0101tigama\") and Prakrit \"v\u0101i\u1e43a\u1e47a\". According to the entry \"brinjal\" in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", the Sanskrit word \"v\u0101tin-g\u0101na\" denoted 'the class (that removes) the wind-disorder (windy humour)': that is, \"v\u0101tin-g\u0101na\" came to be the name for eggplants because they were thought to cure flatulence. The modern Hindustani words descending directly from the Sanskrit name are \"baingan\" and \"began\".\nThe Indic word \"v\u0101ti\u1e45-ga\u1e47a\" was then borrowed into Persian as \"b\u0101ding\u0101n\". Persian \"b\u0101ding\u0101n\" was borrowed in turn into Arabic as \"b\u0101\u1e0finj\u0101n\" (or, with the definite article, \"al-b\u0101\u1e0finj\u0101n\"). From Arabic, the word was borrowed into European languages.\nFrom Arabic into Iberia and beyond.\nIn al-Andalus, the Arabic word \"(al-)b\u0101\u1e0finj\u0101n\" was borrowed into the Romance languages in forms beginning with \"b\"- or, with the definite article included, \"alb\"-:\nThe Spanish word was then borrowed into French, giving (along with French dialectal forms like , , , and ). The French name was then borrowed into British English, appearing there first in the late eighteenth century.\nThrough the colonial expansion of Portugal, the Portuguese form was borrowed into a variety of other languages:\nThus although Indian English \"brinjal\" ultimately originates in languages of the Indian Subcontinent, it actually came into Indian English via Portuguese.\nFrom Arabic into Greek and beyond.\nThe Arabic word \"b\u0101\u1e0finj\u0101n\" was borrowed into Greek by the eleventh century CE. The Greek loans took a variety of forms, but crucially they began with \"m-\", partly because Greek lacked the initial \"b-\" sound and partly through folk-etymological association with the Greek word \"\u03bc\u03ad\u03bb\u03b1\u03c2\" (\"melas\"), 'black'. Attested Greek forms include \"\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b9\u03b6\u03ac\u03bd\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd\" (\"matizanion\", eleventh-century), \"\u03bc\u03b5\u03bb\u03b9\u03bd\u03c4\u03b6\u03ac\u03bd\u03b1\" (\"melintzana\", fourteenth-century), and \"\u03bc\u03b5\u03bb\u03b9\u03bd\u03c4\u03b6\u03ac\u03bd\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd\" (\"melintzanion\", seventeenth-century).\nFrom Greek, the word was borrowed into Italian and medieval Latin, and onwards into French. Early forms include:\nFrom these forms came the botanical Latin \"melong\u0113na\". This was used by Tournefort as a genus name in 1700, then by Linnaeus as a species name in 1753. It remains in scientific use.\nThese forms also gave rise to the Caribbean English \"melongene\".\nThe Italian \"melanzana\", through folk-etymology, was adapted to \"mela insana\" ('mad apple'): already by the thirteenth century, this name had given rise to a tradition that eggplants could cause insanity. Translated into English as 'mad-apple', 'rage-apple', or 'raging apple', this name for eggplants is attested from 1578 and the form 'mad-apple' may still be found in Southern American English.\nOther English names.\nThe plant is also known as \"guinea squash\" in Southern American English. The term \"guinea\" in the name originally denoted the fact that the fruits were associated with West Africa, specifically the region that is now the modern day country Guinea.\nIt has been known as 'Jew's apple', apparently in relation to a belief that the fruit was first imported to the West Indies by Jewish people.\nHistory.\nThere is no consensus about the place of origin of eggplant; the plant species has been described as native to South Asia, where it continues to grow wild, or Africa. It has been cultivated in southern and eastern Asia since prehistory. The earliest known mention of the eggplant is in the 59 BCE \"Slave's Contract\" (; ) by Chinese poet Wang Bao (); subsequently, the plant was mentioned in other later sources such as \"Qimin Yaoshu\", an agricultural treatise completed in 544 CE.\nEggplant was introduced to Europe through the Iberian Peninsula, where it became a staple among Muslim and Jewish communities. The presence of numerous Arabic and North African names for the vegetable, coupled with the absence of ancient Greek and Roman names, suggests that it was cultivated in the Mediterranean area by Arabs during the early Middle Ages, arriving in Spain in the 8th century. A book on agriculture by Ibn Al-Awwam in 12th-century Muslim Spain described how to grow aubergines. Records exist from later medieval Catalan and Spanish, as well as from 14th-century Italy. Unlike its popularity in Spain and limited presence in southern Italy, the eggplant remained relatively obscure in other regions of Europe until the 17th century.\nThe aubergine is unrecorded in England until the 16th century. An English botany book in 1597 described the madde or raging Apple:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This plant groweth in Egypt almost everywhere... bringing foorth fruite of the bignes of a great Cucumber... We have had the same in our London gardens, where it hath borne flowers, but the winter approching before the time of ripening, it perished: notwithstanding it came to beare fruite of the bignes of a goose egge one extraordinarie temperate yeere... but never to the full ripenesse.\nThe Europeans brought it to the Americas.\nBecause of the plant's relationship with various other nightshades, the fruit was at one time believed to be extremely poisonous. The flowers and leaves can be poisonous if consumed in large quantities due to the presence of solanine.\nThe eggplant has a special place in folklore. In 13th-century Italian traditional folklore, the eggplant can cause insanity. In 19th-century Egypt, insanity was said to be \"more common and more violent\" when the eggplant is in season in the summer.\nCultivars.\nDifferent cultivars of the plant produce fruit of different size, shape, and color, though typically purple. The less common white varieties of eggplant are also known as Easter white eggplants, garden eggs, Casper or white eggplant. The most widely cultivated varieties\u2014cultivars\u2014in Europe and North America today are elongated ovoid, long and broad with a dark purple skin.\nA much wider range of shapes, sizes, and colors is grown in India and elsewhere in Asia. Larger cultivars weighing up to a kilogram (2.2 pounds) grow in the region between the Ganges and Yamuna Rivers, while smaller ones are found elsewhere. Colors vary from white to yellow or green, as well as reddish-purple and dark purple. Some cultivars have a color gradient\u2014white at the stem, to bright pink, deep purple or even black. Green or purple cultivars with white striping also exist. Chinese cultivars are commonly shaped like a narrower, slightly pendulous cucumber. Also, Asian cultivars of Japanese breeding are grown.\nVarieties.\nGenetically engineered eggplant.\nBt brinjal is a transgenic eggplant that contains a gene from the soil bacterium \"Bacillus thuringiensis\". This variety was designed to give the plant resistance to lepidopteran insects such as the brinjal fruit and shoot borer (\"Leucinodes orbonalis\") and fruit borer (\"Helicoverpa armigera\").\nOn 9 February 2010, the Environment Ministry of India imposed a moratorium on the cultivation of Bt brinjal after protests against regulatory approval of cultivated Bt brinjal in 2009, stating the moratorium would last \"for as long as it is needed to establish public trust and confidence\". This decision was deemed controversial, as it deviated from previous practices with other genetically modified crops in India. Bt brinjal was approved for commercial cultivation in Bangladesh in 2013.\nUses.\nCulinary.\nRaw eggplant can have a bitter taste, with an astringent quality, but it becomes tender when cooked and develops a rich, complex flavor. Rinsing, draining, and salting the sliced fruit before cooking may remove the bitterness. The fruit is capable of absorbing cooking fats and sauces, which may enhance the flavor of eggplant dishes.\nEggplant is used in the cuisines of many countries. Due to its texture and bulk, it is sometimes used as a meat substitute in vegan and vegetarian cuisines. Eggplant flesh is smooth. Its numerous seeds are small, soft and edible, along with the rest of the fruit, and do not have to be removed. Its thin skin is also edible, and so it does not have to be peeled. However, the green part at the top, the calyx, does have to be removed when preparing an eggplant for cooking.\nEggplant can be steamed, stir-fried, pan fried, deep fried, barbecued, roasted, stewed, curried, or pickled. Many eggplant dishes are sauces made by mashing the cooked fruit. It can be stuffed. It is frequently, but not always, cooked with oil or fat.\nEast Asia.\nKorean and Japanese eggplant varieties are typically thin-skinned.\nIn Chinese cuisine, eggplants are known as \"qi\u00e9zi\" (). They are often deep fried and made into dishes such as \"y\u00faxi\u0101ng-qi\u00e9zi\" (\"fish fragrance eggplant\") or \"di s\u0101n xi\u0101n\" (\"three earthen treasures\"). Elsewhere in China, such as in Yunnan cuisine (in particular the cuisine of the Dai people) they are barbecued or roasted, then split and either eaten directly with garlic, chilli, oil and coriander, or the flesh is removed and pounded to a mash (typically with a wooden pestle and mortar) before being eaten with rice or other dishes.\nIn Japanese cuisine, eggplants are known as \"nasu\" or \"nasubi\" and use the same characters as Chinese (). An example of it use is in the dish \"hasamiyaki\" () in which slices of eggplant are grilled and filled with a meat stuffing. Eggplants also feature in several Japanese expression and proverbs, such as (because their lack of seeds will reduce her fertility) and .\nIn Korean cuisine, eggplants are known as \"gaji\" (). They are steamed, stir-fried, or pan-fried and eaten as banchan (side dishes), such as \"namul\", \"bokkeum\", and \"jeon\".\nSoutheast Asia.\nIn the Philippines, eggplants are of the long and slender purple variety. They are known as \"talong\" and is widely used in many stew and soup dishes, like \"pinakbet\". However the most popular eggplant dish is \"tortang talong\", an omelette made from grilling an eggplant, dipping it into beaten eggs, and pan-frying the mixture. The dish is characteristically served with the stalk attached. The dish has several variants, including \"rellenong talong\" which is stuffed with meat and vegetables. Eggplant can also be grilled, skinned and eaten as a salad called \"ensaladang talong\". Another popular dish is \"adobong talong\", which is diced eggplant prepared with vinegar, soy sauce, and garlic as an \"adobo\".\nSouth Asia.\nEggplant is widely used in its native India, for example in \"sambar\" (a tamarind lentil stew), \"dalma\" (a \"dal\" preparation with vegetables, native to Odisha), chutney, curry (vankai), and \"achaar\" (a pickled dish). Owing to its versatile nature and wide use in both everyday and festive Indian food, it is often described as the \"king of vegetables\". Roasted, skinned, mashed, mixed with onions, tomatoes, and spices, and then slow cooked gives the South Asian dish \"baingan bharta\" or \"gojju\", similar to \"salat\u0103 de vinete\" in Romania. Another version of the dish, \"begun-pora\" (eggplant charred or burnt), is very popular in Bangladesh and the east Indian states of Odisha and West Bengal where the pulp of the vegetable is mixed with raw chopped shallot, green chilies, salt, fresh coriander, and mustard oil. Sometimes fried tomatoes and deep-fried potatoes are also added, creating a dish called \"begun bhorta\". In a dish from Maharashtra called , small brinjals are stuffed with ground coconut, peanuts, onions, tamarind, jaggery and masala spices, and then cooked in oil. Maharashtra and the adjacent state of Karnataka also have an eggplant-based vegetarian pilaf called 'vangi bhat'.\nMiddle East and the Mediterranean.\nEggplant is often stewed, as in the French \"ratatouille\", or deep-fried as in the Italian \"parmigiana di melanzane\", the Turkish \"karn\u0131yar\u0131k\", or Turkish, Greek, and Levantine \"musakka/moussaka\", and Middle Eastern and South Asian dishes. Eggplants can also be battered before deep-frying and served with a sauce made of tahini and tamarind. In Iranian cuisine, it is blended with whey as \"kashk e bademjan\", tomatoes as \"mirza ghassemi\", or made into stew as \"khoresht-e-bademjan\". It can be sliced and deep-fried, then served with plain yogurt (optionally topped with a tomato and garlic sauce), such as in the Turkish dish \"patl\u0131can k\u0131zartmas\u0131\" (meaning fried aubergines), or without yogurt, as in \"patl\u0131can \u015fak\u015fuka\". Perhaps the best-known Turkish eggplant dishes are \"imam bay\u0131ld\u0131\" (vegetarian) and \"karn\u0131yar\u0131k\" (with minced meat). It may also be roasted in its skin until charred, so the pulp can be removed and blended with other ingredients, such as lemon, tahini, and garlic, as in the Levantine \"baba ghanoush,\" Greek \"melitzanosalata,\" Moroccan \"zaalouk\" and Romanian \"salat\u0103 de vinete\". A mix of roasted eggplant, roasted red peppers, chopped onions, tomatoes, mushrooms, carrots, celery, and spices is called \"zacusc\u0103\" in Romania, and \"ajvar\" or \"pinjur\" in the Balkans.\nA Spanish dish called \"escalivada\" in Catalonia calls for strips of roasted aubergine, sweet pepper, onion, and tomato. In Andalusia, eggplant is mostly cooked thinly sliced, deep-fried in olive oil and served hot with honey (\"berenjenas a la Cordobesa\"). In the La Mancha region of central Spain, a small eggplant is pickled in vinegar, paprika, olive oil, and red peppers. The result is berenjena of Almagro, Ciudad Real.\nIn the Eastern Mediterranean (including the Balkans), eggplant is prepared as dolma, i.e. hollowed out and stuffed with meat, rice, or other fillings, and then baked or braised. A Levantine specialty is \"makdous\", another pickling of eggplants, stuffed with red peppers and walnuts in olive oil. In Georgia, eggplant is fried and stuffed with walnut paste to make \"nigvziani badrijani\".\nIn medieval Spain, eggplant, along with ingredients such as Swiss chard and chickpeas, was closely associated with Jewish cuisine. The \"Kit\u0101b al-\u1e6cabikh\", a 13th-century Andalusian cookbook, features eggplant as the main ingredient in fifteen out of its nineteen vegetable dishes, indicating its significance in the local cuisine at the time. Jewish communities in Spain prepared eggplant in various ways, including in dishes like \"almodrote\", a casserole of eggplant and cheese. This dish and others became identifiers for Jews during their expulsion from Spain and the Inquisition, and they were carried by the expelled Jews to their new homes in the Ottoman Empire. The classic Judaeo-Spanish song \"Siete modos de gizar la berendgena\" lists various methods of preparing eggplant that persisted among Jews in the Ottoman Empire. Today, eggplant remains a defining ingredient of Sephardic Jewish cuisine.\nIran.\nIn Iranian cuisine, eggplant (called \"b\u0101denj\u0101n\" or \"b\u0101demj\u0101n\" in Persian) can be used in both appetizers and main courses. It can also be pickled in vinegar. The ideal eggplant in Iranian cuisine is long, straight, firm, and black. Based on how al-Razi uses the color of eggplant as a shorthand for purpleness in his \"Kitab al-hawi\", it can be assumed that the dark purple kind of eggplant was the widely grown variety in Iran at his time (9th century). Its importance in Iran is alluded to in the \"Ain-i-Akbari\" of Abu'l-Fazl ibn Mubarak, which says \"this vegetable is on sale in the markets in Iran all the year round and in such abundance that it is sold for 1.5 \"dam\"s per seer\" (which was a cheap price at that time).\nIn Iran, unlike places like Greece, Turkey, and North Africa, eggplant is cooked peeled and usually seasoned with cinnamon or especially turmeric. Most eggplant dishes are classified as \"nankhoreshi\" (eaten with bread), and they are commonly served as snacks alongside alcoholic beverages.\nThe 14th-century poet Boshaq At'ema refers to an early eggplant dish called \"burani-e badenjan\": chopped eggplant saut\u00e9ed with onions and turmeric, then slowly cooked, and finally mixed with yogurt. The combination of eggplant and kashk (condensed whey) is popular in Iranian cuisine; it is found in dishes like \"kashk o badenjan\" as well as \"ash-e kashk o badenjan\" (involving layers of saut\u00e9ed eggplant, grilled onions, and red beans topped by kashk seasoned with turmeric). Another eggplant dish is \"mast o badenjan\", also known as \"nazkhatun\" in Tehran, which involves eggplant, yogurt, and dried mint. Eggplant can also be cooked in stews (\"khoresh\"es), either with lamb (\"khoresh-e badenjan\") or with chicken and either unripe grapes or pomegranate juice (\"mosamma-ye badenjan\"). Variants of ab-gusht, eshkana, fesenjan, and kuku also make use of eggplant. Some regional dishes involving eggplant include \"badenjan-polow\", a dish mainly from Fars and Kerman that combines white rice with a paste of chopped saut\u00e9ed eggplant, chopped meat, and spices; as well as the northern Iranian \"badenjan-e qasemi\", a casserole using grilled eggplant, garlic, tomatoes, and eggs.\nEggplants are traditionally among the foods that get preserved and stored for winter in Iran. They are selected in the last month of summer, when they are most readily available, then peeled, and finally preserved in one of two ways. In the first way, the peeled eggplants are cut, salted, and left to \"sweat\" (to make them less bilious); then they are sun-dried by hanging them on a line. The dried eggplants are then rehydrated 24 hours before being cooked. In the second way, the peeled eggplants are cooked in oil, put in a copper pot, and finally covered with plenty of hot oil, \"which congeals to seal them\".\nMedieval Iranian writers such as al-Razi and al-Biruni cautioned that eggplant contains harmful qualities, and it must be ripe and cooked before eating to neutralize them. They wrote that it could cause heat and dryness and an excess of black bile, contributing to a wide range of health problems. If the \"salt\" in it was removed, or it was cooked in oil or vinegar, then they wrote that eggplant gained healthy attributes. Present-day Iranian attitudes to the eggplant reflect this medical tradition's influence: the eggplant is \"considered rather dangerous... a cook in Tehran will say that the poison must be taken out\". People also use eggplant seeds as an expectorant to relieve asthma and catarrh.\nNutrition.\nRaw eggplant is 92% water, 6% carbohydrates, 1% protein, and has negligible fat (table). It provides low amounts of essential nutrients, with only manganese having a moderate percentage (10%) of the Daily Value. Minor changes in nutrient composition occur with season, environment of cultivation (open field or greenhouse), and genotype.\nCultivation and pests.\nIn tropical and subtropical climates, eggplant can be sown in the garden. Eggplant grown in temperate climates fares better when transplanted into the garden after all danger of frost has passed. Eggplant prefers hot weather, and when grown in cold climates or in areas with low humidity, the plants languish or fail to set and produce mature fruit. Seeds are typically started eight to 10 weeks prior to the anticipated frost-free date. \"S. melongena\" is included on a list of low flammability plants, indicating that it is suitable for growing within a building protection zone.\nSpacing should be between plants, depending on cultivar, and between rows, depending on the type of cultivation equipment being used. Mulching helps conserve moisture and prevent weeds and fungal diseases and the plants benefit from some shade during the hottest part of the day. Hand pollination by shaking the flowers improves the set of the first blossoms. Growers typically cut fruits from the vine just above the calyx owing to the somewhat woody stems. Flowers are complete, containing both female and male structures, and may be self- or cross-pollinated.\nMany of the pests and diseases that afflict other solanaceous plants, such as tomato, capsicum, and potato, are also troublesome to eggplants. For this reason, it should generally not be planted in areas previously occupied by its close relatives. However, since eggplants can be particularly susceptible to pests such as whiteflies, they are sometimes grown with slightly less susceptible plants, such as chili pepper, as a sacrificial trap crop. Four years should separate successive crops of eggplants to reduce pest pressure.\nCommon North American pests include the potato beetles, flea beetles, aphids, whiteflies, and spider mites. Good sanitation and crop rotation practices are extremely important for controlling fungal disease, the most serious of which is \"Verticillium\".\nThe potato tuber moth (\"Phthorimaea operculella\") is an oligophagous insect that prefers to feed on plants of the family Solanaceae such as eggplants. Female \"P. operculella\" use the leaves to lay their eggs and the hatched larvae will eat away at the mesophyll of the leaf.\nSeveral different \"Phytoplasmas\" cause little leaf of brinjal, which is agriculturally significant in South Asia. This is spread by the leafhopper \"Hishimonus phycitis\".\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2023, world production of eggplants was 61 million tonnes, led by China with 64% and India with 21% of the total (table).\nChemistry.\nThe color of purple skin cultivars is due to the anthocyanin nasunin.\nThe browning of eggplant flesh results from the oxidation of polyphenols, such as the most abundant phenolic compound in the fruit, chlorogenic acid.\nAllergies.\nCase reports of itchy skin or mouth, mild headache, and stomach upset after handling or eating eggplant have been reported anecdotally and published in medical journals (see also oral allergy syndrome). A 2021 review indicated that possibly four interacting mechanisms may elicit an allergic response from consuming eggplant: lipid transfer protein, profilin, polyphenol oxidase, and pollen reactions.\nA 2008 study of a sample of 741 people in India, where eggplant is commonly consumed, found nearly 10% reported some allergic symptoms after consuming eggplant, with 1.4% showing symptoms within two hours. Contact dermatitis from eggplant leaves and allergy to eggplant flower pollen have also been reported.\nIndividuals who are atopic (genetically predisposed to developing certain allergic hypersensitivity reactions) are more likely to have a reaction to eggplant, which may be because eggplant is high in histamines. Cooking eggplant thoroughly seems to preclude reactions in some individuals, but some of the allergenic proteins may survive the cooking process.\nTaxonomy.\nThe eggplant is quite often featured in the older scientific literature under the junior synonyms \"S. ovigerum\" and \"S. trongum\". Several other names that are now invalid have been uniquely applied to it:\nA number of subspecies and varieties have been named, mainly by Dikii, Dunal, and (invalidly) by Sweet. Names for various eggplant types, such as , are not considered to refer to anything more than cultivar groups at best. However, \"Solanum incanum\" and cockroach berry (\"S. capsicoides\"), other eggplant-like nightshades described by Linnaeus and Allioni, respectively, were occasionally considered eggplant varieties, but this is not correct.\nThe eggplant has a long history of taxonomic confusion with the scarlet and Ethiopian eggplants (\"Solanum aethiopicum)\", known as \"gilo\" and \"nakati\", respectively, and described by Linnaeus as \"S. aethiopicum\". The eggplant was sometimes considered a variety \"violaceum\" of that species. \"S. violaceum\" of de Candolle applies to Linnaeus' \"S. aethiopicum\". An actual \"S. violaceum\", an unrelated plant described by Ortega, included Dunal's \"S. amblymerum\" and was often confused with the same author's \"S. brownii\".\nLike the potato and \"S. lichtensteinii\", but unlike the tomato, which then was generally put in a different genus, the eggplant was also described as \"S. esculentum\", in this case once more in the course of Dunal's work. He also recognized the varieties \"aculeatum\", \"inerme\", and \"subinerme\" at that time. Similarly, H.C.F. Schuhmacher and Peter Thonning named the eggplant as \"S. edule\", which is also a junior synonym of sticky nightshade (\"S. sisymbriifolium\"). Scopoli's \"S. zeylanicum\" refers to the eggplant, and that of Blanco to \"S. lasiocarpum\".\nCulture.\nVegetable orchestras, such as the London Vegetable Orchestra use zucchini trumpets, butternut squash trombones, pumpkin drums and aubergine castanets. Other vegetables played include carrots, bell peppers, potatoes and parsnips.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45714", "revid": "7646666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45714", "title": "Horseradish", "text": "Species of flowering plants in the cabbage family Brassicaceae\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHorseradish (Armoracia rusticana, syn. Cochlearia armoracia) is a perennial plant of the family Brassicaceae (which also includes mustard, wasabi, broccoli, cabbage, and radish). It is a root vegetable, cultivated and used worldwide as a spice and as a condiment. The species is likely native to Southeastern Europe and Western Asia.\nDescription.\nHorseradish grows up to tall, with hairless bright green unlobed leaves up to long that may be mistaken for docks (\"Rumex\"). It is cultivated primarily for its large, white, tapered root. The white four-petalled flowers are scented and are borne in dense panicles. Established plants may form extensive patches and may become invasive unless carefully managed.\nIntact horseradish root has little aroma. When cut or grated, enzymes from within the plant cells digest sinigrin (a glucosinolate) to produce allyl isothiocyanate (mustard oil), which irritates the mucous membranes of the sinuses and eyes. Once exposed to air or heat, horseradish loses its pungency, darkens in color, and develops a bitter flavor.\nHistory.\nHorseradish has been cultivated since antiquity. Dioscorides listed horseradish equally as \"Persicon sinapi\" (\"Diosc.\" 2.186) or \"Sinapi persicum\" (\"Diosc.\" 2.168), which Pliny's Natural History reported as \"Persicon napy\"; Cato discusses the plant in his treatises on agriculture. A mural in Ostia Antica shows the plant. Horseradish is probably the plant mentioned by Pliny the Elder in his \"Natural History\" under the name of \"Amoracia\", and recommended by him for its medicinal qualities, and possibly the wild radish, or \"raphanos agrios\" of the Greeks. The early Renaissance herbalists Pietro Andrea Mattioli and John Gerard showed it under \"Raphanus\". Its modern Linnaean genus \"Armoracia\" was first applied to it by Heinrich Bernhard Ruppius, in his \"Flora Jenensis\", 1745, but Linnaeus himself called it \"Cochlearia armoracia\".\nBoth roots and leaves were used as a traditional medicine during the Middle Ages. The root was used as a condiment on meats in Germany, Scandinavia, and Britain. It was introduced to North America during European colonization; both George Washington and Thomas Jefferson mention horseradish in garden accounts. Native Americans used it to stimulate the glands, stave off scurvy, and as a diaphoretic treatment for the common cold.\nWilliam Turner mentions horseradish as \"Red Cole\" in his \"Herbal\" (1551\u20131568), but not as a condiment. In \"The Herball, or Generall Historie of Plantes\" (1597), John Gerard describes it under the name of \"raphanus rusticanus\", stating that it occurs wild in several parts of England. After referring to its medicinal uses, he says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]he Horse Radish stamped with a little vinegar put thereto, is commonly used among the Germans for sauce to eat fish with and such like meats as we do mustard.\nEtymology and common names.\nThe word \"horseradish\" is attested in English from the 1590s. It combines the word \"horse\" (formerly used in a figurative sense to mean strong or coarse, as with archaic \"horsepistol\" and \"horselock\") and the word \"radish\". Some sources say that the term originates from a mispronunciation of the German word \"meerrettich\" as \"mareradish\". However, this hypothesis has been disputed, as there is no historical evidence of this term being used.\nCultivation.\nHorseradish is perennial in hardiness zones 2\u20139 and can be grown as an annual in other zones, although not as successfully as in zones with both a long growing season and winter temperatures cold enough to ensure plant dormancy. After the first frost in autumn kills the leaves, the root is dug and divided. The main root is harvested and one or more large offshoots of the main root are replanted to produce next year's crop. Horseradish left undisturbed in the garden spreads via underground shoots and can become invasive. Older roots left in the ground become woody, after which they are no longer culinarily useful, although older plants can be dug and re-divided to start new plants. The early season leaves can be distinctively different, asymmetric spiky before the mature typical flat broad leaves start to be developed.\nPests and diseases.\nIntroduced by accident, \"cabbageworms\", the larvae of \"Pieris rapae\", are a common caterpillar pest in horseradish. Mature caterpillars chew large, ragged holes in the leaves leaving the large veins intact. Handpicking is an effective control strategy in home gardens. Another common pest of horseradish is the mustard leaf beetle (\"Phaedon cochleariae\"). These beetles are undeterred by the defense mechanisms produced by Brassicaceae plants like horseradish.\nProduction.\nIn the United States, horseradish is grown in several areas, such as Eau Claire, Wisconsin, and Tule Lake, California. The most concentrated growth occurs in the Collinsville, Illinois, region.\nThirty thousand metric tonnes of horseradish are produced in Europe annually, of which Hungary produces 12,000, making it the biggest single producer.\nCulinary uses.\nThe distinctive pungent taste of horseradish is from the compound allyl isothiocyanate. Upon crushing the flesh of horseradish, the enzyme myrosinase is released and acts on the glucosinolates sinigrin and gluconasturtiin, which are precursors to the allyl isothiocyanate. The allyl isothiocyanate serves the plant as a natural defense against herbivores. Since allyl isothiocyanate hurts the plant, it is stored in the harmless form of glucosinolate, separate from the enzyme myrosinase. When an animal chews the plant, the allyl isothiocyanate is released, repelling the animal. Allyl isothiocyanate is an unstable compound, degrading over days at . Because of this instability, horseradish sauces lack the pungency of freshly crushed roots.\nCooks may use the terms \"horseradish\" or \"prepared horseradish\" to refer to the mashed (or grated) root of the horseradish plant mixed with vinegar. Prepared horseradish is white to creamy beige. It can be stored for up to 3 months under refrigeration, but eventually will darken, indicating less flavour. The leaves of the plant are edible as well, either cooked or raw when young, with a similar but less pronounced flavor.\nOn Passover, many Ashkenazi Jews use grated horseradish as a choice for Maror (bitter herbs) at the Passover Seder.\nHorseradish sauce.\nHorseradish sauce made from grated horseradish root and vinegar is a common condiment in the United Kingdom, in Denmark (with sugar added) and in Poland. In the UK, it is usually served with roast beef, often as part of a traditional Sunday roast, but can be used in a number of other dishes, including sandwiches or salads. A variation of horseradish sauce, which in some cases may replace the vinegar with other products like lemon juice or citric acid, is known in Germany as \"Tafelmeerrettich\". Also available in the UK is Tewkesbury mustard, a blend of mustard and grated horseradish originating in medieval times and mentioned by Shakespeare (Falstaff says: \"his wit's as thick as Tewkesbury Mustard\" in Henry IV Part II). A similar mustard, called \"Krensenf\" or \"Meerrettichsenf\", is common in Austria and parts of Germany. In France, \"sauce au raifort\" is used in Alsatian cuisine. In Russia, horseradish root is usually mixed with grated garlic and a small amount of tomatoes for color (Khrenovina sauce).\nIn the United States, the term \"horseradish sauce\" refers to grated horseradish combined with mayonnaise or salad dressing. In Denmark, it is mixed with whipping cream and as such used on top of traditional Danish open sandwiches with beef (boiled or steaked) slices. Prepared horseradish is a common ingredient in Bloody Mary cocktails and in cocktail sauce and is used as a sauce or sandwich spread. Horseradish cream is a mixture of horseradish and sour cream and is served au jus for a prime rib dinner.\nVegetable.\nIn Europe, there are two varieties of chrain. \"Red\" chrain is mixed with red beetroot and \"white\" chrain contains no beetroot. Chrain is a part of Christian Easter and Jewish Passover tradition (as \"maror\") in Eastern and Central Europe. In the Christian tradition, horseradish is eaten during Eastertide (Paschaltide) as \"a reminder of the bitterness of Jesus' suffering\" on Good Friday.\nRelation to wasabi.\nOutside Japan, the Japanese condiment wasabi, although traditionally prepared from the true wasabi plant (\"Wasabia japonica\"), is now usually made with horseradish due to the scarcity of the wasabi plant. The Japanese botanical name for horseradish is , or \"Western wasabi\". Both plants are members of the family Brassicaceae.\nNutritional content.\nIn a 100-gram amount, prepared horseradish provides of food energy and has a high content of vitamin C with moderate content of sodium, folate and dietary fiber, while other essential nutrients are negligible in content. In a typical serving of one tablespoon (15 grams), horseradish supplies no significant nutrient content.\nHorseradish contains volatile oils, notably mustard oil.\nBiomedical uses.\nThe enzyme horseradish peroxidase (HRP), found in the plant, is used extensively in molecular biology and biochemistry primarily for its ability to amplify a weak signal and increase the detectability of a target molecule. HRP has been used in decades of research to visualize under microscopy and assess non-quantitatively the permeability of capillaries, particularly those of the brain.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45715", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45715", "title": "Arecaceae", "text": "Family of food and ornamental plants\nThe Arecaceae () are a family of perennial, flowering plants in the monocot order Arecales. Their growth form can be climbers, shrubs, tree-like and stemless plants, all commonly known as palms. Those having a tree-like form are colloquially called palm trees. Currently, 181 genera with around 2,600 species are known, most of which are restricted to tropical and subtropical climates. Most palms are distinguished by their large, compound, evergreen leaves, known as fronds, arranged at the top of an unbranched stem, except for the \"Hyphaene\" genus, which has branched palms. However, palms exhibit an enormous diversity in physical characteristics and inhabit nearly every type of habitat within their range, from rainforests to deserts.\nPalms are among the best known and most extensively cultivated plant families. They have been important to humans throughout much of history, especially in regions like the Middle East and North Africa. A wide range of common products and foods are derived from palms. In contemporary times, palms are also widely used in landscaping. In many historical cultures, because of their importance as food, palms were symbols for such ideas as victory, peace, and fertility.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Arecaceae\" is derived from the word \"areca\" with the suffix \"-aceae\". \"Areca\" is derived from Portuguese, via Malayalam \u0d05\u0d1f\u0d2f\u0d4d\u0d15\u0d4d\u0d15 (\"a\u1e6daykka\"), which is from Dravidian \"*a\u1e6d-ay-kk\u0101y\" (\"areca nut\"). The suffix \"-aceae\" is the feminine plural of the Latin \"-\u0101ceus\" (\"resembling\").\n\"Palm\" originates from Latin \"palma\" semantically overlapping with sense of \"hand front\" (due to similar splayed shape) ultimately from Proto-Indo-European *\"pl\u0325h\u2082meh\u2082\", a direct descendant once existed in Old English.\nMorphology.\nWhether as shrubs, tree-like, or vines, palms have two methods of growth: solitary or clustered. The common representation is that of a solitary shoot ending in a crown of leaves. This monopodial character may be exhibited by prostrate, trunkless, and trunk-forming members. Some common palms restricted to solitary growth include \"Washingtonia\" and \"Roystonea\". Palms may instead grow in sparse though dense clusters. The trunk develops an axillary bud at a leaf node, usually near the base, from which a new shoot emerges. The new shoot, in turn, produces an axillary bud and a clustering habit results. Exclusively sympodial genera include many of the rattans, \"Guihaia\", and \"Rhapis\". Several palm genera have both solitary and clustering members. Palms which are usually solitary may grow in clusters and vice versa.\nPalms have large, evergreen leaves that are either palmately ('fan-leaved') or pinnately ('feather-leaved') compound and spirally (-alternately) arranged at the top of the stem, with the sole exception of the king raphia (\"Raphia vinifera\" variety \"nigerica\") which has opposite pairs of fronds. The leaves have a tubular sheath at the base that usually splits open on one side at maturity. The inflorescence is a spadix or spike surrounded by one or more bracts or spathes that become woody at maturity. The flowers are generally small and white, radially symmetric, and can be either uni- or bisexual. The sepals and petals usually number three each and may be distinct or joined at the base. The stamens generally number six, with filaments that may be separate, attached to each other, or attached to the pistil at the base. The fruit is usually a single-seeded drupe (sometimes berry-like) but some genera (e.g., \"Salacca\") may contain two or more seeds in each fruit.\nLike all monocots, palms do not have the ability to increase the width of a stem (secondary growth) via the same kind of vascular cambium found in non-monocot woody plants. This explains the cylindrical shape of the trunk (almost constant diameter) that is often seen in palms, unlike in ring-forming trees. However, many palms, like some other monocots, do have secondary growth, although because it does not arise from a single vascular cambium producing xylem inwards and phloem outwards, it is often called \"anomalous secondary growth\".\nThe Arecaceae are notable among monocots for their height, and for the size of their seeds, leaves, and inflorescences. \"Ceroxylon quindiuense\", Colombia's national \"tree\", is the tallest monocot in the world, reaching up to tall. The \"coco de mer\" (\"Lodoicea maldivica\") has the largest seeds of any plant, in diameter and weighing each (coconuts are the second largest). Raffia palms (\"Raphia\" spp.) have the largest leaves of any plant, up to long and wide. The \"Corypha\" species have the largest inflorescence of any plant, up to tall and containing millions of small flowers. \"Calamus\" stems can reach in length.\nRange and habitat.\nMost palms are native to tropical and subtropical climates. Palms thrive in moist and hot climates but can be found in a variety of different habitats. Their diversity is highest in wet, lowland forests. South America, the Caribbean, and areas of the South Pacific and southern Asia are regions of concentration. Colombia may have the highest number of palm species in one country. There are some palms that are also native to desert areas such as the Arabian Peninsula and parts of northwestern Mexico. Only about 130 palm species naturally grow entirely beyond the tropics, mostly in humid lowland subtropical climates, in highlands in southern Asia, and along the rim lands of the Mediterranean Sea. The northernmost native palm is \"Chamaerops humilis\", which reaches 44\u00b0N latitude along the coast of Liguria, Italy. In the southern hemisphere, the southernmost palm is the \"Rhopalostylis sapida\" (n\u012bkau), which reaches 44\u00b0S on the Chatham Islands where an oceanic climate prevails. Cultivation of palms is possible north of subtropical climates, and some higher latitude locales such as the British Isles and the Pacific Northwest feature a few palms in protected locations and microclimates. In the United States, there are at least 12 native palm species, mostly occurring in the states of the Deep South and Florida.\nPalms inhabit a variety of ecosystems. More than two-thirds of palm species live in humid moist forests, where some species grow tall enough to form part of the canopy and shorter ones form part of the understory. Some species form pure stands in areas with poor drainage or regular flooding, including \"Raphia hookeri\" which is common in coastal freshwater swamps in West Africa. Other palms live in tropical mountain habitats above , such as those in the genus \"Ceroxylon\" native to the Andes. Palms may also live in grasslands and scrublands, usually associated with a water source, and in desert oases such as the date palm. A few palms are adapted to extremely basic lime soils, while others are similarly adapted to extreme potassium deficiency and toxicity of heavy metals in serpentine soils.\nTaxonomy.\nPalms are a monophyletic group of plants, meaning the group consists of a common ancestor and all its descendants. Extensive taxonomic research on palms began with botanist H.E. Moore, who organized palms into 15 major groups based mostly on general morphological characteristics. The following classification, proposed by N.W. Uhl and J. Dransfield in 1987, is a revision of Moore's classification that organizes palms into 6 subfamilies. A few general traits of each subfamily are listed below.\nThe &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Phytelephantoideae is the sixth subfamily of Arecaceae in N.W. Uhl and J. Dransfield's 1987 classification. Members of this group have distinct monopodial flower clusters. Other distinct features include a gynoecium with five to 10 joined carpels, and flowers with more than three parts per whorl. Fruits are multiple-seeded and have multiple parts. From the modern phylogenomic data, the Phytelephantoideae are tribe in the Ceroxyloideae subfamily.\nCurrently, few extensive phylogenetic studies of the Arecaceae exist. In 1997, Baker \"et al.\" explored subfamily and tribe relationships using chloroplast DNA from 60 genera from all subfamilies and tribes. The results strongly showed the Calamoideae are monophyletic, and Ceroxyloideae and Coryphoideae are paraphyletic. The relationships of Arecoideae are uncertain, but they are possibly related to the Ceroxyloideae and Phytelephantoideae. Studies have suggested the lack of a fully resolved hypothesis for the relationships within the family is due to a variety of factors, including difficulties in selecting appropriate outgroups, homoplasy in morphological character states, slow rates of molecular evolution important for the use of standard DNA markers, and character polarization. However, hybridization has been observed among \"Orbignya\" and \"Phoenix\" species, and using chloroplast DNA in cladistic studies may produce inaccurate results due to maternal inheritance of the chloroplast DNA. Chemical and molecular data from non-organelle DNA, for example, could be more effective for studying palm phylogeny.\nRecently, nuclear genomes and transcriptomes have been used to reconstruct the phylogeny of palms. This has revealed, for example, that a whole-genome duplication event occurred early in the evolution of the Arecaceae lineage, that was not experienced by its sister clade, the Dasypogonaceae.\nFor a phylogenetic tree of the family, see the list of Arecaceae genera.\nEvolution.\nThe Arecaceae were the first modern family of monocots to appear in the fossil record around 80\u00a0million years ago (Mya), during the late Cretaceous period. The first modern species, such as \"Nypa fruticans\" and \"Acrocomia aculeata\", appeared 69\u00a0Mya, as evidenced by fossil \"Nypa\" pollen. Palms appear to have undergone an early period of adaptive radiation. By 60\u00a0Mya, many of the modern, specialized genera of palms appeared and became widespread and common, much more widespread than their range today. Because palms separated from the monocots earlier than other families, they developed more intrafamilial specialization and diversity. By tracing back these diverse characteristics of palms to the basic structures of monocots, palms may be valuable in studying monocot evolution. Several species of palms have been identified from flowers preserved in amber, including \"Palaeoraphe dominicana\" and \"Roystonea palaea\". Fossil evidence of them can also be found in samples of petrified palmwood.\nThe relationship between the subfamilies is shown in the following cladogram:\nUses.\nEvidence for cultivation of the date palm by Mesopotamians and other Middle Eastern peoples exists from more than 5,000 years ago, in the form of date wood, pits for storing dates, and other remains of the date palm in Mesopotamian sites. The date palm had a significant effect on the history of the Middle East and North Africa. In the text \"Date Palm Products\" (1993), W.H. Barreveld wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAn indication of the importance of palms in ancient times is that they are mentioned more than 30 times in the Bible, and at least 22 times in the Quran. The Torah also references the \"70 date palm trees\", which symbolize the 70 aspects of Torah that are revealed to those who \"eat of its fruit.\"\nArecaceae have great economic importance, including coconut products, oils, dates, palm syrup, ivory nuts, carnauba wax, rattan cane, raffia, and palm wood. This family supplies a large amount of the human diet and several other human uses, both by absolute amount produced and by number of species domesticated. This is far higher than almost any other plant family, sixth out of domesticated crops in the human diet, and first in total economic value produced \u2013 sharing the top spot with the Poaceae and Fabaceae. These human uses have also spread many Arecaceae species around the world.\nAlong with dates mentioned above, members of the palm family with human uses are numerous:\nEndangered species.\nLike many other plants, palms have been threatened by human intervention and exploitation. The greatest risk to palms is destruction of habitat, especially in the tropical forests, due to urbanization, wood-chipping, mining, and conversion to farmland. Palms rarely reproduce after such great changes in the habitat, and those with small habitat ranges are most vulnerable to them. The harvesting of heart of palm, a delicacy in salads, also poses a threat because it is derived from the palm's apical meristem, a vital part of the palm that cannot be regrown (except in domesticated varieties, e.g. of peach palm). The use of rattan palms in furniture has caused a major population decrease in these species that has negatively affected local and international markets, as well as biodiversity in the area. The sale of seeds to nurseries and collectors is another threat, as the seeds of popular palms are sometimes harvested directly from the wild. In 2006, at least 100 palm species were considered endangered, and nine species have been reported as recently extinct.\nHowever, several factors make palm conservation more difficult. Palms live in almost every type of warm habitat and have tremendous morphological diversity. Most palm seeds lose viability quickly, and they cannot be preserved in low temperatures because the cold kills the embryo. Using botanical gardens for conservation also presents problems, since they can rarely house more than a few plants of any species or truly imitate the natural setting. There is also the risk that cross-pollination can lead to hybrid species.\nThe Palm Specialist Group of the World Conservation Union (IUCN) began in 1984, and has performed a series of three studies to find basic information on the status of palms in the wild, use of wild palms, and palms under cultivation. Two projects on palm conservation and use supported by the World Wildlife Fund took place from 1985 to 1990 and 1986\u20131991, in the American tropics and southeast Asia, respectively. Both studies produced copious new data and publications on palms. Preparation of a global action plan for palm conservation began in 1991, supported by the IUCN, and was published in 1996.\nThe rarest palm known is \"Hyophorbe amaricaulis\". The only living individual remains at the Botanic Gardens of Curepipe in Mauritius.\nArthropod pests.\nSome pests are specialists to particular taxa. Pests that attack a variety of species of palms include:\nSymbolism.\nThe palm branch was a symbol of triumph and victory in classical antiquity. The Romans rewarded champions of the games and celebrated military successes with palm branches. Early Christians used the palm branch to symbolize the victory of the faithful over enemies of the soul, as in the Palm Sunday festival celebrating the triumphal entry of Jesus Christ into Jerusalem. In Judaism, the palm represents peace and plenty, and is one of the Four Species of Sukkot; the palm may also symbolize the Tree of Life in Kabbalah.\nThe canopies of the Rathayatra carts which carry the deities of Krishna and his family members in the cart festival of Jagganath Puri in India are marked with the emblem of a palm tree. Specifically it is the symbol of Krishna's brother, Baladeva.\nIn 1840, the American geologist Edward Hitchcock (1793\u20131864) published the first tree-like paleontology chart in his \"Elementary Geology\", with two separate trees of life for the plants and the animals. These are crowned (graphically) with the Palms and with Man.\nToday, the palm, especially the coconut palm, remains a symbol of the tropical island paradise.\nPalms appear on the flags and seals of several places where they are native, including those of Haiti, Guam, Saudi Arabia, Florida, and South Carolina.\nOther plants.\nSome species commonly called palms, though they are not true palms, include:\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45716", "revid": "28804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45716", "title": "Transporter (Star Trek)", "text": "Teleportation device installed on starships in Star Trek\nA transporter is a fictional teleportation machine used in the \"Star Trek\" universe. Transporters allow for teleportation by converting a person or object into an energy pattern (a process called \"dematerialization\"), then sending (\"beaming\") it to a target location or else returning it to the transporter, where it is reconverted into matter (\"rematerialization\"). The command often used to request activation of the transporter is \"Energize.\" \nIntroduced in \"\" in 1966, the transporter had predecessors in teleportation devices in other science fiction stories, such as the 1939 serial \"Buck Rogers\". The name and similar concepts have made their way to later science fiction scenarios, in literature (such as the \"Thousand Cultures\" series), games (\"SimEarth\"), etc.\nThe transporter was originally conceived as a device to convey characters from a starship to the surface of a planet without the need for expensive and time-consuming special effects to depict the starship or another craft physically landing. Malfunctioning transporters are also often used as a plot device to set up a variety of science fiction premises. The transporter has become a hallmark of the \"Star Trek\" franchise; the famous catchphrase \"Beam me up, Scotty\" (a misquote) refers to the use of the transporter on \"Star Trek: The Original Series\", operated by the character Montgomery Scott, presumably at the request of Captain Kirk. Transporter technology has been used in many subsequent \"Star Trek\" series.\nDesign.\nOn \"Star Trek: The Original Series\", the transporter was portrayed as a platform on which characters stand before being engulfed by a beam of light and transported to their destination. The transporter's special effect was originally created by turning a slow-motion camera upside down and photographing some backlit shiny grains of aluminium powder that were dropped between the camera and a black background; later series would eventually use computer animation for the effect. On \"The Original Series\", the transporter operator would activate the device by moving three sliders on a console. In the sequel series ', the sliders were replaced with three touch-sensitive light-up bars, which according to the ' were designed as a homage to the original sliders.\nNarrative function.\nCreator Gene Roddenberry's original plan did not include transporters, instead calling for characters to land the starship itself. However, this would have required unfeasible and unaffordable (for the 1960s) sets and model filming, as well as episode running time spent while landing, taking off, etc. The shuttlecraft was the next idea, but when filming began, the full-sized shooting model was not ready. Transporters were devised as a less expensive alternative, achieved by a simple fade-out/fade-in of the subject. Transporters first appear in the original pilot episode \"\".\nTransporter accidents.\nMany episodes of \"Star Trek\" series feature transporter accidents as a plot device: a malfunctioning transporter fails to rematerialize a person or object properly in some bizarre way that creates a science-fictional problem or ethical dilemma that characters must resolve. In various episodes, transporter accidents have been used to send characters to a parallel universe, or back in time; to split a character into two distinct individuals, or merge two characters into a single individual; and to regress adult characters to children, among a variety of other effects.\nPortrayal.\nFictional history.\nAccording to dialogue in the ' (\"ENT\") episode \"Daedalus\", the transporter was invented in the early 22nd century by Dr. Emory Erickson, who also became the first human to be successfully transported. Although the \"Enterprise\" (NX-01) has a transporter, the crew does not routinely use it for moving biological organisms. Instead, they generally prefer using shuttlepods or other means of transportation unless no other means of transportation are possible or feasible. The capability is rare; in \"The Andorian Incident\", the Andorians, technologically far superior to Starfleet in many regards, are explicitly stated not to possess the technology. In \"Chosen Realm\", a group of alien religious extremists who hijack the ship is unaware of it to the point that when Archer insists on sacrificing a crew member and claims that the device disintegrates matter rather than teleporting it, he is unhesitatingly taken at his word. The crew aboard the 23rd century USS \"Enterprise\" frequently use the transporter. By the 24th century, transporter travel was reliable and \"the safest way to travel\" according to dialogue in the ' (\"TNG\") episode \"Realm of Fear\".\nAccording to the \"\" episode \"Homefront\", Starfleet Academy cadets receive transporter rations, and the Sisko family once used a transporter to move furniture into a new home.\nDespite its frequent use, characters such as Leonard McCoy and Katherine Pulaski are reluctant to use the transporter, as the characters express in the \"Next Generation\" episodes \"Encounter at Farpoint\" and \"\", respectively. Reginald Barclay expresses his outright fear of transporting in \"Realm of Fear\".\nCapabilities and limitations.\nThe television series and films do not go into great detail about transporter technology. The \"\" claims that the devices transport objects in real time, accurate to the quantum level. The episode \"TNG\": \"Realm of Fear\" specifies the length of a transport under unusual circumstances would last \"... four or five seconds; about twice the normal time\" (making the length of a typical transport between 2 and 2.5 seconds). Heisenberg compensators remove uncertainty from the subatomic measurements, making transporter travel feasible. Further technology involved in transportation include a computer pattern buffer to enable a degree of leeway in the process. When asked \"How does the Heisenberg compensator work?\" by \"Time\" magazine, \"Star Trek\" technical adviser Michael Okuda responded: \"It works very well, thank you.\"\nAccording to \"The Original Series\" (\"TOS\") writers' guide, the effective range of a transporter is 40,000 kilometers. The \"TOS\" episode \"\" however, appears to indicate that the transporters' maximum range, during that time period in \"Star Trek\" history, is actually around 30,000 kilometers. Transporter operations have been disrupted or prevented by dense metals (\"TNG\": \"\"), solar flares (\"TNG\": \"\"), and other forms of radiation, including electromagnetic (\"TNG\": \"\"; \"TNG\": \"\") and nucleonic (\"TNG\": \"\"), and affected by ion storms (\"TOS\": \"\"). Transporting, in progress, has also been stopped by telekinetic powers (\"TNG\": \"\") and by brute strength (\"TNG\": \"\"). The \"TNG\" episode \"\" features a dangerous and experimental \"subspace transporter\" capable of interstellar distances and the Dominion had the ability to transport over great distances (\"DS9\": \"\"). The 40,000-kilometer limit is also referred to in \"ENT\": \"\". It was established in \"TOS\" episode \"\" that the transporter cannot be used when the ship's deflector shields are up.\nStarfleet transporters from the \"TNG\" era onward include a device that can detect and disable an active weapon (\"TNG\": \"\"), and a bio-filter to remove contagious microbes or viruses from an individual in transport (\"TNG\": \"\", \"TOS\": \"The Naked Time\"). The transporter can also serve a tactical purpose, such as beaming a photon grenade or photon torpedo to detonate at remote locations (\"TNG\": \"\", \"VOY\": \"\"), or to outright destroy objects (\"TNG\": \"Captain's Holiday\"). The \"TOS\" episode \"A Taste of Armageddon\" mentions Vendikar materializing fusion bombs over targets of enemy planet Eminiar VII in the course of theoretical computer warfare.\nKlingon transporters, as seen in \"\", have a harsh red light in contrast to Federation blue, and operate with complete silence (in the movie, no sound effects). Presumably this is to enhance the combat effectiveness of Klingon boarding parties. It is not made clear whether Klingon transporters are more risky for the boarders, but the warlike Klingons are likely not to be concerned about transport casualties in combat.\nWhenever a person or object is transported, the machine creates a memory file of the pattern. This has been used at least once in every \"Star Trek\" series to revert people adversely affected by a transport to their original state.\nVarious episodes of \"Deep Space Nine\" (\"DS9\") and \"Voyager\" (\"VOY\") have introduced two anti-transporter devices: transport inhibitors and transporter scramblers. Inhibitors prevent a transporter beam from \"locking on\" to whatever the device is attached to. Scramblers distort the pattern that is in transit, literally scrambling the atoms upon rematerialization, resulting in the destruction of inanimate objects and killing living beings by rematerializing them as masses of random tissue; this was gruesomely demonstrated in the \"DS9\" episode \"\".\nTransporter operations can also be curtailed when either the point of origin and/or the intended target site is moving at warp velocities. In the \"TNG\" episode \"\", a \"long-range\" or \"near-warp\" transport was required as a transporter beam cannot penetrate a warp field. (In the 2009 \"Star Trek\" film Kirk and Scotty beam aboard while the \"Enterprise\" is traveling at warp, however, the movie takes place in an alternate continuity, thus not affecting the Prime Continuity used in all previous media and the \"Star Trek\" Online computer game.) To deposit an away team on the planet Gravesworld while at the same time responding to a distress signal, the \"Enterprise\" would only drop out of warp drive just long enough to energize the transporter beam. Geordi La Forge personally performed the delicate operation, which involved compensating for the ship's relativistic motion. After materializing, Deanna Troi commented that for a moment she thought she was trapped in a nearby wall, to which Worf replied, \"For a moment, you were\". In later stories (\"TNG\": \"\" and \"TNG\": \"\"), it was confirmed that the transporter would work at warp only if the sending and receiving sites were moving at equal velocities.\nIn his book \"The Physics of Star Trek\", after explaining the difference between transporting information and transporting the actual atoms, Krauss notes that \"The \"Star Trek\" writers seem never to have got it exactly clear what they want the transporter to do. Does the transporter send the atoms and the bits, or just the bits?\" He notes that according to the canon definition of the transporter the former seems to be the case, but that that definition is inconsistent with a number of applications, particularly incidents, involving the transporter, which appear to involve only a transport of information, for example the way in which it splits Kirk into two versions in the episode \" or the way in which Riker is similarly split in the episode \". Krauss elaborates that: \"If the transporter carries both the matter stream and the information signal, this splitting phenomenon is impossible. The number of atoms you end up with has to be the same as the number you began with. There is no possible way to replicate people in this manner. On the other hand, if only the information were beamed up, one could imagine combining it with atoms that might be stored aboard a starship and making as many copies as wanted of an individual.\"\nReliability.\nAside from external influences causing disruptions in the normal operations of transporters, the technology itself has been known to fail on occasion, causing serious injury or usually death to those being transported. This was demonstrated in Star Trek's 1979 film debut, \"\" when a malfunction in the transporter sensor circuits resulted in insufficient signal being present at the \"Enterprise\" end to successfully rematerialize the two subjects, and Starfleet was unable to pull them back to where they had dematerialized from. The transporter system attempted to rematerialize what little signal was available, and despite the efforts of Kirk and Scotty, the system failed and both subjects vanished from the transporter pad and back to Starfleet, where both subjects died from radiation and disfiguration. Kirk, visibly shaken by what he had witnessed asked, \"Starfleet, do you have them?\", to which the response was made \"\"Enterprise\", what we got back didn't live long, fortunately\".\nBy the time of \"\", transporter technology has advanced considerably, meaning that accidents are now remote, if not near impossible. In the episode \"Realm of Fear\", Geordi La Forge states that there have been no more than two or three transporter accidents in the preceding ten years. Reference is also made to the advancement of transporter technology in the same episode, where Chief O'Brien states that each individual transporter pad has four redundant scanners whereby in the event a scanner fails the other three will take over, and that he has never lost anyone having been a transporter operator for over 20 years.\nIn \"\", four adult \"Enterprise\" crew members were beamed off a shuttle and rematerialized as children still in their adult-sized clothing. The incoming \"matter stream\" had a commensurate drop in mass; the operator had initially thought the reduction in mass meant \"we may have lost one\".\nIn the \"\" episode \"Tuvix\", a transporter accident combines both the physical and behavioral aspects of Lt. Tuvok and Neelix into a single being wearing a melange of each other's clothing. Notably, Tuvix was of equal mass of both Tuvok and Neelix combined. When they were later separated, Neelix and Tuvok were both wearing Starfleet uniforms.\nTechnological and scientific restrictions.\nWhile several characters have asserted that transporters cannot transport through a ship's shields or planetary defense shields, there are instances of this \"rule\" being broken through a technobabble solution (\"TNG\": \"\", \"DS9\": \"Trials and Tribble-ations\") or disregarded by the show's writers (\"Voyager\": \"\"). The non-canon \"TNG Technical Manual\" describes how a starship may create \"windows\" in the shield geometry through which a transporter beam may propagate at the expense of creating weak spots in the vessel's defensive field.\nIn ', Vice Admiral James T. Kirk and Lieutenant Saavik carry on a conversation during rematerialization. In ', Dr. Gillian Taylor jumps into Kirk's transporter beam during dematerialization, and rematerializes without any apparent ill effects. This is probably due to the \"annular confinement beam\", a component of the transporter mentioned in the various television episodes which serves to keep patterns separate from one another. In the same film, Mr. Spock is beamed onto a cloaked ship while walking.\nAccording to the \"TNG Technical Manual\", the transporter cannot move antimatter, but in the \"Voyager\" episode \"Dark Frontier\" \"Voyager\" transported a live photon torpedo equipped with antimatter onto a Borg ship. Also in \"TOS\" episode \"\" Kirk and a fellow crewman beam down to the surface of a planet with an antimatter bomb. The \"TAS\" episode \"One of Our Planets Is Missing\" has the \"Enterprise\" beaming a chunk of antimatter into a stasis box.\nIn the original series, beaming to and from the transporter chamber was a necessity. This is explained in the \"TOS\" episode \"Day of the Dove\". Spock and Scotty had said that doing a site-to-site transport, as they are referred to on the show, on board the ship could be risky. They could beam into a deck or other inanimate object and get stuck there. However, there are apparently safeguards in place to prevent people from being beamed into hostile environments such as under water and into lava pits, although it is possible to override this safety feature; for example, in the \"TOS\" episode \"And the Children Shall Lead\", two security guards are beamed into open space. In the following series, however, the transporter room seems to become mostly obsolete, the actual equipment notwithstanding. Characters are shown activating the transporter from ordinary consoles and beaming from place to place without apparent trouble. The main operator can likewise send those in transport anywhere with ease (for example, in the \"Voyager\" episode \", a medical console is used to transport a body from the morgue to the surgical bay). A possible explanation for this is put forward in the \", where such site-to-site transports would probably use twice as much energy as would be required for transport to or from the transporter room itself, since the subject would have to be beamed to the transporter, stored, then shunted to their destination. In addition, the six circles on the platform are generally used as targets for the subjects to stand on, but they do not appear to represent any limitation of the hardware to six or fewer people. People have been transported carrying others, in a coffin style transport, as well as animals, hay, and various inanimate objects.\nDialogue in \"Deep Space Nine\" indicates the existence of portable transporters, but these are never seen. The \"Next Generation\" episode \" features emergency transporter armbands, although these may have served only to activate a remote transporter. To confuse things more, \" featured the prototype \"emergency transport unit\". Tom Paris uses a portable transporter in the \"Voyager\" episode \"\". \nFor special effects reasons, in \"TOS\", people generally appear immobilized during transport, with the exception of Kirk in the episode \"That Which Survives\". However, by \"TNG\", characters can move within the confines of the transporter beam while being transported, although this is rarely shown. Persons being transported are at least sometimes able to perceive the functioning of the transporter while they are in transit. In the \"TOS\" episode \"\", the \"Enterprise\" transporter malfunctions while transporting Scotty from the disabled USS \"Constellation\" to the \"Enterprise\" due to a power drain, and Scotty's pattern is nearly lost in transit. As soon as he successfully materializes, Scotty asks the transporter operator with concern, \"What's the matter with that thing?\" and orders the transporter to be taken offline for emergency repair.\nSome species do not use transporter technology for a variety of reasons. In the first appearance of Trill in the \"TNG\" episode \"\", Trill were unable to be transported, once joined with a symbiont. It seems that was due to the symbiont being detected and removed by the transporter technology as an infestation in the host. Odan, the Trill host in this episode, is reluctant to say why he will not travel this way, and it only becomes apparent that he is carrying a symbiont when he is later injured. All the crew of the \"Enterprise\" react as if they have had no contact with this species before. It later becomes apparent that joined Trill have been working in the Federation for some time.\nIn season three of \"\", set in the 32nd century, personal transporters are used.\n\"Beam me up, Scotty\".\nThe famous catchphrase \"Beam me up, Scotty\" refers to the use of the transporter device to recall a crewmember to the ship; the device was often operated by chief engineer Montgomery Scott during \"\". However, it is a slight misquote that was never uttered verbatim on the show.\nThe closest actual phrase, \"Scotty, beam me up\", was spoken by Admiral Kirk in ' (1986). On the special edition DVD of \"Star Trek IV\", the text commentary provided by Michael and Denise Okuda (co-authors of \"The Star Trek Encyclopedia\" (1994) and ') indicates that this was the closest anyone came to using that catchphrase in an official \"Star Trek\" production.\nReal-world feasibility.\nIn August 2008, physicist Michio Kaku predicted in \"Discovery Channel Magazine\" that a teleportation device similar to those in \"Star Trek\" would be invented within 100 years. Physics students at University of Leicester calculated that to \"beam up\" just the genetic information of a single human cell (not the positions of the atoms, just the gene sequences) together with a \"brain state\" would take 4,850 trillion years assuming a 30 gigahertz microwave bandwidth. A study by Eric Davis for the US Air Force Research Laboratory of speculative teleportation technologies showed that to dematerialize a human body by heating it up to a million times the temperature of the core of the sun so that the quarks lose their binding energy and become massless and can be beamed at the speed of light in the closest physics equivalent to the \"Star Trek\" teleportation scenario would require the equivalent of 330 megatons of energy. To meet the information storage and transmission requirements would require current computing capabilities to continue to improve by a factor of 10 to 100 times per decade for 200 to 300 years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45720", "revid": "50998409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45720", "title": "Schleswig, Schleswig-Holstein", "text": "Schleswig (, , ; ; South Jutlandic: \"Sljasvig\"; ) is a town in the northeastern part of Schleswig-Holstein, Germany. It is the capital of the \"Kreis\" (district) Schleswig-Flensburg. It has a population of about 27,000, the main industries being leather and food processing. It takes its name from the Schlei (Slien), an inlet of the Baltic Sea at the end of which it sits, and \"vik\" or \"vig\" which means \"bay\" in Old Norse and Danish. Schleswig or Slesvig therefore means \"bay of the Schlei\".\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nToday's small town has a great past, as it served as a major supraregional trading center, a bishop's seat, the residence of the dukes of Gottorf, and finally the capital of a Prussian province. Many historic buildings in Schleswig bear witness to the town's former importance.\nThe Viking settlement of Hedeby, located south of the modern town, was first mentioned in 804. It was a powerful settlement in the Baltic region, dominating the area for more than 200 years. In 1050, following several destructions, the population was moved to the opposite shore of the Schlei, becoming the city of Schleswig. In 1066 Hedeby was finally destroyed, and Schleswig remained a part of the Danish kingdom.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSchleswig became a bishopric in 947 and remained so until 1624. The first church building has disappeared, and the current Schleswig Cathedral was built starting in 1138. In 1544, Gottorf Castle became the residence of the local rulers. The dukes of Gottorf were vassals of the Danish kings and ruled over much of present-day Schleswig-Holstein. In 1721, when the Great Northern War ended, the dukes of Gottorf lost their power and most of their land, including Gottorf, became Danish crown land. After the Second Schleswig War (1864), Schleswig was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia in 1867. Until 1917, Schleswig was the capital of the Prussian province of Schleswig-Holstein before it had to relinquish this function to Kiel. However, it remains the seat of the state's Higher Regional Court (Oberlandesgericht) to this day.\nGeography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSchleswig lies at the western end of the Schlei F\u00f6rde, which separates the two peninsulas of Angeln and Schwansen, and is on the western edge of the Schleswig-Holstein Uplands on the transition to the Geest country. The urban area ranges from 0 to above sea level. Brautsee (lake) is in the town.\nThe nearest major cities are Flensburg, Husum and Kiel. Autobahn 7 runs immediately west of the city. Highways 76 and 77 end in Schleswig and B\u00a0201 runs to the north of the town. Schleswig station is a stop for InterCity and Intercity-Express trains and is on the Hamburg\u2013Neum\u00fcnster\u2013Flensburg and Husum\u2013Kiel lines.\nClimate.\nThe climate is oceanic (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"), humid and mild with a slight continental influence. The annual mean temperature is 8\u00a0\u00b0C and precipitation averages 925\u00a0mm.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nSchleswig is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45723", "revid": "1233313", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45723", "title": "Academy Award, Best Short Subject, Novelty", "text": ""}
{"id": "45724", "revid": "2273576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45724", "title": "Panthera leo", "text": ""}
{"id": "45725", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45725", "title": "National parks", "text": ""}
{"id": "45726", "revid": "8390765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45726", "title": "Academy Award for Best Title Writing", "text": ""}
{"id": "45728", "revid": "49291118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45728", "title": "Hamburger", "text": "Dish with patty between buns\nA hamburger, often known as a burger, consists of fillings\u2014usually a patty of ground meat, typically beef\u2014placed inside a sliced bun, sesame seed bun, or bread roll. The patties are often served with lettuce, tomato, onion, pickles, bacon, or chilis. The filling of the burger can be topped with condiments such as ketchup, mustard, mayonnaise, relish or a \"special sauce\", often a variation of Thousand Island dressing. A burger with the patty topped with cheese is called a cheeseburger. Under some definitions, a hamburger is considered a sandwich.\nHamburgers are typically associated with fast-food restaurants and diners but are also sold at other restaurants, including high-end establishments. There are many international and regional variations of hamburgers. Some of the largest multinational fast-food chains feature burgers as one of their core products: McDonald's Big Mac and Burger King's Whopper have become global icons of American culture.\nEtymology and terminology.\nThe term \"hamburger\" originally derives from Hamburg, Germany. However, it's contentious what the exact connection between the food item and the city is.\nBy linguistic rebracketing, the term \"burger\" eventually became a self-standing word that is associated with many different types of sandwiches that are similar to a hamburger, but contain different meats such as buffalo in the buffalo burger, venison, kangaroo, chicken, turkey, elk, lamb or fish such as salmon in the salmon burger, and even with meatless sandwiches as is the case of the veggie burger.\nThe term \"burger\" can also be applied to a meat patty on its own. Since the term \"hamburger\" usually implies beef, for clarity \"burger\" may be prefixed with the type of meat or meat substitute used, as in beef burger, turkey burger, bison burger, or portobello burger.\nHistory.\nVersions of the meal have been served for over a century, but its origins are still unclear. The 1758 edition of the book \"The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy\" by Hannah Glasse included a recipe called \"Hamburgh sausage\", suggesting that it should be served \"roasted with toasted bread under it.\" A similar snack was also popular in Hamburg under the name of \"Rundst\u00fcck warm\" (\"bread roll warm\") in 1869 or earlier, and was supposedly eaten by emigrants on their way to America. However, this may have contained roasted beefsteak rather than Frikadelle. It has alternatively been suggested that Hamburg steak served between two pieces of bread and eaten by Jewish passengers travelling from Hamburg to New York on Hamburg America Line vessels (which began operations in 1847) became so well known that the shipping company gave its name to the dish. It is not known which of these stories is the reason hamburgers got their name.\nThere is a reference to a \"Hamburg steak\" as early as 1884 in \"The Boston Journal\".[OED, under \"steak\"] On July 5, 1896, the \"Chicago Daily Tribune\" made a highly specific claim regarding a \"hamburger sandwich\" in an article about a \"Sandwich Car\": \"A distinguished favorite, only five cents, is Hamburger steak sandwich, the meat for which is kept ready in small patties and 'cooked while you wait' on the gasoline range.\"\nClaims of invention.\n\"Hamburger steak sandwiches\" have been advertised in U.S. newspapers from New York to Hawaii since at least the 1890s, but the inventor is unclear. \nThe invention of hamburgers is attributed to various people, including Charlie Nagreen, Frank and Charles Menches, Oscar Weber Bilby, Fletcher Davis, and Louis Lassen. White Castle traces the origin of the hamburger to Otto Krause in Hamburg, Germany. Some have pointed to a recipe for \"Hamburgh sausages\" on toasted bread, published in \"The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy\" by Hannah Glasse in 1758, as a notable first source of the dish.\nHamburgers gained national recognition in the U.S. at the 1904 St. Louis World's Fair when the \"New York Tribune\" referred to the hamburger as \"the innovation of a food vendor on the pike.\" No conclusive argument has ended the dispute over invention. An article from ABC News sums up: \"One problem is that there is little written history. Another issue is that the burger spread happened largely at the World's Fair, from tiny vendors that came and went instantly. And it is entirely possible that more than one person came up with the idea at the same time in different parts of the country.\"\nLouis Lassen.\nThe restaurant Louis' Lunch in New Haven, Connecticut, founded in 1895, has long claimed to be the \"birthplace of the hamburger sandwich\". Ostensibly, around 1900, Danish immigrant Louis Lassen found himself out of steaks when a customer ordered a quick hot meal. Taking ground beef trimmings, Louis made a patty and grilled it, putting it between two slices of toast. (Some critics, such as \"New York Magazine\" food editor Joshua Ozersky, claim that this sandwich was not a hamburger because the bread was toasted.) \"New York Magazine\" wrote in 1977 that, supposedly, \"The dish actually had no name until some rowdy sailors from Hamburg named the meat on a bun after themselves years later\". This origin story has been amplified by Connecticut Congresswoman Rosa DeLauro and the Library of Congress\u2014notwithstanding earlier references to hamburgers elsewhere in the country.\nCharlie Nagreen.\nOne of the earliest claims of hamburger invention comes from Charlie Nagreen, who in 1885 sold a meatball between two slices of bread at the Seymour Fair now sometimes called the Outagamie County Fair. The Seymour Community Historical Society of Seymour, Wisconsin, credits Nagreen, also referred to as \"Hamburger Charlie\", with the invention. Nagreen was 15 when he reportedly sold pork sandwiches at the 1885 Seymour Fair so customers could eat while walking. The Historical Society explains that Nagreen named the hamburger after the Hamburg steak with which local German immigrants were familiar.\nOtto Krause.\nAccording to White Castle, Otto Krause was the inventor of the hamburger. In 1891, he created a beef patty cooked in butter and topped with a fried egg. German sailors later omitted the fried egg.\nOscar Weber Bilby.\nThe family of Oscar Weber Bilby claims the first-known hamburger on a bun was served on July 4, 1891, on Grandpa Oscar's farm. The bun was a yeast bun. In 1995, Governor Frank Keating proclaimed that the first true hamburger on a bun was created and consumed in Tulsa, Oklahoma in 1891, calling Tulsa, \"The Real Birthplace of the Hamburger\".\nFrank and Charles Menches.\nFrank and Charles Menches claim to have sold a ground beef sandwich at the Erie County Fair in 1885 in Hamburg, New York. During the fair, they ran out of pork sausage for their sandwiches and substituted beef. The brothers exhausted their supply of sausage, so they purchased chopped-up beef from a butcher, Andrew Klein. Historian Joseph Streamer wrote that the meat was from Stein's market, not Klein's, despite Stein's having sold the market in 1874. The story notes that, in this case, the name of the hamburger comes from Hamburg, New York, not Hamburg, Germany. Frank Menches's obituary in \"The New York Times\" states that these events took place at the 1892 Summit County Fair in Akron, Ohio.\nFletcher Davis.\nFletcher Davis of Athens, Texas, claimed to have invented the hamburger. According to oral histories, he opened a lunch counter in Athens in the 1880s and served a 'burger' of fried ground beef patties with mustard and Bermuda onion between two slices of bread, with a pickle on the side. The story is that in 1904, Davis and his wife Ciddy ran a sandwich stand at the St. Louis World's Fair. Historian Frank X. Tolbert noted that Athens resident Clint Murchison said his grandfather dated the hamburger to the 1880s with Fletcher \"Old Dave\" Davis. A photo of \"Old Dave's Hamburger Stand\" from 1904 was sent to Tolbert as evidence of the claim.\nOther hamburger-steak claims.\nVarious claims of the invention relate to the term \"hamburger steak\" without mention of its being a sandwich. The alleged first printed American menu listing hamburgers is an 1834 menu from Delmonico's in New York. However, the printer of the original menu was not yet in business in 1834. In 1889, a menu from Walla Walla Union in Washington offered hamburger steak as a menu item.\nBetween 1871 and 1884, \"Hamburg Beefsteak\" was on the \"Breakfast and Supper Menu\" of the Clipper Restaurant at 311/313 Pacific Street in San Fernando, California. It cost 10 cents\u2014the same price as mutton chops, pig's feet in batter, and stewed veal. It was not, however, on the dinner menu. Only \"Pig's Head\", \"Calf Tongue\", and \"Stewed Kidneys\" were listed. Another claim ties the hamburger to Summit County, in New York or Ohio. Summit County, Ohio, exists, but Summit County, New York, does not.\nIn the United States.\nHamburgers are often a feature of fast food restaurants. In the United States, the hamburger patties served by major fast food chains are usually mass-produced in factories and then frozen for delivery to the site. These hamburgers are relatively thin, differing from the traditional American hamburger prepared in homes and conventional restaurants, which is thicker and prepared by hand from ground beef. Most American hamburgers are round, but some fast-food chains, such as Wendy's, Krystal, and White Castle sell square-cut hamburgers. Hamburgers in fast food restaurants are usually grilled on a flat top, but some establishments, such as Burger King, use a gas flame grilling process. At conventional American restaurants, hamburgers may be ordered \"rare\" but normally are served medium-well or well-done for food safety reasons. Fast food restaurants do not usually offer this option.\nThe McDonald's fast-food chain sells the Big Mac, one of the world's top-selling hamburgers, with an estimated 550 million sold annually in the United States. Many other major fast-food chains, also rely heavily on hamburger sales, including Burger King (known as Hungry Jack's in Australia), A&amp;W, Culver's, Whataburger, Carl's Jr./Hardee's chain, Wendy's, Jack in the Box, Krystal, White Castle, Cook Out, Harvey's, Hesburger, Supermac's, Shake Shack, In-N-Out Burger, Five Guys, Fatburger, Vera's, Burgerville, Back Yard Burgers, Lick's Homeburger, Roy Rogers, Smashburger, and Sonic. Fuddruckers and Red Robin are hamburger chains that specialize in the mid-tier \"restaurant-style\" variety of hamburgers.\nSome restaurants offer elaborate hamburgers using expensive cuts of meat and various cheeses, toppings, and sauces. One example is the Bobby's Burger Palace chain founded by celebrity chef and Food Network star Bobby Flay.\nHamburgers are often served as a fast dinner, picnic, or party food and are often cooked outdoors on barbecue grills.\nA high-quality hamburger patty is made entirely of ground (minced) beef and seasonings. These may be described as \"all-beef hamburger\" or \"all-beef patties\" to distinguish them from inexpensive hamburgers made with cost-savers like added flour, textured vegetable protein, ammonia treated defatted beef trimmings, advanced meat recovery, or other fillers. In the 1930s, ground liver was sometimes added. Some cooks prepare their patties with binders like eggs or breadcrumbs. Seasonings may include salt and pepper, parsley, onions, soy sauce, Thousand Island dressing, onion soup mix, or Worcestershire sauce. Many name-brand seasoned salt products are also used.\nCost.\nAccording to Bloomberg News, the average price of a fast-food restaurant burger in the United States increased by 16% between 2019 and 2024, reaching $8.41 in the second quarter of 2024. Specifically, the iconic Big Mac at McDonald's cost $5.29 during the same period, representing a 21% price increase over the same five-year span.\nThe cost of Big Mac hamburgers in different countries has been used by The Economist to easily compare purchasing power of different currencies in the Big Mac Index.\nSafety.\nRaw hamburgers may contain harmful bacteria that can produce food-borne illnesses such as , due to the occasional initial improper preparation of the meat, so caution is required for safety during handling and cooking. Because of the potential for food-borne illness, the USDA, recommends hamburgers be cooked to an internal temperature of . If cooked to this temperature, they are considered well-done.\nVariations.\nOther meats.\nBurgers can also be made with meat other than beef. Examples include:\nVeggie burgers.\nVegetarian and vegan burgers can be formed from a meat analogue. These may include, when formed into patties, tofu, TVP, seitan (wheat gluten), beans, grains, or an assortment of vegetables.\nJohn Harvey Kellogg developed a peanut-based meat substitute which he called Nuttose in the 1890s. In the 1960s and 1970s, some companies began making soy-based burgers, including Loma Linda, Boca Burger and Lightlife. Other producers entered business with new burgers in the 2000s, including Gardein, Impossible Foods and Beyond Meat. These products are primarily made of peas, soy, mushrooms, yeast, beans, and/or nuts.\nBy country.\nUnited States and Canada.\nThe hamburger is considered a national dish of the United States. In the United States and Canada, burgers may be classified as either fast food hamburgers or individually prepared burgers made in homes and restaurants. The latter are often prepared with a variety of toppings, including lettuce, tomato, onion, and often sliced pickles (or pickle relish). French fries (or commonly poutine in Canada) often accompany the burger. Cheese (usually processed cheese slices but often Cheddar, Swiss, pepper jack, or blue), may be either melted directly on the meat patty or crumbled on top.\nCondiments might be added to a hamburger or may be offered separately on the side, including ketchup, mustard, mayonnaise, relish, salad dressings and barbecue sauce. Other toppings can include bacon, avocado or guacamole, sliced saut\u00e9ed mushrooms, cheese sauce, chili (usually without beans), fried egg, scrambled egg, feta cheese, blue cheese, salsa, pineapple, jalape\u00f1os and other kinds of chili peppers, anchovies, slices of ham or bologna, pastrami or teriyaki-seasoned beef, tartar sauce, french fries, onion rings or potato chips.\nA patty melt consists of a patty, saut\u00e9ed onions and cheese between two slices of rye bread. The sandwich is then buttered and fried.\nA slider is a tiny square hamburger patty served on an equally small bun and usually sprinkled with diced onions. According to the earliest citations, the name originated aboard U.S. Navy ships due to how greasy burgers slid across the galley grill as the ship sailed. Other versions claim the term \"slider\" originated from the hamburgers that were so greasy they practically slid down flight line galleys at military airfields, or from the fact that the burgers' small size allowed them to \"slide\" right down the throat in one or two bites.\nMarketing.\nIn the United States, \"steak burger\" is a marketing term for a hamburger claimed to be of superior quality. In Australia, the term refers to a burger bun containing a steak and is more commonly called a steak sandwich.\nUse of the term \"steakburger\" dates to the 1920s in the United States. In the U.S. in 1934, A.H. \"Gus\" Belt, the founder of Steak 'n Shake, devised a higher-quality hamburger and offered it as a \"steakburger\" to customers at the company's first location in Normal, Illinois. This burger used a combination of ground meat from the strip portion of T-bone steak and sirloin steak in its preparation. Steakburgers are a primary menu item at Steak 'n Shake restaurants, and the company's registered trademarks included \"original steakburger\" and \"famous for steakburgers\". Steak 'n Shake's \"Prime Steakburgers\" are now made of choice grade brisket and chuck.\nIn 2004, Steak 'n Shake sued Burger King over the latter's use of the term \"Steak Burger\" in conjunction with one of its menu items, claiming that such use infringed on trademark rights.\nThe case was settled out of court.\nFrance.\nIn 2012, according to a study by the NDP cabinet, the French consume 14 hamburgers in restaurants per year per person, placing them fourth in the world and second in Europe, just behind the British. A popular burger chain in France is Quick.\nAccording to a study by Gira Conseil on the consumption of hamburgers in France in 2013, 75% of traditional French restaurants offer at least one hamburger on their menu, and for a third of these restaurants, it has become the leader in the range of dishes, ahead of rib steaks, grills, or fish.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, burgers (called \"hamburguesas\") are served with ham and slices of American cheese fried on top of the meat patty. The toppings include avocado, jalape\u00f1o slices, shredded lettuce, onion, and tomato. The bun has mayonnaise, ketchup, and mustard. Bacon may also be added, which can be fried or grilled along with the meat patty. A slice of pineapple may be added to a hamburger for a \"Hawaiian hamburger\".\nSome restaurants' burgers also have barbecue sauce, and others replace the ground patty with sirloin, Al pastor meat, barbacoa, or fried chicken breast. Many burger chains from the United States can be found in Mexico, including Carl's Jr., Sonic, McDonald's, and Burger King.\nUnited Kingdom and Ireland.\nHamburgers in the UK and Ireland are very similar to those in the US, and the same big two chains dominate there as in the U.S.\u00a0\u2014 McDonald's and Burger King. The menus offered to both countries are virtually identical, although portion sizes tend to be smaller in the UK. In Ireland, the burger-serving food outlet Supermacs is widespread throughout the country. In Ireland, Abrakebabra, which began as a kebab restaurant, and Eddie Rocket's are also major chains.\nA native rival to the big two U.S. chains was the fast-food chain popular in Britain, Wimpy, originally known as Wimpy Bar (opened 1954 at the Lyon's Corner House in Coventry Street London), which served its hamburgers on a plate with British-style chips, accompanied by cutlery and delivered to the customer's table. In the late 1970s, to compete with McDonald's, Wimpy began to open American-style counter-service restaurants, and the brand disappeared from many UK high streets when those restaurants were re-branded as Burger Kings between 1989 and 1990 by the then-owner of both brands, Grand Metropolitan. A management buyout in 1990 split the brands again, and now Wimpy table-service restaurants can still be found in many town centers, while new counter-service Wimpys are now often found at highway service stations.\nHamburgers are also available from mobile kiosks, commonly known as \"burger vans\", particularly at outdoor events such as soccer games. These burgers are usually served without any form of salad, only fried onions and a choice of tomato ketchup, mustard, or brown sauce.\nHamburgers and veggie burgers served with chips, and salad are standard pub grub menu items. Many pubs specialize in \"gourmet\" burgers. These are usually high-quality minced steak patties topped with things such as blue cheese, brie, avocado, or anchovy mayonnaise.. Some British pubs serve burger patties made from more exotic meats, including venison burgers (sometimes nicknamed Bambi Burgers), bison burgers, ostrich burgers, and in some Australian-themed pubs even kangaroo burgers can be purchased. These burgers are served similarly to the traditional hamburger but are sometimes served with a different sauce, including redcurrant sauce, mint sauce, or plum sauce.\nIn the early 21st century, \"premium\" hamburger chains and independent restaurants have arisen, selling burgers produced from meat stated to be of high quality and often organic, usually served to eat on the premises rather than to take to-go. Chains include Gourmet Burger Kitchen, Ultimate Burger, Hamburger Union, and Byron Hamburgers in London. Independent restaurants such as Meatmarket and Dirty Burger developed a style of rich, juicy burger in 2012 which is known as a \"dirty burger\" or \"third-wave burger\".\nIn the UK, as in North America and Japan, the term \"burger\" can refer simply to the patty, be it beef, some other kind of meat, or vegetarian.\nAustralia and New Zealand.\nFast food franchises sell American-style fast-food hamburgers in Australia and New Zealand. The traditional Australasian hamburgers are usually bought from fish and chip shops or milk bars rather than from chain restaurants. These traditional hamburgers are becoming less common as older-style fast food outlets decrease in number. The hamburger meat is almost always ground beef, or \"mince\", as it is more commonly referred to in Australia and New Zealand. They often include tomato, lettuce, grilled onion, and meat, at least. This is known in Australia as a \"plain hamburger\", and may also include cheese, pineapple, a fried egg, beetroot, and bacon. If all these optional ingredients are included, it is known in Australia as a \"burger with the lot\".\nIn Australia and New Zealand, as in the United Kingdom, the word \"sandwich\" is generally reserved for two \"slices\" of bread (from a loaf) with fillings in between them. This is unlike in American English where a \"sandwich\" is fillings between two pieces of any kind of bread, not only slices of bread. As such, in Australia and New Zealand, \"burgers\" are not generally considered to be \"sandwiches\". The term \"burger\" is applied to any cut bun with a hot filling, even when the filling does not contain beef, such as a chicken burger (generally with chicken breast rather than chicken mince), salmon burger, pulled pork burger, veggie burger, etc.\nThe only variance between the two countries' hamburgers is that New Zealand's equivalent to \"The Lot\" often contains a steak (beef). The condiments regularly used are barbecue sauce and tomato sauce. The traditional Australasian hamburger never includes mayonnaise. The McDonald's \"McOz\" Burger is partway between American and Australian style burgers, having beetroot and tomato in an otherwise typical American burger; however, it is no longer a part of the menu. Likewise, McDonald's in New Zealand created a Kiwiburger, similar to a Quarter Pounder, but including salad, beetroot, and a fried egg. The Hungry Jack's (Burger King) \"Aussie Burger\" has tomato, lettuce, onion, cheese, bacon, beetroot, egg, ketchup, and a meat patty, while adding pineapple is an upcharge. It is essentially a \"Burger with the lot\" but uses the standard Hungery Jack's circular breakfast egg rather than the fully fried egg used by local fish shops.\nChina.\nIn China, due to the branding of their sandwiches by McDonald's and KFC restaurants in China, the word \"burger\" () refers to all sandwiches that consist of two pieces of bun and a meat patty in between.\nA popular Chinese street food, known as (), consists of meat (most commonly pork) sandwiched between two buns. has been called the \"Chinese hamburger\". Since the sandwich dates back to the Qin dynasty (221\u2013206 BC) and fits the aforementioned Chinese word for burger, Chinese media have claimed that the hamburger was invented in China.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, hamburgers can be served in a bun, called , or without a bun, which is known as or \"hamburg\", short for \"hamburg steak\".\n\"Hamburg steaks\" (served without buns) are similar to what are known as Salisbury steaks in the US. They are made from minced beef, pork, or a blend of the two mixed with minced onions, eggs, breadcrumbs, and spices. They are served with brown sauce (or demi-glace in restaurants) with vegetable or salad sides, or occasionally in Japanese curries. Hamburgers may be served in casual, Western-style suburban restaurant chains known in Japan as \"family restaurants\".\nHamburgers with buns are predominantly the domain of fast food chains. Japan has homegrown hamburger chain restaurants such as MOS Burger, First Kitchen, and Freshness Burger. Local varieties of burgers served in Japan include teriyaki burgers, burgers (containing ) and burgers containing shrimp . Some of the more unusual examples include the rice burger, where the bun is made of rice, and the luxury 1,000-yen (US$10) \"Takumi Burger\" (meaning \"artisan taste\"), featuring avocados, freshly grated wasabi, and other rare seasonal ingredients. In terms of the actual patty, there are burgers made with Kobe beef, butchered from cows that are fed with beer and massaged daily. McDonald's Japan also recently in 2021 launched a McPork burger made with US pork. McDonald's has been gradually losing market share in Japan to these local hamburger chains due partly to the preference of Japanese diners for fresh ingredients and more refined, \"upscale\" hamburger offerings.\nDenmark.\nIn Denmark, the hamburger was introduced in 1949, though it was called the b\u00f8fsandwich. There are many variations. While the original b\u00f8fsandwich was simply a generic meat patty containing a mix of beef and horse meat, with slightly different garnish (mustard, ketchup, and soft onions), it has continued to evolve. Today, a b\u00f8fsandwich usually contains a beef patty; pickled cucumber; raw, pickled, fried, or soft onions; pickled red beets; mustard; ketchup; remoulade; and is often overflowing with brown gravy, which is sometimes even poured on top of the assembled b\u00f8fsandwich. The original b\u00f8fsandwich is still on the menu at the same restaurant from which it originated in 1949, now run by the original owner's grandson.\nFollowing the popularity of the b\u00f8fsandwich, many variations sprung up, using different types of meat instead of the beef patty. One variation, the fl\u00e6skestegssandwich, grew especially popular. This variation replaces the minced beef patty with slices of pork loin or belly and typically uses sweet-and-sour pickled red cabbage, mayonnaise, mustard, and pork rinds as garnish.\nToday, the b\u00f8fsandwich, fl\u00e6skestegssandwich, and their many variations co-exist with the more typical hamburger, with the opening of the first Burger King restaurant in 1977 popularizing the United States dish in Denmark. Many local, high-end burger restaurants dot the major cities, including Popl, an offshoot of Noma.\nEast Asia.\nRice burgers mentioned above are also available in several East Asian countries such as Taiwan and South Korea. Lotteria is a prominent hamburger franchise in Japan owned by the South Korean Lotte group, with outlets also in China, South Korea, Vietnam, and Taiwan. In addition to selling beef hamburgers, they have hamburgers made from squid, pork, tofu, and shrimp. Variations available in South Korea include Bulgogi burgers and Kimchi burgers.\nIn the Philippines, a wide range of major U.S. fast-food franchises are well represented, together with local imitators, often amended to the local palate. The chain McDonald's (locally nicknamed \"McDo\") has a range of burger and chicken dishes often accompanied by plain steamed rice, or French fries. The Philippines boasts its own burger chain called Jollibee, which offers burger meals and chicken, including a signature burger called \"Champ\". Jollibee now has several outlets in the United States, the SWANA region, and East Asia.\nIndia.\nIn India, where there are cultural beliefs against eating beef (which stem from Hindu religious practice) and pork (which stems from Islamic religious practice), the term \"burger\" refers to a variety of sandwiches usually made from chicken or vegetable patties. Accordingly, most fast food chains and restaurants in India do not serve beef. McDonald's in India offers the \"Maharaja Mac\" instead of the Big Mac, substituting the beef patties with chicken.\nThe \"vada pav\", consisting of a deep-fried potato patty dipped in gram flour batter, is sometimes called the Bombay burger.\nPakistan.\nIn Pakistan, apart from in American fast food chains, burgers can be found in stalls near shopping areas. The best known is the \"shami burger\". This is made from \"shami kebab\", made by mixing lentils and minced lamb. Onions, scrambled eggs, and ketchup are the most popular toppings.\nMalaysia.\nFast-food burger restaurants in Malaysia typically sell eggs and fried chicken in addition to U.S.-style burgers. A popular local brand is Ramly Burger, which combines a standard hamburger with an omelette.\nMongolia.\nIn Mongolia, a recent surge in popularity of fast food due to the sudden influx of foreign influence has led to increasing prominence of the hamburger. Specialized fast food restaurants serving to Mongolian tastes have sprung up and seen great success.\nTurkey.\nIn Turkey, in addition to the internationally familiar offerings, numerous localized variants of the hamburger may be found, such as the Islak Burger (lit.\u2009'Wet-Burger'), which is a beef slider doused in seasoned tomato sauce and steamed inside a special glass chamber, and has its origins in the Turkish fast food retailer Kizilkayalar. Other variations include lamb burgers and offal-burgers, which are offered by local fast food businesses and global chains alike, such as McDonald's and Burger King. Almost all major fast food chains deliver.\nYugoslavia and Serbia.\nIn the former Yugoslavia, and originally in Serbia, there is a local version of the hamburger known as the \"pljeskavica\". It is often served as a patty but may also have a bun.\nBelgium and Netherlands.\nThroughout Belgium and in some eateries in the Netherlands, a Bicky Burger is sold that combines pork, chicken, and horse meat. The hamburger, usually fried, is served between a bun, sprinkled with sesame seeds. It often comes with a specific \"Bickysaus\" (Bicky dressing) made with mayonnaise, mustard, cabbage, and onion.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45729", "revid": "40890488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45729", "title": "Panthera", "text": "Genus within Felidae\nPanthera is a genus within the family Felidae, and one of two extant genera in the subfamily Pantherinae. It contains the largest living members of the cat family. There are five living species: the jaguar, leopard, lion, snow leopard and tiger. Numerous extinct species are also named, including the cave lion and American lion.\nEtymology.\nThe word derives from Classical Latin , itself from the Ancient Greek ().\nCharacteristics.\nIn \"Panthera\" species, the dorsal profile of the skull is flattish or evenly convex. The frontal interorbital area is not noticeably elevated, and the area behind the elevation is less steeply sloped. The basic cranial axis is nearly horizontal. The inner chamber of the bullae is large, the outer small. The partition between them is close to the external auditory meatus. The convexly rounded chin is sloping.\nAll \"Panthera\" species have an incompletely ossified hyoid bone and a specially adapted larynx with large vocal folds covered in a fibro-elastic pad; these characteristics enable them to roar. Only the snow leopard cannot roar, as it has shorter vocal folds of that provide a lower resistance to airflow; it was therefore proposed to be retained in the genus \"Uncia\".\n\"Panthera\" species can prusten, which is a short, soft, snorting sound; it is used during contact between friendly individuals. The roar is an especially loud call with a distinctive pattern that depends on the species.\nEvolution.\nGenetic studies indicate that the pantherine cats diverged from the subfamily Felinae between six and ten million years ago. The genus \"Neofelis\" is sister to \"Panthera\".\nThe geographic origin of the genus \"Panthera\" is uncertain, though the earliest known definitive species \"Panthera principialis\" is from Tanzania. \"P. blytheae\" from northern Central Asia, originally described as the oldest known \"Panthera\" species, is suggested to have similar skull features to the snow leopard, but subsequent studies have since agreed that it is not a member of or a related species of the snow leopard lineage and that it belongs to a different genus \"Palaeopanthera\". The tiger, snow leopard, and clouded leopard genetic lineages likely dispersed in Southeast Asia during the Late Miocene.\nThe clouded leopard appears to have diverged about https://\u00a0million years ago. \"Panthera\" diverged from other cat species about https://\u00a0million years ago and then evolved into the species tiger about https://\u00a0million years ago, snow leopard about https://\u00a0million years ago and leopard about https://\u00a0million years ago. Mitochondrial sequence data from fossils suggest that the American lion (\"P. atrox\") is a sister lineage to \"Panthera spelaea\" (the Eurasian cave or steppe lion) that diverged about https://\u00a0million years ago, and that both \"P. atrox\" and \"P. spelaea\" are most closely related to lions among living \"Panthera\" species. The snow leopard is nested within \"Panthera\" and is the sister species of the tiger.\nThe extinct species \"Panthera gombaszogensis\", was probably closely related to the modern jaguar. The first fossil remains were excavated in Olivola, in Italy, and date to https://\u00a0million years ago.\nFossil remains found in South Africa that appear to belong within the \"Panthera\" lineage date to about https:// 3.8.\nClassification.\n\"Panthera\" was named and described by Lorenz Oken in 1816 who placed all the spotted cats in this group. During the 19th and 20th centuries, various explorers and staff of natural history museums suggested numerous subspecies, or at times called \"races\", for all \"Panthera\" species. The taxonomist Reginald Innes Pocock reviewed skins and skulls in the zoological collection of the Natural History Museum, London, and grouped subspecies described, thus shortening the lists considerably. Reginald Innes Pocock revised the classification of this genus in 1916 as comprising the tiger (\"P. tigris\"), lion (\"P. leo\"), jaguar (\"P. onca\"), and leopard (\"P. pardus\") on the basis of common features of their skulls. Since the mid-1980s, several \"Panthera\" species became subjects of genetic research, mostly using blood samples of captive individuals. Study results indicate that many of the lion and leopard subspecies are questionable because of insufficient genetic distinction between them. Subsequently, it was proposed to group all African leopard populations to \"P. p. pardus\" and retain eight subspecific names for Asian leopard populations. Results of genetic analysis indicate that the snow leopard (formerly \"Uncia uncia\") also belongs to the genus \"Panthera\" (\"P. uncia\"), a classification that was accepted by IUCN Red List assessors in 2008.\nBased on genetic research, it was suggested to group all living sub-Saharan lion populations into \"P. l. leo\".\nResults of phylogeographic studies indicate that the Western and Central African lion populations are more closely related to those in India and form a different clade than lion populations in Southern and East Africa; southeastern Ethiopia is an admixture region between North African and East African lion populations.\nBlack panthers do not form a distinct species, but are melanistic specimens of the genus, most often encountered in the leopard and jaguar.\nContemporary species.\nThe following list of the genus \"Panthera\" is based on the taxonomic assessment in \"Mammal Species of the World\" and reflects the taxonomy revised in 2017 by the Cat Classification Task Force of the Cat Specialist Group:\nExtinct species and subspecies.\nOther, now invalid, species have also been described, such as \"Panthera crassidens\" from South Africa, which was later found to be based on a mixture of leopard and cheetah fossils. A \"Panthera dhokpathanensis\" was briefly referenced in 1986 in a report on apparent new carnivorans from the Dhok Patha region in the Siwaliks, but as no description was provided this name is a \"nomen nudum\".\nPhylogeny.\nResults of a 2016 study based on analysis of biparental nuclear genomes suggest the following relationships of living \"Panthera\" species:\nIn 2018, results of a phylogenetic study on living and fossil cats were published. This study was based on the morphological diversity of the mandibles of saber-toothed cats, their speciation and extinction rates.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45730", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45730", "title": "Kilograms", "text": ""}
{"id": "45731", "revid": "2366721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45731", "title": "Meters", "text": ""}
{"id": "45732", "revid": "33940202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45732", "title": "Hieronymus Bosch", "text": "Dutch painter (c. 1450\u20131516)\nHieronymus Bosch (; ; born Jheronimus van Aken ; c.\u20091450\u00a0\u2013 9 August 1516) was a Dutch painter from Brabant. He is one of the most notable representatives of the Early Netherlandish painting school. His work, generally oil on oak wood, mainly contains fantastic illustrations of religious concepts and narratives. Within his lifetime, his work was collected in the Netherlands, Austria, and Spain, and widely copied, especially his macabre and nightmarish depictions of hell.\nLittle is known of Bosch's life, though there are some records. He spent most of it in the town of 's-Hertogenbosch, where he was born in his grandfather's house. The roots of his forefathers are in Nijmegen and Aachen (reflected in his surname, Van Aken). His original, fantastical style cast a wide influence on northern art of the 16th century; Pieter Bruegel the Elder was his best-known follower. Today, Bosch is seen as a highly individualistic artist who offered profound insights into humanity's desires and deepest fears. Attribution of his work has been especially difficult; today only about 25 paintings are confidently given to his hand along with eight drawings. About another half-dozen paintings are confidently attributed to his workshop. His most acclaimed works consist of three triptych altarpieces, particularly \"The Garden of Earthly Delights\".\nLife.\nHieronymus Bosch's first name was originally Jheronimus (or Joen, respectively the Latin and Middle Dutch form of the name \"Jerome\"), and he signed a number of his paintings as \"Jheronimus Bosch\".\nThe surname Bosch derives from his birthplace, 's-Hertogenbosch ('Duke's forest'), which, in Holland, is commonly called \"Den Bosch\" ('the forest').\nLittle is known of Bosch's life or training. He left behind no letters or diaries, and known references to him have been taken from brief mentions in the municipal records of 's-Hertogenbosch, and in the account books of the local religious confraternity, the order of the Illustrious Brotherhood of Our Blessed Lady. Nothing is known of his personality, nor of his thoughts on the meaning of his art. Bosch's date of birth has not been determined with certainty. It is estimated at , on the basis of a hand-drawn portrait (which may be a self-portrait) made shortly before his death in 1516. The drawing shows the artist at an advanced age, probably in his late sixties.\nBosch lived all his life in and near 's-Hertogenbosch, in the Duchy of Brabant. His grandfather Jan van Aken (died 1454) was a painter and is first mentioned in the records in 1430. Jan had five sons, four of whom were also painters. Bosch's father, Anthonius van Aken (died c. 1478), acted as artistic adviser to the Illustrious Brotherhood of Our Blessed Lady. It is generally assumed that either Bosch's father or one of his uncles taught the artist to paint, but none of their works survives. Bosch first appears in the municipal record on 5 April 1474, when he is named along with two brothers and a sister.\n's-Hertogenbosch was a flourishing city in 15th-century Brabant, in the south of the present-day Netherlands, which at the time was part of the Burgundian Netherlands. It was originally under the control of the Duchy of Brabant before being passed through marriage to the Habsburgs. In 1463, 4,000 houses in the town were destroyed by a catastrophic fire, which the (approximately) thirteen-year-old Bosch presumably witnessed. He became a popular painter in his lifetime and often received commissions from abroad. In 1486/7, he joined the highly respected Brotherhood of Our Lady, a devotional confraternity of some 40 influential citizens of 's-Hertogenbosch, and 7,000 \"outer-members\" from around Europe.\nSometime between 1479 and 1481, Bosch married Aleid Goyaerts van den Meervenne, who was a few years his senior. The couple moved to the nearby town of Oirschot, where Aleid Goyaerts van den Meervenne had inherited a house and land from her wealthy family. An entry in the accounts of the Brotherhood of Our Lady records Bosch's death in 1516. A memorial funeral mass was held in the church of Saint John on 9 August of that year.\nWorks.\nBosch produced at least sixteen triptychs: of them, eight survive fully intact with another five surviving in fragments. Bosch's works are generally organised into three periods of his life dealing with the early works (c.\u20091470\u20131485), the middle period (c.\u20091485\u20131500), and the late period (c.\u20091500 until his death). According to Stefan Fischer, thirteen of Bosch's surviving paintings were completed in the late period, with seven attributed to his middle period. Bosch's early period is studied in terms of his workshop activity and possibly some of his drawings. Indeed, he taught pupils in the workshop, who were influenced by him. The recent dendrochronological investigation of the oak panels by the scientists at the Bosch Research and Conservation Project led to a more precise dating of the majority of Bosch's paintings.\nBosch sometimes painted in a comparatively sketchy manner, contrasting with the traditional Early Netherlandish style of painting in which the smooth surface\u2014achieved by the application of multiple transparent glazes\u2014conceals the brushwork. His paintings with their rough surfaces, so-called \"impasto\" painting, differed from the tradition of the great Netherlandish painters of the end of the 15th and the beginning of the 16th centuries, who wished to hide the work done and thus suggest their paintings as more nearly divine creations.\nBosch did not date his paintings, but\u2014unusually for the time\u2014seems to have signed several of them, although some signatures purporting to be his are certainly not. About twenty-five paintings remain today that can be attributed to him. In the late 16th century, Philip II of Spain acquired many of Bosch's paintings. As a result, the Prado Museum in Madrid now owns the \"Adoration of the Magi\", \"The Garden of Earthly Delights\", the tabletop painting of \"The Seven Deadly Sins and the Four Last Things\" and \"The Haywain Triptych\".\nPainting materials.\nBosch painted his works mostly on oak panels using oil as a medium. Bosch's palette was rather limited and contained the usual pigments of his time. He mostly used azurite for blue skies and distant landscapes, green copper-based glazes and paints consisting of malachite or verdigris for foliage and foreground landscapes, and lead-tin-yellow, ochres and red lake (carmine or madder lake) for his figures.\n\"The Garden of Earthly Delights\".\nOne of his most famous triptychs is \"The Garden of Earthly Delights\" (c.\u20091495\u20131505) whose outer panels are intended to bracket the main central panel between the Garden of Eden depicted on the left panel and the Last Judgment depicted on the right panel. It is attributed by Fischer as a transitional painting rendered by Bosch between his middle period and his late period. In the left-hand panel God presents Eve to Adam. Innovatively, God is given a youthful appearance. The figures are set in a landscape populated by exotic animals and unusual semi-organic hut-shaped forms. The central panel is a broad panorama teeming with nude figures engaged in innocent, self-absorbed joy, as well as fantastical compound animals, oversized fruit, and hybrid stone formations.\nThe right panel presents a hellscape: a world in which humankind has succumbed to the temptations of evil and is reaping eternal damnation. Set at night, the panel features cold colours, tortured figures, and frozen waterways. The nakedness of the human figures has lost any eroticism suggested in the central panel. Large explosions in the background throw light through the city gate and spill onto the water in the panel's midground.\n\"Triptych of the Temptation of St. Anthony\".\nBosch's \"Temptation of St. Anthony\" triptych is one of his most famous works, along with \"The Garden of Earthly Delights\". It shows Saint Anthony being tempted or assailed in the desert by demons, whose temptations he resisted. Strictly speaking, there are at least two different episodes deriving from Athanasius's \"Life of St. Anthony\", as well as later versions of the life, which may be depicted. \nThe most common is the temptation by seductive women, sometimes in conjunction with other demonic forms. The Martin Schongauer composition (copied, according to Vasari, by Michelangelo) probably shows a later episode where St Anthony, normally flown about the desert and supported by angels, was ambushed and attacked in mid-air by devils. Anasthasius describes another episode where the saint was attacked on the ground.\nInterpretation.\nIn the 20th century, when changing artistic tastes made artists like Bosch more palatable to the European imagination, it was sometimes argued that Bosch's art was inspired by heretical points of view (e.g., the ideas of the Cathars and/or putative Adamites or Brethren of the Free Spirit) as well as by obscure hermetic practices. Erasmus had been educated at one of the houses of the Brethren of the Common Life in 's-Hertogenbosch, and the town was religiously progressive, some writers have found it unsurprising that strong parallels exist between the caustic writing of Erasmus and the often bold painting of Bosch.\nOthers, following a strain of Bosch-interpretation datable already to the 16th century, continued to think his work was created merely to titillate and amuse, much like the \"grotteschi\" of the Italian Renaissance. While the art of the older masters was based in the physical world of everyday experience, Bosch confronts his viewer with, in the words of the art historian Walter Gibson, \"a world of dreams [and] nightmares in which forms seem to flicker and change before our eyes\". In one of the first known accounts of Bosch's paintings, in 1560 the Spaniard Felipe de Guevara wrote that Bosch was regarded merely as \"the inventor of monsters and chimeras\". In the early 17th century, the artist-biographer Karel van Mander described Bosch's work as comprising \"wondrous and strange fantasies\"; however, he concluded that the paintings are \"often less pleasant than gruesome to look at\".\nIn recent decades, scholars have come to view Bosch's vision as less fantastic, and accepted that his art reflects the orthodox religious belief systems of his age. His depictions of sinful humanity and his conceptions of heaven and hell are now seen as consistent with those of late medieval didactic literature and sermons. Most writers attach a more profound significance to his paintings than had previously been supposed, and attempt to interpret them in terms of a late medieval morality. It is generally accepted that Bosch's art was created to teach specific moral and spiritual truths in the manner of other Northern Renaissance figures, such as the poet Robert Henryson, and that the images rendered have precise and premeditated significance. According to Dirk Bax, Bosch's paintings often represent visual translations of verbal metaphors and puns drawn from both biblical and folkloric sources.\nArt historians have pointed to ambiguities in Bosch's work, emphasising ironic tendencies, for example in \"The Garden of Earthly Delights\", both in the central panel (delights), and the right panel (hell). They theorise that the irony offers the option of detachment, both from the real world and from the painted fantasy world, thus appealing to both conservative and progressive viewers. According to Joseph Koerner, some of the cryptic qualities of the artist's work are due to his special focus on social, political, and spiritual enemies, whose symbolism is, by nature, disguised because it is intended to shield the artist from criticism and harm.\nDebates on attribution.\nThe exact number of Bosch's surviving works has been a subject of considerable debate. His signature can be seen on only seven of his surviving paintings, and there is considerable doubt that many of the paintings once ascribed to him were actually from his hand. It is known that from the early 16th century onward, numerous copies and variations of his paintings began to circulate. In addition, his style was highly influential, and was widely imitated by his numerous followers.\nOver the years, scholars have attributed to him fewer and fewer of the works once thought to be his. This is partly a result of technological advances such as infrared reflectography, which enable researchers to examine a painting's underdrawing. Art historians of the early and mid-20th century, such as Tolnay and Baldass, identified between thirty and fifty paintings that they believed to be by Bosch's hand. A later monograph by Gerd Unverfehrt (1980) attributed twenty-five paintings and 14 drawings to him.\nIn early 2016, \"The Temptation of St. Anthony\", a small panel in the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art in Kansas City, Missouri, long attributed to the workshop of Hieronymus Bosch, was credited to the painter himself after intensive forensic study by the Bosch Research and Conservation Project. The BRCP has also questioned whether two well-known paintings traditionally accepted to be by Bosch, \"The Seven Deadly Sins\" in the Prado and \"Christ Carrying the Cross\" in the Museum of Fine Arts, Ghent should instead be credited to the artist's workshop rather than to the painter's own hand.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45733", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45733", "title": "Pseudorandom number generators", "text": ""}
{"id": "45738", "revid": "49287968", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45738", "title": "Visual DialogScript", "text": "Interpreted programming language\nVisual DialogScript (VDS) is an interpreted programming language for Microsoft Windows, using dialog and graphic elements to create programs. VDS is similar to other programming languages such as Visual Basic, C++, or Delphi, as they use Windows API.\nLanguage.\nThe syntax of VDS is straightforward. Each command occupies one line and has a plain English name that clearly describes its purpose. Variables are typeless and can hold many kinds of information, such as numbers or text. Functions are clearly distinguishable with names that start with '@', similar to a spreadsheet.\nThe DialogScript language has a syntax similar to the MS-DOS batch language. It is designed for ease of use and efficiency when being interpreted by the run-time engine. There are 10 system variables, %0 to %9, which initially have the script file name in %0 and command line parameters in %1 through %9, just as in a batch file. There are also a further 26 user variables, from %A to %Z. The contents of all variables (including system ones) can be changed once the script is running. There are now also 4032 global variables. These variables begin with %%, a letter, then alphanumerics plus underscores (e.g., %%my_variable_1.) There is no limit on the length of these user-defined variable names.\nSyntax examples.\nComments:\nSimple Information Message Box:\nSimple Warning Message Box:\nCreate a custom dialog box:\nWrite to the Windows Registry:\nDisplay an input prompt dialog box, storing the result in the variable %A:\nHistory.\nJulian Moss (1953 \u2013 October 24, 2014[1]) of JM-Tech/Tech-Pro Ltd. created Visual DialogScript. In 1998, after version 3.0, Emmanuel Daunizeau of S.A.D.E. Sarl took over the ownership and development of VDS. He modified and improved its syntax. The British company Commercial Research Ltd. currently markets VDS, though it is still the property of Emmanuel Daunizeau, who continues to develop it.\nThe developers have released several versions of VDS over time.\nCurrently available versions.\nThere are several versions available for download:"}
{"id": "45739", "revid": "14457240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45739", "title": "Mozia", "text": ""}
{"id": "45742", "revid": "33013896", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45742", "title": "Mazara del Vallo", "text": "Mazara del Vallo (; ) is a city and in the province of Trapani, northwestern Sicily, Italy. It lies mainly on the left bank at the mouth of the Mazaro river.\nIt is an agricultural and fishing centre and its port gives shelter to the largest fishing fleet in Italy. The city is also one of the most historically significant in Sicily.\nHistory.\nEtymology and origins.\nMazara was founded by the Phoenicians in the 9th century BC with the name of \"Mazar\" who made it an important mercantile emporium. The discovery of Phoenician vases demonstrate the existence of a Phoenician port built between the 6th and 5th centuries BC. Other evidence is in the palace of the Knights of Malta, where finds show the existence of the ancient Punic trading post. Also, a stone slab engraved with a Phoenician inscription found in the channel of the river M\u00e0zaro is now preserved in the Museum of the Dancing Satyr.\nIt then passed under the control of Greeks, Carthaginians, Romans, Vandals, Ostrogoths, Byzantines, before being occupied by the Arabs in the year 827 AD. During the Arab period, Sicily was divided into three different administrative regions, \"Val di Noto\", \"Val Demone\" and \"Val di Mazara\", making the city an important commercial harbour and centre of learning.\nIn 1072, Mazara was conquered by Normans, headed by Roger I. During that period, in 1093, the Roman Catholic Diocese of Mazara del Vallo was instituted.\nAfter the death of Emperor Frederick II, Sicily passed to the Angevins, then followed by the Catalans of the Aragon Crown. The Aragon period (1282\u20131409) is characterized by a political, economic and demographic decline of Mazara. The city passed under the control of the House of Savoy in 1713, a reign which lasted only five years, being replaced by the Habsburg Empire (for 16 years) followed by the Bourbons. In 1860 the city was finally conquered by Giuseppe Garibaldi and the Mille, thus joining the then newly formed Kingdom of Italy.\nThe city was known as \"Mazzara del Vallo\" until the World War II period, following which the spelling was changed to \"Mazara del Vallo\".\nToday.\nToday Mazara is widely considered to be one of the most important fishing centres of Italy; tussles about fishing rights, especially with the North-African countries, figure large in the town's recent history, boat sequestrations being a common event. Currently the fishing business in the city seems to be less significant, mainly because of the increasing lack of younger people willing to work in the industry.\nGeography.\nMazara borders the municipalities of Campobello di Mazara, Castelvetrano, Marsala, Petrosino, and Salemi. It counts the hamlets (\"frazioni\") of Borgata Costiera and Mazara Due.\nMain sights.\nMazara made national news in March 1998, when a bronze statue called the \"Dancing Satyr\" (\"Satiro Danzante\") was found off the port, at a depth of in the Strait of Sicily by a local fishing boat. The statue is believed to have been sculpted by Greek artist Praxiteles and is now on display to the public in a dedicated museum in the city, after having been on show at the Chamber of Deputies of Rome, and in Aichi, Japan. After this event, the city quickly gained in terms of visiting tourists and a national advertising campaign was mounted with the slogan \"Mazara del Satiro\".\nOther attractions include the \"Norman Arc\", that is the remains of the old Norman Castle built in 1073 and demolished in 1880, and a number of churches, including the Royal Saint Nicholas (\"San Nicol\u00f2 Regale\") Church, a rare example of Norman architecture built in 1124, the Seminary, built in 1710, which surrounds the main local piazza, \"Piazza della Repubblica\", and St. Vitus on the Sea (\"San Vito a Mare\") Church. In honour of St. Vitus, the official patronal saint as well as a native of Mazara del Vallo, the St. Vitus Feast (\"Lu Fistinu di Santu Vitu\") is held every year.\nTransportation.\nMazara del Vallo is connected to the rest of Sicily by a regional train service (run by Trenitalia), a private bus service (only to Palermo), and by car, via the A29 highway (also known as \"Palermo-Mazara del Vallo\"). It is reachable from Trapani-Birgi Airport by an infrequent bus service or by taxi (\u20ac20 per person) and from Palermo by car or taxi.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45743", "revid": "50998834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45743", "title": "Asti", "text": "Asti ( , ; ; ) is a \"comune\" (municipality) of 74,348 inhabitants (1\u20131\u20132021) located in the Italian region of Piedmont, about east of Turin, in the plain of the Tanaro River. It is the capital of the province of Asti and it is deemed to be the modern capital of Montferrat.\nHistory.\nAncient times and early Middle Ages.\nPeople have lived in and around what is now Asti since the Neolithic period. Before their defeat in 174 BC by the Romans, tribes of Ligures, the Statielli, dominated the area and the toponym probably derives from \"Ast\" which means \"hill\" in the ancient Celtic language.\nIn 124 BC the Romans built a \"castrum\", or fortified camp, which eventually evolved into a full city named Hasta. In 89 BC the city received the status of \"colonia\", and in 49 BC that of \"municipium\". Asti became an important city of the Augustan Regio IX, favoured by its strategic position on the Tanaro river and on the Via Fulvia, which linked Derthona (Tortona) to Augusta Taurinorum (Turin). Other roads connected the city to the main passes for what are today Switzerland and France.\nThe city was crucial during the early stages of the barbarian invasions which stormed Italy during the fall of the Western Roman Empire. In early 402 AD, the Visigoths had invaded northern Italy and were advancing on Mediolanum (modern Milan) which was the imperial capital at that time. Honorius, the young emperor and a resident in that city, unable to wait for promised reinforcements any longer, was compelled to flee from Milan for safety in the city of Arles in Gaul. However, just after his convoy had left Milan and crossed the River Po his escape route through the Alps was cut off by the Gothic cavalry. This forced him to take emergency refuge in the city of Hasta until more Roman troops could be assembled in Italy. The Goths placed Hasta under siege until March when General Stilicho, bringing reinforcements from the Rhine, fought and defeated them at the Battle of Pollentia. After this first victorious defence, thanks to a massive line of walls, Hasta suffered from the barbarian invasions which stormed Italy after the fall of the Western Empire, and declined economically.\nIn the second half of the 6th century, it was chosen as a seat for one of the 36 Duchies in which the Lombards divided Italy. The territory of Asti comprised a wide area, stretching out to Albenga and the Maritime Alps. This remained when northern Italy was conquered by the Franks in 774, with the title of County.\nIn the late Carolingian age, Asti was ruled directly by his bishops, who were the main landlords of the area. Most important are Audax (904-926) and Bruningus (937-966), who moved the episcopal seat to the Castel Vecchio (\"Old Castle\"), where it remained until 1409. The bishopric of Asti remained a powerful entity well into the 11th century when Pietro II received huge privileges by emperor Henry II. In the second half of the century, Bishop Otto tried to resist the aims of the powerful countess Adelaide of Susa, who damaged the city several times. During Otto's reign, a commune and the consul magistrates are mentioned for the first time (1095).\nLocal power.\nAsti was one of the first free communes of Italy, and in 1140 received the right to mint coins of its own by Conrad II. As the commune, however, had begun to erode the lands of the bishop and other local feudatories, the latter sued for help to Frederick Barbarossa, who presented under the city walls with a huge army in February 1155. After a short siege, Asti was stormed and burnt. Subsequently, Asti adhered to the Lombard League (1169) against the German emperor, but was again defeated in 1174. Despite this, after the Peace of Constance (1183), the city gained further privileges.\nThe 13th century saw the peak of the Astigiani economic and cultural splendour, only momentarily hindered by wars against Alba, Alessandria, Savoy, Milan (which besieged the city in 1230) and the Marquesses of Montferrat and Saluzzo. In particular, the commune aimed to gain control over the lucrative trade routes leading northwards from the Ligurian ports. In this period, the rise of the Casane Astigiane resulted in contrasting political familial alliances of Guelph and Ghibelline supporters. During the wars led by Emperor Frederick II in northern Italy, the city chose his side: Asti was defeated by the Guelphs of Alessandria at Quattordio and Clamandrana, but thanks to Genoese help, it recovered easily. After Frederick's death, the struggle against Thomas II of Savoy became fierce: the Astigiani defeated him on 23 February 1255, at the Battle of Montebruno, but Thomas (who had been taken prisoner) replied ordering all traders from Asti to be arrested in Savoy and France. This move showed worry on the part of Asti's neighbouring states over the excessive power gained by the city, which had captured Alba and controlled both Chieri and Turin.\nThis state of affairs led to the intervention of Charles I of Anjou, then King of Naples and the most powerful man in Italy. After some guerrilla actions, Asti signed a pact of alliance with Pavia, Genoa and William VII of Montferrat. In 1274 the Astigiani troops were defeated at the Battle of Cassano, but, on 12 December 1275, were victorious over the Angevins at the Battle of Roccavione, ending Charles' attempt to expand in Piedmont. In the 1290s, after William VII had also been defeated, Asti was the most powerful city in Piedmont. However, internal struggles for the control of trading and banking enterprises soon divided the city into factions. The most prominent faction was the powerful bankers of the Solari family, who, in 1314, gave the city to king Robert of Naples.\nIn 1339, Ghibelline exiles recaptured the city, expelling the Solari and their Neopolitan allies. Shortly thereafter in 1340, Luchino Visconti, Lord of Milan took control of Asti, an act which the rulers of the commune formally accepted in 1342 to protect against the potential of a Solari counteroffensive. To protect the new burgs of the city, Visconti built a citadel and a second ring of walls. In 1345, at the Battle of Gamenario, the Ghibelline Astigiani and John II of Montferrat defeated the Neapolitans in a clash between Guelph forces from the Kingdom of Naples and the Ghibellines supported by the Lombard communes. After the Battle of Gamenario, John II expanded the territory of Montferrat and ultimately in 1356 took Asti from the Visconti ending 16 years of control by Milan. John ruled over Asti until 1372, but seven years later the city council submitted to Galeazzo II Visconti's authority. Later in 1389, when Galeazzo's daughter Valentina Visconti married Louis of Valois, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, Asti would be included as part of her dowry.\nFrench and Savoyard domination.\nWith the exception of several brief periods under Visconti, Montferrat and Sforza rule, Asti remained under Valois control; it eventually became a direct subject of the French Crown. The situation changed in the early 16th century, during the wars between Charles V and Francis I of France. In 1526 it was besieged in vain by Charles' condottiero Fabrizio Maramaldo. Three years later, Asti was conveyed as a result of the Treaty of Cambrai to the Holy Roman Empire by which it was ruled until 1531 when Emperor Charles V gave the territory as a fiefdom to his cousin Beatrice of Portugal, Duchess of Savoy. Later at the time of Beatrice's death in 1538, Asti was inherited by her son and included on the Savoys' heritage. \nAsti was one of the main Savoyard strongholds in later wars. In 1616, besieged by the Spanish governor of Milan, it was defended by Duke Charles Emmanuel I himself. In 1630\u201331, the city suffered a high mortality rate from an outbreak of the plague. Some years later Asti was conquered by the Spanish, although Savoy regained the city in 1643. Another unsuccessful Spanish siege occurred in 1650. In November 1703, during the War of Spanish Succession, Asti fell to France again; it was reconquered in 1705 by Victor Amadeus II. In 1745 French troops invaded the city once more, but it was liberated the following year.\nIn 1797 the Astigiani, enraged by the continuous military campaigns and by their resulting poor economic situation, revolted against the Savoyard government. On July 28 the Repubblica Astese was declared. However, it was suppressed only two days later. The revolutionary chiefs were arrested and executed. The following year the Savoyards were expelled from Piedmont by the French revolutionary army, and Asti was occupied by general Montrichard. After a short reversal, the French returned after the victory at Marengo (1800) near to Alessandra. Napoleon himself visited Asti on 29 April 1805, but was received rather coldly by the citizens. The city was demoted and incorporated with Alessandra under the department of Marengo. After the end of the French empire, Asti returned to Piedmont in 1814; the city followed Piedmontese history until the unification of Italy in 1861.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nAsti has a continental climate which is moderated by the proximity of the Mediterranean sea: its winters are warmer, and its summers cooler than Turin. Rain falls mostly during the spring and autumn; during the hottest months, rain is less common, but stronger when it does occur, usually in thunderstorms. During November and December in particular, the town of Asti can be prone to fog, which is less common in the higher-altitude areas that surround it.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMain sights.\nSections of the ancient city walls remain on the north side of the city and in the late 20th century building work uncovered a section of Roman wall in the center of the city.\nThe area to the northwest of the city, between the centre and the cathedral, is rich in medieval palaces and merchants' houses, many with monumental towers. Asti was known as the city of 100 towers (although there were 120 in total) of which several still remain, among them, the \"Tower of the Comentini\" (13th century), the octagonal \"Torre de Regibus\" and \"Torre Troyana\" (13th century), as well as the ancient \"Torre Rossa\", built during the reign of the Roman Emperor Augustus.\nAsti is home to several old churches. These include:\nThere is a synagogue and a museum depicting the history of Asti's Jewish community, whose presence is documented since 812.\nEvents.\nOne of the most famous events held in Asti is the famous Palio di Asti, in which all the old town wards, called \"Rioni\" and \"Borghi\", plus nearby towns compete in a bareback horse race. This event recalls a victory in battle against the rival city Alba, during the Middle Ages. After the victorious battle, a race was held around Alba's walls, and from then on, every year in Asti. Asti's Palio is the oldest recorded one in Italy, and in modern times is held in the triangular Piazza Alfieri, preceded by a medieval pageant through the old town on the 3rd Sunday of September.\nWine.\nThe three neighbouring Provinces of Asti, Cuneo, and Alessandria incorporate the Langhe and Monferrato Hills region in the centre of Piedmont, limestone and sandstone deposits laid down by the retreating Adriatic some 5 million years ago, and are home to some of Italy's most known red wines, plus some white ones.\nAsti is the centre of production of the sparkling Asti (DOCG, often known as \"Asti Spumante\"). Asti is typically sweet and low in alcohol (often below 8%). It is made solely from the \"moscato bianco\" white muscat grape. Other wines include a premium version known as Moscato d'Asti (DOCG) and the red Barbera.\nThe first products from the province of Asti to become known internationally are Martini and Rossi, Gancia, and Riccadonna, which made commercial wines like Asti Spumante; red wines such as Barbera d'Asti, Freisa d'Asti, Grignolino d'Asti, Bonarda, Grignolino and Ruch\u00e9 di Castagnole Monferrato are also becoming widespread worldwide. These wines and many others can be sampled during the week-long Douja d'Or wine exhibition, which is held at the same time as the Palio and Sagre.\nThe first documentation on the variety Freisa d'Asti is from the beginning of the 16th century. \nFood.\nAsti is also famous for its Asti's Festival of Festivals, held in September, a week before the Palio. During the festival, most of the towns in Asti province meet in a great square called \"Campo del Palio\", where they offer typical food and wine for which they are known. On the Sunday of the Sagre, all the towns involved stage a parade with floats depicting traditional farming with everyone in costume along Asti's roads to reach \"Campo del Palio\" square.\nAsti province becomes a gourmand's delight from October to December in the white truffle or \"tartufo bianco\" season. Although neighbouring Alba is better known for its October truffle fair, some of the best truffles are found around Asti's hills, and every weekend there is a local truffle festival.\nSport.\nThe main football club of the town was Asti Calcio F.C. (ex-A.C.D. Asti), which folded in 2017. Another football club, A.S.D. Colline Alfieri Don Bosco (ex-A.C. Celle, from Celle Enomondo), relocated to the city and was renamed to \"A.S.D. Alfieri Asti\" in 2017. Since 2019, it has been known as A.S.D. Asti.\nFormer futsal league champion, A.S.D. Asti Calcio a 5, is also based in Asti.\nTransport.\nAsti railway station, opened in 1849, forms part of the Turin\u2013Genoa and Castagnole\u2013Asti\u2013Mortara railways. It is also a junction for two other lines, to Genoa and Chivasso, respectively.\nPeople.\nPeople from Asti include:\nFrazioni.\nThe Asti \"comune\" consists of the following \"frazioni\":\nCasabianca, Castiglione, Mombarone, Montegrosso, Montemarzo, Poggio D'Asti, Quarto D'Asti, Revignano, San Marzanotto, Serravalle, Sessant, Stazione Di Portacomaro, Vaglierano, Valgera, Valleandona, Valletanaro, Variglie, Viatosto, Avidano, Baciglio, Balestrino, Barbantana, Belangero, Beneficio-Stangona, Biamini, Bramairate, Bricchetto, Bricco Modena, Briccolino, Burie, C\u00e0 Dei Coppi, Carretti, Cascin Ruasin, Cascina Angelo, Cascina Conti, Cascina Fanfarina, Cascina Fontana, Cascina Gioia, Cascina Stella, Cascine Artiglione, Cascine Roasio, Ceresa, Cravera, Distretto, Fornaca, Ghirlandina, Gianotti, Giberto, Lama-Garoppa, Madonna Di Caniglie, Madonna Di Viatosto, Malandroni, Manina, Manzoni, Matei, Meridiana, Olivero, Palucco, Quaranta, Quarto, Roccaschiavino, Rocche Di Callianetto, Rossi, San Giuseppe, San Grato, San Marzanotto Piana, San Sebastiano, Stazione Di Sessant, Torrazzo, Vaglierano Basso, Vairo, Valcossana-Grilletto, Valenzani, Valfea, Valmairone, Vareglio.\nInternational relations.\nAsti is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45744", "revid": "16680171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45744", "title": "Villanova d'Asti", "text": "Villanova d'Asti is a town and \"comune\" in the province of Asti, Piedmont, northern Italy. It has around 5,000 inhabitants. The economy is based on a mixture of agriculture and industry.\nVillanova d'Asti was founded in the Middle Ages.\nThe main sight is the sanctuary of the \"Beata Vergine delle Grazie\"\nTwin towns \u2014 sister cities.\nVillanova d'Asti is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;br&gt;"}
{"id": "45745", "revid": "4497767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45745", "title": "Dacia", "text": "Ancient kingdom in Southeastern Europe (168 BC \u2013 106 AD)\nDacia (, ; ; Ancient Greek: \u0394\u03b1\u03ba\u03af\u03b1) was the land inhabited by the Dacians, its core in Transylvania, stretching to the Danube in the south, the Black Sea in the east, and the Tisza in the west. The Carpathian Mountains were located in the middle of Dacia. It thus roughly corresponds to present-day Romania, as well as parts of Moldova, Bulgaria, Serbia, Hungary, Slovakia, Czech Republic, Poland and Ukraine.\nA Dacian kingdom that united the Dacians and the Getae was formed under the rule of Burebista in 82 BC and lasted until the Roman conquest in AD 106. As a result of the wars with the Roman Empire, after the conquest of Dacia, the population was dispersed, and the capital city, Sarmizegetusa Regia, was destroyed by the Romans. However, the Romans built a settlement bearing the same name, Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetuza, 40\u00a0km away, to serve as the capital of the newly established Roman province of Dacia. A group of \"Free Dacians\" may have remained outside the Roman Empire in the territory of modern-day Northern Romania until the start of the Migration Period.\nNomenclature.\nThe Dacians are first mentioned in the writings of the Ancient Greeks, in Herodotus (\"Histories\" Book IV XCIII: \"[Getae] the noblest as well as the most just of all the Thracian tribes\") and Thucydides (\"Peloponnesian Wars\", Book II: \"[Getae] border on the Scythians and are armed in the same manner, being all mounted archers\"). Some historians argue that Daxia (mentioned in 3rd century BC) was the previous home of Indo-Iranian nomads who later came to form the Geto-Dacian people.\nGeographical history.\nThe extent and location of Dacia varied in its three distinct historical periods (see below):\n1st century BC.\nThe Dacia of King Burebista (82\u201344 BC) stretched from the Black Sea to the river Tisza. During that period, the Getae and Dacians conquered a wider territory and Dacia extended from the Middle Danube to the Black Sea littoral (between Apollonia and Pontic Olbia) and from the Northern Carpathians to the Balkan Mountains. After Burebista's death in 44 BC, Dacia plunged into internal strife, resembling a civil war, as his unified kingdom split into several rival states. The constant power struggle weakened Dacia, but the Dacians remained a significant force, frequently making incursions into Roman territory. Stability was only restored when Duras and later Decebalus managed to reunite the kingdom.\n1st century AD.\nStrabo, in his Geography written around AD 20, says:\nAs for the southern part of Germany beyond the Albis, the portion which is just contiguous to that river is occupied by the Suevi; then immediately adjoining this is the land of the Getae, which, though narrow at first, stretching as it does along the Ister [Danube] on its southern side and on the opposite side along the mountain-side of the Hercynian Forest (for the land of the Getae also embraces a part of the mountains), afterwards broadens out towards the north as far as the Tyregetae; but I cannot tell the precise boundaries\nOn this basis, Lengyel and Radan (1980), Hoddinott (1981) and Mountain (1998) consider that the Geto-Dacians inhabited both sides of the Tisza river prior to the rise of the Celtic Boii. The hold of the Dacians between the Danube and the Tisza was tenuous. However, the archaeologist Parducz argued for a Dacian presence west of the Tisa dating from the time of Burebista. According to Tacitus (AD 56\u2013117) Dacians bordered Germania in the south-east, while Sarmatians bordered it in the east.Although Strabo and Caesar notes that the Dacians reached the Hercynian Forest, Germania and beyond, Strabo still indicates their borders as the middle Danube and the northwestern Carpathians. This suggests that, while they exerted influence over more distant regions, they did not formally annex them. This also helps explain why some maps depict regions such as Bohemia or Pannonia as falling under Dacian territory or influence. However, most academic maps concentrate on formally annexed areas, as regions of temporary control or mere influence are inherently imprecise and difficult to define.\nIn the 1st century AD, the Iazyges settled West of Dacia, on the plain between the Danube and the Tisa rivers, according to the scholars' interpretation of Pliny's text: \"The higher parts between the Danube and the Hercynian Forest, as far as the winter quarters of Pannonia at Carnutum and the plains and level country of the German frontiers there are occupied by the Sarmatian Iazyges, while the Dacians whom they have driven out hold the mountains and forests as far as the river Theiss\".\n2nd century AD.\nStarting with AD 85, Dacia was once again reunified under King Decebalus. Following an incursion into Roman Moesia, which resulted in the death of its governor, Gaius Oppius Sabinus, a series of conflicts between the Romans and Dacians ensued. Although the Romans gained a major strategic victory at Tapae in AD 88, Emperor Domitian offered the Dacians favourable terms, in exchange for which Roman suzerainty was recognised. However, Emperor Trajan restarted the conflicts in AD 101-102 and then again in AD 105\u2013106, which ended with the annexation of most of Dacia and its reorganisation as a Roman Province, Dacia Felix.\nWritten a few decades after Emperor Trajan's Roman conquest of parts of Dacia in AD 105\u2013106, Ptolemy's \"Geographia\" included the boundaries of Dacia. According to the scholars' interpretation of Ptolemy (Hrushevskyi 1997, Bunbury 1879, Mocsy 1974, B\u0103rbulescu 2005) Dacia was the region between the rivers Tisza, Danube, upper Dniester, and Siret. Mainstream historians accept this interpretation: Avery (1972) Berenger (1994) Fol (1996) Mountain (1998), Waldman Mason (2006).\nPtolemy also provided a couple of Dacian toponyms in south Poland in the Upper Vistula (Polish: Wisla) river basin: Susudava and Setidava (with a manuscript variant Getidava). This could have been an \"echo\" of Burebista's expansion. It seems that this northern expansion of the Dacian language, as far as the Vistula river, lasted until AD 170\u2013180 when the migration of the Vandal Hasdingi pushed out this northern Dacian group. This Dacian group, possibly the Costoboci/Lipi\u021ba culture, is associated by Gudmund Sch\u00fctte with towns having the specific Dacian language ending \"dava\" i.e. Setidava.\nAfter the Marcomannic Wars (AD 166\u2013180), Dacian groups from outside Roman Dacia had been set in motion. So too were the 12,000 Dacians \"from the neighbourhood of Roman Dacia sent away from their own country\". Their native country could have been the Upper Tisa region, but other places cannot be excluded.\nThe later Roman province \"Dacia Aureliana\", was organized inside former Moesia Superior after the retreat of the Roman army from Dacia, during the reign of emperor Aurelian during AD 271\u2013275. It was reorganized as Dacia Ripensis (as a military province) and Dacia Mediterranea (as a civil province).\nCities.\nPtolemy gives a list of 43 names of towns in Dacia, out of which arguably 33 were of Dacian origin. Most of the latter included the added suffix \"dava\" (meaning settlement, village). But, other Dacian names from his list lack the suffix (e.g. Zarmisegethusa regia = Zermizirga). In addition, nine other names of Dacian origin seem to have been Latinised.\nThe cities of the Dacians were known as \"-dava\", \"-deva\", -\u03b4\u03b1\u03c5\u03b1 (\"-dawa\" or \"-dava\", Anc. Gk.), -\u03b4\u03b5\u03b2\u03b1 (\"-deva\", Byz. Gk.) or -\u03b4\u03b1\u03b2\u03b1 (\"-dava\", Byz. Gk.), etc. .\n\"Gil-doba\", a village in Thracia, of unknown location.\n\"Thermi-daua\", a town in Dalmatia. Probably a Grecized form of \"*Germidava\".\n\"Pulpu-deva\", (Phillipopolis) today Plovdiv in Bulgaria.\nPolitical entities.\nRubobostes.\nGeto-Dacians inhabited both sides of the Tisa river prior to the rise of the Celtic Boii and again after the latter were defeated by the Dacians under the king Burebista. It seems likely that the Dacian state arose as a tribal confederacy, which was united only by charismatic leadership in military-political and ideological-religious domains. At the beginning of the 2nd century BC, under the rule of Rubobostes, a Dacian king in modern Transylvania, Dacian power in the Carpathian basin increased after they defeated the Celts, who previously held power in the region.\nOroles.\nA kingdom of Dacia also existed as early as the first half of the 2nd century BC under King Oroles. Conflicts with the Bastarnae and the Romans (112\u2013109 BC, 74 BC), against whom they had assisted the Scordisci and Dardani, greatly weakened the resources of the Dacians.\nBurebista.\nBurebista (Boerebista), a contemporary of Julius Caesar, ruled Geto-Dacian tribes between 82 BC and 44 BC. He thoroughly reorganised the army and attempted to raise the moral standard and obedience of the people by persuading them to cut their vines and give up drinking wine. During his reign, the Dacian Kingdom expanded to its maximum extent. The Bastarnae and Boii were conquered, and even the Greek towns of Olbia and Apollonia on the Black Sea (\"Pontus Euxinus\") recognized Burebista's authority. In 53 BC, Caesar stated that the Dacian territory was on the eastern border of the Hercynian Forest.\nBurebista suppressed the indigenous minting of coinages by four major tribal groups, adopting imported or copied Roman denarii as a monetary standard. During his reign, Burebista transferred Geto-Dacians capital from Argedava to Sarmizegetusa Regia. For at least one and a half centuries, Sarmizegetusa was the Dacians' capital and reached its peak under King Decebalus. The Dacians appeared so formidable that Caesar contemplated an expedition against them, which his death in 44 BC prevented. In the same year, Burebista was murdered, and the kingdom was divided into four (later five) parts under separate rulers.\nCotiso.\nOne of these entities was Cotiso's state, to whom Augustus betrothed his own five-year-old daughter Julia. He is well known from the line in Horace (\"Occidit Daci Cotisonis agmen\", Odes, III. 8. 18).\nThe Dacians are often mentioned under Augustus, according to whom they were compelled to recognize Roman supremacy. However they were by no means subdued, and in later times to maintain their independence they seized every opportunity to cross the frozen Danube during the winter and ravaging the Roman cities in the province of Moesia, which was under Roman occupation.\nStrabo testified: \"although the Getae and Daci once attained to very great power, so that they actually could send forth an expedition of two hundred thousand men, they now find themselves reduced to as few as forty thousand, and they have come close to the point of yielding obedience to the Romans, though as yet they are not absolutely submissive, because of the hopes which they base on the Germans, who are enemies to the Romans.\"\nIn fact, this occurred because Burebista's empire split after his death into four and later five smaller states, as Strabo explains, \"only recently, when Augustus Caesar sent an expedition against them, the number of parts into which the empire had been divided was five, though at the time of the insurrection it had been four. Such divisions, to be sure, are only temporary and vary with the times\".\nDecebalus.\nDecebalus ruled the Dacians between AD 87 and 106. The frontiers of Decebal's Dacia were marked by the Tisa River to the west, by the trans-Carpathians to the north and by the Dniester River to the east. His name translates into \"strong as ten men\".\nRoman conquest.\nWhen Trajan turned his attention to Dacia, it had been on the Roman agenda since before the days of Julius Caesar when a Roman army had been beaten at the Battle of Histria.\nFrom AD 85 to 89, the Dacians under Decebalus were engaged in two wars with the Romans.\nIn AD 85, the Dacians had swarmed over the Danube and pillaged Moesia. In AD 87, the Roman troops sent by the Emperor Domitian against them under Cornelius Fuscus, were defeated and Cornelius Fuscus was killed by the Dacians by authority of their ruler, Diurpaneus. After this victory, Diurpaneus took the name of \"Decebalus\", but the Romans were victorious in the Battle of Tapae in AD 88 and a truce was drawn up. The next year, AD 88, new Roman troops under Tettius Julianus, gained a significant advantage, but were obligated to make peace following the defeat of Domitian by the Marcomanni, leaving the Dacians effectively independent. Decebalus was given the status of \"king client to Rome\", receiving military instructors, craftsmen and money from Rome. To Rome, Domitian brought Italian peasants in Dacian clothing because he couldn't take slaves in the war.\nTo increase the glory of his reign, restore the finances of Rome, and end a treaty perceived as humiliating, Trajan resolved on the conquest of Dacia, the capture of the famous Treasure of Decebalus, and control over the Dacian gold mines of Transylvania. The result of his first campaign (101\u2013102) was the siege of the Dacian capital Sarmizegethusa and the occupation of part of the country. Emperor Trajan recommenced hostilities against Dacia and, following an uncertain number of battles, and with Trajan's troops pressing towards the Dacian capital Sarmizegethusa, Decebalus once more sought terms.\nDecebalus rebuilt his power over the following years and attacked Roman garrisons again in AD 105. In response Trajan again marched into Dacia, attacking the Dacian capital in the Siege of Sarmizegethusa, and razing it to the ground; the defeated Dacian king Decebalus committed suicide to avoid capture. With part of Dacia quelled as the Roman province Dacia Traiana. Trajan subsequently invaded the Parthian empire to the east. His conquests brought the Roman Empire to its greatest extent. Rome's borders in the east were governed indirectly in this period, through a system of client states, which led to less direct campaigning than in the west.\nSome of the history of the war is given by Cassius Dio. Trajan erected the Column of Trajan in Rome to commemorate his victory.\nProvincial history.\nAlthough the Romans conquered and destroyed the ancient Kingdom of Dacia, a large remainder of the land remained outside of Roman Imperial authority. Additionally, the conquest changed the balance of power in the region and was the catalyst for a renewed alliance of Germanic and Celtic tribes and kingdoms against the Roman Empire. However, the material advantages of the Roman Imperial system was attractive to the surviving aristocracy. Afterwards, many of the Dacians became Romanised (see also Origin of Romanians). In AD 183, war broke out in Dacia: few details are available, but it appears two future contenders for the throne of emperor Commodus, Clodius Albinus and Pescennius Niger, both distinguished themselves in the campaign.\nAccording to Lactantius, the Roman emperor Decius (AD 249\u2013251) had to restore Roman Dacia from the Carpo-Dacians of Zosimus \"having undertaken an expedition against the Carpi, who had then possessed themselves of Dacia and Moesia\".\nEven so, the Germanic and Celtic kingdoms, particularly the Gothic tribes, slowly moved toward the Dacian borders, and within a generation were making assaults on the province. Ultimately, the Goths succeeded in dislodging the Romans and restoring the \"independence\" of Dacia following Emperor Aurelian's withdrawal, in 275.\nIn AD 268\u2013269, at Naissus, Claudius II (Gothicus Maximus) obtained a decisive victory over the Goths. Since at that time Romans were still occupying Roman Dacia it is assumed that the Goths didn't cross the Danube from the Roman province. The Goths who survived their defeat didn't even attempt to escape through Dacia, but through Thrace. At the boundaries of Roman Dacia, Carpi (Free Dacians) were still strong enough to sustain five battles in eight years against the Romans from AD 301\u2013308. Roman Dacia was left in AD 275 by the Romans, to the Carpi again, and not to the Goths. There were still Dacians in AD 336, against whom Constantine the Great fought.\nThe province was abandoned by Roman troops, and, according to the \"Breviarium historiae Romanae\" by Eutropius, Roman citizens \"from the towns and lands of Dacia\" were resettled to the interior of Moesia. Under Diocletian, c. AD 296, in order to defend the Roman border, fortifications were erected by the Romans on both banks of the Danube.\nLate Roman Age (c. 270 \u2013 c. 700).\nConstantinian reconquest.\nIn 328 the emperor Constantine the Great inaugurated the Constantine's Bridge (Danube) at Sucidava, (today Corabia in Romania) in hopes of reconquering Dacia, a province that had been abandoned under Aurelian. In the late winter of 332, Constantine campaigned with the Sarmatians against the Goths. The weather and lack of food cost the Goths dearly: reportedly, nearly one hundred thousand died before they submitted to Rome. In celebration of this victory Constantine took the title \"Gothicus Maximus\" and claimed the subjugated territory as the new province of Gothia. In 334, after Sarmatian commoners had overthrown their leaders, Constantine led a campaign against the tribe. He won a victory in the war and extended his control over the region, as remains of camps and fortifications in the region indicate. Constantine resettled some Sarmatian exiles as farmers in Illyrian and Roman districts, and conscripted the rest into the army. The new frontier in Dacia was along of a huge earthen wall, almost 700 km long, named today the Brazda lui Novac line, supported by Castra of Hinova, Rusidava and Castra of Pietroasele. The limes passed to the north of Castra of Tirighina-B\u0103rbo\u0219i and ended at Sasyk Lagoon near the Dniester River. Constantine took the title \"Dacicus maximus\" in 336. \nBefore 300, the Romans erected small forts at Dierna and in other places on the northern bank of the Danube in modern-day Banat. In their wider region, Roman coins from the period\u2014mostly of bronze\u2014have been found. The Huns destroyed Drobeta and Sucidava in the 440s, but the forts were restored under Emperor Justinian I (527\u2013565). Eastern Roman coins from the first half of the 6th\u00a0century suggest a significant military presence in Oltenia\u2014a region also characterized by the predominance of pottery with shapes of Roman tradition.\nScythia Minor.\nThe territory between the Lower Danube and the Black Sea (today Dobrogea in Romania) remained a fully integrated part of the Roman Empire, even after the abandonment of Trajan's Dacia. It was transformed into a separate province under the name of Scythia Minor around 293. \nThe existence of Christian communities in Scythia Minor became evident under Emperor Diocletian (284\u2013305). He and his co-emperors ordered the persecution of Christians throughout the empire, causing the death of many between 303 and 313. Under Emperor Constantine the Great (306\u2013337), a bridge across the Danube was constructed at Sucidava, a new fort (Constantiana Daphne) was built, and ancient roads were repaired in Oltenia. The Lower Danube again became the empire's northern boundary in 369 at the latest, when Emperor Valens met Athanaric\u2014the head of the Goths\u2014in a boat in the middle of the river because the latter had taken an oath \"never to set foot on Roman soil\".\nAlthough Eastern Roman emperors made annual payments to the neighboring peoples in an attempt to keep the peace in the Balkans, the Avars regularly invaded Scythia Minor from the 580s. The Romans abandoned Sucidava in 596 or 597, but Tomis, which was the last town in Scythia Minor to resist the invaders, only fell in 704.\nNorth of the \"limes\" (c.\u00a0270 \u2013 c.\u00a0330).\nTransylvania and northern Banat, which belonged to Dacia before Trajan conquest, had no direct contact with the Roman Empire from the 270s. There is no evidence that they were invaded in the following decades. Towns, including Apulum and Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa, and the surrounding areas continued to be inhabited but the urban areas diminished. The existence of local Christian communities can be assumed in Porolissum, Potaissa and other settlements. On the other hand, evidence\u00a0\u2013 mainly pottery with \"Chi-rho\" \"(\u03a7-\u03a1)\" signs and other Christian symbols\u00a0\u2013 is \"shadowy and poorly understood\", according to archaeologists Haynes and Hanson.\nUrns found in late 3rd-century cemeteries at Bezid, Media\u015f, and in other Transylvanian settlements had clear analogies in sites east of the Carpathians, suggesting that the Carpians were the first new arrivals in the former province from the neighboring regions. Other Carpian groups, pressured by the Goths, also departed from their homeland and sought refuge in the Roman Empire around 300. Nevertheless, \"Carpo-Dacians\" were listed among the peoples \"mixed with the Huns\" as late as 379. The Sarmatians of the Banat were allies of the empire, demonstrated by a Roman invasion in 332 against the Goths, their enemies. Sarmatians were admitted into the empire in 379, but other Sarmatian groups remained in the Tisa plains up until the 460s.\nDacia after the Romans.\nThe Victohali, Taifals, and Thervingians are tribes mentioned for inhabiting Dacia in 350, after the Romans left. Archeological evidence suggests that Gepids were disputing Transylvania with Taifals and Tervingians. Taifals, once independent from Gothia, became federati of the Romans, from whom they obtained the right to settle in Oltenia.\nIn 376, the region was conquered by Huns, who kept it until the death of Attila in 453. The Gepid tribe, ruled by Ardaric, used it as their base, until in 566, when it was destroyed by the Lombards. Lombards abandoned the country and the Avars (second half of the 6th century) dominated the region for 230 years, until their kingdom was destroyed by Charlemagne in 791. At the same time, Slavic people arrived.\nUsage in modern culture.\nS.C. Automobile Dacia S.A., also known as Dacia, is a Romanian car manufacturer that takes its name from the historical kingdom. It is Romania's largest company by revenue, and sells its products mainly in Europe and North Africa. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45746", "revid": "17398924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45746", "title": "Carpathian Mountains", "text": "Mountain range in Central and Eastern Europe\nThe Carpathian Mountains or Carpathians () are a range of mountains forming an arc across Central Europe and Southeast Europe. Roughly long, it is the third-longest European mountain range after the Urals at and the Scandinavian Mountains at . The highest peaks in the Carpathians are in the Tatra Mountains, exceeding , closely followed by those in the Southern Carpathians in Romania, exceeding .\nThe range stretches from the Western Carpathians in Austria, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Poland, clockwise through the Eastern Carpathians in Ukraine and Romania, to the Southern Carpathians in Romania and Serbia. The term Outer Carpathians is frequently used to describe the northern rim of the Western and Eastern Carpathians.\nThe Carpathians provide habitat for the largest European populations of brown bears, wolves, chamois, and lynxes, with the highest concentration in Romania, as well as over one-third of all European plant species. The mountains and their foothills also have many thermal and mineral waters, with Romania having one-third of the European total.\nRomania is likewise home to the second-largest area of virgin forests in Europe after Russia, totaling 250,000 hectares (65%), most of them in the Carpathians, with the Southern Carpathians constituting Europe's largest unfragmented forest area. Rates of forest loss due to clearcutting, and deforestation due to illegal logging in the Carpathians are high.\nName.\nIn modern times, the range is called in Czech, Polish and Slovak and in Ukrainian, / in Serbo-Croatian, in Romanian, in Rusyn, in German and in Hungarian. Although the toponym was recorded by Ptolemy in the second century AD, the modern form of the name is a neologism in most languages.\nHistorical names.\nIn late Roman documents, the Eastern Carpathian Mountains were referred to as \"Montes Sarmatici\" (meaning Sarmatian Mountains). The Western Carpathians were called \"Carpates\", a name that is first recorded in Ptolemy's \"Geographia\" (second century AD).\nIn the Scandinavian \"Hervarar saga\", which relates ancient Germanic legends about battles between Goths and Huns, the name \"Karpates\" appears in the predictable Germanic form as \"Harva\u00f0a fj\u00f6llum\" (see Grimm's law). \"Inter Alpes Huniae et Oceanum est Polonia\" (\"Between the Hunic Alps and the ocean lies Poland\") by Gervase of Tilbury, was described in his \"Otia Imperialia\" (\"Recreation for an Emperor\") in 1211. Thirteenth- to fifteenth-century Hungarian documents named the mountains \"Thorchal\", \"Tarczal\", or less frequently \"Montes Nivium\" (\"Snowy Mountains\").\n\"Havasok\" (\"Snowy Mountains\") was its medieval Hungarian name. Rus' chronicles referred to it as \"Hungarian Mountains\". Later sources, such as Dimitrie Cantemir and the Italian chronicler Giovanandrea Gromo, referred to the range as \"Transylvania's Mountains\", while the 17th-century historian Constantin Cantacuzino translated the name of the mountains in an Italian-Romanian glossary to \"Rumanian Mountains\".\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of the Carpathians is not clearly established, but the name \"Carpates\" is highly associated with the old Dacian tribes called \"Carpes\" or \"Carpi\" who lived in an area to the east of the Carpathians, from the east, northeast of the Black Sea to the Transylvanian Plain in the present day Romania and Moldova.\nPotential root words.\n\"Karpates\" is considered a Paleo-Balkan name, with evidence provided by the Albanian \"k\u00e1rp\u00eb / k\u00e1rpa\", pl. \"k\u00e1rpa / k\u00e1rpat\" ('rock, stiff'), and the Messapic \"karpa\" 'tuff (rock), limestone' (preserved as \"c\u00e0rp\u00eb\" 'tuff' in Bitonto dialect and \"c\u00e0rparu\" 'limestone' in Salentino). This connection is further supported by the fact that also the oronym \"Beskydy\", a series of mountain ranges in the Carpathians, has a meaning in Albanian: \"bjeshk\u00eb / bjeshk\u00ebt\" 'high mountains, mountain pastures' (cf. also the Albanian oronym \"Bjeshk\u00ebt e Namuna\", the Accursed Mountains / Albanian Alps).\nThe name \"Carpates\" may ultimately be from the Proto Indo-European root \"*sker-\"/\"*ker-\", which meant mountain, rock, or rugged (cf. Albanian \"k\u00e1rp\u00eb\", Germanic root \"*skerp-\", Old Norse \"harrow\", Gothic \"skarpo\", Middle Low German \"scharf\" \"potsherd\", and Modern High German \"Scherbe\" \"shard\", Lithuanian \"kar~pas\" \"cut, hack, notch\", Latvian \"c\u00ecrpt\" \"to shear, clip\"). The archaic Polish word \"karpa\" meant 'rugged irregularities, underwater obstacles/rocks, rugged roots, or trunks'. The more common word \"skarpa\" means a sharp cliff or other vertical terrain, cf. Old English and English \"sharp\".\nThe name may instead come from Indo-European * 'to turn', akin to Old English 'to turn, change' (English \"warp\") and Greek 'wrist' (Karpathos island has the same root word), perhaps referring to the way the Carpathian mountain range bends or veers in an L-shape.\nGeography.\nAlthough commonly referred to as a mountain chain, the Carpathians do not form an uninterrupted chain of mountains, but consist of several orographically and geologically distinctive groups. The northwestern Carpathians begin in Slovakia and southern Poland. They surround Transcarpathia and Transylvania in a large semicircle, sweeping towards the southeast, and end on the Danube near Or\u0219ova in Romania. The total length of the Carpathians is over .\nThe mountain chain's width varies between . The highest altitudes of the Carpathians occur where they are widest, in the Transylvanian plateau and in the southern Tatra Mountains group. The highest range, in which Gerlachovsk\u00fd \u0161t\u00edt in Slovakia is the highest peak, is above sea level.\nThe Carpathians cover an area of . After the Alps, they form the next-most extensive mountain system in Europe. Percentage of the range by country is: Czech Republic\u00a0(3%) and Austria\u00a0(1%) in the northwest through Slovakia\u00a0(21%), Poland\u00a0(10%), Ukraine\u00a0(10%), Romania\u00a0(50%) to Serbia\u00a0(5%) in the south.\nIt was believed that no area of the Carpathian range was covered in snow all year round and there were no glaciers, but recent research by Polish scientists discovered one permafrost and glacial area in the Tatra Mountains.\nComparison with the Alps.\nThe Carpathians, which attain an altitude over in only a few places, lack the bold peaks, extensive snowfields, large glaciers, high waterfalls, and numerous large lakes that are common in the Alps. The Carpathians at their highest altitude are only as high as the middle region of the Alps, with which they share a common appearance, climate, and flora.\nThe Carpathians are separated from the Alps by the Danube, only meeting at the Leitha Mountains at Bratislava. The river also separates the Carpathians from the Balkan Mountains at Or\u0219ova in Romania. The valley of the March and Oder separates the Carpathians from the Silesian and Moravian chains, which belong to the middle wing of the great Central Mountain System of Europe.\nUnlike the other wings of the system, the Carpathians, which form the watershed between the northern seas and the Black Sea, are surrounded on all sides by plains. The Pannonian plain is to the southwest, the Lower Danubian Plain to the south, with the southern part being in Bulgaria, and the northern \u2013 in (Romania), and the Galician plain to the northeast.\nMountain passes.\nIn the Romanian part of the main chain of the Carpathians, mountain passes include Prislop Pass, Tihu\u021ba Pass, Bicaz Canyon, Ghime\u0219 Pass, Buz\u0103u Pass, Predeal Pass (crossed by the railway from Bra\u0219ov to Bucharest), Turnu Ro\u0219u Pass (1,115\u00a0ft., running through the narrow gorge of the Olt River and crossed by the railway from Sibiu to Bucharest), Vulcan Pass, and the Iron Gate (both crossed by the railway from Timi\u0219oara to Craiova).\nGeology.\nThe area now occupied by the Carpathians was once occupied by smaller ocean basins. The Carpathian mountains were formed during the Alpine orogeny in the Mesozoic and Cenozoic by moving the ALCAPA (Alpine-Carpathian-Pannonian), Tisza and Dacia plates over subducting oceanic crust.\nThe mountains take the form of a fold and thrust belt with generally north vergence in the western segment, northeast to east vergence in the eastern portion and southeast vergence in the southern portion. Currently, the area is the most seismically active in Central Europe.\nThe external, generally northern, portion of the orogenic belt is a Tertiary accretionary wedge of a so-called Flysch belt (the Carpathian Flysch Belt) created by rocks scraped off the sea bottom and thrust over the North-European plate. The Carpathian accretionary wedge is made of several thin skinned nappes composed of Cretaceous to Paleogene turbidites. Thrusting of the Flysch nappes over the Carpathian foreland caused the formation of the Carpathian foreland basin. The boundary between the Flysch belt and internal zones of the orogenic belt in the western segment of the mountain range is marked by the Pieniny Klippen Belt, a narrow complicated zone of polyphase compressional deformation, later involved in a supposed strike-slip zone.\nInternal zones in western and eastern segments contain older Variscan igneous massifs reworked in Mesozoic thick and thin-skinned nappes. During the Middle Miocene this zone was affected by intensive calc-alkaline arc volcanism that developed over the subduction zone of the flysch basins. At the same time, the internal zones of the orogenic belt were affected by large extensional structure of the back-arc Pannonian Basin. The last volcanic activity occurred at Ciomadul about 30,000 years ago.\nThe mountains started to gain their current shape from the latest Miocene onward. At some locations solifluction deposits have formed on the slopes of the Carpathians. Iron, gold and silver were found in great quantities in the Western Carpathians. After the Roman emperor Trajan's conquest of Dacia, he brought back to Rome over 165 tons of gold and 330 tons of silver.\nEcology.\nThe ecology of the Carpathians varies with altitude, ranging from lowland forests to alpine meadows. Foothill forests are primarily of broadleaf deciduous trees, including oak, hornbeam, and linden. European beech is characteristic of the montane forest zone. Higher-elevation subalpine forests are characterized by Norway spruce (\"Picea abies\"). Krummholz and alpine meadows occur above the treeline.\nWildlife in the Carpathians includes Eurasian brown bear (\"Ursus arctos arctos\"), Eurasian wolf (\"Canis lupus lupus\"), Eurasian lynx (\"Lynx lynx\"), European wildcat (\"Felis silvestris\"), Tatra chamois (\"Rupicapra rupicapra tatrica\"), European bison (\"Bison bonasus\"), and golden eagle (\"Aquila chrysaetos\").\nDivisions of the Carpathians.\nIn geopolitical terms, Carpathian Mountains are often grouped and labeled according to national or regional borders, but such division has turned out to be relative, since it was, and still is dependent on frequent historical, political and administrative changes of national or regional borders. According to modern geopolitical division, Carpathians can be grouped as: Serbian, Romanian, Ukrainian, Polish, Slovakian, Czech and Austrian. Within each nation, specific classifications of the Carpathians have been developing, often reflecting local traditions, and thus creating terminological diversity, that produces various challenges in the fields of comparative classification and international systematization.\nA major part of the western and northeastern Outer Eastern Carpathians in Poland, Ukraine, and Slovakia is traditionally called the Eastern Beskids.The border between the eastern and southern Carpathians is formed by the Predeal Pass, south of Bra\u0219ov and the Prahova Valley.\nThe geological border between the Western and Eastern Carpathians runs approximately along the line (south to north) between the towns of Michalovce, Bardejov, Nowy S\u0105cz and Tarn\u00f3w. In older systems the border runs more in the east, along the line (north to south) along the rivers San and Os\u0142awa (Poland), the town of Snina (Slovakia) and river Tur'ia (Ukraine). Biologists shift the border even further to the east.\nThe section of the Carpathians within the borders of Romania is commonly known as the Romanian Carpathians. In local use, Romanians sometimes denote as \"Eastern Carpathians\" only the Romanian part of the Eastern Carpathians, which lies on their territory (i.e., from the Ukrainian border or from the Prislop Pass to the south), which they subdivide into three simplified geographical groups (northern, central, southern), instead of Outer and Inner Eastern Carpathians. These groups are:\nThe section of the Carpathians within the borders of Ukraine is commonly known as the Ukrainian Carpathians. Classification of eastern sections of the Carpathians is particularly complex, since it was influenced by several overlapping traditions. Terms like\nWooded Carpathians, Poloniny Mountains or Eastern Beskids are often used in varying scopes by authors belonging to different traditions.\nHighest peaks.\nThis is an (incomplete) list of the peaks of the Carpathians having summits over , with their heights, geologic divisions, and locations.\nHighest peaks by country.\nThis is a list of the highest national peaks of the Carpathians, their heights, geologic divisions, and locations.\nCities and towns.\nImportant cities and towns in or near the Carpathians are, in approximate descending order of population:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45747", "revid": "1316874996", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45747", "title": "Weapons in Star Trek", "text": "The \"Star Trek\" fictional universe contains a variety of weapons, ranging from missiles (photon torpedoes) to melee (primarily used by the Klingons, a race of aliens in the \"Star Trek\" universe). The \"Star Trek\" franchise consists mainly of several multi-season television shows and fourteen movies, as well as various video games and merchandise. Many aspects of the \"Star Trek\" universe impact modern popular culture, especially its fictitious terminology and the concept of weaponry on spacecraft. The franchise has had a widespread influence on its audiences from the late 20th to early 21st century. Notably, \"Star Trek\"'s science fiction concepts have been studied by real scientists; NASA described it in relation to the real world as \"entertaining combination of real science, imaginary science gathered from lots of earlier stories, and stuff the writers make up week-by-week to give each new episode novelty.\" For example, NASA noted that the \"Star Trek\" \"phasers\" were a fictional extrapolation of real-life lasers, and compared them to real-life microwave based weapons that have a stunning effect.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEnergy weapons.\nThe franchise depicts various weapons which mostly fit the motif of the raygun, the most prominent of these being the \"phaser\". These directed-energy weapons emit energy rather than a projectile, though some (particularly in newer Star Trek shows) do fire bolts/pulses. A hand phaser can be set to \"stun\" or \"kill\".\nPhaser.\nPhasers are common and versatile phased array pulsed energy projectile weapons, first seen in the original \"\" series and later in almost all subsequent films and television spin-offs. Phasers range in size from small arms to starship-mounted weaponry. Phasers can either fire projectile like energy bolts or directed energy beams like a raygun.\nPhaser output can be adjusted in both area of effect and output: a typical hand phaser can be adjusted so that it will merely shock or stun a living organism, while the effects of higher settings range from burning, disintegration, or to true vaporization. This versatility means they can also be used as welding torches or cutting tools, and can create heat sources by firing at a large, solid object (like a rock). The stream can be adjusted to strike multiple targets at once, strike a single target with precision, or even destroy large amounts of material. Phasers can be set to overload, whereby they build up a force-chamber explosion by continuously generating energy without releasing it; the resulting blast can destroy most natural objects within a radius. The overload process is marked by a distinctive sound that increases in volume and frequency until it is deactivated or it detonates. Personal phasers can be made small enough to fit in the user's palm and still be lethal. Larger and more powerful phaser rifles are issued to security personnel.\nShip-mounted phasers have a similar range of functions on a larger scale: The phasers on the USS \"Enterprise\" can be used as an \"anti-missile\" defense to destroy incoming projectiles, stun entire city blocks full of people, destroy cities, and even destroy entire asteroids up to a given size. The ship's phaser system is also said to be capable of destroying continents.\nAlthough starships are frequently shown firing their phasers while at Warp speeds across the various Star Trek series, this was generally avoided during \"The Next Generation\", and the ' states that it is impossible. The ', on the other hand, describes an \"ACB-jacketed beam device\" as the mechanism which allows phasers to function at Warp speeds.\nAccording to later series, phasers release a beam or bolt of fictional subatomic particles called \"rapid nadion\", which are then refracted (\"rectified\") through superconducting crystals. The \"Star Trek: The Next Generation Technical Manual\" indicates that the superconducting crystals used in phasers are called , which is Japanese for \"sea of mystery\", and the phrase is written in the original glyphs. This was a homage to the 1990 anime series \"\", known in North America as \"Nadia: The Secret of Blue Water\".\nThe phasers in the 2009 reboot film \"Star Trek\" appear similar in shape to the classic phasers, but fire singular energy pulses instead of a sustained stream of them, in a fashion similar to semi-automatic weapons. This version of the phaser has two settings, stun and kill, which fire blue and red colored pulses respectively. The barrel of the weapon is two-sided, one being colored red and the other blue to indicate the current setting; the user must manually rotate to the other output to use the other setting. A similar change is seen in the starship-mounted phaser banks, which also fire single energy pulse instead of continuous streams. In \"Star Trek Beyond\", the barrel sides of the sidearm phasers are flat and both barrels shoot blue bolts that deal no physical damage, while the barrel tips are still colored blue and red.\nThe original phaser rifle prop from \"Where No Man Has Gone Before\" sold at auction in 2013 for $231,000.\nLaser.\nLasers are a sidearm in the original \"Star Trek\" pilot \"\", and laser pistols appear in several ' (\"TOS\") episodes, although later episodes in ' (\"TNG\") indicate that the laser's use as a weapon is outdated. In one instance, the ship-mounted lasers of two spacecraft were incapable of overcoming the navigational shields of the USS \"Enterprise\"-D, though on two other occasions it is threatened with destruction by a laser-armed spacecraft. The Borg cutter weapon is a laser, as mentioned in the \"TNG\" episode \"Q Who\" and is capable of quickly disintegrating the hull of a Federation starship, as seen in the pilot episode of \", \". At lower power levels, it is capable of making \"surgical\" incisions into a ship's hull.\nAccording to \"The Making of Star Trek\", Gene Roddenberry claimed that production staff realized using laser technology would cause problems in the future, as people came to understand what lasers could and could not do. This resulted in the move to phasers on-screen, while letting lasers be known as a more primitive weapon style.\nPlasma cannon.\nPlasma cannons are a form of directed energy weaponry used by both Earth Starfleet and the early Romulan Star Empire. On Starfleet vessels, they are the precursors to phase cannons. Plasma cannons fire a plasma discharge in the form of a beam or a burst, similar to the plasma bullets fired by hand-held plasma weapons, but much bigger in size. The NX-class is initially armed with plasma cannons.\nPhase cannon.\nPhase cannons are 22nd century weapons, several of which first appear mounted to the \"Enterprise\" in the \"Star Trek: Enterprise\" episode \"\". Phase cannons have a variable yield, with the cannons on the \"Enterprise\" being rated for a maximum output of 500 gigajoules, equivalent to about 120 tons of TNT. Phase cannons are generally more powerful than spatial torpedoes. They are the 22nd century precursor to phaser technology, in addition to phase pistols (hand-carried phase cannons). Unlike 24th century phasers, they do not have the normal variable power settings or a variable beam width \u2013 only stun and kill.\nDisruptor.\nDisruptors are employed by several alien species in this series, including Romulans, Klingons, Breen, Cardassians, Iridians and Orions in their personal and military small arms as well as being mounted as cannon, emitters, turrets, and banks. Only the first three species are known to have type-3 disruptors, the most advanced type developed by the 24th Century. Disruptors cause damage by exciting the molecular bonds of targets to such great extents that those bonds are weakened and/or broken by the energies emitted, which often manifest as an explosive force. According to Last Unicorn's ', disruptors are considered less \"elegant\" than phaser-based weapons; their effects there are described as thermal shock and blunt force, as opposed to the \"rapid nadion effect\". As a result, disruptors inflict more damage to matter, but less damage to shields, than phasers. Klingons call their disruptors \"nISwI.\nPhased polaron cannon.\nPhased polaron cannons are the primary armament of the Dominion, the main antagonist faction in the later seasons of \"Star Trek: Deep Space Nine\". The cannon emits a beam of polaron particles, the fictional in-universe antimatter counterpart of the muon (not to be confused with the actual polaron or the actual antimuon). When first introduced, Dominion polaron cannons easily penetrate the shielding systems of most Alpha Quadrant races. The Alpha Quadrant races eventually learn to modify their shields to resist polaron weaponry (\").\nTetryon cannon.\nTetryon cannons are the primary armament of the Hirogen and are similar in application to phasers and disruptors. Tetryon cannons are unique in that they are designed primarily to damage energy and force fields, such as starship shields. Tetryon cannons damage matter, but not to the same extent as phasers or disruptors. This is in line with the Hirogen philosophy of the hunt, as depicted in \" (\"VOY\"). The Hirogen ship would therefore knock out its opponent's shields and beam over hunters to engage in face-to-face ranged or melee combat. This allows the Hirogen hunters to collect items that they would consider to be hunting trophies.\nVaron-T disruptor.\nVaron-T disruptors are featured in the \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\" (\"TNG\") episode \"The Most Toys\", and are mentioned to be a rare type of disruptor that are illegal in the Federation because of their slow, excruciating method of killing, with the weapons tearing the body apart from the inside. Kivas Fajo, a Zibalian trader in that episode, owns four of the five Varon-T disruptors ever manufactured (he sleeps with one under his pillow) and uses one on his own crew before his collection of rare items was confiscated after his capture and arrest for kidnapping and theft (among other crimes). The fifth Varon-T was kept by the criminal Kelsey who was killed when her scout ship exploded.\nFerengi energy whip.\nThe Ferengi energy whip, as seen in the \" episode \", looks and handles like a typical bullwhip and discharges a powerful phaser-like energy pulse.\nProjectile weapons.\nSpatial torpedo.\nAlso referred to as conventional torpedoes, spatial torpedoes are 22nd century weapons used by \"Enterprise\". Spatial torpedoes are the ship's most powerful and primary ship-to-ship weapon before the installation of phase cannons. Spatial torpedoes are themselves superseded by more powerful photonic torpedoes. Unlike photonic torpedoes or any of the warhead's successors, spatial torpedoes are launched at sub-light velocity and can be used much in the manner of a missile, having the warhead on a fly-by-wire.\nPhoton torpedo.\nPhoton torpedoes are a standard ship-based weapon armed with an antimatter warhead. They are present in every version of the \"Star Trek\" series and are a standard weapon on almost every Federation ship, though in \"\" (\"ENT\"), the titular ship uses less powerful spatial torpedoes (guided, rocket propelled missiles) until receiving the more powerful \"photonic\" variant. Photon torpedoes first appear on a Starfleet ship in the original series' episode \"\" as part of the USS \"Enterprise\"'s armament. In the \"Star Trek: Enterprise\" episode \"\", the \"Enterprise\" (NX-01) first receives photonic torpedoes. Smaller Starfleet craft such as shuttlecraft and runabouts can be armed with \"micro-torpedoes\", a scaled-down version of photon torpedoes designed for use on craft too small to accommodate the full-sized weapon.\nWhen fired, photon torpedoes usually appear as a spiky orb of energy of varying colours, such as red, orange, yellow, blue, or green, or in the case of \"Star Trek: The Original Series\" (\"TOS\"), red bolts. According to the original notes to ' and \"The Making of Star Trek\", photon torpedoes are energy shielded to allow armor-penetration. Several episodes seem to suggest this (': \"\"). The energy output of a photon torpedo, according to the \"Star Trek\" Technical Manuals is a maximum theoretical yield of 25 isotons and a maximum rated yield of 18.5 isotons. According to \"Star Trek: The Next Generation Technical Manual\", photon torpedoes use of matter and the same amount of antimatter. In the \"\" episode, \"Balance of Terror\", photon torpedoes had replaced nuclear warheads as the primary wartime weapons on Federation starships.\nTorpedoes are often depicted as being easy to modify to suit specific situations. Despite the stated maximum yield, torpedoes can be made far more destructive with relatively little effort. In \"Star Trek: Voyager\", Tuvok and Kim modify a normal photon torpedo with a gravimetric charge, a piece of Borg technology, to increase its destructive yield to 54 isotons. Kim comments that 50 isotons would be sufficient to destroy a small planet. Janeway later instructs them to increase its yield to 80 isotons. In \"\", Spock and Dr. McCoy modify a photon torpedo to track the plasma emissions from a cloaked Klingon bird of prey as it attacks the \"Enterprise\"-A and the \"Excelsior\", similar to the principal function of a heat-seeking missile.\nPhoton torpedo launchers aboard ships are shown to be able to fire probes, which, in-universe, are designed with this functionality in mind. In \"\", a torpedo casing is used as a makeshift coffin for burial in space and as scientific probes as in the \"TNG\" episode \"In Theory\" and in \"Star Trek Generations\".\nPlasma torpedo.\nPlasma torpedoes are used by the Romulans, Cardassians, and (according to \"Star Fleet Battles\", \"Klingon Academy\" and \"\") the Gorn. The damage of a plasma torpedo spreads out over several ship systems at once, but the torpedo loses its effectiveness after only a few minutes of travel. Romulan plasma torpedoes use trilithium isotopes in their warheads.\nGravimetric torpedoes.\nGravimetric torpedoes are torpedoes used by the Borg. The weapon emits a complex phase variance of gravitons to create a gravimetric distortion capable of tearing starships apart.\nQuantum torpedo.\nQuantum torpedoes first appear in the \"Deep Space Nine\" episode \"\" as a weapon aboard the . In the \"DS9\" episode \"\", the USS \"Lakota\" was also stated to be carrying quantum torpedoes, although they were never used. Additionally, the USS \"Enterprise\"-E is equipped with quantum torpedoes in ' and '. The Federation are the only known users of quantum torpedoes. The \"Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Technical Manual\" states that quantum torpedoes derive their destructive power from vacuum energy. Various in-universe sources describe quantum torpedoes as roughly double the destructive power of standard photon torpedoes, putting their yield somewhere in excess of 100 megatons of TNT.\nFour of the USS \"Enterprise\"-E's quantum torpedoes destroyed an unshielded Borg sphere. The launcher appears on the 1701-E in \"Star Trek: Insurrection\" but is never fired. In \"Star Trek: Nemesis\", nine of the \"Enterprise\"-E's quantum torpedoes disable the \"Scimitar\"'s cloaking function.\nQuantum torpedoes are normally shown in a shade of blue. As of \"Nemesis\" the following ship classes have quantum torpedoes launcher; \"Defiant\"\u2013, \"Intrepid\"\u2013, \"Luna\"\u2013, \"Sovereign\"\u2013, \"Vesta\"\u2013 , \"Akira\"\u2013 and \"Achilles\"\u2013class. In addition to the uncrewed Cardassian spacecraft \"\", these are the only ships known to be equipped with quantum torpedoes. Though Dreadnought only has quantum torpedoes due to the maquis acquiring them illicitly, along with their other military grade weapons. B'elanna Torres installed the quantum torpedoes on Dreadnought to increase its armament from the original complement.\nPolaron torpedo.\nPolaron torpedoes, like the Dominion weapon, are capable of penetrating normal shielding with ease. They appear in various \"Star Trek\" games. In ', it is one of the Klingon's three heavy weapon options, the others being the photon torpedo and the ion cannon. It also appears in ' and \"\", as a researchable weapon for the Klingon Empire exclusive to the \"Vor'cha\"-class cruiser which takes out one of the targeted ship's systems at random.\nTransphasic torpedo.\nTransphasic torpedoes appear only once, in the \"Voyager\" series finale, \"Endgame\". They are high-yield torpedoes that are designed specifically to fight the Borg. The future Admiral Janeway brought them back in time in a Federation shuttlecraft and had them installed onboard \"Voyager\" in 2378. They are among the most powerful weapons used in the \"Star Trek\" universe; just one is capable of obliterating an entire Borg cube. They work by delivering destructive subspace compression pulse explosion. Upon detonation the pulse is delivered in asymmetric superposition of multiple phase states. Since the shields can block only one subcomponent of the pulse the remaining majority is delivered to the target. On the top of it every torpedo has different transphasic configuration generated randomly by a dissonant feedback effect to prevent Borg or any other enemy to predict the configuration of the phase states. Although they do not appear in the film \"Nemesis\", according to the non-canon \"Destiny\" book trilogy these are kept by Starfleet as the weapon of last resort to be deployed to starships only when all else had failed against the Borg. Eventually, the situation becomes dire enough that the specifications are released to Federation and Klingon ships; the Borg eventually learn to adapt to them.\nIsokinetic cannon.\nThe Isokinetic cannon was seen in only one episode of \"Star Trek: Voyager\", \"\". In the episode, representatives of USS \"Voyager\" meet with a weapons trader and designer known as Kovin. The demonstration of the weapon destroys a target buoy composed of 10\u00a0m thick solid monotanium with a chromoelectric forcefield in one shot, coring it cleanly through.\nTR-116 projectile rifle.\nThe TR-116 projectile rifle is a prototype weapon developed by the Federation for situations where conventional energy weapons might be rendered useless by damping fields or other countermeasures. It is introduced in the \"Star Trek: Deep Space Nine\" episode \", where it is used in conjunction with a micro-transporter and a visual scanner headpiece to create an extremely potent sniper rifle. With the scanner, the shooter can precisely target people hundreds of meters away and through solid matter with no difficulty. Using the transporter attached to the barrel, the slug can then be transported during motion at full velocity, thus traveling through walls and materializing within point-blank range of the target.\nPhased plasma torpedo.\nPhased plasma torpedoes can phase out of normal space-time to bypass shields, then phase back in to detonate on a ship's hull, thus making shields worthless against them. They only appear in the PC game \". Shortly after the recovery of the Pegasus device, the phasing properties used in the design are seen as a delivery system for torpedoes. Reducing the size of the phasing coils used to accomplish an intangible state proves difficult. Further, the antimatter within the warhead has a destabilizing effect on the phasing coil. A new kind of explosive material is needed, and it is found using the principles behind the first observed Romulan plasma weapons. The installation of a high-energy plasma infuser allows a torpedo casing to be filled with a warhead charged with high-energy plasma from the ship's warp nacelles. Warp plasma is highly unstable and can be easily detonated. Using a nanite-controlled trigger for reactant release allows vessels to deliver a high-energy plasma warhead payload within a Mark IV torpedo casing.\nChroniton torpedo.\nChroniton torpedoes are a unique form of weapon employed by the Krenim. The weapons phase in and out of normal time, allowing them to pass through ordinary shields and directly damage a vessel's hull. Though dangerous, their reliability is not absolute, as Seven of Nine and Tuvok (as well as Kes in the alternate timeline presented in \"\") find an undetonated chroniton torpedo lodged in \"Voyager\"'s hull, which in turn allow the crew to adapt the shields to withstand further attacks.\nPositron torpedo.\nThe Kessok are a highly intelligent race that ally themselves with the Cardassians, albeit through deceit, in the video game \"\". They utilize positron torpedoes: powerful, slow-moving projectiles able to inflict nearly twice as much damage as quantum torpedoes.\nBiological, radioactive, and chemical weapons.\nThalaron radiation.\nThalaron radiation was first used in the feature film ' by the villain Shinzon to assassinate the entire Romulan senate. Later in the movie, Shinzon attempts to kill the crew of the USS \"Enterprise\"-E using a ship-mounted version. Thalaron radiation, even in small amounts, petrifies living tissue almost instantly. Its properties also allow its range and area of effect to be precisely controlled, from encompassing a single room to engulfing an entire planet. Its massive destructive potential leads the Federation to consider it an extremely illegal biogenic weapon. It later features prominently in the plot of \"Homecoming\", the ' short story in the 2008 Mirror Universe anthology \"Shards and Shadows\", in which the rebels manage to steal a Romulan thalaron bomb intended for use by the Alliance, to strike a balance of power against them.\nMetreon cascade.\nThe metreon cascade was designed by Dr. Ma'Bor Jetrel of the Haakonian Order. Unstable metreon isotopes are used to create a devastating explosion, with radiation effects similar to those of the 20th-century atomic bomb. Those not killed or vaporized in the initial blast suffer radiation poisoning and death in the aftermath. It is used only once, on the Talaxian moon Rinax in 2355.\nTrilithium resin.\nTrilithium resin is a byproduct of a starship's warp engines that is lethal to humans, but harmless to Cardassians. A team of terrorists attempted to steal Trilithium resin from the warp core of the \"Enterprise\"-D when it was docked at Arkaria Station to receive a baryon sweep.\nCaptain Benjamin Sisko would later use a Trilithium resin torpedo to render a Maquis planet uninhabitable to all human life for fifty years by detonating it in the atmosphere.\nCobalt diselenide.\nCobalt diselenide is a biogenic weapon that affects the nervous system. It is composed of selenium and rhodium nitrates. It is the counterpart to trilithium resin, being lethal to Cardassians but harmless to most other humanoids.\nAceton assimilators.\nAceton assimilators are used to absorb energy from other sources and then redirect it back as hazardous radiation.\nMelee weapons.\nFederation.\nKaBar combat knife.\nThe KaBar combat knife is the Federation's standard-issue combat and survival knife. It is 32.5\u00a0cm (12.8\u00a0in) and is standard equipment in survival gear and in emergency weapons caches aboard starships. Captain Kathryn Janeway uses one in the \"Star Trek: Voyager\" episode \"\".\nIn the real world, the KA-BAR is an official combat knife of the United States Marine Corps.\nKatana.\nA katana is a Federation sword of Japanese origin. The only major difference is that the \"Star Trek\" version is foldable, thus occupying a minimum space when carried and stored. In the 2009 \"Star Trek\" reboot, Lieutenant Hikaru Sulu produces a folding katana with which to cut the lines of his parachute.\nJem'Hadar.\nBayonet.\nThe Jem'Hadar often have bayonets attached to their plasma (also known as polaron-pulse) rifles. They employ these in close combat, or to execute prisoners. Often Jem'Hadar bayonets are chemically enhanced, releasing a lethal nerve-agent on contact.\nKar'takin.\nKar'takin are straight-bladed polearms used by the Jem'Hadar in close combat. They are used by both Starfleet officers and Jem'Hadar in the \"Star Trek: Deep Space Nine\" episode \"To the Death\". The Kar'takin bear a resemblance to the Bardiche axe.\nShock Blade.\nIn the \"\" video game, this weapon delivers a taser-like jolt to whatever it strikes in combat. Holding the shock blade's trigger discharges a beam of neuro-electrical energy, with an effective range of 15 feet.\nKlingon.\nBat'leth (AKA betleH).\nThe bat'leth is the Klingon double-sided scimitar/hook sword/lujiaodao hybrid\u2013edge weapon, designed by martial arts enthusiast and \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\" effects producer Dan Curry. The bat'leth is a curved blade with spiked protrusions and handholds along the middle of the blade's back. In battle, the handholds are used to twirl and spin the blade rapidly.\nKlingon oral history holds that the first bat'leth was forged around 625 A.D. by Kahless, who dropped a lock of his hair into the lava from the Kri'stak Volcano, then plunged the fiery lock into the lake of Lursor and twisted it to form a blade. After forging the weapon, he used it to defeat the tyrant Molor, and in doing so united the Klingon homeworld. This first bat'leth is known as the Sword of Kahless' and was stolen by the invading Hur'q; an episode of \"Deep Space Nine\" revolves around an effort to recover the Sword of Kahless. The name \"bat'leth\" itself is a slight corruption of , which means \"Sword of Honor\" in Klingon.\nA \"Valdris\" blade was used in Colorado Springs, Colorado, in two 7-Eleven armed-robberies in 2009.\nChon'naq (AKA chonnaQ).\nA smaller version of this \"belly\u2013spear\" (the literal Klingon translation) is used in the children's game of , which incorporates spinning hoops, and hones assorted skills needed for hunting. Once a male Klingon reaches the Age of Ascension, he is presented with an adult version of the chon'naq by his father - on the occasion of their first hunt together as men.\nD'k tahg (AKA Daqtagh).\nA d'k tahg is a Klingon dagger. The knife has three blades: a main blade with a cutout in the center, and two smaller blades on either side. In some models, these side blades are spring\u2013loaded and can pop out into position and close up for storage. In other models, the blades are fixed. It also features a pommel studded with blunt spikes. The d'k tahg first appears in \"\", and appears occasionally throughout the following films and television series. The knife was designed by Gil Hibben. Although the d'k tahg appears in \"Star Trek III\", it is not referred to by name until \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\".\nHaf'leth.\nThis polearm is similar to a halberd.\nIw'taj (AKA 'Iw taj).\nDirectly descended from the weapon which inspired the Klingon emblem, this dagger (literal translation: 'blood-knife') is longer and heavier than the d\u2019k tahg (which was derived from it). The Iw'taj is a dedicated dueling weapon.\nThe two side\u2013blades, one pointing up and one pointing down, serve particular functions. The upward-pointing blade is designed to catch an opponent's weapon and, with a twisting motion, disarm him. The downward-pointing blade is designed to inflict shallow cuts in passing, sapping the enemy's strength; said design allows the weapon to advance smoothly, without this blade getting in the way. Duelists often hook their index and middle fingers over the crossbar; doing this allows the weapon to achieve impressive agility, despite weakening the grip. It may also be used with a reverse grip.\nThe Iw'taj is often carried by traditionalists, and by discerning martial artists. Usually, a warrior who carries both a mek\u2019leth and an Iw'taj is from a Qvav\u2019mar background, and/or is a personal combatant of high caliber.\nJej'taj (AKA jejtaj).\nThis throwing-dagger is more often used defensively, to ward off blade attacks. Typically, it is wielded as a combination knuckleduster/boomerang.\nMek'leth (AKA meqleH).\nA mek'leth is the Klingon short sword that appears in several episodes of \"Star Trek: Deep Space Nine\" and in the film \"\". Designed by Dan Curry, it consists of a short, thick, curved blade with a metal guard extending back parallel with the grip to protect the hand. Worf is the most commonly seen user of the mek'leth, owning one and using it several times, including in hand-to-hand combat against Borg drones in \"First Contact\".\nOy'naq (AKA 'oy'naQ).\nThis \"pain-stick\" (the literal translation), capable of killing a 2-ton Rectyne Monopod, is used as part of the Klingon Age of Ascension ritual.\nKut'luch (AKA qutluch).\nSimilar to the d'k tahg, the kut'luch is \"the ceremonial weapon of an assassin\". A kut'luch is designed to do considerable damage to internal organs, by Klingon standards thus making it an extremely lethal weapon. The kut'luch is featured in the \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\" episode \"\", when Worf's brother, Kurn, is stabbed; and in the \"Star Trek: Voyager\" episode \"\", where the Doctor's simulated \"son\" prepares for the Kut'luch ceremony.\nTik'leth (AKA tIqleH).\nThis \u201clongsword\u201d (the literal translation of tIq 'etlh) is one of the more Terran\u2013like Klingon weapons. Like spears, tik'leths are traditional weapons of the rank-and-file. Many nobles prefer a tik'leth's offensive functionality to that of a bat'leth, while many soldiers carry mass-produced bat\u2019leths as a status symbol.\nRomulan.\nTeral'n.\nA Romulan polearm, similar to a trident with retractable blades. It appears in the 2009 \"Star Trek\" reboot and is used by the renegade miner Nero. In the \"\" comic, Nero's weapon is revealed to be the \"Debrune teral'n\", an ancient Romulan artifact that symbolized the empire's power; it is traditionally held by the presiding Praetor.\nA similar weapon, resembling an axe was also used by a member of Nero's crew.\nVulcan.\nAhn'woon.\nAn ahn'woon is a Vulcan catch\u2013strangle weapon, similar in principle to a cast net but more versatile. Depending on the skill of the user, it can be used several ways. It is wide enough to be a sling. In James Blish\u2019s adaptation of the \"TOS\" script, Kirk employs it this way and hits Spock in the ribs with a stone. The multi-strapped weapon (approximately 1.1 meters long) uses weights on the ends of the straps, like bolas, to entangle, stun, or cut the target. The application of tying action and wrapping, as with a garrote, can restrict the breathing of the target, asphyxiating the victim. It is considered the oldest Vulcan weapon.\nLirpa.\nA lirpa is a large Vulcan weapon consisting of a wooden staff with a semicircular blade at one end and a metal bludgeon on the other. It is similar to the monk's spade and the pugil stick. Captain James T. Kirk and Spock used lirpas when they fought for possession of T'Pring during Spock's Pon farr ritual in \"Amok Time\". Soldiers sent after Jonathan Archer and T'Pol fought with lirpas because Vulcan's \"Forge\" region makes conventional energy weapons useless.\nOthers.\nGlavin.\nIn the \"TNG\" episode \"Code of Honor\", the Ligonians have deep traditions of fighting with a poison-tipped hand weapon called a glavin. It is a large glove with a recurved claw at the end, and covered with dozens of spines. In several episodes, Worf is seen displaying one in his quarters, most likely the same one used by Lt. Tasha Yar.\nMortaes.\nIn the \"TOS\" episode \"The Cloud Minders\", mortaes and thongs are mining tools used as martial weapons by the \"troglyte\" (a corruption of \"troglodyte\") miners, and apparently the ruling class is also trained with these weapons, as Plasus challenges Kirk to hand-to-hand combat, asking, \"Are you as brave with a mortae as with a phaser?\" Kirk responds, \"Both will kill.\"\nUshaan-tor.\nIn the \"Enterprise\" episode \"United\", Andorian commander Thy'lek Shran and the NX-01's captain Jonathan Archer, as a second for a Tellarite officer who kills Tallas, Shran's chief tactical officer and lover, engage in an Andorian \"ushaan\" duel. The weapon used is the ushaan-tor, an Andorian ice-mining blade. The handheld blade of the \"ushaan-tor\" is about 20\u00a0cm from end to end, and resembles an Inupiat Ulu blade from Alaska, but in a one-piece all-metal design instead of having a separate wooden handle.\nSubspace weapons.\nSubspace weapons are a class of directed energy weapons that directly affect subspace. The weapons can produce actual tears in subspace, and are extremely unpredictable. These weapons were banned under the second Khitomer Accord. The Son'a equipped their vessels with these types of weapons.\nIsolytic burst.\nSon'a vessels carried and used isolytic burst weapons, a type of subspace weapon. They were seen using this weapon against the \"Enterprise\"-E in \"Star Trek: Insurrection\". The \"Enterprise\" was only able to escape the weapon's effect by ejecting its warp core and detonating it to seal a subspace rift.\nTricobalt devices.\nThe tricobalt warhead is a subspace weapon whose high-yield detonations can tear holes in subspace. Tricobalt devices are not a standard armament of Federation vessels and yields are calculated in Tera-Cochranes, indicating that its mechanism is somewhat similar to the general reaction in a warp field.\nIn \"TOS\": \"A Taste of Armageddon\", the Eminian Union classified the USS \"Enterprise\" as 'destroyed' when it was hit by virtual tricobalt satellites. In \"DS9\": \"Trials and Tribble-ations\", Arne Darvin plants a tricobalt explosive in a dead Tribble in an attempt to kill Kirk. USS \"Voyager\" uses a pair of tricobalt devices to destroy the Caretaker array in the \"Star Trek: Voyager\" pilot episode, \"\", and such a device was used against \"Voyager\" in the episode \"\". A tricobalt warhead was also used by the Tholians in the \"Star Trek: Enterprise\" episode \"In a Mirror, Darkly\". They detonated a tricobalt warhead inside the gravity well of a dead star. The explosion created an interphasic rift, which they used to lure the Federation starship USS \"Defiant\" from another universe.\nThe games ' and ' have ships armed with Tricobalt devices for artillery support. The Federation \"Steamrunner\"-class, the Klingon \"Chuq'Beh\"-class Bird of Prey, the Romulan \"Raptor\"-class Warbird, and the Borg Harbinger are all capable of using them. The workings of the weapon is unknown but theorised is the use of Cobalt-60.\nIt is far more likely that tricobalt refers to the third periodical table analog for cobalt; similar to dilithium being the second periodic table equivalent of regular lithium. \"trititanium\" and most other in trek universe usage where a numeric prefix is appended to a regular real world periodic table element refers to additional periodic tables whose elements are composed of nucleons that are not protons or neutrons and maybe not even regular electrons yet can form atoms molecules and chemical compounds similar to normal matter.\nNeutron radiation such as produced by a Cobalt 60 weapon is not very useful for destroying outposts, starships or anything else that is not a living creature.\nOther weapons.\nMagnetometric guided charges.\nAround Stardate 43995, the Borg used this weapon to drive the USS \"Enterprise\", NCC-1701-D, from the Paulson Nebula. This shortly leads to the abduction of Captain Jean-Luc Picard.\nMultikinetic neutronic mines.\nDuring Season 4, Episode 1 of \"Star Trek: Voyager\", Captain Janeway consults with Borg representative Seven of Nine on how to destroy Species 8472. Janeway calls Seven of Nine's \"multikinetic neutronic mine\" a \"weapon of mass destruction,\" following up on a statement from Tuvok that it would affect an entire starsystem, destroying innocent worlds. The mine's five-million isoton yield can disperse Borg nanoprobes across a five-light year range.\nDreadnought.\nDreadnought was a Cardassian self-guided missile, containing one thousand kilograms of matter, and another thousand of antimatter. Tuvok describes this as enough to destroy a small moon. Although described as a self-guided missile, in practice Dreadnought functions much like an autonomous starship, and it even had life support capability on board. It possesses shields, phasers, a complement of quantum torpedoes, a Thoron shock emitter, a plasma wave weapon, engines capable of reaching at least Warp 9, and a sophisticated computer AI. It appears in the \"Voyager\" . It had been captured by the Maquis due to a failed detonator and reprogrammed to attack its original creator. It was dragged into the Delta Quadrant in much the same manner as \"Voyager\", and when unable to resolve the unforeseen situation it locked on to a planet that was similar to the one it was programmed to target, but which was inhabited by innocents. Dreadnought was equipped with an exceptionally sophisticated artificial intelligence, capable of \"paranoia\" to a certain degree, as when reprogrammer B'Elanna Torres attempted to prevent it from destroying the innocent planet, it came to the conclusion that she had been captured by her Cardassian enemies and forced to make up a story to prevent the attack; it then \"pretended\" to follow her commands and shut down, only to re-activate and continue its mission once she was no longer aboard.\nSeries 5 long range tactical armor unit.\nSimilar in purpose to the Cardassian Dreadnought, the Tactical Armor Units are self-guided missiles with sophisticated artificial intelligence. They are much smaller than Dreadnought, being only a few feet in length, and while nowhere near as powerful, they are nonetheless classified as weapons of mass destruction, capable of destroying everything in a 200-kilometer radius with a highly focused antimatter explosion. Their coordination and control is done through a \"Strategic Command Matrix\", analogous to a nuclear control network of the type used by the United States. Each one possesses shielding, warp drive of indeterminate speed, and a sentient, genius-level artificial intelligence programmed to do whatever is necessary to reach their targets and detonate. They can detect and prevent tampering, are intelligent enough to find a way past almost any obstacle, and can win engagements even when outnumbered. They were created by a Delta Quadrant race called the Druoda, and the devices were greatly feared for their endurance and tenacity.\nQ firearms.\nQ firearms were used in the Q Civil War by the \"Voyager\" crew to compensate against the infinite power of the Q in \"The Q and the Grey\". They are depicted as muzzle-loading muskets, to fit with the American Civil War-theme used by the Q Continuum as a concession to the human characters' limited perceptions. Presumably, their actual form would be as incomprehensible to non-Q as the Continuum itself. The use of the weapons caused stars to go supernova as a side effect in normal reality. They are arguably the most powerful weapons ever wielded by any humanoid species, as indicated by their ability to injure the otherwise-invulnerable Q.\nRed matter.\nIn the 2009 \"Star Trek\" reboot, red matter was developed on Vulcan before 2387. When even a droplet is ignited an unstable singularity is formed; accordingly, it must be stored in a protective chamber. The red matter was originally to be used to save the Romulan homeworld from a volatile supernova, but the design was finished too late to prevent Romulus' destruction. Upon capture in the \"past\" (2258) by the Romulan Nero, it was used as a planet-destroying doomsday weapon in conjunction with a plasma drill which bored a hole almost to the core of a planet. A small amount of red matter was then activated at the bottom of the drilling site, creating a black hole in the heart of the planet that would tear it apart from within. Red matter was thus used to destroy an alternate Vulcan (\"alternate\" due to temporal disruption, from Nero's haphazard method of time travel), then ultimately destroyed Nero's ship, the \"Narada\", along with all remaining technology from his ship, and all of the remaining red matter.\nPsionic resonator.\nA psionic resonator was a weapon that functioned by amplifying telepathic energy and focusing it into kinetic form. In 2369 one type of Vulcan psionic resonator, known as the Stone of Gol was discovered to still exist, though in pieces, long after it was thought destroyed. The mercenary Arctus Baran was hired to locate the pieces and deliver them to the Vulcan Isolationist Movement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45748", "revid": "15304212", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45748", "title": "Chariot", "text": "Carriage using animals to provide rapid motive power\nA chariot is a type of vehicle similar to a cart, driven by a charioteer, usually using horses to provide rapid motive power. The oldest known chariots have been found in burials of the Sintashta culture in modern-day Chelyabinsk Oblast, Russia, dated to c. 1950\u20131880 BC and are depicted on cylinder seals from Central Anatolia in K\u00fcltepe dated to c. 1900 BC. The critical invention that allowed the construction of light, horse-drawn chariots was the spoked wheel.\nThe chariot was a fast, light, open, two-wheeled conveyance drawn by two or more equids (usually horses) that were hitched side by side, and was little more than a floor with a waist-high guard at the front and sides. It was initially used for ancient warfare during the Bronze and Iron Ages, but after its military capabilities had been superseded by light and heavy cavalries, chariots continued to be used for travel and transport, in processions, for games, and in races.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"chariot\" comes from the Latin term \"carrus\" through French \"chariot\", a loanword from Gaulish \"karros\".\nIn ancient Rome a \"biga\" described a chariot requiring two horses, a \"triga\" three, and a \"quadriga\" four.\nOrigins.\nThe wheel may have been invented at several places, with early evidence found in Ukraine, Poland, Germany, and Slovenia. Evidence of wheeled vehicles appears from the mid 4th millennium BC near-simultaneously in the Northern Caucasus (Maykop culture), and in Central Europe. These earliest vehicles may have been ox carts. A necessary precursor to the invention of the chariot is the domestication of animals, and specifically domestication of horses \u2013 a major step in the development of civilization. Despite the large impact horse domestication has had in transport and communication, tracing its origins has been challenging. Evidence supports horses having been domesticated in the Eurasian Steppes, with studies suggesting the Botai culture in modern-day Kazakhstan were the first, about 3500 BC. Others say horses were domesticated earlier than 3500 BC in Eastern Europe (modern Ukraine and Western Kazakhstan), 6000 years ago.\nThe spread of spoke-wheeled chariots has been closely associated with early Indo-Iranian migrations. The earliest known chariots have been found in Sintashta culture burial sites, and the culture is considered a strong candidate for the origin of the technology, which spread throughout the Old World and played an important role in ancient warfare. It is also strongly associated with the ancestors of modern domestic horses, the DOM2 population. (DOM2 horses originated from the Western Eurasia steppes, especially the lower Volga-Don, but not in Anatolia, during the late fourth and early third millennia BC. Their genes may show selection for easier domestication and stronger backs.)\nThe earliest fully developed spoke-wheeled horse chariots are from the chariot burials of the Andronovo (Timber-Grave) sites of the Sintashta-Petrovka Proto-Indo-Iranian culture in modern Russia and Kazakhstan from around 2000 BC. This culture is at least partially derived from the earlier Yamna culture. It built heavily fortified settlements, engaged in bronze metallurgy on an industrial scale, and practiced complex burial rituals reminiscent of Hindu rituals known from the \"Rigveda\" and the \"Avesta\". Over the next few centuries, the Andronovo culture spread across the steppes from the Urals to the Tien Shan, likely corresponding to the time of early Indo-Iranian cultures.\nNot everyone agrees that the Sintashta culture vehicle finds are true chariots.\nIn 1996, Mary Aiken Littauer and Joost Crouwel wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let us consider what is actually known of the Sintashta and Krivoe Ozero vehicles. At Sintashta, there remained only the imprints of the lower parts of the wheels in their slots in the floor of the burial chamber; Krivoe Ozero also preserved imprints of parts of the axle and naves. At Sintashta, the wheel tracks and their position relative to the walls of the tomb chamber limited the dimensions of the naves, hence the stability of the vehicle. Ancient naves were symmetrical, the part outside the spokes of equal length to that inside.\nThe present reconstructions of the Sintashta and Krivoe Ozero vehicles above the axle level raise many doubts and questions, but one cannot argue about something for which there is no evidence. It is from the wheel track measurements and the dimensions and positions of the wheels alone that we may legitimately draw conclusions and these are alone sufficient to establish that the Sintashta-Petrovka vehicles would not be manoeuverable enough for use either in warfare or in racing.\nPeter Raulwing and Stefan Burmeister consider the Sintashta and Krivoe Ozero finds from the steppe to be carts rather than chariots:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;However, recent discoveries in the Eurasian steppe have provided fresh support to the claim that the chariot originated there, rather than in the Near East itself, and may be attributed to speakers of an Indo-Iranian (or Indo-Aryan) language. In particular, archaeological remains of horse gear and spoked wheeled vehicles have been found at the sites of Sintashta (Russia) and Krivoe Ozero (northern Kazakhstan), with calibrated radiocarbon dating to ca. 2000\u20131800. These finds, however, provide evidence of a two-wheeled spoked cart that does not fit the definition of the ancient Near Eastern chariot. Before these discoveries can help answer the question of where the chariot originated, thorough studies of the spoked wheeled vehicles and horse gear of the steppes, as well as of interconnections and transfer of knowledge, are necessary (cf. Epimachov and Korjakova in Fansa and Burmeister 2004).\nSpread by Indo-Europeans.\nChariots figure prominently in Indo-Iranian and early European mythology. Chariots are also an important part of both Hindu and Persian mythology, with most of the gods in their pantheon portrayed as riding them. The Sanskrit word for a chariot is (m.), which is cognate with Avestan (also m.), and in origin a substantiation of the adjective Proto-Indo-European meaning \"having wheels\", with the characteristic accent shift found in Indo-Iranian substantivisations. This adjective is in turn derived from the collective noun \"wheels\", continued in Latin , which belongs to the noun for \"wheel\" (from \"to run\") that is also found in Germanic, Celtic and Baltic (Old High German n., Old Irish m., Lithuanian m.). Nomadic tribes of the Pontic steppes, like Scythians such as Hamaxobii, would travel in wagons, carts, and chariots during their migrations.\nHittites.\nThe oldest testimony of chariot warfare in the ancient Near East is the Old Hittite Anitta text (18th century BC), which mentions 40 teams of horses (in the original cuneiform spelling: 40 \"\u1e62\u00cd-IM-TI\" AN\u0160E.KUR.RA\u1e2aI.A) at the siege of Salatiwara. Since the text mentions \"teams\" rather than \"chariots\", the existence of chariots in the 18th century BC is uncertain. The first certain attestation of chariots in the Hittite empire dates to the late 17th century BC (Hattusili I). A Hittite horse-training text is attributed to Kikkuli the Mitanni (15th century BC).\nThe Hittites were renowned charioteers. They developed a new chariot design that had lighter wheels, with four spokes rather than eight, and that held three rather than two warriors. It could hold three warriors because the wheels were placed in the middle of the chariot and not at the back as in Egyptian chariots. Typically one Hittite warrior steered the chariot while the second man was usually the main archer; the third warrior would either wield a spear or sword when charging at enemies or hold up a large shield to protect himself and the others from enemy arrows.\nHittite prosperity largely depended on their control of trade routes and natural resources, specifically metals. As the Hittites gained dominion over Mesopotamia, tensions flared among the neighboring Assyrians, Hurrians, and Egyptians. Under Suppiluliuma I, the Hittites conquered Kadesh and, eventually, the whole of Syria. The Battle of Kadesh in 1274 BC is likely to have been the largest chariot battle ever fought, involving over 5,000 chariots.\nBronze Age Indian Subcontinent.\nModels of single axled, solid wheeled ox-drawn vehicles, have been found at several mature Indus Valley cites, such as Chanhudaro, Daimabad, Harappa, and Nausharo. While the late Harappan site of Pirak, Pakistan, offers evidence of true horses present in South Asia, from c. 1700 BC.\nSpoked-wheeled, horse-drawn chariots, often carrying an armed passenger, are depicted in second millennium BC Chalcolithic period rock paintings, examples are known from Chibbar Nulla, Chhatur Bhoj Nath Nulla, and Kathotia. There are some depictions of chariots among the petroglyphs in the sandstone of the Vindhya range. Two depictions of chariots are found in Morhana Pahar, Mirzapur district. One depicts a biga and the head of the driver. The second depicts a quadriga, with six-spoked wheels, and a driver standing up in a large chariot box. This chariot is being attacked. One figure, who is armed with a shield and a mace, stands in the chariot's path; another figure, who is armed with a bow and arrow, threatens the right flank. It has been suggested (speculated) that the drawings record a story, most probably dating to the early centuries BC, from some center in the area of the Ganges\u2013Yamuna plain into the territory of still Neolithic hunting tribes. The very realistic chariots carved into the Sanchi stupas are dated to roughly the 1st century CE.\nBronze Age solid-disk wheel carts were found in 2018 at Sinauli, which were interpreted by some as horse-pulled \"chariots,\" predating the arrival of the horse-centered Indo-Aryans. They were ascribed by Sanjay Manjul, director of the excavations, to the Ochre Coloured Pottery culture (OCP)/Copper Hoard Culture, which was contemporaneous with the Late Harappan culture, and interpreted by him as horse-pulled chariots. Majul further noted that \"the rituals relating to the Sanauli burials showed close affinity with Vedic rituals. According to Asko Parpola these finds were ox-pulled carts, indicating that these burials are related to an early Aryan migration of Proto-Indo-Iranian speaking people into the Indian subcontinent, \"forming then the ruling elite of a major Late Harappan settlement.\"\nHorse-drawn chariots, as well as their cult and associated rituals, were spread by the Indo-Iranians, and horses and horse-drawn chariots were introduced in India by the Indo-Aryans. These Aryan people migrated southward into South Asia, ushering in the Vedic period around 1750 BC.\nIn religion.\nIn \"Rigveda\", Indra is described as strong willed, armed with a thunderbolt, riding a chariot:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;May the strong Heaven make thee the Strong wax stronger: Strong, for thou art borne by thy two strong Bay Horses. So, fair of cheek, with mighty chariot, mighty, uphold us, strong-willed, thunder armed, in battle.\n\u2014\u2009RigVeda, Book 5, Hymn XXXVI: GriffithAmong Rigvedic deities, notably the Vedic Sun God Surya rides on a one spoked chariot driven by his charioteer Aru\u1e47a. Ushas (the dawn) rides in a chariot, as well as Agni in his function as a messenger between gods and men.\nThe Jain Bhagavi Sutra states that Indian troops used a chariot with a club or mace attached to it during the war against the Licchavis during the reign of Ajatashatru of Magadha.\nHindu symbolism.\nIn Hindu mythology, the chariot (ratha) is a powerful symbol representing divine movement and cosmic order. The most famous depiction is in the Bhagavad Gita, where Krishna serves as Arjuna's charioteer, guiding him through the moral and spiritual dilemmas of the Kurukshetra War. Symbolically, the chariot represents the human body, the horses symbolize the senses, and the charioteer (\"Atman\") represents the higher self controlling the mind.\nPersia.\nThe Persians succeeded Elam in the mid 1st millennium. They may have been the first to yoke four horses to their chariots. They also used scythed chariots. Cyrus the Younger employed these chariots in large numbers at the Battle of Cunaxa.\nHerodotus mentions that the Ancient Libyan and the Ancient Indian (Sattagydia, Gandhara and Hindush) satrapies supplied cavalry and chariots to Xerxes the Great's army. However, by this time, cavalry was far more effective and agile than the chariot, and the defeat of Darius III at the Battle of Gaugamela (331 BC), where the army of Alexander simply opened their lines and let the chariots pass and attacked them from behind, marked the end of the era of chariot warfare (barring the Seleucid and Pontic powers, India, China, and the Celtic peoples).\nIntroduction in the Near East.\nChariots were introduced in the Near East in the 17(18)th\u201316th centuries BC. Some scholars argue that the horse chariot was most likely a product of the ancient Near East early in the 2nd millennium BC. Archaeologist Joost Crouwel writes that \"Chariots were not sudden inventions, but developed out of earlier vehicles that were mounted on disk or cross-bar wheels. This development can best be traced in the Near East, where spoke-wheeled and horse-drawn chariots are first attested in the earlier part of the second millennium BC...\" and were illustrated on a Syrian cylinder seal dated to either the 18th or 17th century BC.\nEarly wheeled vehicles in the Near East.\nAccording to Christoph Baumer, the earliest discoveries of wheels in Mesopotamia come from the first half of the third millennium BC \u2013 more than half a millennium later than the first finds from the Kuban region. At the same time, in Mesopotamia, some intriguing early pictograms of a sled that rests on wooden rollers or wheels have been found. They date from about the same time as the early wheel discoveries in Europe and may indicate knowledge of the wheel.\nThe earliest depiction of vehicles in the context of warfare is on the Standard of Ur in southern Mesopotamia, c.\u20092500 BCE. These are more properly called wagons which were double-axled and pulled by oxen or a hybrid of a donkey and a female onager, named Kunga in the city of Nagar which was famous for breeding them. The hybrids were used by the Eblaite, early Sumerian, Akkadian and Ur III armies. The seal depicts a line of vehicles, each carrying a standing charioteer (driver), accompanied by a standing axe or spearman, with a rack of three to four spare spears, driving over a smattering of dead bodies. Such heavy wagons, borne on solid wooden wheels and covered with skins, may have been part of the baggage train (e.g., during royal funeral processions) rather than vehicles of battle in themselves.\nThe Sumerians had a lighter, two-wheeled type of cart, pulled by four asses, and with solid wheels. The spoked wheel did not appear in Mesopotamia until the mid second millennium BC.\nEgypt.\nChariot use made its way into Egypt around 1650 BC during the Hyksos invasion of Egypt and establishment of the Fourteenth Dynasty. In 1659 BC the Indo-European Hittites sacked Babylon, which demonstrated the superiority of chariots in antiquity.\nThe chariot and horse were used extensively in Egypt by the Hyksos invaders from the 16th century BC onwards, though discoveries announced in 2013 potentially place the earliest chariot use as early as Egypt's Old Kingdom (c.\u20092686\u20132181 BC). In the remains of Egyptian and Assyrian art, there are numerous representations of chariots, which display rich ornamentation. The chariots of the Egyptians and Assyrians, with whom the bow was the principal arm of attack, were richly mounted with quivers full of arrows. The Egyptians invented the yoke saddle for their chariot horses in c.\u20091500 BC. As a general rule, the Egyptians used chariots as mobile archery platforms; chariots always had two men, with the driver steering the chariot with his reins while the main archer aimed his bow and arrow at any targets within range. The best preserved examples of Egyptian chariots are the four specimens from the tomb of Tutankhamun. Chariots can be pulled by two or more horses.\nAncient Canaan and Israel.\nChariots are frequently mentioned in the Hebrew Tanakh and the Greek Old Testament, respectively, particularly by the prophets, as instruments of war or as symbols of power or glory. First mentioned in the story of Joseph (Genesis 50:9), \"Iron chariots\" are mentioned also in Joshua (17:16, 18) and Judges (1:19,4:3, 13) as weapons of the Canaanites and Israelites. 1 Samuel 13:5 mentions chariots of the Philistines, who are sometimes identified with the Sea Peoples or early Greeks.\nExamples from The Jewish Study Bible of the Tanakh (\"Jewish Bible\") include:\nExamples from the King James Version of the Christian Bible include:\nSmall domestic horses may have been present in the northern Negev before 3000 BC. Jezreel (city) has been identified as the chariot base of King Ahab. And a decorated bronze tablet thought to be the head of a lynchpin of a Canaanite chariot was found at a site that may be Sisera's fortress Harosheth Haggoyim.\nUrartu.\nIn Urartu (860\u2013590 BC), the chariot was used by both the nobility and the military. In Erebuni (Yerevan), King Argishti of Urartu is depicted riding on a chariot which is pulled by two horses. The chariot has two wheels and each wheel has about eight spokes. This type of chariot was used around 800 BC.\nIntroduction in Bronze-Age Europe.\nAs David W. Anthony writes in his book \"The Horse, the Wheel, and Language\", in Eastern Europe, the earliest well-dated depiction of a wheeled vehicle (a wagon with two axles and four wheels) is on the Bronocice pot (c.\u20093500 BC). It is a clay pot excavated in a Funnelbeaker settlement in Swietokrzyskie Voivodeship in Poland. The oldest securely dated real wheel-axle combination in Eastern Europe is the Ljubljana Marshes Wheel (c.\u20093150 BC).\nGreece.\nThe later Greeks of the first millennium BC had a (still not very effective) cavalry arm (indeed, it has been argued that these early horseback riding soldiers may have given rise to the development of the later, heavily armed foot-soldiers known as hoplites), and the rocky terrain of the Greek mainland was unsuited for wheeled vehicles. The chariot was heavily used by the Mycaenean Greeks, most probably adopted from the Hittites, around 1600 BC. Linear B tablets from Mycenaean palaces record large inventories of chariots, sometimes with specific details as to how many chariots were assembled or not (i.e. stored in modular form). On a gravestone from the royal Shaft-grave V in Mycenae dated LH II (about 1500 BC) there is one of the earliest depiction of the chariot in Achaean art. This sculpture shows a single man driving a two-wheeled small box chariot. Later the vehicles were used in games and processions, notably for races at the Olympic and Panathenaic Games and other public festivals in ancient Greece, in \"hippodromes\" and in contests called \"agons\". They were also used in ceremonial functions, as when a \"paranymph\", or friend of a bridegroom, went with him in a chariot to fetch the bride home.\nHerodotus (\"Histories\", 5. 9) Reports that chariots were widely used in the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe by the Sigynnae.\nGreek chariots were made to be drawn by two horses attached to a central pole. If two additional horses were added, they were attached on each side of the main pair by a single bar or \"trace\" fastened to the front or \"prow\" of the chariot, as may be seen on two prize vases in the British Museum from the Panathenaic Games at Athens, Greece, in which the driver is seated with feet resting on a board hanging down in front close to the legs of the horses. The biga itself consists of a seat resting on the axle, with a rail at each side to protect the driver from the wheels. Greek chariots appear to have lacked any other attachment for the horses, which would have made turning difficult.\nThe body or \"basket\" of the chariot rested directly on the axle (called \"beam\") connecting the two wheels. There was no suspension, making this an uncomfortable form of transport. At the front and sides of the basket was a semicircular guard about 3\u00a0ft (1 m) high, to give some protection from enemy attack. At the back the basket was open, making it easy to mount and dismount. There was no seat, and generally only enough room for the driver and one passenger.\nThe reins were mostly the same as those in use in the 19th century, and were made of leather and ornamented with studs of ivory or metal. The reins were passed through rings attached to the collar bands or yoke, and were long enough to be tied round the waist of the charioteer to allow for defense.\nThe wheels and basket of the chariot were usually of wood, strengthened in places with bronze or iron. The wheels had from four to eight spokes and tires of bronze or iron. Due to the widely spaced spokes, the rim of the chariot wheel was held in tension over comparatively large spans. Whilst this provided a small measure of shock absorption, it also necessitated the removal of the wheels when the chariot was not in use, to prevent warping from continued weight bearing. Most other nations of this time had chariots of similar design to the Greeks, the chief differences being the mountings.\nAccording to Greek mythology, the chariot was invented by Erichthonius of Athens to conceal his feet, which were those of a dragon.\nThe most notable appearance of the chariot in Greek mythology occurs when Pha\u00ebton, the son of Helios, in an attempt to drive the chariot of the sun, managed to set the earth on fire. This story led to the archaic meaning of a \"phaeton\" as one who drives a chariot or coach, especially at a reckless or dangerous speed. Plato, in his \"Chariot Allegory\", depicted a chariot drawn by two horses, one well behaved and the other troublesome, representing opposite impulses of human nature; the task of the charioteer, representing reason, was to stop the horses from going different ways and to guide them towards enlightenment.\nThe Greek word for chariot, \u1f05\u03c1\u03bc\u03b1, \"h\u00e1rma\", is also used nowadays to denote a tank, properly called \u03ac\u03c1\u03bc\u03b1 \u03bc\u03ac\u03c7\u03b7\u03c2, \"\u00e1rma m\u00e1kh\u0113s\", literally a \"combat chariot\".\nCentral and Northern Europe.\nThe Trundholm sun chariot is dated to c. 1500-1300 BC (see: Nordic Bronze Age). The horse drawing the solar disk runs on four wheels, and the Sun itself on two. All wheels have four spokes. The \"chariot\" comprises the solar disk, the axle, and the wheels, and it is unclear whether the sun is depicted as the chariot or as the passenger. Nevertheless, the presence of a model of a horse-drawn vehicle on two spoked wheels in Northern Europe at such an early time is astonishing.\nIn addition to the Trundholm chariot, there are numerous petroglyphs from the Nordic Bronze Age that depict chariots. One petroglyph, drawn on a stone slab in a double burial from c. 1000 BC, depicts a biga with two four-spoked wheels.\nThe use of the composite bow in chariot warfare is not attested in northern Europe.\nWestern Europe.\nThe Celts were famous for their chariots and modern English words like \"car\", \"carriage\" and \"carry\" are ultimately derived from the native Brythonic language (Modern Welsh: \"Cerbyd\"). The word \"chariot\" itself is derived from the Norman French \"charriote\" and shares a Celtic root (Gaulish: \"karros\"). Some 20 iron-aged chariot burials have been excavated in Britain, roughly dating from between 500 BC and 100 BC. Virtually all of them were found in East Yorkshire \u2013 the exception was a find in 2001 in Newbridge, 10\u00a0km west of Edinburgh.\nThe Celtic chariot, which may have been called in Gaulish (compare Latin ), was a \"biga\" that measured approximately in width and in length.\nBritish chariots were open in front. Julius Caesar provides the only significant eyewitness report of British chariot warfare:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Their mode of fighting with their chariots is this: firstly, they drive about in all directions and throw their weapons and generally break the ranks of the enemy with the very dread of their horses and the noise of their wheels; and when they have worked themselves in between the troops of horse, leap from their chariots and engage on foot. The charioteers in the meantime withdraw some little distance from the battle, and so place themselves with the chariots that, if their masters are overpowered by the number of the enemy, they may have a ready retreat to their own troops. Thus they display in battle the speed of horse, [together with] the firmness of infantry; and by daily practice and exercise attain to such expertness that they are accustomed, even on a declining and steep place, to check their horses at full speed, and manage and turn them in an instant and run along the pole, and stand on the yoke, and thence betake themselves with the greatest celerity to their chariots again.\nChariots play an important role in Irish mythology surrounding the hero C\u00fa Chulainn.\nChariots could also be used for ceremonial purposes. According to Tacitus (\"Annals\" 14.35), Boudica, queen of the Iceni and a number of other tribes in a formidable uprising against the occupying Roman forces, addressed her troops from a chariot in 61:\n \"Boudicca curru filias prae se vehens, ut quamque nationem accesserat, solitum quidem Britannis feminarum ductu bellare testabatur\"\n \"Boudicca, with her daughters before her in a chariot, went up to tribe after tribe, protesting that it was indeed usual for Britons to fight under the leadership of women.\"\nThe last mention of chariot use in battle seems to be at the Battle of Mons Graupius, somewhere in modern Scotland, in 84 CE. From Tacitus (\"Agricola\" 1.35\u201336) \"The plain between resounded with the noise and with the rapid movements of chariots and cavalry.\" The chariots did not win even their initial engagement with the Roman auxiliaries: \"Meantime the enemy's cavalry had fled, and the charioteers had mingled in the engagement of the infantry.\"\nLater through the centuries, the chariot was replaced by the \"war wagon\". The \"war wagon\" was a medieval development used to attack rebel or enemy forces on battle fields. The wagon was given slits for archers to shoot enemy targets, supported by infantry using pikes and flails and later for the invention of gunfire by hand-gunners; side walls were used for protection against archers, crossbowmen, the early use of gunpowder and cannon fire.\nIt was especially useful during the Hussite Wars, c. 1420, by Hussite forces rebelling in Bohemia. Groups of them could form defensive works, but they also were used as hardpoints for Hussite formations or as firepower in pincer movements. This early use of gunpowder and innovative tactics helped a largely peasant infantry stave off attacks by the Holy Roman Empire's larger forces of mounted knights.\nEtruria.\nThe only intact Etruscan chariot dates to c. 530 BC and was uncovered as part of a chariot burial at Monteleone di Spoleto. Currently in the collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, it is decorated with bronze plates decorated with detailed low-relief scenes, commonly interpreted as depicting episodes from the life of Achilles.\nRome.\nIn the Roman Empire, chariots were not used for warfare, but for chariot racing, especially in circuses, or for triumphal processions, when they could be pulled by as many as ten horses or even by dogs, tigers, or ostriches. There were four divisions, or \"factiones\", of charioteers, distinguished by the colour of their costumes: the red, blue, green and white teams. The main centre of chariot racing was the Circus Maximus, situated in the valley between the Palatine and Aventine Hills in Rome. The track could hold 12 chariots, and the two sides of the track were separated by a raised median termed the \"spina\". Chariot races continued to enjoy great popularity in Byzantine times, in the Hippodrome of Constantinople, even after the Olympic Games had been disbanded, until their decline after the Nika riots in the 6th century. Byzantium racing factions and races continued, to some extent, until the imperial court was moved to Blachernae during the 12th century. The starting gates were known as the Carceres.\nAn ancient Roman car or chariot pulled by four horses abreast together with the horses pulling it was called a \"Quadriga\", from the Latin \"quadriugi\" (of a team of four). The term sometimes meant instead the four horses without the chariot or the chariot alone. A three-horse chariot, or the three-horse team pulling it, was a \"triga\", from \"triugi\" (of a team of three). A two-horse chariot, or the two-horse team pulling it, was a \"biga\", from \"biugi\".\nA popular legend that has been around since at least 1937 traces the origin of the 4\u00a0ft &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;8+1\u20442\u00a0in standard railroad gauge to Roman times, suggesting that it was based on the distance between the ruts of rutted roads marked by chariot wheels dating from the Roman Empire. There is no evidence of the distance being used in the millennium and a half between the departure of the Romans from Britain and the adoption of the gauge on the Stockton and Darlington Railway in 1825.\nIntroduction in Ancient China.\nThe earliest archaeological evidence of chariots in China, a chariot burial site discovered in 1933 at Hougang, Anyang in Henan province, dates to the rule of King Wu Ding of the Late Shang (c.\u20091250 BC). Oracle bone inscriptions suggest that the western enemies of the Shang used limited numbers of chariots in battle, but the Shang themselves used them only as mobile command-vehicles and in royal hunts.\nDuring the Shang dynasty, members of the royal family were buried with a complete household and servants, including a chariot, horses, and a charioteer. A Shang chariot was often drawn by two horses, but four-horse variants are occasionally found in burials.\nJacques Gernet claims that the Zhou dynasty, which conquered the Shang ca. 1046 BC, made more use of the chariot than did the Shang and \"invented a new kind of harness with four horses abreast\". The crew consisted of an archer, a driver, and sometimes a third warrior who was armed with a spear or dagger-axe. From the 8th to 5th centuries BC the Chinese use of chariots reached its peak. Although chariots appeared in greater numbers, infantry often defeated charioteers in battle.\nMassed-chariot warfare became all but obsolete after the Warring-States period (476\u2013221 BC). The main reasons were increased use of the crossbow, use of long halberds up to long and pikes up to long, and the adoption of standard cavalry units, and the adaptation of mounted archery from nomadic cavalry, which were more effective. Chariots would continue to serve as command posts for officers during the Qin dynasty (221\u2013206 BC) and the Han dynasty (206 BC\u2013220 AD), while armored chariots were also used during the Han dynasty against the Xiongnu Confederation in the Han\u2013Xiongnu War (133 BC to 89 AD), specifically at the Battle of Mobei (119 BC).\nBefore the Han dynasty, the power of Chinese states and dynasties was often measured by the number of chariots they were known to have. A country of a thousand chariots ranked as a medium country, and a country of ten thousand chariots ranked as a huge and powerful country.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "45749", "revid": "50913961", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45749", "title": "Peloponnese", "text": "Traditional peninsular region in Greece\nThe Peloponnese, Peloponnesus, or Morea, is a peninsula and geographic region in Southern Greece, and the southernmost region of the Balkans. It is connected to the central part of the country by the Isthmus of Corinth land bridge, which separates the Gulf of Corinth from the Saronic Gulf. From the late Middle Ages until the 19th century, the peninsula was known as the Morea, a name still in colloquial use in its demotic form.\nThe peninsula is divided among three administrative regions: most belong to the Peloponnese region, with smaller parts belonging to the West Greece and Attica regions.\nGeography.\nThe Peloponnese is a peninsula located at the southern tip of the mainland, in area, and constitutes the southernmost part of mainland Greece. It is connected to the mainland by the Isthmus of Corinth, where the Corinth Canal was constructed in 1893. However, it is also connected to the mainland by several bridges across the canal, including two submersible bridges at the north and the south end. Near the northern tip of the peninsula, there is another bridge, the Rio\u2013Antirrio bridge (completed 2004). The peninsula has a mountainous interior, although extensive lowlands are also found in the west, in the Evrotas Valley in the south, and in the Argolid Peninsula in the northeast. The Peloponnese possesses four south-pointing peninsulas: the Messenian, the Mani, the Cape Malea, and the Argolid in the far northeast of the Peloponnese. The Messenian Gulf, Laconian Gulf, and Argolic Gulf separate these peninsulas. Moreover, Mount Taygetus in the south is the highest mountain in the Peloponnese, at . \u039fther important mountains include Cyllene in the northeast (), Aroania in the north (), Erymanthos () and Panachaikon in the northwest (), Mainalon in the center (), and Parnon in the southeast (). The entire peninsula is earthquake-prone and has suffered many earthquakes in the past.\nThe longest river is the Alfeios in the west (), followed by the Evrotas in the south (), and also the Pineios, also in the west (). The Peloponnese, with its indented coasts, is home to numerous spectacular beaches, which are a major tourist draw.\nTwo groups of islands lie off the Peloponnesian coast: the Argo-Saronic Islands to the east, and the Ionian to the west. The island of Kythira, to the south of the Peloponnese, is considered to be part of the Ionian Islands. The island of Elafonisos used to be part of the peninsula but was separated in the aftermath of the 365 Crete earthquake.\nSince antiquity, and continuing to the present day, the Peloponnese has been divided into seven major regions: Achaea (north), Corinthia (northeast), Argolis (east), Arcadia (center), Laconia (southeast), Messenia (southwest), and Elis (west). Each of these regions is headed by a city, with the largest being Patras (pop. 170,000) in Achaia, followed by Kalamata (pop. 55,000) in Messenia.\nClimate.\nThe Peloponnese for the most part enjoys a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Csa\"), while the Gulf of Corinth has a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"BSh\"). Rainfall is higher on the west coast, while the east of the peninsula is significantly drier. Average annual temperatures can reach up to while summer highs reach over in Sparta, within the Evrotas Valley. On 27 June 2007, Monemvasia registered a staggering minimum temperature of 35.9\u00b0C, which is the highest minimum temperature ever recorded in mainland Greece and Continental Europe.\nHistory.\nMythology and early history.\nThe peninsula has been inhabited since prehistoric times. Its modern name derives from ancient Greek mythology, specifically the legend of the hero Pelops, who was said to have conquered the entire region. The name \"Peloponnesos\" means Island or Peninsula (archaic meaning of the word ) of Pelops.\nThe Mycenaean civilization, mainland Greece's (and Europe's) first major civilization, dominated the Peloponnese in the Bronze Age from the palaces of Mycenae, Pylos, and Tiryns, among others. The Mycenaean civilization collapsed suddenly at the end of the 2nd millennium BC. Archeological research has found that many of its cities and palaces show signs of destruction. The subsequent period, known as the Greek Dark Ages, is marked by an absence of written records.\nClassical antiquity.\nIn 776 BC, the first Olympic Games were held at Olympia, in the western Peloponnese, and this date is sometimes used to denote the beginning of the classical period of Greek antiquity. During classical antiquity, the Peloponnese was at the heart of the affairs of ancient Greece, possessed some of its most powerful city-states, and was the location of some of its bloodiest battles.\nThe major cities of Sparta, Corinth, Argos, and Megalopolis were all located on the Peloponnese, and it was the homeland of the Peloponnesian League. Soldiers from the peninsula fought in the Persian Wars, and it was also the scene of the Peloponnesian War of 431\u2013404 BC. The entire Peloponnese, with the notable exception of Sparta, joined Alexander's expedition against the Persian Empire.\nAlong with the rest of Greece, the Peloponnese fell to the expanding Roman Republic in 146 BC, when the Romans razed the city of Corinth and massacred its inhabitants. The Romans established the province of Achaea, comprising the Peloponnese and central Greece. During the Roman period, the peninsula remained prosperous but became a provincial backwater, relatively disengaged from the affairs of the wider Roman world.\nMiddle Ages.\nByzantine rule.\nAfter the partition of the Empire in 395, the Peloponnese became a part of the Byzantine Empire. The devastation of Alaric's raid in 396\u2013397 led to the construction of the Hexamilion wall across the Isthmus of Corinth. Throughout the major part of late antiquity, the peninsula retained its urbanized character: in the 6th century, Hierocles counted 26 cities in his \"Synecdemus\". By the latter part of that century, however, building activity seems to have stopped virtually everywhere except in Constantinople, Thessalonica, Corinth, and Athens. This has traditionally been attributed to calamities such as plague, earthquakes, and Slavic invasions. However, more recent analysis suggests that urban decline was closely linked with the collapse of long-distance and regional commercial networks that underpinned and supported late antique urbanism in Greece, as well as with the generalized withdrawal of imperial troops and administration from the Balkans.\nSlavic migration, settlement, and decline.\nThe scale of the Slavic \"invasion\" and settlement in the 7th and 8th centuries remains a matter of dispute, although it is nowadays considered much smaller than previously thought. The Slavs did occupy most of the peninsula, as evidenced by the abundance of Slavic toponyms, but these toponyms accumulated over centuries rather than as a result of an initial \"flood\" of Slavic invasions, and many appear to have been mediated by speakers of Greek, or in mixed Slavic-Greek compounds.\nFewer Slavic toponyms appear on the eastern coast, which remained in Byzantine hands and was included in the \"thema\" of Hellas, established by Byzantine emperor Justinian II c.\u2009690. While traditional historiography has dated the arrival of Slavs to southern Greece to the late 6th century, according to Florin Curta, there is no evidence for a Slavic presence in the Peloponnese until after c.\u2009700 AD, when Slavs may have been allowed to settle in specific areas that had been depopulated.\nRelations between the Slavs and Greeks were probably peaceful apart from intermittent uprisings. There was also a continuity of the Peloponnesian Greek population. This is especially true in Mani and Tsakonia, where Slavic incursions were minimal or non-existent. Considering their predominantly agricultural economy and rural lifestyle, the Slavs probably traded with the Greeks, who remained in the towns, while Greek villages continued to exist in the interior, governing themselves, possibly paying tribute to the Slavs. The first attempt by the Byzantine imperial government to reassert its control over the independent Slavic tribes of the Peloponnese occurred in 783, with the logothete Staurakios' overland campaign from Constantinople into Greece and the Peloponnese, which, according to Theophanes the Confessor, captured many prisoners and forced the Slavs to pay tribute.\nFrom the mid-9th century, in the aftermath of a Slavic revolt and attack on Patras, a process of Hellenization was carried out overwhelmingly and persistently. According to the \"Chronicle of Monemvasia\", in 805, the Byzantine governor of Corinth went to war with the Slavs, exterminated them, and allowed the original inhabitants to claim their lands. They regained control of the city of Patras, and the region was resettled with Greeks. Many Slavs were transported to Asia Minor, and many Asian, Sicilian, and Calabrian Greeks were resettled in the Peloponnese. By the turn of the 9th century, the entire Peloponnese was formed into the new \"thema\" of Peloponnesos, with its capital at Corinth.\nThe imposition of Byzantine rule over the Slavic enclaves may have largely been a process of Christianization and accommodation of Slavic chieftains into the Imperial fold, considering that literary, epigraphic, and sigillographic evidence corroborate Slavic \"archontes\" participating in Imperial affairs. By the end of the 9th century, the Peloponnese was culturally and administratively Greek again, except for a few small Slavic tribes in the mountains such as the Melingoi and Ezeritai. Although they were to remain relatively autonomous until Ottoman times, such tribes were the exception rather than the rule. Even the Melingoi and Ezeritai, however, could speak Greek and appear to have been Christian.\nThe success of the Hellenization campaign also shows that the Slavs had settled among many Greeks, in contrast to areas further north in what is now Bulgaria and the former Yugoslavia, as those areas could not be Hellenized when they were recovered by the Byzantines in the early 11th century. A human genetics study in 2017 showed that the Peloponnesians have little admixture with populations of the Slavic homeland and are much closer to Sicilians and southern Italians.\nApart from the troubled relations with the Slavs, the coastal regions of the Peloponnese suffered greatly from repeated Arab raids following the Arab capture of Crete in the 820s and the establishment of a corsair emirate there. After the island was recovered by Byzantium in 961, however, the region entered a period of renewed prosperity, where agriculture, commerce, and urban industry flourished.\nFrankish rule and Byzantine reconquest.\nIn 1205, following the destruction of the Byzantine Empire by the forces of the Fourth Crusade, the Crusaders under William of Champlitte and Geoffrey of Villehardouin marched south through mainland Greece and conquered the Peloponnese against sporadic local Greek resistance. The Franks then founded the Principality of Achaea, nominally a vassal of the Latin Empire, while the Venetians occupied several strategically important ports around the coast, such as Navarino and Coron, which they retained into the 15th century. The Franks popularized the name \"Morea\" for the peninsula, which first appears as the name of a small bishopric in Elis during the 10th century. Its etymology is disputed, but it is most commonly held to be derived from the mulberry tree (\"morea\"), whose leaves are similar in shape to the peninsula.\nIn 1208, William I founded a commission at Andravida, consisting of Latin bishops, two bannerets, five Greek magnates, and chaired by himself, to assess the land and divide it, according to Latin practice, in fiefs. As a result, the country was divided into twelve baronies, mostly centred around a newly constructed castle\u2014a testament to the fact that the Franks were a military elite amidst a potentially hostile Greek population. The twelve temporal barons were joined by seven ecclesiastic lords, headed by the Latin Archbishop of Patras. Each of the latter was granted several estates as knightly fiefs, with the Archbishop receiving eight, the other bishops four each, and likewise four granted to each of the military orders: the Templars, Hospitallers, and the Teutonic Knights. Shortly after 1260, a thirteenth barony, that of Arcadia (modern Kyparissia), was established, which was also a personal fief of the Geoffrey I of Villehardouin. The barons retained considerable powers and privileges, so that the Prince was not an absolute sovereign but rather a \"first among equals\" among them. Thus they had the right to construct a castle without the Prince's permission, or to decree capital punishment. Since Salic Law was not adopted in Achaea, women could also inherit the fiefs.\nDespotate of Morea and Ottoman incursions.\nFrankish supremacy in the peninsula, however, received a critical blow after the Battle of Pelagonia, when William II of Villehardouin was forced to cede the newly constructed fortress and palace at Mystras near ancient Sparta to a resurgent Byzantium. At this point, the emperor concluded an agreement with the captive prince: William and his men would be set free in exchange for an oath of fealty, and for the cession of Monemvasia, Grand Magne, and Mystras. The handover was effected in 1262, and henceforth Mystras was the seat of the governor of the Byzantine territories in the Morea. Initially this governor (\"kephale\") was changed every year, but after 1308 they started being appointed for longer terms. Almost immediately on his return to the Morea, William of Villehardouin renounced his oath to the emperor, and warfare broke out between Byzantines and Franks. The first Byzantine attempts to subdue the Principality of Achaea were beaten back in the battles of Prinitsa and Makryplagi, but the Byzantines were firmly ensconced in Laconia. Warfare became endemic, and the Byzantines slowly pushed the Franks back. The insecurity engendered by the raids and counter-raids caused the inhabitants of Lacedaemon to abandon their exposed city and settle at Mystras, in a new town built under the shadow of the fortress.\nWhile Mystras served as the provincial capital from this time, it became a royal capital in 1349, when the first despot was appointed to rule over the Morea. The Byzantine Emperor John VI Kantakouzenos, reorganized the territory in 1349 to establish it as an appanage for his son, the Despot Manuel Kantakouzenos. Around that time, the Ottoman Turks began raiding the Peloponnese, but their raids intensified only after 1387 when the energetic Evrenos Bey took control. Exploiting the quarrels between Byzantines and Franks, he plundered across the peninsula and forced both the Byzantine despots and the remaining Frankish rulers to acknowledge Ottoman suzerainty and pay tribute. This situation lasted until the Ottoman defeat at the Battle of Ankara in 1402, after which Ottoman power was for a time checked. From 1349 until its surrender to the Ottoman Turks on 31 May 1460, Mystras was the residence of a Despot who ruled over the Byzantine Morea, known as the \"Despotate of the Morea\". For the larger portion of his reign, Manuel maintained peaceful relations with his Latin neighbors and secured a long period of prosperity for the area. Greco-Latin cooperation included an alliance to contain the raids of the Ottoman Sultan Murad I into Morea in the 1360s. The rival Palaiologos dynasty seized the Morea after Manuel's death in 1380, with Theodore I Palaiologos becoming despot in 1383. \nTheodore I ruled until 1407, consolidating Byzantine rule and coming to terms with his more powerful neighbours\u2014particularly the expansionist Ottoman Empire, whose suzerainty he recognised. Subsequent despots were the sons of the Emperor Manuel II Palaiologos, brother of the despot Theodore: Theodore II, Constantine, Demetrios, and Thomas. As Latin power in the Peloponnese waned during the 15th century, the Despotate of the Morea expanded to incorporate the entire peninsula in 1430 with territory being acquired by dowry settlements, and the conquest of Patras by Constantine. However, in 1446 the Ottoman Sultan Murad II destroyed the Byzantine defences\u2014the Hexamilion wall at the Isthmus of Corinth. His attack opened the peninsula to invasion, though Murad died before he could exploit this. His successor Mehmed II \"the Conqueror\" captured the Byzantine capital Constantinople in 1453. The despots, Demetrios Palaiologos and Thomas Palaiologos, brothers of the last emperor, failed to send him any aid, as Morea was recovering from a recent Ottoman attack. Their own incompetence resulted in the Morea revolt of 1453\u20131454, led by Manuel Kantakouzenos against them, during which they invited in Ottoman troops to help them put down the revolt. At this time, the Greek \"archons\" made peace with Mehmed. After several years of incompetent rule by the despots, their failure to pay their annual tribute to the Sultan, and finally their own revolt against Ottoman rule, Mehmed came into the Morea in May 1460. Demetrios ended up a prisoner of the Ottomans, and his younger brother Thomas fled. By the end of the summer, the Ottomans had achieved the submission of virtually all cities held by the Greeks.\nOttoman incursions into the Morea resumed under Turahan Bey after 1423. Despite the reconstruction of the Hexamilion wall at the Isthmus of Corinth, the Ottomans under Murad II breached it in 1446, forcing the Despots of the Morea to re-acknowledge Ottoman suzerainty, and again under Turahan in 1452 and 1456. Following the occupation of the Duchy of Athens in 1456, the Ottomans occupied a third of the Peloponnese in 1458, and Sultan Mehmed II extinguished the remnants of the Despotate in 1460. A few holdouts remained for a time. The rocky peninsula of Monemvasia refused to surrender, and it was first ruled for a brief time by a Catalan corsair. When the population drove him out, they obtained the consent of Thomas to submit to the Pope's protection before the end of 1460. The Mani Peninsula at the south end of the Morea resisted under a loose coalition of the local clans, and that area then came under Venice's rule. The last holdout was Salmeniko, in the Morea's northwest. Graitzas Palaiologos was the military commander there, stationed at Salmeniko Castle. While the town eventually surrendered, Graitzas and his garrison and some town residents held out in the castle until July 1461, when they escaped and reached Venetian territory. Only the Venetian fortresses of Modon, Coron, Navarino, Monemvasia, Argos and Nauplion escaped Ottoman control.\nAlbanian migration, settlement and relocations to Italy.\nThe same period was also marked by the migration and settlement of Christian Albanians to parts of Central Greece and the Peloponnese, a group that eventually became known as the Arvanites The Albanians settled in successive waves, often invited by the local rulers. They start appearing more frequently in the historical record from during the second part of the 14th century, when they were being offered arable land, pasture and favorable taxation in exchange for military service. One of the larger groups of Albanian settlers, amounting to 10,000, settled the Peloponnese during the reign of Theodore I Palaiologos, first in Arcadia and subsequently in other regions around Messenia, Argolis, Elis and Achaia. Around 1418, a second large group arrived, possibly fleeing Aetolia, Acarnania and Arta, where Albanian political power had been defeated. The settling Albanians lived in tribes spread out into small villages, practicing nomadic lifestyles based on pastoralism and animal husbandry. By the mid-15th century, they formed a substantial part of the population of the Peloponnesus. In the second half of the 15th century, Albanians constituted at least one-third of the population of the Peloponnese. Military sources of the era (1425) report about 30,000 Albanian men who could carry arms in the Peloponnese. The Greeks tended to live in large villages and cities, while Albanians in small villages. \nFollowing Ottoman conquest, many Albanians fled to Italy, settling primarily in nowadays Arbereshe villages of Calabria and Sicily. On the other hand, in an effort to control the remaining Albanians, during the second half of the 15th century, the Ottomans adopted favorable tax policies towards them, likely in continuation of similar Byzantine practices. This policy had been discontinued by the early 16th century. Throughout the Ottoman\u2013Venetian wars, many Albanians died or were captured in service to the Venetians; at Nafpaktos, Nafplio, Argos, Methoni, Koroni and Pylos. Furthermore, 8,000 Albanian stratioti, most of them along with their families, left the Peloponnese to continue their military service under the Republic of Venice or the Kingdom of Naples. At the end of the Ottoman\u2013Venetian wars, a large number of Albanians had fled from the Peloponnese to Sicily.\nA demographic census by Alfred Philippson, based on fieldwork between 1887 and 1889, found that out of the approximately 730,000 inhabitants of the Peloponnese, and the three neighboring islands of Poros, Hydra and Spetses, Arvanites numbered 90,253, or 12.3% of the total population.\nOttoman conquest, Venetian interlude and Ottoman reconquest.\nThe Venetian fortresses were conquered in a series of Ottoman-Venetian Wars: the first war, lasting from 1463 to 1479, saw much fighting in the Peloponnese, resulting in the loss of Argos, while Modon and Coron fell in 1500 during the second war. Coron and Patras were captured in a crusading expedition in 1532, led by the Genoese admiral Andrea Doria, but this provoked another war in which the last Venetian possessions on the Greek mainland were lost.\nFollowing the Ottoman conquest, the peninsula was made into a province (\"sanjak\"), with 109 \"ziamets\" and 342 \"timars\". During the first period of Ottoman rule (1460\u20131687), the capital was first in Corinth (Turk. \"G\u00f6rdes\"), later in Leontari (\"Londari\"), Mystras (\"Misistire\") and finally in Nauplion (Tr. \"Anaboli\"). Sometime in the mid-17th century, the Morea became the centre of a separate \"eyalet\", with Patras (\"Ballibadra\") as its capital. Until the death of Suleiman the Magnificent in 1570, the Christian population (counted at some 42,000 families c. 1550) managed to retain some privileges and Islamization was slow, mostly among the Albanians or the estate owners who were integrated into the Ottoman feudal system.\nAlthough they quickly came to control most of the fertile lands, Muslims remained a distinct minority. Christian communities retained a large measure of self-government, but the entire Ottoman period was marked by a flight of the Christian population from the plains to the mountains. This occasioned the rise of the \"klepht\"s, armed brigands and rebels, in the mountains, as well as the corresponding institution of the government-funded \"armatoloi\" to check the \"klephts\"' activities.\nWith the outbreak of the \"Great Turkish War\" in 1683, the Venetians under Francesco Morosini occupied the entire peninsula by 1687, and received recognition by the Ottomans in the Treaty of Karlowitz (1699). The Venetians established their province as the \"Kingdom of the Morea\" (It. \"Regno di Morea\"), but their rule proved unpopular, and when the Ottomans invaded the peninsula in 1715, most local Greeks welcomed them. The Ottoman reconquest was easy and swift, and was recognized by Venice in the Treaty of Passarowitz in 1718.\nThe Peloponnese now became the core of the Morea Eyalet, headed by the \"Mora valesi\", who until 1780 was a pasha of the first rank (with three horsetails) and held the title of vizier. After 1780 and until the Greek War of Independence, the province was headed by a \"muhassil\". The pasha of the Morea was aided by several subordinate officials, including a Christian translator (\"dragoman\"), who was the senior Christian official of the province. As during the first Ottoman period, the Morea was divided into 22 districts or beyliks. The capital was first at Nauplion, but after 1786 at Tripolitza (Tr. \"Trabli\u00e7e\").\nThe Greeks of the Peloponnese rose against the Ottomans with Russian aid during the so-called \"Orlov Revolt\" of 1770, but it was swiftly and brutally suppressed by bands of Muslim Albanian mercenaries hired by the Ottomans. Referred to by the local Greek populace as \"Turk-Albanians\", those forces had also destroyed many cities and towns in Epirus during the 1769\u201370 revolt there. The Peloponnese suffered more than any other Greek inhabited area by irregular Albanian gangs during the decades following. In Patras nearly no one was left alive after the Turkish-Albanian invasion. The city of Mystras was left in ruins and the metropolitan bishop Ananias was executed despite having saved the life of several Turks during the uprising. A great number of local Greeks were killed by the Albanian groups, while children were sold to slavery. It is estimated that 20,000 local Greeks were captured during those nine years of devastation by those Albanian mercenaries and sold to slave markets. Also an additional of 50,000 Greeks left Peloponesse: around one-sixth of the pre-1770 population.\nThe Ottoman government was unable to pay the wages the Albanian mercenaries demanded for their service, causing the latter to ravage the region even after revolt had been put down. 1770-1779 was a prolonged period of devastation and atrocities committed by Albanian irregulars in the Peloponnese. In 1774 the Russo-Turkish War ended with the Treaty of K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Kaynarca which granted general amnesty to the population. Nevertheless, attacks by Muslim Albanian mercenaries in the region continued not only against the Greek population but also against Turks. The extensive destruction and lack of control in the Peloponnese forced the central Ottoman government to send a regular Turkish military force to suppress those Albanian troops in 1779, and eventually drive them out from Peloponnese. As a result of the invasion by those mercenary groups the local population had to found refuge in the mountains of Peloponnese to avoid persecution. The total population decreased during this time, while the Muslim element in it increased.\nAs such Greek resistance in the peninsula was reinforced and powerful groups of klephts were formed under the clans of Zacharias, Melios, Petmezas and Kolokotronis. Klephtic songs of that era describe the resistance activities. Nevertheless, through the privileges granted with the Treaty of Kuchuk-Kainarji, especially the right for the Christians to trade under the Russian flag, led to a considerable economic flowering of the local Greeks, which, coupled with the increased cultural contacts with Western Europe (Modern Greek Enlightenment) and the inspiring ideals of the French Revolution, laid the groundwork for the Greek War of Independence.\nModern Greece.\nThe Peloponnesians played a major role in the Greek War of Independence \u2013 the war began in the Peloponnese, when rebels took control of Kalamata on March 23, 1821. After the arrival of Ypsilantis's emissaries, local people rose under the leadership of Mavromichalis. Greek and Albanian insurgents organised in units of armed civilians took control of most of the fortresses. The Greek insurgents made rapid progress and the entire peninsula was under Greek control within a few months, except for a few coastal forts and the main Turkish garrison at Tripolitsa. The fighting was fierce and marked by atrocities on both sides; eventually the entire Muslim population was either massacred or fled to the forts. The capture of Tripolitsa in September 1821 marked a turning point. Short of men and money, the Ottoman state turned to hiring Albanian tribesmen to fight the Greeks, and by 1823, the bulk of the Ottoman forces in Greece were Albanian mercenaries hired for a campaigning season rather than the Ottoman Army. Rivalries among the insurgents eventually erupted into civil war in 1824, which enabled the Ottoman Egyptian vassal Ibrahim Pasha to land in the peninsula in 1825.\nThe Peloponnese peninsula was the scene of fierce fighting and extensive devastation following the arrival of Ibrahim's Egyptian troops. Partly as a result of the atrocities committed by Ibrahim, the UK, France, and the Russian Empire decided to intervene in favor of the Greeks. The decisive naval Battle of Navarino was fought in 1827 off Pylos on the west coast of the Peloponnese, where a combined British, French and Russian fleet decisively defeated the Turko-Egyptian fleet. Subsequently, a French expeditionary corps cleared the last Turko-Egyptian forces from the peninsula in 1828. The city of Nafplion, on the east coast of the peninsula, became the first capital of the independent Greek state. By the conclusion of the war, the entire Muslim population of the newly independent Greek state, including the Peloponnese, had been exterminated or had fled.\nDuring the 19th and early 20th centuries, the region became relatively poor and economically isolated. A significant part of its population emigrated to the larger cities of Greece, especially Athens, and other countries such as the United States and Australia. It was badly affected by the Second World War and Greek Civil War, experiencing some of the worst atrocities committed in Greece during those conflicts. Living standards improved dramatically throughout Greece after the country accedes to the European Union in 1981.\nThe Corinth Canal was completed in the late 19th century, linking the Aegean Sea with the Gulf of Corinth and the Ionian. In 2001, the Rio-Antirio Bridge was completed, linking the western Peloponnese to western Greece. In late August 2007, large parts of Peloponnese suffered from wildfires, which caused severe damage in villages and forests and the death of 77 people. The impact of the fires to the environment and economy of the region are still unknown. It is thought to be one of the largest environmental disasters in modern Greek history.\nCities.\nThe principal modern cities of the Peloponnese are (2011 census):\nArchaeological sites.\nThe Peloponnese possesses many important archaeological sites dating from the Bronze Age through to the Middle Ages. Among the most notable are:\n\u2021 UNESCO World Heritage Site\nCuisine.\nSpecialities of the region:\nSeveral notable Peloponnese wines have Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) status. The Mantineia region makes a white wine made from Moschofilero, the Nemea wine region makes renowned red wines from the Agiorgitiko grape, and fortified red wine is made in the region around the city of Patras from Mavrodafni grapes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
