{"id": "46231", "revid": "13843287", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46231", "title": "Super 8 film", "text": "Small motion picture film format\nSuper 8\u00a0mm film is a motion-picture film format released in 1965 by Eastman Kodak as an improvement over the older \"Double\" or \"Regular\" 8\u00a0mm home movie format. The formal name for Super 8 is 8-mm Type S, distinguishing it from the older double-8 format, which is called 8-mm Type R. Unlike Super 35 (which is generally compatible with standard 35\u00a0mm equipment), the film stock used for Super\u00a08 is not compatible with standard 8\u00a0mm film cameras.\nThe film is nominally 8\u00a0mm wide, the same as older formatted 8\u00a0mm film, but the dimensions of the rectangular sprocket hole perforations along one edge are smaller, which allows for a larger image area. The Super\u00a08 standard also allocates the border opposite the perforations for an oxide stripe upon which sound can be magnetically recorded.\nFujifilm released a competing system named Single-8, also in 1965, which used the same film, image frame, and perforation dimensions, but with a different film base and incompatible cartridge format. The Kodak Super 8 system was adopted by more manufacturers and proved to be the more popular home movie format until it was displaced by video camera and recorder systems.\nSuper 8 System.\nStarting in 1963, Kodak privately invited manufacturers of home movie equipment to inform them about a new 8\u00a0mm format under development. After Bell &amp; Howell learned about it, they began developing cameras and projectors as the \"Earlybird\" project, despite incomplete details about the cartridge and film size.\nLaunched in May 1965 by Eastman Kodak at that year's International Photo Exposition, held simultaneously with the ongoing 1964 New York World's Fair, Super\u00a08 film comes in plastic light-proof cartridges containing coaxial supply and take-up spools loaded with of film, with 72 frames per foot, for a nominal total of 3600 frames per film cartridge. This is enough film for 2.5\u00a0minutes at the professional motion picture standard of 24 frames per second, and for \u00a0minutes of continuous filming at 18 frames per second (upgraded from the 16\u00a0frames per second rate of standard 8\u00a0mm) for amateur use. \nIn 1973, the system was supplemented with a larger cartridge, containing mag stripe film, which allowed sound cameras to record monaural sync-sound audio on the main strip. In 1975, an even larger cartridge became available, which could be used in specifically designed cameras. The sound and the 200-foot cartridge system are no longer available, but the 50-foot silent cartridge system is still manufactured.\nHistorically, Super\u00a08 film was a reversal stock for home projection used primarily for the creation of home movies. It became an extremely popular consumer product in the late 1960s through the 1970s, but was largely replaced in the 1980s by the use of video tape. \nDuring the mid-to-late 1980s Super\u00a08 began to re-emerge as an alternative method for movie production, beginning with its use in MTV music videos in 1981. In 1993, the company Super8 Sound, now called Pro8mm, pioneered the use of the color negative in Super\u00a08 by custom perforating and loading a variety of 35\u00a0mm film stocks into the Super\u00a08 film cartridge. This included emulsions from Kodak, Fuji and Ilford. Today Super\u00a08 color negative film is the main color stock used. There are also Super\u00a08 reversal films available, including 100D Kodak Ektachrome and 200D Agfa color, as well as black-and-white (B&amp;W) from Foma, ADOX, ORWO and Kodak.\nDesign.\nSuper 8 film and frame dimensions are specified by standards published by ANSI/SMPTE and ISO, including ISO 1700 and 3645; and ANSI/SMPTE ST\u00a0149 (superseding ANSI PH22.149) and ANSI/SMPTE ST\u00a0157 (superseding ANSI PH22.156M and PH22.157).\nThe standard Super 8 cartridge is a rectangular box approximately and contains 50\u00a0feet of film.\nThe Super 8 plastic cartridge is probably the fastest loading film system ever developed, as it can be loaded into the Super\u00a08 camera in less than two seconds without the need to directly thread or touch the film. In addition, coded notches cut into the Super\u00a08 film cartridge exterior allow the camera to recognize the film speed automatically. Not all cameras can read all the notches correctly, however, and there is some debate about which notches actually deliver the best results. Canon keeps an exhaustive list of their Super\u00a08 cameras with detailed specifications on what film speeds can be used with their cameras. Usually, testing one cartridge of film can help settle any uncertainty a filmmaker may have about how well their Super\u00a08 camera reads different film stocks. Color stocks were originally available only in tungsten (3400\u00a0K) Type A, and almost all Super\u00a08 cameras come with a switchable daylight filter built in, allowing for both indoor and outdoor shooting.\nThe original Super 8 film release was a silent system only, but in 1973, a sound on film version was released. The film with sound had a magnetic soundtrack and came in larger cartridges than the original cartridge in order to accommodate the sound recording head in the film path. Sound film requires a longer film path (for smoothing the film movement before it reaches the recording head) and a second aperture for the recording head. Sound cameras are compatible with silent cartridges, but not conversely. Sound film is typically filmed at a speed of 18 or 24 frames per second. Kodak discontinued the production of Super\u00a08 sound film in 1997, citing environmental regulations, as the adhesive used to bond the magnetic track to the film is environmentally hazardous.\nKodak introduced a Super 8 cartridge with magnetic sound in 1974; the accompanying Supermatic 200 camera was identical to its existing Ektasound camera, but included a door which allowed the extended reels to extend through the top.\nCurrent use.\nIn 2005, Kodak announced the discontinuation of their most popular stock Kodachrome due to the decline of facilities equipped with the K-14 developing process. Kodachrome was \"replaced\" by a new ISO\u00a064 Ektachrome, which uses the simpler E-6 process. The last roll of Kodachrome was processed on January 18, 2011, in Parsons, Kansas, by the sole remaining lab capable of processing it. \nIn December 2012, Kodak discontinued color reversal stock in all formats, including 35\u00a0mm and Super\u00a08. However, in Spring of 2019, Kodak introduced Ektachrome 100D in super\u00a08 and 16\u00a0mm formats, citing surges in demand.\nToday, there are still a variety of Super\u00a08 film stocks. Kodak sells one Super\u00a08 color reversal stock, Ektachrome 100D, and three Super\u00a08 color negative stocks cut from their Vision\u00a03 film series, ISO\u00a050, ISO\u00a0200 and ISO\u00a0500, which can be used in very low light. Kodak reformulated the emulsions for the B&amp;W reversal stocks and made Tri-X (ISO\u00a0200).\nFilm cut to Super\u00a08 from other manufactured raw stock such as Fuji, Orwo, Adox, Agfa and Foma are also available. Pro8mm offers 7 color negative stocks made from Kodak and Fuji film. Color Reversal film for Super\u00a08 is still available from several Super\u00a08 specialty companies. Wittner Kinotechnik offers Super\u00a08 made from a batch of Agfa Aviphot 200D, which is perforated and slit for Super\u00a08, 8\u00a0mm and 16\u00a0mm formats. This film is loaded into Super\u00a08 and Single cartridges by several of the specialty companies. Other stocks, such as the new Fuji reversal film, and existing supplies of Kodak 35\u00a0mm 100D are often made available in Super\u00a08 by these specialty companies.\nThe growing popularity and availability of non-linear editing systems has allowed film-makers and any user of film to shoot Super\u00a08 film but edit in digital. This avoids much of the tedium of handling film and the damage to the film, which can occur when editing the actual film. Super\u00a08 films may be transferred (scanned) to digital and then imported into computer-based editing and correction systems for post production. Today's systems can scan Super\u00a08 to 4K digital in a variety of formats.\nCompetitors.\nFujifilm Single-8 system.\nFujifilm of Japan developed an alternative format called Single-8, which was released in 1965 as a different option to the Kodak Super\u00a08 format, using a separate set of standards as \"8 mm Type S Model II\".\nSingle-8 cartridges are of a different design from a Super\u00a08 cartridge. Where Super\u00a08 uses coaxial supply and take-up reels, Single-8 uses coplanar reels, resembling a cassette-style design where the supply and take-up reels are side by side. In addition, the pressure plate to flatten the Single-8 film is in the camera, rather than the cartridge (Super\u00a08). Single-8 also uses a stronger polyester base, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 the thickness of the acetate base of Super\u00a08 film. Therefore, Single-8 film cartridges can only be used in Single-8 cameras. However, since Single-8 film has exactly the same image frame and perforation dimensions as Super\u00a08, it can be viewed in any Super\u00a08 projector after processing. Fuji recommended that only tape splices be used when combining Single-8 footage with Super-8, as standard film cement would not adhere to the Single-8 footage. Also, when jammed, Single-8 footage has a tendency to stretch in the projector, unlike the acetate-based Super-8 film, which simply breaks.\nAlthough never as popular as Super\u00a08, the format existed in parallel. On June 2, 2009, Fuji announced the end of Single-8 motion picture film. Tungsten balanced 200\u00a0ASA Fuji RT200N ceased to be manufactured by May 2010. Daylight balanced 25\u00a0ASA Fujichrome R25N remained available until March 2012. Fuji's in-house processing service was available until September 2013.\nPolaroid Polavision.\nAn instant 8\u00a0mm film released in 1977 by Polaroid, Polavision uses the same perforations as Super 8\u00a0mm film. It can be projected through a Super 8\u00a0mm projector if the film is transferred from the original cartridge to an 8\u00a0mm reel. However, because of the additive color process, the picture will be much darker.\nSuper 8 derivative formats.\nDouble Super 8.\nDouble Super 8 film (commonly abbreviated as DS8 or DS\u00a08) is a 16\u00a0mm wide film but has Super\u00a08 size sprockets.\nIn amateur DS8 cameras, the film is used in the same way as standard 8\u00a0mm film in that the film is run through the camera twice, exposing one side on each pass. During processing, the film is split down the middle, and the two pieces spliced together to produce a single strip for projection in a Super\u00a08 projector.\nThe advantages of this system are the possibility of higher frame rates and rewinding film for double exposures or crossfades, which were very difficult or impossible with the super\u00a08 film cartridges but possible with cameras using film spools. Since the film doesn't follow a diagonal path through the stacked spools of the super\u00a08 cassette, the pin-registration of DS8 is considered to be superior to that of Super\u00a08 film, and so picture stability is better.\nAlso, camera manufacturers could use models already in production for double 8\u00a0mm film by enlarging the gate and slightly modifying the advancement mechanism for the use with Double Super\u00a08 film (see comparison pictures in this segment).\nDS8 can also be used as an alternative film stock in modified 16\u00a0mm cameras and projectors, which allows for larger image sizes due to the narrower super\u00a08 sprockets. Some of the formats taking advantage of this are Max DS8 and Ultra DS8.\nWidescreen Super8 and Max8.\nAs Super 8 progressed to be used in HD and theatrical applications, a need arose for widescreen compatibility without having to use expensive optical adapters or excessive cropping. Since magnetic sound-striped film was no longer available, that area of the film could be used to expand the picture aspect ratio in a process similar to the creation of Super\u00a016 from standard 16\u00a0mm film. The creators of Sleep Always experimented with widening the camera gate to expose into the sound track region to achieve this.\nIn March 2005, Pro8mm introduced its own version of the widened gate, achieving aspect ratio of 1.58 and calling it Max8. Because top and bottom of the frame are meant to be cropped to achieve final 16:9 aspect ratio, the viewfinder is modified to show 16:9 frame markings. Pro8mm claims that shooting with Max8 and then cropping it to achieve 16:9 provides 20% increase in the size of the negative compared to regular Super8 cropped to 16:9.\nIn 2015, Logmar of Denmark made a one-off batch of 50 \"digicanical\" pro-level Super\u00a08 cameras to celebrate the 50th anniversary of Super\u00a08. These cameras use a widened gate as well, providing an 11% increase in imaging area over the standard Super\u00a08 frame and achieving aspect ratio of 1.5.\nIn 2016, Eastman Kodak showed a concept for a new Super\u00a08 camera, its first such camera in over 30 years. Although Kodak has neither confirmed nor denied it, Logmar is said to have assisted in the design of the transport and the camera's firmware. A working prototype was displayed at the 2017 Consumer Electronics Show, with Kodak hoping to begin production in spring 2017. However, nothing has been heard from Kodak concerning the camera, until 8 years later, on 22 November 2023, Kodak formally released the Super 8 camera for pre-order, confirmed its analog and digital-assist hybrid features, and 1.5:1 aspect ratio \"Expanded Super 8 Gate\" aperture feature. The camera is expected to be shipped around Q1 2024.\nEquipment and film.\nEquipment.\nAlthough Kodak launched Super 8 and had its own cameras, hundreds of other companies produced Super\u00a08 camera, projection, editing, and sound equipment. Some of the more notable companies that made Super\u00a08 equipment include: Canon, Bauer, Nizo, Super8 Sound (Pro8mm), Beaulieu, Leicina, Logmar, Ciro, Bolex, Goko, Hahnel, Wurker, Minolta, Minnette, Nikon. Most of these companies had long histories in the production of motion-picture equipment, dating back to the 1930s with 8\u00a0mm. In 1980, the consumer market for Super\u00a08 collapsed. Most of the independent companies were forced into bankruptcy or merged, as the demand for Super\u00a08 evaporated overnight. Some companies remained in business until 1985, when many gave up completely on movie-film equipment. A few later re-emerged, including Beaulieu, who, in 1985, introduced a new 7008 camera and Super 8 Sound that introduced a new version of its full-coat recorder, the Mag\u00a0IV. The companies in which Super\u00a08 was only a division simply closed. Kodak continued support for Super\u00a08. A few products re-emerged with new features such as crystal sync and Max8. Several Canon models have also started to reappear as restoration efforts like the RhondaCam. Recently, new companies have started producing new Super\u00a08 cameras. In 2015, Logmar introduced a limited-edition completely new Super\u00a08 camera, and in 2016, Kodak showed a concept of a new Super\u00a08 camera at the 2016 CES expo. There are literally millions of Super\u00a08 cameras that are still available and viable because of manufacturing methods back in the 1960s and 1970s. These cameras can be found at specialized retailers and distributors and at auction sites such as eBay.\nFilm stock.\nKodak currently offers one color reversal stock, Ektachrome 100D, three of its latest Vision\u00a03 color negative stock, the 50D, 200T, and 500T, and Tri-X B&amp;W reversal film in the Super\u00a08 format. Several Super\u00a08 specialty companies such as Pro8mm in Burbank CA, Wittner Cinetec in Hamburg, Germany, and Kahlfilm in Br\u00fchl, Germany, slit and perforate raw 35\u00a0mm film stock from Kodak, Fuji, ORWO, Agfa, and Foma and then repackage it in Kodak Super\u00a08 cartridges. Adox has its own B&amp;W film supply and provides this in its own Super\u00a08 cartridge design by GKfilmCinevia. Retro\u00a08 of Japan provides a similar service for Super\u00a08 film in the Fuji Cartridge (Single8). There are now more varieties of Super\u00a08 film available than ever before.\nIn 2017, Kodak announced that Ektachrome will soon be available again in the Super\u00a08 format. In Spring of 2019, Kodak officially released Ektachrome 100D in Super\u00a08 and 16\u00a0mm formats.\nSuper 8 film is available worldwide through specialty shops and online from major companies such as Amazon. It has become common to see it sold with processing prepaid and for it to be sold with scan-to-digital services at a variety of different levels from standard-definition digital to 4K data. It can even be purchased to include all the logistic associated with the process, including film processing, scanning and internet delivery of image and mail in and back services. This is a sample video done with the Super\u00a08 film kit.\nSound.\nIn the beginning of 1965, Super 8 was introduced as a silent format. Over time, several companies began to offer sync sound options for Super 8 filmmaking. Two companies introduced comprehensive sound systems for Super 8. These were Super8 Sound Inc. led by Harvard film professor Bob Doyle and Optasound led by Richard Leacock at MIT. With double system, as it was called, sound and picture are recorded separately. This was fine for more professional applications and for education about film production, but for consumers it was simply too complex and expensive.\nIn 1973 Kodak introduced Ektasound\u2014magnetic recording on the actual Super 8 film. The sound track was added on the edge of the film opposite to the perforations. Standard 8mm had the stripe between the perforations and the edge of the film which made good contact with a magnetic head problematic. A balance stripe was added on the opposite edge to facilitate spooling of the film. The Ektasound cartridge was deeper than the silent cartridge to allow access of the camera's recording head. Thus, silent cameras could not accept Ektasound cartridges, but Ektasound cameras and projectors accepted silent cartridges. Projectors, that could record and play sound, appeared before sound cameras. The sound was recorded 18 frames in advance of the picture (as opposed to 56 frames for standard 8mm). This short distance of just 3 inches facilitated the relatively compact size of the later sound cartridges. Some projectors used the balance stripe to provide a second channel for stereo sound.\nSuper 8mm was also specified with an optical sound track. This occupied the same location as the magnetic track. Picture to sound separation in this format was 22 frames. Projectors and cameras obviously could not record sound in this system, but optical sound package movies became briefly popular, particularly in Europe (mainly because they were cheaper to produce - though the projectors cost more). Although the optical sound should have been inferior in quality to magnetic sound (running at 3.6 inches per second for 24 frames per second), in practice it was often much better, largely because packaged movie magnetic sound was often poorly recorded.\nPackaged movies.\nAlthough the 8mm format was originally intended for creating amateur films, condensed versions of popular cinema releases were available from the 1940s (in the Standard 8 format) until the mid-1980s, for projection at home. These were scenes from feature-length films generally edited to fit onto a reel that ran 8\u20139 minutes. Also popular were theatrical cartoons which could fit on the 200-foot reels without being edited. The 200-foot editions in black and white and silent were widely available and often sold in department stores such as Woolco in the $5.00-6.00 price range in the 1960s and 1970s. The leading companies releasing such films were Castle Films, owned by Universal Pictures and Ken Films, which licensed titles from 20th Century-Fox and other studios. The Walt Disney Studio released excerpts from many of their animated feature films in the 1970s, as well as some short subjects.\nReleases in color and with sound began appearing in the 1970s and by the end of the decade, demand for longer condensations resulted in reels being released, running approximately 16\u201318 minutes, sometimes with a second \"part II\" 400'. The list price for the sound color films in 1980 were $39.95 for a single 200' film and $59.95 for a single 400' film, though most sellers sold them at a reduced price. The Walt Disney Studio, however, kept their releases at the 200-foot limit. Columbia Pictures, which had operated an 8mm division since the early 1960s, enjoyed success with a \"Viewer's Digest\" series of 400' feature condensations and complete prints of their Three Stooges short comedies.\nVintage silent films starring Charlie Chaplin, Buster Keaton, Mary Pickford, Rudolph Valentino, Lillian Gish, and other legends were available from companies specializing in them such as Blackhawk Films and included both short films and multi-reel complete feature-length movies. Full-length sound films, particularly those in color, were seldom released due to the fairly expensive price of such films although a small number were released by such companies as Viacom featuring stars with wide popularity such as John Wayne, Elvis Presley, and Katharine Hepburn. Blackhawk, which held the 8mm and 16mm rights to the Laurel and Hardy classics produced by Hal Roach, offered both their short comedies and complete features in black-and-white sound prints. Most sound films that were released complete on Super 8 with multi reels were usually public domain titles such as \"My Man Godfrey\" (1936), \"Of Human Bondage\" (1934) and \"His Girl Friday\" (1940), and sold by smaller companies such as Thunderbird and Niles.\nThe emergence of home video and the increasing available of cable television dramatically decreased the market for Super 8 films in America in the early 1980s which led to a quick fadeout in availability, although the format remained quite popular in England into the early years of the 21st century with Derann films releasing full-length versions of many Disney films and vintage Hollywood musicals.\nIn-flight movies.\nStarting in 1971 in-flight movies (previously 16 mm) were shown in Super 8 format until video distribution became the norm and they were replaced by Video8 and later on, digital video. The films were printed with an optical sound track (amateur films use magnetic sound), and spooled into proprietary cassettes that often held an entire two-hour movie.\nPopularity.\nSuper 8 was most widely used for filming home movies. Some lower-budget television stations used Super 8 to film news stories. Today amateur usage of Super 8 has been replaced by digital, but the format is still regularly used by artists and students. Some seek to imitate the look of old home movies, or create a stylishly grainy look. Others want to create alternative looks for flashback sequences and altered states of consciousness. Some just like the idea of creating images in the classic style of using actual film. Super 8 is a relatively inexpensive film, making it popular among filmmakers working on a low budget who still want to achieve the classic look of real film.\nSuper 8 has been used in theatrical features, usually for creative effect. Oliver Stone, for example, has used it in films such as \"JFK\", where his director of photography Robert Richardson employed it to evoke a period or to give a different look to scenes. The PBS series \"Globe Trekker\" uses approximately five minutes of Super 8 footage per episode. In the UK, broadcasters such as the BBC still occasionally make use of Super 8 in both drama and documentary contexts.\nThanks to over a dozen film stocks, the ease of function and finding a camera, and the ability to do high quality digital scanning to standard motion picture digital formats like 2K and 4K, DPX or ProRes 4444, Super 8 remains a popular format for creating a variety of interesting scenes. Super 8 provides an ideal, inexpensive medium for traditional stop-motion and cel animation and other types of filming speed effects not common to video cameras.\nFilm festivals.\nTo give further support to filmmakers dedicated to shooting on Super 8\u00a0mm film, many film festivals and screenings\u2014such as the Flicker Film Festival, and Super Gr8 Film Festival\u2014exist to give filmmakers a place to screen their Super 8\u00a0mm films. Many of these screenings shun video and are only open to films shot on film. Some require film to be turned in undeveloped and thus not permitting any editing, providing an additional challenge to the filmmaker. These include the Bentley Film Festival and straight 8, which runs screenings at the Cannes Film Festival and many other festivals and events worldwide, where a sound track is required to be supplied with a completed but unprocessed cartridge. In the 2005 Cannes Film Festival, a Super 8 short film (\"The Man Who Met Himself\") by British filmmaker Ben Crowe, shot on the now discontinued Kodachrome 40 format, was the first Super 8 film to be nominated for the Short Film Palme d'Or in the Official Selection.\nIn the UK, the Cambridge International Super 8 Film Festival, with the support of the film industry, runs a competition program of more than 60 films every year. The festival also features work of Super 8 filmmakers, industry talks, and a workshop.\nThe United States Super 8mm Film + Digital Video Festival, established in 1988, takes place annually at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, New Jersey and is the longest running Super 8mm festival in the US.\nIn Brazil Curta8 | Festival Internacional de Cinema Super8 is in its 11th year.\nA number of experimental filmmakers, such as Mason Shefa, continue to work extensively in the format and festivals such as the Images Festival (Toronto), the Media City Film Festival (Windsor, Ont.), and TIE (based in Colorado) regularly project Super 8 films as part of their programming.\nIn June 2010, the Super8 Shots film festival was launched in Galway, Ireland, the first Super 8 festival to occur in Ireland, and included classes on basics and uses of film through to processing your own film.\nChicago 8: A Small Gauge Film Festival started in 2011, and will feature yearly programming of small gauge film from around the world.\nEducational use.\nSuper 8 can still be found at a few select higher educational institutions offering film production courses including the program at Chaffey College in Southern California. It is more common to find Super 8 film in art programs. These programs use the analog experience of film for its own creative potential rather than use Super 8 to teach traditional modern production methods. Art programs on many levels, such as this program put on in Santa Clarita California at ArtTree for students aged 10 to 15, teach the basic nature of film. Other programs such as \"Do A Shot\" sponsored by Pro8mm and Kodak give individuals a chance to experience film by lending film and cameras to a select group at film festivals and trade events like this film festival at The Art Center College of Art &amp; Design.\nSeveral post-secondary institutions in the United States continue to utilize Super 8 in Film and Cinema programs. For example, both City College of San Francisco's Cinema Department and the University of North Texas' Radio, Television and Film Department require the use of Super 8.\nThis experience provides students with the basics of film production and editing. Importantly, it also emphasizes the need for detailed pre-production planning, especially for in-camera edits. Further, the use of Super 8 leads students into the Regular 16 and Super 16 films shot in higher-level courses.\nIn popular culture.\nAustralian band TISM references Super-8 in their song Neighbours \u2013 Everybody Loves Good Neighbours in a way that suggests using Super-8 is more artistic than video.\nThe plot of the 2011 film \"Super 8\" involves a group of teenagers in the fictional Ohio town of Lillian filming their own Super 8 movie depicting their experience with a landlocked alien in the summer of 1979. One of the cameras featured in the film is a Kodak Ektasound 130 movie camera produced and sold by Kodak in the early 1970s.\nThe 2012 film \"Sinister\" contains Super 8 shots used to depict the various gruesome murders.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46233", "revid": "39635320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46233", "title": "Siegfried Sassoon", "text": "English war poet and writer (1886\u20131967)\nSiegfried Loraine Sassoon (8 September 1886\u00a0\u2013 1 September 1967) was an English war poet, writer, and soldier. Decorated for bravery on the Western Front, he became one of the leading poets of the First World War. His poetry both described the horrors of the trenches and satirized the patriotic pretensions of those who, in Sassoon's view, were responsible for a jingoism-fuelled war. Sassoon became a focal point for dissent within the armed forces when he made a lone protest against the continuation of the war with his \"Soldier's Declaration\" of July 1917, which resulted in his being sent to the Craiglockhart War Hospital. During this period, Sassoon met and formed a friendship with Wilfred Owen, who was greatly influenced by him. Sassoon later won acclaim for his prose work, notably his three-volume, fictionalised autobiography, collectively known as the Sherston trilogy.\nEarly life.\nSiegfried Sassoon was born to a Jewish father and an Anglo-Catholic mother, and grew up in the neo-gothic mansion named Weirleigh (after its builder Harrison Weir) in Matfield, Kent. His father, Alfred Ezra Sassoon (1861\u20131895), son of Sassoon David Sassoon, was a member of the wealthy Baghdadi Jewish Sassoon merchant family. Siegfried's mother, Theresa, belonged to the Thornycroft family, sculptors responsible for many of the best-known statues in London; among them her brother, Sir Hamo Thornycroft.\nThere was no German ancestry in Sassoon's family; his mother named him Siegfried because of her love of Wagner's operas. His middle name, Loraine, was the surname of a clergyman she respected.\nSiegfried was the second of three sons, the others being Michael and Hamo. When he was four years old his parents separated. During his father's weekly visits to the boys, Theresa locked herself in the drawing-room. In 1895, Alfred Sassoon died of tuberculosis.\nSassoon was educated at the New Beacon School, Sevenoaks, Kent; at Marlborough College, Wiltshire; and at Clare College, Cambridge, where from 1905 to 1907 he read history. He left Cambridge without a degree and spent the years after 1907 hunting, playing cricket and writing verse, some of which he published privately.\nAlthough his father had been disinherited from the Sassoon fortune for marrying a woman who was not Jewish, Siegfried had a small private income that allowed him to live modestly without having to earn a living. Later, he was left a large legacy by an aunt, Rachel Beer, allowing him to buy the great estate of Heytesbury House in Wiltshire.\nHis first published success, \"The Daffodil Murderer\" (1913), was a parody of John Masefield's \"The Everlasting Mercy\". Robert Graves, in \"Good-Bye to All That\", describes it as a \"parody of Masefield which, midway through, had forgotten to be a parody and turned into rather good Masefield.\"\nCricket.\nSassoon played for his village cricket team at a young age, and his brothers and three of his tutors were cricket enthusiasts. The Marchant family were neighbouring landowners, and Frank Marchant was captain of the county side between 1890 and 1897. Sassoon played for his house at Marlborough, once taking 7 wickets for 18 runs, and during this time he contributed three poems to \"Cricket\" magazine.\nFor some years around 1910 he often played for Bluemantles Cricket Club, at the Nevill Ground, in Tunbridge Wells, sometimes alongside Arthur Conan Doyle. He later played for a Downside Abbey team called \"The Ravens\", continuing playing well into his seventies.\nWar service.\nThe Western Front: Military Cross.\nSassoon joined the Army just as the threat of a new European war was recognized, and was in service with the Sussex Yeomanry on 4 August 1914, the day the United Kingdom declared war on Germany. He broke his arm badly in a riding accident and was put out of action before leaving England, spending the spring of 1915 convalescing. He was commissioned into the 3rd Battalion (Special Reserve), Royal Welch Fusiliers, as a second lieutenant on 29 May 1915.\nOn 1 November, his younger brother Hamo was killed in the Gallipoli Campaign, dying on board the ship after having had his leg amputated. In the same month, Siegfried was sent to the 1st Battalion, Royal Welch Fusiliers, in France, where he met Robert Graves, and they became close friends. United by their poetic vocation, they often read and discussed each other's work. Though this did not have much perceptible influence on Graves' poetry, Graves' views on what may be called \"gritty realism\" profoundly affected Sassoon's concept of what constituted poetry.\nHe soon became horrified by the realities of war, and the tone of his writing changed completely: where his early poems exhibit a Romantic, dilettantish sweetness, his war poetry moves to an increasingly discordant music, intended to convey the ugly truths of the trenches to an audience hitherto lulled by patriotic propaganda. Details such as rotting corpses, mangled limbs, filth, cowardice and suicide are all trademarks of his work at this time, and this philosophy of \"no truth unfitting\" had a significant effect on the movement towards Modernist poetry.\nSassoon's periods of duty on the Western Front were marked by exceptionally brave actions, including the single-handed capture of a German trench. Armed with grenades, he scattered sixty German soldiers:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He went over with bombs in daylight, under covering fire from a couple of rifles, and scared away the occupants. A pointless feat, since instead of signalling for reinforcements, he sat down in the German trench and began reading a book of poems which he had brought with him. When he went back he did not even report. Colonel Stockwell, then in command, raged at him. The attack on Mametz Wood had been delayed for two hours because British patrols were still reported to be out. \"British patrols\" were Siegfried and his book of poems. \"I'd have got you a DSO, if you'd only shown more sense,\" stormed Stockwell.Sassoon's bravery was so inspiring that soldiers of his company said that they felt confident only when they were accompanied by him. He often went out on night raids and bombing patrols, and demonstrated ruthless efficiency as a company commander.\nDeepening depression at the horror and misery the soldiers were forced to endure produced in Sassoon a paradoxically manic courage, and he was nicknamed \"Mad Jack\" by his men for his near-suicidal exploits. On 27 July 1916 he was awarded the Military Cross; the citation read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;2nd Lt. Siegfried Lorraine [\"sic\"] Sassoon, 3rd (attd. 1st) Bn., R. W. Fus.\nFor conspicuous gallantry during a raid on the enemy's trenches. He remained for 1\u00bd hours under rifle and bomb fire collecting and bringing in our wounded. Owing to his courage and determination all the killed and wounded were brought in.\nRobert Graves described Sassoon as engaging in suicidal feats of bravery. Sassoon was also later recommended for the Victoria Cross.\nWar opposition and Craiglockhart.\nDespite his decorations and reputation, in 1917 Sassoon decided to make a stand against the conduct of the war. One of the reasons for his violent anti-war feeling was the death of his friend David Cuthbert Thomas, who appears as \"Dick Tiltwood\" in the Sherston trilogy. Sassoon spent years trying to overcome his grief.\nIn August 1916, Sassoon arrived at Somerville College, Oxford, which was used as a hospital for convalescing officers, with a case of gastric fever. He wrote: \"To be lying in a little white-walled room, looking through the window on to a College lawn, was for the first few days very much like a paradise\". Graves ended up at Somerville as well. \"How unlike you to crib my idea of going to the Ladies' College at Oxford\", Sassoon wrote to him in 1917.\nAt the end of a spell of convalescent leave, Sassoon declined to return to duty; encouraged by pacifist friends such as Bertrand Russell and Lady Ottoline Morrell, he sent a letter to his commanding officer titled \"\". Forwarded to the press and read aloud in the House of Commons by a sympathetic member of Parliament, the letter was seen by some as treasonous (\"I am making this statement as an act of willful defiance of military authority\") or at best as condemning the war government's motives (\"I believe that the war upon which I entered as a war of defence and liberation has now become a war of aggression and conquest\").\nRather than court-martial Sassoon, the Under-Secretary of State for War, Ian Macpherson, decided that he was unfit for service and had him sent to Craiglockhart War Hospital near Edinburgh, where he officially was treated for neurasthenia (\"shell shock\").\nAt the end of 1917, Sassoon was posted to Limerick, Ireland, where in the New Barracks he helped train new recruits. He wrote that it was a period of respite for him, and allowed him to indulge in his love of hunting. Reflecting on the period years later, he mentioned how trouble was brewing in Ireland at the time, in the few years before the Irish War of Independence. After only a short period in Limerick he was posted to Egypt.\nBefore declining to return to active service, Sassoon had thrown his MC ribbon into the sea at Formby beach; some people misinterpreted his description of this incident in \"Memoirs of an Infantry Officer\" and believed that he had thrown the medal itself away, but this was retained and passed into the care of his family. He stated that he did not do this as a symbolic rejection of militaristic values, but simply out of the need to perform some destructive act as catharsis. His account states that one of his pre-war sporting trophies, had he had one to hand, would have served his purpose equally well. The actual decoration was rediscovered after the death of Sassoon's only son, George, and subsequently became the subject of a dispute among Sassoon's heirs.\nAt Craiglockhart, Sassoon met Wilfred Owen, another poet. It was thanks to Sassoon that Owen persevered in his ambition to write better poetry. A manuscript copy of Owen's \"Anthem for Doomed Youth\" containing Sassoon's handwritten amendments survives as testimony to the extent of his influence and is currently on display at London's Imperial War Museum.\nSassoon became to Owen \"Keats and Christ and Elijah\", according to a surviving letter which demonstrates the depth of Owen's love and admiration for him. Both men returned to active service in France, but Owen was killed in 1918, a week before Armistice. Sassoon was promoted to lieutenant, and, having spent some time in Palestine, eventually returned to France by 20 June 1918.\nSassoon was wounded again on 13 July 1918\u2014reportedly by friendly fire when he was injured by a shot to the head by a fellow British soldier who had apparently mistaken him for a German, near Arras, France (per a 2018 story published by a British online tabloid, it was suggested that the friendly fire incident was not accidental, however the veracity of this claim is in some question). As a result of this injury, he spent the remainder of the war in Britain. By this time, he had been promoted to acting captain. He relinquished his commission on health grounds on 12 March 1919, but retained the rank of captain.\nAfter the war, Sassoon was instrumental in bringing Owen's work to the attention of a wider audience. Their relationship is the subject of Stephen MacDonald's play \"Not About Heroes\".\nPost-war life.\nEditor and novelist.\nHaving lived for a period at Oxford, where he spent more time visiting literary friends than studying, Sassoon dabbled briefly in the politics of the Labour movement. In November 1918, he travelled to Blackburn to support the Labour candidate in the general election, Philip Snowden, who had been a pacifist during the war.\nThough a self-confessed political novice, Sassoon delivered campaign speeches for Snowden, later writing that he 'felt grateful for [Snowden's] anti-war attitude in parliament, and had been angered by the abuse thrown at him. All my political sympathies were with him.'\nWhile his commitment to politics waned after this, he remained a supporter of the Labour Party, and in 1929 'rejoiced that [they] had gained seats in the British general election.' Similarly, 'news of the massive Labour victory in 1945 pleased him, because many Tories from the class he had loathed during the First World War had gone.'\nIn 1919 Sassoon took up a post as literary editor of the socialist \"Daily Herald\". He lived at 54 Tufton Street, Westminster, from 1919 to 1925; the house is no longer standing, but the location of his former home is marked by a memorial plaque.\nDuring his period at the \"Herald\", Sassoon was responsible for employing several eminent names as reviewers, including E. M. Forster and Charlotte Mew, and commissioned original material from writers like Arnold Bennett and Osbert Sitwell. His artistic interests extended to music.\nWhile at Oxford he was introduced to the young William Walton, to whom he became a friend and patron. Walton later dedicated his \"Portsmouth Point\" overture to Sassoon in recognition of his financial assistance and moral support.\nSassoon later embarked on a lecture tour of the US, as well as travelling in Europe and throughout Britain. He acquired a car, a gift from the publisher Frankie Schuster, and became renowned among his friends for his lack of driving skill, but this did not prevent him making full use of the mobility it gave him.\nSassoon had expressed his growing sense of identification with German soldiers in poems such as \"Reconciliation\" (1918), and after the war, he travelled extensively in Germany, visiting the country a number of times over the next decade.\nIn 1921 Sassoon went to Rome, where he met the Kaiser's nephew, Prince Philipp of Hesse. The two became lovers for a while, later taking a holiday together in Munich. They had become estranged by the mid-1920s, due in part to geographical distance and in part, as Jean Moorcroft Wilson notes, to Sassoon's increasing discomfort over Philipp's growing interest in right-wing politics.\nSassoon continued to visit Germany. In 1927 he travelled to Berlin and Dresden with Osbert and Sacheverell Sitwell, and in 1929 he accompanied Stephen Tennant on a trip to a sanatorium in the Bavarian countryside.\nSassoon was a great admirer of the Welsh poet Henry Vaughan. On a visit to Wales in 1924, he made a pilgrimage to Vaughan's grave at Llansantffraed, Powys, and there wrote \"At the Grave of Henry Vaughan\", one of his better-known peacetime poems. The deaths within a short space of time of three of his closest friends \u2013 Edmund Gosse, Thomas Hardy and Frankie Schuster \u2013 came as setbacks to his personal happiness.\nAt the same time, Sassoon was preparing to take a new direction. While in the U.S., he had experimented with a novel. In 1928, he branched into prose, with \"Memoirs of a Fox-Hunting Man\", the anonymously published first volume of a fictionalized autobiography, which was almost immediately accepted as a classic, bringing its author new fame as a prose writer.\nThe memoir, whose mild-mannered central character is content to do little more than be an idle country gentleman, playing cricket, riding and hunting foxes, is often humorous, revealing a side of Sassoon that had rarely been seen in his work during the war years.\nThe book won the 1928 James Tait Black Award for fiction. Sassoon followed it with \"Memoirs of an Infantry Officer\" (1930) and \"Sherston's Progress\" (1936). In later years, he revisited his youth and early manhood with three volumes of genuine autobiography, which were acclaimed. These were \"The Old Century\", \"The Weald of Youth\" and \"Siegfried's Journey\".\nPersonal life.\nHomosexuality and affairs.\nAt Craiglockhart, Sassoon had met Wilfred Owen, another war poet. Numerous surviving documents demonstrate clearly the depth of Owen's love and admiration for him. Writing years after Owen died, Sassoon said that \"W's death was an unhealed wound, &amp; the ache of it has been with me ever since. I wanted him back \u2013 not his poems.\" Despite sentiments expressed in numerous letters between Sassoon and Owen, there is no support for a physical relationship between them. Both men returned to active service in France, where Owen was killed in 1918.\nFollowing the war he is believed to have had a succession of love affairs with men, including:\nAlthough Byam Shaw remained Sassoon's close friend throughout his life, only Tennant made a permanent impression.\nIntroduced by the Sitwells in 1927, Sassoon and Stephen Tennant began a relationship which lasted nearly six years. Tennant, however, had recurrent tuberculosis, and the strain which that put on their relationship had started to show by the early 1930s. In May 1933, Tennant, then receiving treatment at a sanatorium in Kent, abruptly informed Sassoon via a letter written by his physician that he never wanted to see him again. Sassoon was devastated.\nWhen he met his future wife Hester Gatty a few months later, he was still reeling from his break-up with Tennant. Sensing a sympathetic nature, Sassoon confided in Hester about their relationship and, at her suggestion, wrote Tennant a letter to put the past to rest. While he and Tennant exchanged letters, telephone calls and infrequent visits in the years to come, they never resumed their previous relationship.\nMarriage and later life.\nIn September 1931, Sassoon rented Fitz House, Teffont Magna, Wiltshire, and began to live there. In December 1933, he married Hester Gatty (daughter of Sir Stephen Gatty), who was 20 years his junior, and soon afterwards they moved to Heytesbury House.\nThe marriage led to the birth of a child, something Sassoon had purportedly craved for a long time. Siegfried's son, George Sassoon (1936\u20132006), became a scientist, linguist, and author, and was adored by Siegfried, who wrote several poems addressed to him. Siegfried's marriage broke down after the Second World War, with Sassoon apparently unable to find a compromise between the solitude he enjoyed and the companionship he needed.\nSeparated from his wife in 1945, Sassoon lived in seclusion at Heytesbury in Wiltshire, but he maintained contact with a circle which included E. M. Forster and J. R. Ackerley. One of his closer friends was the cricketer Dennis Silk who later became Warden (headmaster) of Radley College. He also formed a close platonic friendship with Vivien Hancock, then headmistress of Greenways School at Ashton Gifford House, Wiltshire, where his son George was a pupil. The relationship provoked Hester to make strong accusations of Hancock engaging in dubious behavior including alcoholism. Hancock responded with the threat of legal action.\nReligion.\nAfter a lifetime of grappling with questions of faith and spirituality, Sassoon made the decision to convert to Catholicism in 1957. His motivation for this conversion has been the subject of much speculation and analysis. Intellectual exploration, aesthetic appeal, spiritual seeking, and the influence of figures like Ronald Knox were factors for Sassoon's decision to convert.\nDeath and awards.\nSassoon was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 1951 New Year Honours. He died from stomach cancer on 1 September 1967, one week before his 81st birthday.\nHe is buried at St Andrew's Church, Mells, Somerset, not far from the grave of Father Ronald Knox, whom he so admired. His CBE, MC and campaign medals are on display at the Royal Welch Fusiliers Museum at Caernarfon Castle.\nLegacy.\nOn 11 November 1985, Sassoon was among 16 Great War poets commemorated on a slate stone unveiled in Westminster Abbey's Poet's Corner. The inscription on the stone was taken from Wilfred Owen's \"Preface\" to his poems and reads: \"My subject is War, and the pity of War. The Poetry is in the pity.\"\nThe year 2003 saw the publication of \"Memorial Tablet\", an authorised audio CD of readings by Sassoon recorded during the late 1950s. These included extracts from \"Memoirs of an Infantry Officer\" and \"The Weald of Youth\" as well as several war poems, including \"Attack\", \"The Dug-Out\", \"At Carnoy\" and \"Died of Wounds\", and postwar works. The CD also included comment on Sassoon by three of his Great War contemporaries: Edmund Blunden, Edgell Rickword and Henry Williamson.\nSiegfried Sassoon's only child, George Sassoon, died of cancer in 2006. George had three children, two of whom were killed in a car crash in 1996. His daughter by his first marriage, Kendall Sassoon, is patron-in-chief of the Siegfried Sassoon Fellowship, established in 2001.\nSassoon's Military Cross was rediscovered by his family in May 2007 and was put up for sale. It was bought by the Royal Welch Fusiliers for display at their museum in Caernarfon. Sassoon's other service medals went unclaimed until 1985 when his son George obtained them from the Army Medal Office, then based at Droitwich. The \"late claim\" medals consisting of the 1914\u201315 Star, Victory Medal and British War Medal along with Sassoon's CBE and Warrant of Appointment were auctioned by Sotheby's in 2008.\nIn June 2009, the University of Cambridge announced plans to purchase an archive of Sassoon's papers from his family, to be added to the university library's Sassoon collection. On 4 November 2009, it was reported that this purchase would be supported by \u00a3550,000 from the National Heritage Memorial Fund, meaning that the University still needed to raise a further \u00a3110,000 on top of the money already received to meet the full \u00a31.25\u00a0million asking price.\nThe funds were raised and in December 2009 it was announced that the University had received the papers. Included in the collection are war diaries kept by Sassoon while he served on the Western Front and in Palestine, a draft of \"\" (1917), notebooks from his schooldays and post-war journals.\nOther items in the collection include love letters to his wife Hester and photographs and letters from other writers. Sassoon was an undergraduate at the university, as well as being made an honorary fellow of Clare College; the collection is housed at the Cambridge University Library. As well as private individuals, funding came from the Monument Trust, the JP Getty Jr Trust and Sir Siegmund Warburg's Voluntary Settlement.\nIn 2010, \"Dream Voices: Siegfried Sassoon, Memory and War\", a major exhibition of Sassoon's life and archive, was held at Cambridge University. Several of Sassoon's poems have been set to music, some during his life, by Cyril Rootham, who co-operated with the author.\nThe discovery in 2013 of an early draft of one of Sassoon's best-known anti-war poems had a biographer saying she would rewrite portions of her work about the poet. In the poem \"Atrocities\", which concerned the killing of German prisoners of war by Allied troops, the early draft shows that some lines were cut and others diluted. The poet's publisher was nervous about publishing the poem and held it for publication in an expurgated version at a later date. Sassoon biographer Jean Moorcroft Wilson said \"This is very exciting material. I want to rewrite my biography and I probably shall be able to get some of it in. It's a treasure trove\". In early 2019, it was announced in \"The Guardian\" that a student from the University of Warwick, whilst looking through Glen Byam Shaw's records at the Shakespeare Birthplace Trust, had serendipitously discovered a Sassoon poem addressed to the former, which had not been published in its entirety.\nIn popular culture.\nA 1970 installment of The Wednesday Play titled \"Mad Jack\" based on Sassoon's wartime experiences and their aftermath leading to his renunciation of his Military Cross starred Michael Jayston as Sassoon.\nThe novel \"Regeneration\" by Pat Barker is a fictionalized account of this period in Sassoon's life, and was made into a film starring James Wilby as Sassoon and Jonathan Pryce as W. H. R. Rivers, the psychiatrist responsible for Sassoon's treatment. Rivers became a kind of surrogate father to the troubled young man, and his sudden death in 1922 was a major blow to Sassoon.\nIn 2014, John Hurt played the older Sassoon and Morgan Watkins the young Sassoon in \"The Pity of War\", a BBC dramatized documentary.\nA film titled \"The Burying Party\" (released August 2018) depicts Wilfred Owen's final year from Craiglockhart Hospital to the Battle of the Sambre (1918), including his meeting with Sassoon at the hospital. Matthew Staite stars as Owen and Sid Phoenix as Sassoon.\nPeter Capaldi and Jack Lowden portrayed Sassoon in Terence Davies' 2021 film \"Benediction\".\nTimothy Renouf portrayed Sassoon in \"The Laureate\", a 2021 biographical film about Robert Graves.\nStevan Rimkus portrayed Sassoon in \"The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles\" episode \"Somme, Early August 1916\".\nSassoon served as inspiration for Alice Winn's novel \"In Memoriam\", Specifically the character Sidney Ellwood.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46235", "revid": "3035831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46235", "title": "Catherine II the Great", "text": ""}
{"id": "46236", "revid": "7949351", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46236", "title": "Sorting Hat", "text": ""}
{"id": "46238", "revid": "1319307378", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46238", "title": "Refrigeration", "text": "Process of moving heat from one location to another in controlled conditions\nRefrigeration is any of various types of cooling of a space, substance, or system to lower or maintain its temperature below the ambient one (while the removed heat is rejected at a higher temperature). Refrigeration is an artificial, or human-made, cooling method. \nRefrigeration refers to the process by which energy, in the form of heat, is removed from a low-temperature medium and transferred to a high-temperature medium. This work of energy transfer is traditionally driven by mechanical means (whether ice or electromechanical machines), but it can also be driven by heat, magnetism, electricity, laser, or other means. Refrigeration has many applications, including household refrigerators, industrial freezers, cryogenics, and air conditioning. Heat pumps may use the heat output of the refrigeration process, and also may be designed to be reversible, but are otherwise similar to air conditioning units.\nRefrigeration has had a large impact on industry, lifestyle, agriculture, and settlement patterns. The idea of preserving food dates back to human prehistory, but for thousands of years humans were limited regarding the means of doing so. They used curing via salting and drying, and they made use of natural coolness in caves, root cellars, and winter weather, but other means of cooling were unavailable. In the 19th century, they began to make use of the ice trade to develop cold chains. In the late 19th through mid-20th centuries, mechanical refrigeration was developed, improved, and greatly expanded in its reach. Refrigeration has thus rapidly evolved since the early 20th century, from ice harvesting to temperature-controlled rail cars, refrigerator trucks, and ubiquitous refrigerators and freezers in both stores and homes in many countries. The introduction of refrigerated rail cars contributed to the settlement of areas that were not on earlier main transport channels such as rivers, harbors, or valley trails.\nThese new settlement patterns sparked the building of large cities which are able to thrive in areas that were otherwise thought to be inhospitable, such as Houston, Texas, and Las Vegas, Nevada. In most developed countries, cities are heavily dependent upon refrigeration in supermarkets in order to obtain their food for daily consumption. The increase in food sources has led to a larger concentration of agricultural sales coming from a smaller percentage of farms. Farms today have a much larger output per person in comparison to the late 1800s. This has resulted in new food sources available to entire populations, which has had a large impact on the nutrition of society.\nHistory.\nEarliest forms of cooling.\nThe seasonal harvesting of snow and ice is an ancient practice estimated to have begun earlier than 1000 BC. A Chinese collection of lyrics from this time period known as the \"Shijing\", describes religious ceremonies for filling and emptying ice cellars. However, little is known about the construction of these ice cellars or the purpose of the ice. The next ancient society to record the harvesting of ice may have been the Jews in the book of Proverbs, which reads, \"As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, so is a faithful messenger to them who sent him.\" Historians have interpreted this to mean that the Jews used ice to cool beverages rather than to preserve food. Other ancient cultures such as the Greeks and the Romans dug large snow pits insulated with grass, chaff, or branches of trees as cold storage. Like the Jews, the Greeks and Romans did not use ice and snow to preserve food, but primarily as a means to cool beverages. Egyptians cooled water by evaporation in shallow earthen jars on the roofs of their houses at night. The ancient people of India used this same concept to produce ice. The Persians stored ice in a pit called a Yakhchal and may have been the first group of people to use cold storage to preserve food. In the Australian outback before a reliable electricity supply was available many farmers used a Coolgardie safe, consisting of a box frame with hessian (burlap) sides soaked in water. The water would evaporate and thereby cool the interior air, allowing many perishables such as fruit, butter, and cured meats to be kept.\nIce harvesting.\nBefore 1830, few Americans used ice to refrigerate foods due to a lack of ice-storehouses and iceboxes. As these two things became more widely available, individuals used axes and saws to harvest ice for their storehouses. This method proved to be difficult, dangerous, and certainly did not resemble anything that could be duplicated on a commercial scale.\nDespite the difficulties of harvesting ice, Frederic Tudor thought that he could capitalize on this new commodity by harvesting ice in New England and shipping it to the Caribbean islands as well as the southern states. In the beginning, Tudor lost thousands of dollars, but eventually turned a profit as he constructed icehouses in Charleston, Virginia and in the Cuban port town of Havana. These icehouses as well as better insulated ships helped reduce ice wastage from 66% to 8%. This efficiency gain influenced Tudor to expand his ice market to other towns with icehouses such as New Orleans and Savannah. This ice market further expanded as harvesting ice became faster and cheaper after one of Tudor's suppliers, Nathaniel Wyeth, invented a horse-drawn ice cutter in 1825. This invention as well as Tudor's success inspired others to get involved in the ice trade and the ice industry grew.\nIce became a mass-market commodity by the early 1830s with the price of ice dropping from six cents per pound to a half of a cent per pound. In New York City, ice consumption increased from 12,000 tons in 1843 to 100,000 tons in 1856. Boston's consumption leapt from 6,000 tons to 85,000 tons during that same period. Ice harvesting created a \"cooling culture\" as majority of people used ice and iceboxes to store their dairy products, fish, meat, and even fruits and vegetables. These early cold storage practices paved the way for many Americans to accept the refrigeration technology that would soon take over the country.\nRefrigeration research.\nThe history of artificial refrigeration began when Scottish professor William Cullen designed a small refrigerating machine in 1755. Cullen used a pump to create a partial vacuum over a container of diethyl ether, which then boiled, absorbing heat from the surrounding air. The experiment even created a small amount of ice, but had no practical application at that time.\nIn 1758, Benjamin Franklin and John Hadley, professor of chemistry, collaborated on a project investigating the principle of evaporation as a means to rapidly cool an object at Cambridge University, England. They confirmed that the evaporation of highly volatile liquids, such as alcohol and ether, could be used to drive down the temperature of an object past the freezing point of water. They conducted their experiment with the bulb of a mercury thermometer as their object and with a bellows used to quicken the evaporation; they lowered the temperature of the thermometer bulb down to , while the ambient temperature was . They noted that soon after they passed the freezing point of water , a thin film of ice formed on the surface of the thermometer's bulb and that the ice mass was about a thick when they stopped the experiment upon reaching . Franklin wrote, \"From this experiment, one may see the possibility of freezing a man to death on a warm summer's day\". In 1805, American inventor Oliver Evans described a closed vapor-compression refrigeration cycle for the production of ice by ether under vacuum.\nIn 1820, the English scientist Michael Faraday liquefied ammonia and other gases by using high pressures and low temperatures, and in 1834, an American expatriate to Great Britain, Jacob Perkins, built the first working vapor-compression refrigeration system in the world. It was a closed-cycle that could operate continuously, as he described in his patent:\nI am enabled to use volatile fluids for the purpose of producing the cooling or freezing of fluids, and yet at the same time constantly condensing such volatile fluids, and bringing them again into operation without waste.\nHis prototype system worked although it did not succeed commercially.\nIn 1842, a similar attempt was made by American physician, John Gorrie, who built a working prototype, but it was a commercial failure. Like many of the medical experts during this time, Gorrie thought too much exposure to tropical heat led to mental and physical degeneration, as well as the spread of diseases such as malaria. He conceived the idea of using his refrigeration system to cool the air for comfort in homes and hospitals to prevent disease. American engineer Alexander Twining took out a British patent in 1850 for a vapour compression system that used ether.\nThe first practical vapour-compression refrigeration system was built by James Harrison, a British journalist who had emigrated to Australia. His 1856 patent was for a vapour-compression system using ether, alcohol, or ammonia. He built a mechanical ice-making machine in 1851 on the banks of the Barwon River at Rocky Point in Geelong, Victoria, and his first commercial ice-making machine followed in 1854. Harrison also introduced commercial vapour-compression refrigeration to breweries and meat-packing houses, and by 1861, a dozen of his systems were in operation. He later entered the debate of how to compete against the American advantage of unrefrigerated beef sales to the United Kingdom. In 1873 he prepared the sailing ship \"Norfolk\" for an experimental beef shipment to the United Kingdom, which used a cold room system instead of a refrigeration system. The venture was a failure as the ice was consumed faster than expected.\nThe first gas absorption refrigeration system using gaseous ammonia dissolved in water (referred to as \"aqua ammonia\") was developed by Ferdinand Carr\u00e9 of France in 1859 and patented in 1860. Carl von Linde, an engineer specializing in steam locomotives and professor of engineering at the Technological University of Munich in Germany, began researching refrigeration in the 1860s and 1870s in response to demand from brewers for a technology that would allow year-round, large-scale production of lager; he patented an improved method of liquefying gases in 1876. His new process made possible using gases such as ammonia, sulfur dioxide (SO2) and methyl chloride (CH3Cl) as refrigerants and they were widely used for that purpose until the late 1920s.\nThaddeus Lowe, an American balloonist, held several patents on ice-making machines. His \"Compression Ice Machine\" would revolutionize the cold-storage industry. In 1869, he and other investors purchased an old steamship onto which they loaded one of Lowe's refrigeration units and began shipping fresh fruit from New York to the Gulf Coast area, and fresh meat from Galveston, Texas back to New York, but because of Lowe's lack of knowledge about shipping, the business was a costly failure.\nCommercial use.\nIn 1842, John Gorrie created a system capable of refrigerating water to produce ice. Although it was a commercial failure, it inspired scientists and inventors around the world. France's Ferdinand Carre was one of the inspired and he created an ice producing system that was simpler and smaller than that of Gorrie. During the Civil War, cities such as New Orleans could no longer get ice from New England via the coastal ice trade. Carre's refrigeration system became the solution to New Orleans' ice problems and, by 1865, the city had three of Carre's machines. In 1867, in San Antonio, Texas, a French immigrant named Andrew Muhl built an ice-making machine to help service the expanding beef industry before moving it to Waco in 1871. In 1873, the patent for this machine was contracted by the Columbus Iron Works, a company acquired by the W.C. Bradley Co., which went on to produce the first commercial ice-makers in the US.\nBy the 1870s, breweries had become the largest users of harvested ice. Though the ice-harvesting industry had grown immensely by the turn of the 20th century, pollution and sewage had begun to creep into natural ice, making it a problem in the metropolitan suburbs. Eventually, breweries began to complain of tainted ice. Public concern for the purity of water, from which ice was formed, began to increase in the early 1900s with the rise of germ theory. Numerous media outlets published articles connecting diseases such as typhoid fever with natural ice consumption. This caused ice harvesting to become illegal in certain areas of the country. All of these scenarios increased the demands for modern refrigeration and manufactured ice. Ice producing machines like that of Carre's and Muhl's were looked to as means of producing ice to meet the needs of grocers, farmers, and food shippers.\nRefrigerated railroad cars were introduced in the US in the 1840s for short-run transport of dairy products, but these used harvested ice to maintain a cool temperature.\nThe new refrigerating technology first met with widespread industrial use as a means to freeze meat supplies for transport by sea in reefer ships from the British Dominions and other countries to the British Isles. Although not actually the first to achieve successful transportation of frozen goods overseas (the \"Strathleven\" had arrived at the London docks on 2 February 1880 with a cargo of frozen beef, mutton and butter from Sydney and Melbourne), the breakthrough is often attributed to William Soltau Davidson, an entrepreneur who had emigrated to New Zealand. Davidson thought that Britain's rising population and meat demand could mitigate the slump in world wool markets that was heavily affecting New Zealand. After extensive research, he commissioned the \"Dunedin\" to be refitted with a compression refrigeration unit for meat shipment in 1881. On February 15, 1882, the \"Dunedin\" sailed for London with what was to be the first commercially successful refrigerated shipping voyage, and the foundation of the refrigerated meat industry.\n\"The Times\" commented \"Today we have to record such a triumph over physical difficulties, as would have been incredible, even unimaginable, a very few days ago...\". The \"Marlborough\"\u2014sister ship to the \"Dunedin\" \u2013 was immediately converted and joined the trade the following year, along with the rival New Zealand Shipping Company vessel \"Mataurua\", while the German Steamer \"Marsala\" began carrying frozen New Zealand lamb in December 1882. Within five years, 172 shipments of frozen meat were sent from New Zealand to the United Kingdom, of which only 9 had significant amounts of meat condemned. Refrigerated shipping also led to a broader meat and dairy boom in Australasia and South America. J &amp; E Hall of Dartford, England outfitted the \"SS Selembria\" with a vapor compression system to bring 30,000 carcasses of mutton from the Falkland Islands in 1886. In the years ahead, the industry rapidly expanded to Australia, Argentina and the United States.\nBy the 1890s, refrigeration played a vital role in the distribution of food. The meat-packing industry relied heavily on natural ice in the 1880s and continued to rely on manufactured ice as those technologies became available. By 1900, the meat-packing houses of Chicago had adopted ammonia-cycle commercial refrigeration. By 1914, almost every location used artificial refrigeration. The major meat packers, Armour, Swift, and Wilson, had purchased the most expensive units which they installed on train cars and in branch houses and storage facilities in the more remote distribution areas.\nBy the middle of the 20th century, refrigeration units were designed for installation on trucks or lorries. Refrigerated vehicles are used to transport perishable goods, such as frozen foods, fruit and vegetables, and temperature-sensitive chemicals. Most modern refrigerators keep the temperature between \u201340 and \u201320\u00a0\u00b0C, and have a maximum payload of around 24,000\u00a0kg gross weight (in Europe).\nAlthough commercial refrigeration quickly progressed, it had limitations that prevented it from moving into the household. First, most refrigerators were far too large. Some of the commercial units being used in 1910 weighed between five and two hundred tons. Second, commercial refrigerators were expensive to produce, purchase, and maintain. Lastly, these refrigerators were unsafe. It was not uncommon for commercial refrigerators to catch fire, explode, or leak toxic gases. Refrigeration did not become a household technology until these three challenges were overcome.\nHome and consumer use.\nDuring the early 1800s, consumers preserved their food by storing food and ice purchased from ice harvesters in iceboxes. In 1803, Thomas Moore patented a metal-lined butter-storage tub which became the prototype for most iceboxes. These iceboxes were used until nearly 1910 and the technology did not progress. In fact, consumers that used the icebox in 1910 faced the same challenge of a moldy and stinky icebox that consumers had in the early 1800s.\nGeneral Electric (GE) was one of the first companies to overcome these challenges. In 1911, GE released a household refrigeration unit that was powered by gas. The use of gas eliminated the need for an electric compressor motor and decreased the size of the refrigerator. However, electric companies that were customers of GE did not benefit from a gas-powered unit. Thus, GE invested in developing an electric model. In 1927, GE released the Monitor Top, the first refrigerator to run on electricity.\nIn 1930, Frigidaire, one of GE's main competitors, synthesized Freon. With the invention of synthetic refrigerants based mostly on a chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) chemical, safer refrigerators were possible for home and consumer use. Freon led to the development of smaller, lighter, and cheaper refrigerators. The average price of a refrigerator dropped from $275 to $154 with the synthesis of Freon. This lower price allowed ownership of refrigerators in American households to exceed 50% by 1940. Freon is a trademark of the DuPont Corporation and refers to these CFCs, and later hydro chlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) and hydro fluorocarbon (HFC), refrigerants developed in the late 1920s. These refrigerants were considered\u00a0\u2014 at the time\u00a0\u2014 to be less harmful than the commonly used refrigerants of the time, including methyl formate, ammonia, methyl chloride, and sulfur dioxide. The intent was to provide refrigeration equipment for home use without danger. These CFC refrigerants answered that need. In the 1970s, though, the compounds were found to be reacting with atmospheric ozone, an important protection against solar ultraviolet radiation, and their use as a refrigerant worldwide was curtailed in the Montreal Protocol of 1987.\nImpact on settlement patterns in the United States of America.\nIn the last century, refrigeration allowed new settlement patterns to emerge. This new technology has allowed for new areas to be settled that are not on a natural channel of transport such as a river, valley trail or harbor that may have otherwise not been settled. Refrigeration has given opportunities to early settlers to expand westward and into rural areas that were unpopulated. These new settlers with rich and untapped soil saw opportunity to profit by sending raw goods to the eastern cities and states. In the 20th century, refrigeration has made \"Galactic Cities\" such as Dallas, Phoenix, and Los Angeles possible.\nRefrigerated rail cars.\nThe refrigerated rail car (refrigerated van or refrigerator car), along with the dense railroad network, became an exceedingly important link between the marketplace and the farm allowing for a national opportunity rather than a just a regional one. Before the invention of the refrigerated rail car, it was impossible to ship perishable food products long distances. The beef packing industry made the first demand push for refrigeration cars. The railroad companies were slow to adopt this new invention because of their heavy investments in cattle cars, stockyards, and feedlots. Refrigeration cars were also complex and costly compared to other rail cars, which also slowed the adoption of the refrigerated rail car. After the slow adoption of the refrigerated car, the beef packing industry dominated the refrigerated rail car business with their ability to control ice plants and the setting of icing fees. The United States Department of Agriculture estimated that, in 1916, over sixty-nine percent of the cattle killed in the country was done in plants involved in interstate trade. The same companies that were also involved in the meat trade later implemented refrigerated transport to include vegetables and fruit. The meat packing companies had much of the expensive machinery, such as refrigerated cars, and cold storage facilities that allowed for them to effectively distribute all types of perishable goods. During World War I, a national refrigerator car pool was established by the United States Administration to deal with problem of idle cars and was later continued after the war. The idle car problem was the problem of refrigeration cars sitting pointlessly in between seasonal harvests. This meant that very expensive cars sat in rail yards for a good portion of the year while making no revenue for the car's owner. The car pool was a system where cars were distributed to areas as crops matured ensuring maximum use of the cars. Refrigerated rail cars moved eastward from vineyards, orchards, fields, and gardens in western states to satisfy Americas consuming market in the east. The refrigerated car made it possible to transport perishable crops hundreds and even thousands of kilometres or miles. The most noticeable effect the car gave was a regional specialization of vegetables and fruits. The refrigeration rail car was widely used for the transportation of perishable goods up until the 1950s. By the 1960s, the nation's interstate highway system was adequately complete allowing for trucks to carry the majority of the perishable food loads and to push out the old system of the refrigerated rail cars.\nExpansion west and into rural areas.\nThe widespread use of refrigeration allowed for a vast amount of new agricultural opportunities to open up in the United States. New markets emerged throughout the United States in areas that were previously uninhabited and far-removed from heavily populated areas. New agricultural opportunity presented itself in areas that were considered rural, such as states in the south and in the west. Shipments on a large scale from the south and California were both made around the same time, although natural ice was used from the Sierras in California rather than manufactured ice in the south. Refrigeration allowed for many areas to specialize in the growing of specific fruits. California specialized in several fruits, grapes, peaches, pears, plums, and apples, while Georgia became famous for specifically its peaches. In California, the acceptance of the refrigerated rail cars led to an increase of car loads from 4,500 carloads in 1895 to between 8,000 and 10,000 carloads in 1905. The Gulf States, Arkansas, Missouri and Tennessee entered into strawberry production on a large-scale while Mississippi became the center of the tomato industry. New Mexico, Colorado, Arizona, and Nevada grew cantaloupes. Without refrigeration, this would have not been possible. By 1917, well-established fruit and vegetable areas that were close to eastern markets felt the pressure of competition from these distant specialized centers. Refrigeration was not limited to meat, fruit and vegetables but it also encompassed dairy product and dairy farms. In the early twentieth century, large cities got their dairy supply from farms as far as . Dairy products were not as easily transported over great distances like fruits and vegetables due to greater perishability. Refrigeration made production possible in the west far from eastern markets, so much in fact that dairy farmers could pay transportation cost and still undersell their eastern competitors. Refrigeration and the refrigerated rail gave opportunity to areas with rich soil far from natural channel of transport such as a river, valley trail or harbors.\nRise of the galactic city.\n\"Edge city\" was a term coined by Joel Garreau, whereas the term \"galactic city\" was coined by Lewis Mumford. These terms refer to a concentration of business, shopping, and entertainment outside a traditional downtown or central business district in what had previously been a residential or rural area. There were several factors contributing to the growth of these cities such as Los Angeles, Las Vegas, Houston, and Phoenix. The factors that contributed to these large cities include reliable automobiles, highway systems, refrigeration, and agricultural production increases. Large cities such as the ones mentioned above have not been uncommon in history, but what separates these cities from the rest are that these cities are not along some natural channel of transport, or at some crossroad of two or more channels such as a trail, harbor, mountain, river, or valley. These large cities have been developed in areas that only a few hundred years ago would have been uninhabitable. Without a cost efficient way of cooling air and transporting water and food from great distances, these large cities would have never developed. The rapid growth of these cities was influenced by refrigeration and an agricultural productivity increase, allowing more distant farms to effectively feed the population.\nImpact on agriculture and food production.\nAgriculture's role in developed countries has drastically changed in the last century due to many factors, including refrigeration. Statistics from the 2007 census gives information on the large concentration of agricultural sales coming from a small portion of the existing farms in the United States today. This is a partial result of the market created for the frozen meat trade by the first successful shipment of frozen sheep carcasses coming from New Zealand in the 1880s. As the market continued to grow, regulations on food processing and quality began to be enforced. Eventually, electricity was introduced into rural homes in the United States, which allowed refrigeration technology to continue to expand on the farm, increasing output per person. Today, refrigeration's use on the farm reduces humidity levels, avoids spoiling due to bacterial growth, and assists in preservation.\nDemographics.\nThe introduction of refrigeration and evolution of additional technologies drastically changed agriculture in the United States. During the beginning of the 20th century, farming was a common occupation and lifestyle for United States citizens, as most farmers actually lived on their farm. In 1935, there were 6.8 million farms in the United States and a population of 127 million. Yet, while the United States population has continued to climb, citizens pursuing agriculture continue to decline. Based on the 2007 US Census, less than one percent of a population of 310 million people claim farming as an occupation today. However, the increasing population has led to an increasing demand for agricultural products, which is met through a greater variety of crops, fertilizers, pesticides, and improved technology. Improved technology has decreased the risk and time involved for agricultural management and allows larger farms to increase their output per person to meet society's demand.\nMeat packing and trade.\nPrior to 1882, the South Island of New Zealand had been experimenting with sowing grass and crossbreeding sheep, which immediately gave their farmers economic potential in the exportation of meat. In 1882, the first successful shipment of sheep carcasses was sent from Port Chalmers in Dunedin, New Zealand, to London. By the 1890s, the frozen meat trade became increasingly more profitable in New Zealand, especially in Canterbury, where 50% of exported sheep carcasses came from in 1900. It was not long before Canterbury meat was known for the highest quality, creating a demand for New Zealand meat around the world. In order to meet this new demand, the farmers improved their feed so sheep could be ready for the slaughter in only seven months. This new method of shipping led to an economic boom in New Zealand by the mid 1890s.\nIn the United States, the Meat Inspection Act of 1891 was put in place in the United States because local butchers felt the refrigerated railcar system was unwholesome. When meat packing began to take off, consumers became nervous about the quality of the meat for consumption. Upton Sinclair's 1906 novel \"The Jungle\" brought negative attention to the meat packing industry, by drawing to light unsanitary working conditions and processing of diseased animals. The book caught the attention of President Theodore Roosevelt, and the 1906 Meat Inspection Act was put into place as an amendment to the Meat Inspection Act of 1891. This new act focused on the quality of the meat and environment it is processed in.\nElectricity in rural areas.\nIn the early 1930s, 90 percent of the urban population of the United States had electric power, in comparison to only 10 percent of rural homes. At the time, power companies did not feel that extending power to rural areas (rural electrification) would produce enough profit to make it worth their while. However, in the midst of the Great Depression, President Franklin D. Roosevelt realized that rural areas would continue to lag behind urban areas in both poverty and production if they were not electrically wired. On May 11, 1935, the president signed an executive order called the Rural Electrification Administration, also known as REA. The agency provided loans to fund electric infrastructure in the rural areas. In just a few years, 300,000 people in rural areas of the United States had received power in their homes.\nWhile electricity dramatically improved working conditions on farms, it also had a large impact on the safety of food production. Refrigeration systems were introduced to the farming and food distribution processes, which helped in food preservation and kept food supplies safe. Refrigeration also allowed for shipment of perishable commodities throughout the United States. As a result, United States farmers quickly became the most productive in the world, and entire new food systems arose.\nFarm use.\nIn order to reduce humidity levels and spoiling due to bacterial growth, refrigeration is used for meat, produce, and dairy processing in farming today. Refrigeration systems are used the heaviest in the warmer months for farming produce, which must be cooled as soon as possible in order to meet quality standards and increase the shelf life. Meanwhile, dairy farms refrigerate milk year round to avoid spoiling.\nEffects on lifestyle and diet.\nIn the late 19th Century and into the very early 20th Century, except for staple foods (sugar, rice, and beans) that needed no refrigeration, the available foods were affected heavily by the seasons and what could be grown locally. Refrigeration has removed these limitations. Refrigeration played a large part in the feasibility and then popularity of the modern supermarket. Fruits and vegetables out of season, or grown in distant locations, are now available at relatively low prices. Refrigerators have led to a huge increase in meat and dairy products as a portion of overall supermarket sales. As well as changing the goods purchased at the market, the ability to store these foods for extended periods of time has led to an increase in leisure time. Prior to the advent of the household refrigerator, people would have to shop on a daily basis for the supplies needed for their meals.\nImpact on nutrition.\nThe introduction of refrigeration allowed for the hygienic handling and storage of perishables, and as such, promoted output growth, consumption, and the availability of nutrition. The change in our method of food preservation moved us away from salts to a more manageable sodium level. The ability to move and store perishables such as meat and dairy led to a 1.7% increase in dairy consumption and overall protein intake by 1.25% annually in the US after the 1890s.\nPeople were not only consuming these perishables because it became easier for they themselves to store them, but because the innovations in refrigerated transportation and storage led to less spoilage and waste, thereby driving the prices of these products down. Refrigeration accounts for at least 5.1% of the increase in adult stature (in the US) through improved nutrition, and when the indirect effects associated with improvements in the quality of nutrients and the reduction in illness is additionally factored in, the overall impact becomes considerably larger. Recent studies have also shown a negative relationship between the number of refrigerators in a household and the rate of gastric cancer mortality.\nCurrent applications of refrigeration.\nProbably the most widely used current applications of refrigeration are for air conditioning of private homes and public buildings, and refrigerating foodstuffs in homes, restaurants and large storage warehouses. The use of refrigerators and walk-in coolers and freezers in kitchens, factories and warehouses for storing and processing fruits and vegetables has allowed adding fresh salads to the modern diet year round, and storing fish and meats safely for long periods.\nThe optimum temperature range for perishable food storage is .\nIn commerce and manufacturing, there are many uses for refrigeration. Refrigeration is used to liquefy gases \u2013 oxygen, nitrogen, propane, and methane, for example. In compressed air purification, it is used to condense water vapor from compressed air to reduce its moisture content. In oil refineries, chemical plants, and petrochemical plants, refrigeration is used to maintain certain processes at their needed low temperatures (for example, in alkylation of butenes and butane to produce a high-octane gasoline component). Metal workers use refrigeration to temper steel and cutlery. When transporting temperature-sensitive foodstuffs and other materials by trucks, trains, airplanes and seagoing vessels, refrigeration is a necessity.\nDairy products are constantly in need of refrigeration, and it was only discovered in the past few decades that eggs needed to be refrigerated during shipment rather than waiting to be refrigerated after arrival at the grocery store. Meats, poultry and fish all must be kept in climate-controlled environments before being sold. Refrigeration also helps keep fruits and vegetables edible longer.\nOne of the most influential uses of refrigeration was in the development of the sushi/sashimi industry in Japan. Before the discovery of refrigeration, many sushi connoisseurs were at risk of contracting diseases. The dangers of unrefrigerated sashimi were not brought to light for decades due to the lack of research and healthcare distribution across rural Japan. Around mid-century, the Zojirushi corporation, based in Kyoto, made breakthroughs in refrigerator designs, making refrigerators cheaper and more accessible for restaurant proprietors and the general public.\nMethods of refrigeration.\nMethods of refrigeration can be classified as \"non-cyclic\", \"cyclic\", \"thermoelectric\" and \"magnetic\".\nNon-cyclic refrigeration.\nThis refrigeration method cools a contained area by melting ice, or by sublimating dry ice. Perhaps the simplest example of this is a portable cooler, where items are put in it, then ice is poured over the top. Regular ice can maintain temperatures near, but not below the freezing point, unless salt is used to cool the ice down further (as in a traditional ice-cream maker). Dry ice can reliably bring the temperature well below water freezing point.\nCyclic refrigeration.\nThis consists of a refrigeration cycle, where heat is removed from a low-temperature space or source and rejected to a high-temperature sink with the help of external work, and its inverse, the thermodynamic power cycle. In the power cycle, heat is supplied from a high-temperature source to the engine, part of the heat being used to produce work and the rest being rejected to a low-temperature sink. This satisfies the second law of thermodynamics.\nA \"refrigeration cycle\" describes the changes that take place in the refrigerant as it alternately absorbs and rejects heat as it circulates through a refrigerator. It is also applied to heating, ventilation, and air conditioning HVACR work, when describing the \"process\" of refrigerant flow through an HVACR unit, whether it is a packaged or split system.\nHeat naturally flows from hot to cold. Work is applied to cool a living space or storage volume by pumping heat from a lower temperature heat source into a higher temperature heat sink. Insulation is used to reduce the work and energy needed to achieve and maintain a lower temperature in the cooled space. The operating principle of the refrigeration cycle was described mathematically by Sadi Carnot in 1824 as a heat engine.\nThe most common types of refrigeration systems use the reverse-Rankine vapor-compression refrigeration cycle, although absorption heat pumps are used in a minority of applications.\nCyclic refrigeration can be classified as:\nVapor cycle refrigeration can further be classified as:\nVapor-compression cycle.\nThe vapor-compression cycle is used in most household refrigerators as well as in many large commercial and industrial refrigeration systems. Figure 1 provides a schematic diagram of the components of a typical vapor-compression refrigeration system.\nThe thermodynamics of the cycle can be analyzed on a diagram as shown in Figure 2. In this cycle, a circulating refrigerant such as a low boiling hydrocarbon or hydrofluorocarbons enters the compressor as a vapour. From point 1 to point 2, the vapor is compressed at constant entropy and exits the compressor as a vapor at a higher temperature, but still below the vapor pressure at that temperature. From point 2 to point 3 and on to point 4, the vapor travels through the condenser which cools the vapour until it starts condensing, and then condenses the vapor into a liquid by removing additional heat at constant pressure and temperature. Between points 4 and 5, the liquid refrigerant goes through the expansion valve (also called a throttle valve) where its pressure abruptly decreases, causing flash evaporation and auto-refrigeration of, typically, less than half of the liquid.\nThat results in a mixture of liquid and vapour at a lower temperature and pressure as shown at point 5. The cold liquid-vapor mixture then travels through the evaporator coil or tubes and is completely vaporized by cooling the warm air (from the space being refrigerated) being blown by a fan across the evaporator coil or tubes. The resulting refrigerant vapour returns to the compressor inlet at point 1 to complete the thermodynamic cycle.\nThe above discussion is based on the ideal vapour-compression refrigeration cycle, and does not take into account real-world effects like frictional pressure drop in the system, slight thermodynamic irreversibility during the compression of the refrigerant vapor, or non-ideal gas behavior, if any. Vapor compression refrigerators can be arranged in two stages in cascade refrigeration systems, with the second stage cooling the condenser of the first stage. This can be used for achieving very low temperatures.\nMore information about the design and performance of vapor-compression refrigeration systems is available in the classic \"Perry's Chemical Engineers' Handbook\".\nSorption cycle.\nAbsorption cycle.\nIn the early years of the twentieth century, the vapor absorption cycle using water-ammonia systems or LiBr-water was popular and widely used. After the development of the vapor compression cycle, the vapor absorption cycle lost much of its importance because of its low coefficient of performance (about one fifth of that of the vapor compression cycle). Today, the vapor absorption cycle is used mainly where fuel for heating is available but electricity is not, such as in recreational vehicles that carry LP gas. It is also used in industrial environments where plentiful waste heat overcomes its inefficiency.\nThe absorption cycle is similar to the compression cycle, except for the method of raising the pressure of the refrigerant vapor. In the absorption system, the compressor is replaced by an absorber which dissolves the refrigerant in a suitable liquid, a liquid pump which raises the pressure and a generator which, on heat addition, drives off the refrigerant vapor from the high-pressure liquid. Some work is needed by the liquid pump but, for a given quantity of refrigerant, it is much smaller than needed by the compressor in the vapor compression cycle. In an absorption refrigerator, a suitable combination of refrigerant and absorbent is used. The most common combinations are ammonia (refrigerant) with water (absorbent), and water (refrigerant) with lithium bromide (absorbent).\nAdsorption cycle.\nThe main difference from absorption cycle is that in adsorption cycle, the refrigerant (adsorbate) can be ammonia, water, methanol, etc., while the adsorbent is a solid, such as silica gel, activated carbon, or zeolite, while in the absorption cycle the absorbent is liquid.\nThe reason adsorption refrigeration technology has been extensively researched in recent 30 years lies in that the operation of an adsorption refrigeration system is often noiseless, non-corrosive and environmentally friendly.\nGas cycle.\nWhen the working fluid is a gas that is compressed and expanded but does not change phase, the refrigeration cycle is called a \"gas cycle\". Air is most often this working fluid. As there is no condensation and evaporation intended in a gas cycle, components corresponding to the condenser and evaporator in a vapor compression cycle are the hot and cold gas-to-gas heat exchangers in gas cycles.\nThe gas cycle is less efficient than the vapor compression cycle because the gas cycle works on the reverse Brayton cycle instead of the reverse Rankine cycle. As such, the working fluid does not receive and reject heat at constant temperature. In the gas cycle, the refrigeration effect is equal to the product of the specific heat of the gas and the rise in temperature of the gas in the low temperature side. Therefore, for the same cooling load, a gas refrigeration cycle needs a large mass flow rate and is bulky.\nBecause of their lower efficiency and larger bulk, \"air cycle\" coolers are not often used nowadays in terrestrial cooling devices. However, the air cycle machine is very common on gas turbine-powered jet aircraft as cooling and ventilation units, because compressed air is readily available from the engines' compressor sections. Such units also serve the purpose of pressurizing the aircraft.\nThermoelectric refrigeration.\nThermoelectric cooling uses the Peltier effect to create a heat flux between the junction of two types of material. This effect is commonly used in camping and portable coolers and for cooling electronic components and small instruments. Peltier coolers are often used where a traditional vapor-compression cycle refrigerator would be impractical or take up too much space, and in cooled image sensors as an easy, compact and lightweight, if inefficient, way to achieve very low temperatures, using two or more stage peltier coolers arranged in a cascade refrigeration configuration, meaning that two or more Peltier elements are stacked on top of each other, with each stage being larger than the one before it, in order to extract more heat and waste heat generated by the previous stages. Peltier cooling has a low COP (efficiency) when compared with that of the vapor-compression cycle, so it emits more waste heat (heat generated by the Peltier element or cooling mechanism) and consumes more power for a given cooling capacity.\nMagnetic refrigeration.\nMagnetic refrigeration, or adiabatic demagnetization, is a cooling technology based on the magnetocaloric effect, an intrinsic property of magnetic solids. The refrigerant is often a paramagnetic salt, such as cerium magnesium nitrate. The active magnetic dipoles in this case are those of the electron shells of the paramagnetic atoms.\nA strong magnetic field is applied to the refrigerant, forcing its various magnetic dipoles to align and putting these degrees of freedom of the refrigerant into a state of lowered entropy. A heat sink then absorbs the heat released by the refrigerant due to its loss of entropy. Thermal contact with the heat sink is then broken so that the system is insulated, and the magnetic field is switched off. This increases the heat capacity of the refrigerant, thus decreasing its temperature below the temperature of the heat sink.\nBecause few materials exhibit the needed properties at room temperature, applications have so far been limited to cryogenics and research.\nOther methods.\nOther methods of refrigeration include the air cycle machine used in aircraft; the vortex tube used for spot cooling, when compressed air is available; and thermoacoustic refrigeration using sound waves in a pressurized gas to drive heat transfer and heat exchange; steam jet cooling popular in the early 1930s for air conditioning large buildings; thermoelastic cooling using a smart metal alloy stretching and relaxing. Many Stirling cycle heat engines can be run backwards to act as a refrigerator, and therefore these engines have a niche use in cryogenics. In addition, there are other types of cryocoolers such as Gifford-McMahon coolers, Joule-Thomson coolers, pulse-tube refrigerators and, for temperatures between 2 mK and 500 mK, dilution refrigerators.\nElastocaloric refrigeration.\nAnother potential solid-state refrigeration technique and a relatively new area of study comes from a special property of super elastic materials. These materials undergo a temperature change when experiencing an applied mechanical stress (called the elastocaloric effect). Since super elastic materials deform reversibly at high strains, the material experiences a flattened elastic region in its stress-strain curve caused by a resulting phase transformation from an austenitic to a martensitic crystal phase.\nWhen a super elastic material experiences a stress in the austenitic phase, it undergoes an exothermic phase transformation to the martensitic phase, which causes the material to heat up. Removing the stress reverses the process, restores the material to its austenitic phase, and absorbs heat from the surroundings cooling down the material.\nThe most appealing part of this research is how potentially energy efficient and environmentally friendly this cooling technology is. The different materials used, commonly shape-memory alloys, provide a non-toxic source of emission free refrigeration. The most commonly studied materials studied are shape-memory alloys, like nitinol and Cu-Zn-Al. Nitinol is of the more promising alloys with output heat at about 66 J/cm3 and a temperature change of about 16\u201320 K. Due to the difficulty in manufacturing some of the shape memory alloys, alternative materials like natural rubber have been studied. Even though rubber may not give off as much heat per volume (12 J/cm3 ) as the shape memory alloys, it still generates a comparable temperature change of about 12 K and operates at a suitable temperature range, low stresses, and low cost.\nThe main challenge however comes from potential energy losses in the form of hysteresis, often associated with this process. Since most of these losses comes from incompatibilities between the two phases, proper alloy tuning is necessary to reduce losses and increase reversibility and efficiency. Balancing the transformation strain of the material with the energy losses enables a large elastocaloric effect to occur and potentially a new alternative for refrigeration.\nFridge Gate.\nThe Fridge Gate method is a theoretical application of using a single logic gate to drive a refrigerator in the most energy efficient way possible without violating the laws of thermodynamics. It operates on the fact that there are two energy states in which a particle can exist: the ground state and the excited state. The excited state carries a little more energy than the ground state, small enough so that the transition occurs with high probability. There are three components or particle types associated with the fridge gate. The first is on the interior of the refrigerator, the second on the outside and the third is connected to a power supply which heats up every so often that it can reach the E state and replenish the source. In the cooling step on the inside of the refrigerator, the g state particle absorbs energy from ambient particles, cooling them, and itself jumping to the e state. In the second step, on the outside of the refrigerator where the particles are also at an e state, the particle falls to the g state, releasing energy and heating the outside particles. In the third and final step, the power supply moves a particle at the e state, and when it falls to the g state it induces an energy-neutral swap where the interior e particle is replaced by a new g particle, restarting the cycle.\nPassive systems.\nWhen combining a passive daytime radiative cooling system with thermal insulation and evaporative cooling, one study found a 300% increase in ambient cooling power when compared to a stand-alone radiative cooling surface, which could extend the shelf life of food by 40% in humid climates and 200% in desert climates without refrigeration. The system's evaporative cooling layer would require water \"re-charges\" every 10 days to a month in humid areas and every 4 days in hot and dry areas.\nCapacity ratings.\nThe refrigeration capacity of a refrigeration system is the product of the evaporators' enthalpy rise and the evaporators' mass flow rate. The measured capacity of refrigeration is often dimensioned in the unit of kW or BTU/h. Domestic and commercial refrigerators may be rated in kJ/s, or Btu/h of cooling. For commercial and industrial refrigeration systems, the kilowatt (kW) is the basic unit of refrigeration, except in North America, where both ton of refrigeration and BTU/h are used.\nA refrigeration system's coefficient of performance (CoP) is very important in determining a system's overall efficiency. It is defined as refrigeration capacity in kW divided by the energy input in kW. While CoP is a very simple measure of performance, it is typically not used for industrial refrigeration in North America. Owners and manufacturers of these systems typically use performance factor (PF). A system's PF is defined as a system's energy input in horsepower divided by its refrigeration capacity in TR. Both CoP and PF can be applied to either the entire system or to system components. For example, an individual compressor can be rated by comparing the energy needed to run the compressor versus the expected refrigeration capacity based on inlet volume flow rate. It is important to note that both CoP and PF for a refrigeration system are only defined at specific operating conditions, including temperatures and thermal loads. Moving away from the specified operating conditions can dramatically change a system's performance.\nAir conditioning systems used in residential application typically use SEER (Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio)for the energy performance rating. Air conditioning systems for commercial application often use EER (Energy Efficiency Ratio) and IEER (Integrated Energy Efficiency Ratio) for the energy efficiency performance rating.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46242", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46242", "title": "Charles Lane Poor", "text": "American astronomer\nCharles Lane Poor (January 18, 1866 \u2013 September 27, 1951) was an American astronomy professor, noted for his opposition to Einstein's theory of relativity.\nBiography.\nHe was born on January 18, 1866, in Hackensack, New Jersey, to Edward Erie Poor.\nHe graduated from the City College of New York and received a PhD in 1892 from Johns Hopkins University. Poor became an astronomer and professor of celestial mechanics at Columbia University from 1903 to 1944, when he was named Professor Emeritus. He published several works disputing the evidence for Einstein's theory of relativity during the 1920s, and reflecting objections to the theory.\nFor 25 years, Poor was chairman of the admissions committee of the New York Yacht Club. In addition, he was a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society and an associate fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He served several terms as mayor of Dering Harbor on Long Island, New York. Poor also invented a circular slide rule used with a sextant for yachting navigation. At Columbia University, Poor was a teacher of the astronomer Samuel A. Mitchell, who went on to become director of the Leander McCormick Observatory at the University of Virginia.\nHe died on September 27, 1951.\nLegacy.\nOne of Poor's sons, Edmund Ward Poor, was one of ten co-founders of Grumman Aircraft on Long Island. Another son was Alfred Easton Poor, an architect.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46243", "revid": "13380028", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46243", "title": "Celebrity Deaths 2001", "text": ""}
{"id": "46245", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46245", "title": "Kenneth Wolstenholme", "text": "English football commentator\nKenneth Wolstenholme, DFC &amp; Bar (17 July 1920 \u2013 25 March 2002) was an English football commentator for BBC television in the 1950s and 1960s. He is best remembered for his commentary during the 1966 FIFA World Cup Final; in the closing minutes, Wolstenholme commented on a series of pitch invaders as Geoff Hurst dribbled down the pitch before scoring, saying \"some people are on the pitch, they think it's all over!\" The phrase has become deeply embedded in British popular culture. As Hurst proceeded to score, Wolstenholme added: 'It is now!'\nEarly life.\nWolstenholme was born in Worsley, Lancashire. His family were Primitive Methodists and his brother attended Elmfield College. He attended Farnworth Grammar School, where Alan Ball Jr. (on whom Wolstenholme commentated in the 1966 World Cup Final) was also a pupil some years later. Wolstenholme began his career as a journalist with a newspaper in Manchester.\nMilitary service.\nAs Wolstenholme was a member of the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve, he was soon called up at the outbreak of the Second World War. By 1941, he had qualified as a bomber pilot and was posted to 107 Squadron, flying Bristol Blenheim Mk. IVs out of RAF Great Massingham, Norfolk. At the start of 1943 he transferred to de Havilland Mosquito with 105 Squadron, part of Air Vice-Marshal Don Bennett's No. 8 Group RAF Pathfinder Group.\nWolstenholme completed more than 100 highly hazardous sorties over Occupied Europe and in May 1944 was awarded the DFC. The following year, he won a Bar to his DFC for his continual bravery in raids on Germany in a period of exceptionally heavy night fighter activity. He finished the war as an acting squadron leader, having spent its last stages working in the RAF's public relations department.\nSports broadcasting.\nAfter the war, he became a freelance journalist, working for BBC Radio before moving to television in 1950. In 1955, he provided a location report from Salford for the BBC's coverage of that year's election night coverage.\nHe covered the 1959 All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship Final between Kilkenny and Waterford for BBC Television, an experience which moved him to describe hurling as his second-favourite sport in the world after his first love, football.\nIn March 1954, Kenneth Wolstenholme and Barney Mulrenan co-commentated on the first football match to be broadcast on TV in Wales, South Wales Amateur Football League v the Worcestershire Football Combination from the Maindy Stadium in Cardiff \nWolstenholme commentated on many English domestic football games of the 1950s and 1960s, including the first ever game featured on \"Match of the Day\" in 1964. He covered the FA Cup final in 1951 and then every year from 1953 to 1971, the year of Arsenal's \"double\". For the BBC he commentated on the 1960 European Cup Final between Real Madrid and Eintracht Frankfurt at Hampden Park, widely regarded as one of the greatest football matches ever played. Real won the match 7\u20133 before a record European Cup Final crowd of 127,000, all their goals scored by Puskas and di Stefano.\n\"They think it's all over\".\nWolstenholme's unscripted delivery in the closing moments of the 1966 FIFA World Cup Final at Wembley Stadium included fourteen words that are among the best known in British sport commentary. With England leading 3\u20132 against West Germany, a small pitch invasion took place during injury time just as Geoff Hurst scored to put England 4\u20132 ahead. The events prompted Wolstenholme to say:\n\"It is now\" was added in an almost matter-of-fact way after Hurst had scored the goal. Since 1966, the phrase \"they think it's all over\" has become well known in modern English. Although unrehearsed, and spoken in the particular circumstances of the game, the words echoed to an extent those of German commentator Herbert Zimmermann \u2013 \"It's over! Over! Over! Germany are the World Champions\" \u2013 when West Germany won the 1954 World Cup against Hungary.\nLater career.\nAfter the 1966 World Cup, Wolstenholme continued his broadcasting career in the UK and Europe. In 1967 he travelled to the Est\u00e1dio Nacional in Lisbon to cover Celtic overcoming Internazionale in the European Cup Final. A year later, he commentated at Wembley as Manchester United defeated Benfica to take the 1968 European Cup. He was the BBC's main man at the 1970 World Cup but he almost took out an injunction when the BBC threatened to demote him in favour of David Coleman if England reached the final. Wolstenholme commentated on the final between Brazil and Italy. He left the corporation in 1971 after Coleman was installed as the BBC's top commentator, his final BBC commentary being on the 1971 European Cup Final between Ajax and Panathinaikos at Wembley Stadium.\nWolstenholme later commentated for Tyne Tees Television in the mid to late 1970s, but re-appeared on TV to provide reports and occasional features for Channel 4 when they earned rights in the early 1990s to show Serie A games from Italy, but ill health forced him to retire. He also took on an acting role, appearing in the BBC Radio 4 comedy series \"Lenin of the Rovers\" in 1988 as football commentator Frank Lee Brian. In 1990, he was a guest star on the first episode of parody satellite television station KYTV on BBC2. \nIn 1996, The Beatles released an outtake version of \"Glass Onion\" on \"The Beatles Anthology 3\" album which featured Wolstenholme's voice at the end of the track repeating, \"it's a goal!\"\nWolstenholme, who had been a supporter of Bolton Wanderers since childhood, was a guest of honour at the club's final game at Burnden Park in April 1997. He also narrated the club's \"End of an Era\" video which was released as part of Bolton's move from Burnden Park to the Reebok Stadium.\nIn 1998, Wolstenholme made a special appearance in EA Sports' videogame \"World Cup 98\", as the sole commentator on the game's classic World Cup matches, recreations of historic World Cup finals that included sepia-toned renditions of the 1930 and 1938 editions.\nLegacy.\nHis phrase was used as the title for the sports quiz programme \"They Think It's All Over\".\nThe words \"They think it's all over, it is now\" are engraved on a flagstone in Churchgate, in Bolton town centre, alongside quotes from other celebrities from Bolton.\nBill Oddie wrote a song about Wolstenholme for the BBC Radio comedy show \"I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again\" which includes the lines: \"I'm going Wolsten-home/And you can't get Wolsten \"(worse than)\" him!\" In another sketch on \"ISIRTA\" a contestant in a television quiz show was awarded Wolstenholme as a prize.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1944 he married his wife, Joan. She died in 1997. They had two daughters, one of whom predeceased him.\nWolstenholme lived in Galmpton, Torbay, Devon until his death.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46246", "revid": "1281551397", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46246", "title": "National Broadcasting Company", "text": ""}
{"id": "46247", "revid": "50820010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46247", "title": "Peter III of Russia", "text": "Emperor of Russia in 1762\nPeter III Fyodorovich (; 21 February\u00a0[O.S. 10 February]\u00a01728 \u2013 17 July\u00a0[O.S. 6 July]\u00a01762) was Emperor of Russia from 5 January 1762 until 9 July of the same year, when he was overthrown by his wife, Catherine II (the Great). He was born in the German city of Kiel as Charles Peter Ulrich of Schleswig-Holstein-Gottorp (), the grandson of Peter the Great and great-grandson of Charles XI of Sweden.\nAfter a 186-day reign, Peter III was overthrown in a palace coup d'\u00e9tat orchestrated by his wife, and soon died under unclear circumstances. The official cause proposed by Catherine's new government was that he died due to hemorrhoids. This explanation was met with skepticism, both in Russia and abroad, with notable critics such as Voltaire and d'Alembert expressing doubt about the plausibility of death from such a condition.\nThe personality and activities of Peter III were long disregarded by historians and his figure was seen as purely negative, but since the 1990s, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, more attention has been directed at the decrees he signed. His most notable reforms were the abolition of the secret police, exemption of nobles from compulsory military service, confiscation of church lands, and equalisation of all religions. He also put an end to the persecution of the Old Believers and made the killing of serfs by landowners punishable by exile. Although he is mostly criticised for undoing Russian gains in the Seven Years' War by forming an alliance with Prussia, Catherine continued it and many of his other policies.\nAfter Peter III's death, many impostors thrived, pretending to be him, the most famous of whom were Yemelyan Pugachev and the \"Montenegerin Tsar Peter III\" (Stephan the Little).\nEarly life.\nPeter was born on 21 February 1728 in Kiel in the duchy of Holstein-Gottorp. His parents were Charles Frederick, Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, and Grand Duchess Anna Petrovna of Russia. Charles Frederick was a grandson of Charles XI of Sweden, and Anna was a daughter of the Russian monarchs Peter the Great and Catherine I. Peter's twenty-year-old mother died just a few weeks after his birth. In 1739, Peter's father also died, and the orphaned boy became Duke of Holstein-Gottorp as Charles Peter Ulrich () at the age of 11.\nTwo years later, Peter's maternal aunt Elizabeth became Empress of Russia. As she had no children of her own, she brought Peter from Germany to Russia and proclaimed him her heir presumptive in the autumn of 1742. Previously in 1742, the 14-year-old Peter was proclaimed Grand Duke of Finland during the Russo-Swedish War (1741\u20131743), when Russian troops held Finland. This proclamation was based on his succession rights to territories held by his childless great-uncle, the late Charles XII of Sweden, who also had been Grand Duke of Finland. About the same time, in October 1742, he was chosen by the Swedish parliament to become heir presumptive to the Swedish throne. However, the Swedish parliament was unaware of the fact that he had also been proclaimed heir presumptive to the throne of Russia, and when their envoy arrived in Saint Petersburg in November, it was too late. Also in November, Peter converted to Eastern Orthodoxy under the name of Pyotr Feodorovich, and was created Grand Duke of Russia. The words \"Grandson of Peter the Great\" () were made an obligatory part of his official title, underscoring his dynastic claim to the Russian throne, and it was made a criminal offence to omit them.\nEmpress Elizabeth arranged for Peter to marry his second cousin, Sophia Augusta Frederica (later Catherine the Great), daughter of Christian August, Prince of Anhalt-Zerbst, and Princess Joanna Elisabeth of Holstein-Gottorp. Sophia formally converted to Russian Orthodoxy and took the name Ekaterina Alexeievna (i.e., Catherine). They married on 21 August 1745. The marriage was not a happy one but produced one son, the future Emperor Paul I, and one daughter, Anna Petrovna (9 December, 1757\u2013 8 March, 1759). Catherine later claimed in her private writings that Paul was not fathered by Peter; that, in fact, they had never consummated the marriage. During the sixteen years of their residence in Oranienbaum, Catherine took numerous lovers, while her husband did the same in the beginning.\nCharacter.\nThe classical view of Peter's character is mainly drawn out of the memoirs of his wife and successor. She described him as an \"idiot\" and as a \"drunkard from Holstein\", also describing her marriage with him with \"there is nothing worse than having a child-husband\"; even Peter's idol, Frederick the Great mentioned him by saying \"he allowed himself to be dethroned like a child sent off to bed\".\nThis portrait of Peter can be found in most history books, including the 1911 \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nature had made him mean, the smallpox had made him hideous, and his degraded habits made him loathsome. And Peter had all the sentiments of the worst kind of a small German prince of the time. He had the conviction that his princeship entitled him to disregard decency and the feelings of others. He planned brutal practical jokes, in which blows had always a share. His most manly taste did not rise above the kind of military interest which has been defined as \"corporal's mania,\" the passion for uniforms, pipeclay, buttons, the \"tricks of parade and the froth of discipline.\" He detested the Russians, and surrounded himself with Holsteiners.\nThere have been many attempts to revise the traditional characterization of Peter and his policies. The Russian historian A. S. Mylnikov views Peter III very differently:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Many contradictory qualities existed in him: keen observation, zeal and sharp wit in his arguments and actions, incaution and lack of perspicuity in conversation, frankness, goodness, sarcasm, a hot temper, and wrathfulness.\nThe German historian Elena Palmer goes even further, portraying Peter III as a cultured, open-minded emperor who tried to introduce various courageous, even democratic reforms in 18th-century Russia. A monument for Peter III stands in Kiel, the city of his birth.\nReign.\nForeign policy.\nAfter Peter succeeded to the Russian throne (5 January 1762 [O.S. 25 December 1761]), he withdrew Russian forces from the Seven Years' War and concluded a peace treaty (5 May\u00a0[O.S. 24 April]\u00a01762) with Prussia (dubbed the \"Second Miracle of the House of Brandenburg\"). He gave up Russian conquests in Prussia and offered 12,000 troops to make an alliance with Frederick II of Prussia (19 June\u00a0[O.S. 8 June]\u00a01762). Russia thus switched from an enemy of Prussia to an ally\u2014Russian troops withdrew from Berlin and marched against the Austrians. This dramatically shifted the balance of power in Europe, suddenly handing the delighted Frederick the initiative. Frederick recaptured southern Silesia (October 1762) and subsequently forced Austria to the negotiating table.\nAs Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, Peter planned war against Denmark-Norway in order to restore parts of Schleswig to his Duchy. He focused on making alliances with Sweden and with Great Britain to ensure that they would not interfere on Denmark's behalf, while Russian forces gathered at Kolberg in Russian-occupied Pomerania. Alarmed at the Russian troops concentrating near their borders, unable to find any allies to resist Russian aggression, and short of money to fund a war, the government of Denmark threatened in late June to invade the free city of Hamburg in northern Germany to force a loan from it. Peter considered this a \"casus belli\" and prepared for open warfare against Denmark.\nIn June 1762, 40,000 Russian troops assembled in Pomerania under General Pyotr Rumyantsev, preparing to face 27,000 Danish troops under the French general Count St. Germain in case the Russian\u2013Danish freedom conference (scheduled for 1 July 1762 in Berlin under the patronage of Frederick II) failed to resolve the issue. However, shortly before the conference, Peter lost his throne (9 July\u00a0[O.S. 28 June]\u00a01762) and the conference did not occur. The issue of Schleswig remained unresolved. Peter was accused of planning an unpatriotic war.\nWhile historically Peter's planned war against Denmark-Norway was seen as a political failure, recent scholarship has portrayed it as part of a pragmatic plan to secure his Holstein-Gottorp duchy and to expand the common Holstein-Russian power northward and westwards. Peter III believed gaining territory and influence in Denmark and Northern Germany was more useful to Russia than taking East Prussia. Equally, he thought that friendship with Prussia and with Britain, following its triumph in the Seven Years War, could offer more to aid his plans than alliance with either Austria or France.\nDomestic reforms.\nDuring his 186-day period of government, Peter III passed 220 new laws that he had developed and elaborated during his life as a crown prince. Writer Elena Palmer claims that his reforms were of a democratic nature and that he also proclaimed religious freedom.\nPeter exempted nobles from compulsory civil and military service during peacetime and allowed them to freely travel abroad. He forbade landowners from murdering peasants at the penalty of lifelong exile and ended the persecution of the Old Believers. He also issued a manifesto proclaiming the secularisation of church lands, which he never lived to see realised but which Catherine, a convinced secularist, began implementing during her own reign.\nWhile Catherine continued some of Peter's policies, she also reversed others. For example, Peter abolished the Secret Chancellery, the secret police of the Russian Empire, stating that he objected to the arbitrary arrests and torture it carried out. Catherine soon reestablished it under a different name, the Secret Expedition.\nPeter III's economic policy reflected the rising influence of Western capitalism and the merchant class or \"Third Estate\" that accompanied it. He established the first state bank in Russia, rejected the nobility's monopoly on trade and encouraged mercantilism by increasing grain exports and forbidding the import of sugar and other materials that could be found in Russia.\nOverthrow and death.\nTsar Peter III was seen as a largely ineffective and unpopular ruler. He was a German-born prince of Prussia, and his loyalty to his native land over his inherited one earned him the ire of his people and his army. Peter had returned Russia\u2019s conquered territories back to Prussia and withdrawn his forces from the Seven Years\u2019 War, rendering all of Russia\u2019s recent victories, and its sacrifices, pointless.\nMany in the Russian army, as well as Russian citizens and Empress Catherine herself, feared that if Peter continued his concessions to Prussia it would lead to a nationwide uprising and threaten the stability of Russia. In the spring of 1762, conspiring with her lover Grigory Orlov and others in the court and military, Catherine began plotting to overthrow her husband. \nAt dawn on June 28, 1762, Catherine marched with a procession of civilian and military supporters to the Winter Palace, where she was proclaimed heir to the Russian throne by the archbishop of Novgorod. Peter tried to escape by taking a boat to the military base of Kronstadt on Kotlin Island, hoping that the fleet remained loyal to him. However, the fleet's cannons opened fire on Peter's boat with two or three shots, and he was repulsed back to the shore, with the commandant declaring that he was no longer recognized as emperor and that Russia was ruled by Empress Catherine. The people of St. Petersburg, drawn to the shore by the loud echoes of cannons, also armed themselves with sticks and stones to prevent him from returning to the capital city. Twenty four hours later, after learning that the senate, army, and fleet had sworn allegiance to Catherine, with the aid of two guards whom Peter had planned to discipline, he was arrested and forced to abdicate on 9 July\u00a0[O.S. 28 June]\u00a01762.\nShortly thereafter, he was transported to Ropsha, where he later died. Much mystery surrounds his death. The official cause, after an autopsy, was a severe attack of hemorrhoidal colic and an apoplectic stroke, while others say he was assassinated. Other accounts state that after a midday meal, Peter's captors tried to suffocate him by using a mattress but he managed to escape. This then led his captors to strangle him to death with a scarf. He was buried on 3 August 1762 [O.S. 23 July] in the Alexander Nevsky Monastery, Saint Petersburg.\nLegacy.\nAfter his death, four pretenders to the throne, insisting that they were Peter (five if \u0160\u0107epan Mali of Montenegro is included) came forth, supported by revolts among the people, who believed in a rumor that Peter had not died but had been secretly imprisoned by Catherine. The most famous was the Cossack Yemelyan Pugachev, who led what came to be known as Pugachev's Rebellion in 1774, which was ultimately crushed by Catherine's forces. In addition, Kondratii Selivanov, who led a castrating sect known as the Skoptsy, claimed to be both Jesus and Peter III.\nIn December 1796, after succeeding Catherine, Peter's son, Emperor Paul I, who disliked his mother's behavior, arranged for Peter's remains to be exhumed and reburied with full honors in the Peter and Paul Cathedral, where other tsars (Russian emperors) were buried.\nLore.\nThe legend of Peter is still talked about, especially in the town where he lived most of his life, formerly Oranienbaum, later Lomonosov, situated on the southern coast of the Gulf of Finland, 40\u00a0km west of St. Petersburg. Peter's palace is the only one of the famous palaces in the St. Petersburg area that was not captured by the Germans during the Second World War. During the war, the building was a school and people say the ghost of Peter protected the children of Oranienbaum from getting hurt by bombs. Furthermore, it was near this town that the siege of Leningrad ended in January 1944. People say that Peter, after his death, stopped Hitler's army near Leningrad, just as the living Peter had ordered the Russian army to stop, just as it was about to capture Konigsberg.\nCultural references.\nPeter has been depicted on screen a number of times, almost always in films concerning his wife Catherine. He was portrayed by Rudolf Klein-Rogge in the 1927 film \"The Loves of Casanova\", Douglas Fairbanks Jr. in the 1934 film \"The Rise of Catherine the Great\" and by Sam Jaffe in \"The Scarlet Empress\" the same year. In 1991 Reece Dinsdale portrayed him in the television series \"Young Catherine\". \"La Tempesta\" (1958) depicts Yemelyan Pugachev's effort to force his recognition as Peter III and offers a critical view of Catherine the Great, with Van Heflin in the role of Pugachev and Viveca Lindfors as Catherine. He was also depicted as a cowardly, drunken wife-beater in the Japanese anime \"Le Chevalier D'Eon\". He also appears in the 2014 TV series played by Aleksandr Yatsenko. A historically inaccurate version of him was played by Nicholas Hoult in the 2020\u20132023 Hulu dramedy series \"The Great\", also starring Elle Fanning as Catherine.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46249", "revid": "16852310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46249", "title": "National Broadcasting Corporation", "text": ""}
{"id": "46251", "revid": "20155832", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46251", "title": "United Paramount Network", "text": ""}
{"id": "46252", "revid": "12044259", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46252", "title": "Fox Broadcasting Company", "text": "American commercial broadcast television network\nFox Broadcasting Company, LLC (commonly known as Fox; stylized in all caps) is an American commercial broadcast television network serving as the flagship namesake property of Fox Corporation and operated through Fox Entertainment. Fox is based at Fox Corporation's corporate headquarters at 1211 Avenue of the Americas in Midtown Manhattan, New York City, and it hosts additional offices at the Fox Network Center in Los Angeles and at the Fox Media Center in Tempe, Arizona. The channel was launched by News Corporation on October 9, 1986 as a competitor to the Big Three television networks, which are the American Broadcasting Company (ABC), the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), and the National Broadcasting Company (NBC). \nFox has gone on to become the most successful attempt at a fourth television network; it was also the highest-rated free-to-air network in the 18\u201349 demographic from 2004 to 2012 and 2020 to 2021 and was the most-watched American television network in total viewership during the 2007\u201308 season. It is a member of the North American Broadcasters Association and the National Association of Broadcasters. Unlike other major commercial broadcast networks, Fox does not have a newscast of its own due to its lack of a news division, and instead relies on its own 24-hour news channels, Fox News, Fox Business Network, and Fox Weather to supply news programming for the network.\nFox and its affiliated companies operate many entertainment channels in international markets, but these do not necessarily air the same programming as the American network. Most viewers in Canada have access to at least one American-based Fox affiliate, either over the air or through a pay television provider, although Fox's National Football League broadcasts and most of its prime time programming are subject to simultaneous substitution regulations for pay television providers imposed by the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) to protect rights held by domestically based networks. \nLike Canada, Fox programming is available in Mexico through free-to-air affiliates in markets located within proximity to the Mexico\u2013United States border whose signals are readily receivable over-the-air in border areas of northern Mexico. In Central America, the Dominican Republic, Peru, Argentina, Venezuela, Colombia, Brazil, Ecuador and the Caribbean, many subscription providers carry either select American-based Fox-affiliated stations or the main network feed from Fox O&amp;Os WNYW in New York City, KTTV in Los Angeles, WTTG in Washington, D.C. or Fox affiliate WSVN in Miami. In addition, the network's programming has been available in the U.S. Virgin Islands since 2011 on WVXF in Charlotte Amalie and Puerto Rico since 2015 from WSJP-LD in San Juan.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\n20th Century Fox (now known as 20th Century Studios) had been involved in television production as early as 1948. Its television arm was known as TCF Television Productions up until 1958, which produced several syndicated programs. Following the closure of the DuMont Television Network in August 1956, after it became mired in severe financial problems, the NTA Film Network was launched as a new \"fourth network\". 20th would also produce original content for the NTA network. The film network effort would fail after a few years, but 20th continued to dabble in television through its production arm, such as \"Perry Mason\", \"Batman\" and \"M*A*S*H\" for the Big Three television networks ABC, NBC, and CBS.\n1980s: Establishment of the network.\nFoundations.\nWhile running Paramount Pictures, Barry Diller attempted to create a fourth television network. The Paramount Television Service of 1977 was canceled before its first broadcast. Paramount produced many programs for the Big Three but catering to their demands \"just wore us down\", he said in 1983: \"I want to make our own things and put them on the air\". Diller hoped to create a \"mini-network\" of independent television stations airing Paramount programs. Unable to achieve his goal at Paramount, Diller joined film studio 20th Century Fox.\nIn March 1985, News Corporation, a media company owned by Australian publishing magnate Rupert Murdoch that had mainly served as a newspaper publisher, paid $255\u00a0million for a 50% interest in TCF Holdings, the parent company of the 20th Century Fox film studio. In May 1985, News agreed to pay $2.55\u00a0billion to acquire independent stations in six major U.S. cities from the John Kluge-run broadcasting company Metromedia: WNEW-TV in New York City, WTTG in Washington, D.C., KTTV in Los Angeles, KRIV-TV in Houston, WFLD-TV in Chicago, and KRLD-TV in Dallas. A seventh station, ABC affiliate WCVB-TV in Boston, was part of the original transaction but was spun off to the Hearst Broadcasting subsidiary of the Hearst Communications in a separate, concurrent deal as part of a right of first refusal related to that station's 1982 sale to Metromedia. (Two years later, News Corporation acquired WXNE-TV in that market from the Christian Broadcasting Network and changed its call letters to WFXT.)\nRadio personality Clarke Ingram suggested that the Fox network is a revival or at least a linear descendant of DuMont, since Metromedia was founded when DuMont spun off its two remaining owned-and-operated stations, WNEW-TV (then known as WABD) and WTTG, as DuMont Broadcasting (it later changed its name to Metropolitan Broadcasting before becoming Metromedia). Additionally, the former base of DuMont's operations, the DuMont Tele-Centre in Manhattan, eventually became the present-day Fox Television Center.\nBeginning of the network.\nIn 1985, 20th Century Fox announced its intentions to form a fourth television network that would compete with ABC, CBS, and NBC. The plans were to use the combination of the Fox studios and the former Metromedia stations to both produce and distribute programming. Organizational plans for the network were held off until the Metromedia acquisitions cleared regulatory hurdles. Then, in December 1985, Rupert Murdoch agreed to pay $325\u00a0million to acquire the remaining equity in TCF Holdings from his original partner, Marvin Davis. The purchase of the Metromedia stations was approved by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in March 1986; the call letters of the New York City and Dallas outlets were subsequently changed respectively to WNYW and KDAF. These first six stations, then broadcasting to a combined reach of 22% of the nation's households, became known as the Fox Television Stations group. With the sole exception of KDAF (which was sold to Renaissance Broadcasting in 1995, at which time it became an affiliate of The WB), all of the original owned-and-operated stations (\"O&amp;Os\") are still part of the Fox network today. Like the core O&amp;O group, Fox's affiliate body initially consisted of independent stations (a few of which had maintained affiliations with ABC, NBC, CBS, or DuMont earlier in their existences). The local charter affiliate was, in most cases, that market's top-rated independent; however, Fox opted to affiliate with a second-tier independent station in markets where a more established independent declined the affiliation (such as Denver, Phoenix and St. Louis). Largely because of both these factors, Fox in a situation very similar to what DuMont had experienced four decades before had little choice but to affiliate with UHF stations in all except a few (mainly larger) markets where the network gained clearance. Then-Fox Inc. head Barry Diller was acknowledged to have been the one who created the network, with the \"New York Times\" noting in October 1986 that Diller's \"current obsession is creating a television network to compete each evening with NBC, CBS and ABC.\"\nThe Fox television network officially debuted with a soft launch at 11:00\u00a0p.m. Eastern and Pacific Time on Thursday, October 9, 1986. Its inaugural program was a late-night talk show, \"The Late Show\", which was hosted by comedian Joan Rivers. After a strong start, \"The Late Show\" quickly eroded in the ratings; it was never able to overtake NBC stalwart \"The Tonight Show\". By early 1987, Rivers (and her then-husband Edgar Rosenberg, the show's original executive producer) quit \"The Late Show\" after disagreements with the network over the show's creative direction, the program then began to be hosted by a succession of guest hosts. After that point, some stations that affiliated with FBC in the weeks before the April 1987 launch of its prime time lineup (such as WCGV-TV in Milwaukee and WDRB-TV in Louisville) signed affiliation agreements with the network on the condition that they would not have to carry \"The Late Show\" due to the program's weak ratings.\nShortly before the official launch of FBC on April 5, 1987, under original Fox Entertainment President Garth Ancier, the network underwent a re-branding to the much shorter \"Fox\". According to an interview Ancier gave at that time, it was ad man Jay Chiat who suggested to network executives that, rather than create a brand from scratch, the network ought to use the \"Fox\" heritage of the previous 80 years and the \"searchlight\" iconography to link Fox Broadcasting to 20th Century Fox. Until late in the game during the 1980s, several station groups like Media Central and Pappas Telecasting had avoided Fox when the network launched, but joined the network later on.\nThe network had its \"grand opening\" when it expanded its programming into prime time on April 5, 1987, inaugurating its Sunday night lineup with the premieres of the sitcom \"Married... with Children\" and the sketch comedy series \"The Tracey Ullman Show\". The premieres of both series were rebroadcast twice following their initial airings (at 7:00\u00a0p.m. and 7:30\u00a0pm. Eastern/Pacific, respectively) that night, which Jamie Kellner, who served as the network's president and chief operating officer until his resignation in January 1993, stated would allow viewers to \"sample FBC programming without missing \"60 Minutes\", \"Murder, She Wrote\", or the 8 o'clock movies\". Fox added one new show per week over the next several weeks, with the drama \"21 Jump Street\" and comedies \"Mr. President\" and \"Duet\" completing its Sunday schedule. On July 11, 1987, the network rolled out its Saturday night schedule with the premiere of the supernatural drama series \"Werewolf\", which began with a two-hour pilot movie event. Three other series were added to the Saturday lineup over the next three weeks: comedies \"The New Adventures of Beans Baxter\", \"Karen's Song\", and \"Down and Out in Beverly Hills\" (the latter being an adaptation of the film of the same name). Both \"Karen's Song\" and \"Down and Out in Beverly Hills\" were canceled by the start of the 1987\u201388 television season, the network's first fall launch, and were replaced by the sitcoms \"Second Chance\" and \"Women in Prison\", both of which would be cancelled by mid 1988. \nIn regard to its late night lineup, Fox had already decided to cancel \"The Late Show\", and had a replacement series in development, \"The Wilton North Report\", when the former series began a ratings resurgence under its final guest host, comedian Arsenio Hall. \"Wilton North\" lasted just a few weeks, however, and the network was unable to reach a deal with Hall to return as host when it hurriedly revived \"The Late Show\" in early 1988. \"The Late Show\" went back to featuring guest hosts, eventually selecting Ross Shafer as its permanent host, only for it to be canceled for good by October 1988, while Hall signed a deal with Paramount Television to develop his own syndicated late night talk show, \"The Arsenio Hall Show\". Fox aired the 39th Primetime Emmy Awards and would air the next five editions.\nAlthough the network had modest successes in \"Married... with Children\" and \"The Tracy Ullman Show\", several affiliates were disappointed with Fox's largely underperforming programming lineup during the network's first three years, KMSP-TV in Minneapolis and KPTV in Portland, Oregon, both owned at the time by Chris-Craft Television, disaffiliated from Fox in 1988 (with KITN (now WFTC) and KPDX respectively replacing those stations as Fox affiliates), citing that the network's weaker program offerings were hampering viewership of their stronger syndicated slate.\nAt the start of the 1989\u201390 television season, Fox added a third night of programming, on Mondays. The season heralded the start of a turnaround for Fox. It saw the debut of a midseason replacement series, \"The Simpsons\", an animated series that originated as a series of shorts on \"The Tracey Ullman Show\". Ranked at a three-way tie for 29th place in the Nielsen ratings, it became a breakout hit and was the first Fox series to break the Top 30. \"The Simpsons\", at 36 years as of 2025, is the longest-running American sitcom, the longest-running American animated program, and the longest-running American scripted primetime television series.\nIn 1989, Fox also first introduced the documentary series \"Cops\" and crime-focused magazine program \"America's Most Wanted\" (the latter of which debuted as a half-hour series as part of the network's mainly comedy-based Sunday lineup for its first season, before expanding to an hour and moving to Fridays for the 1990\u201391 season). These two series, which would become staples on the network for just over two decades, would eventually be paired to form the nucleus of Fox's Saturday night schedule beginning in the 1994\u201395 season. Meanwhile, \"Married... with Children\", which differentiated itself from other family sitcoms of the period as it centered on a dysfunctional lower-middle-class family, saw viewer interest substantially increase beginning in its third season after Michigan homemaker Terry Rakolta began a boycott to force Fox to cancel the series after objecting to risqu\u00e9 humor and sexual content featured in a 1989 episode. \"Married...\"'s newfound success led it to become the network's longest-running live-action sitcom, airing for 11 seasons.\n1990s: Rise into mainstream success and beginnings of rivalry with the Big Three.\nFox survived where DuMont and other attempts to start a fourth network had failed because it programmed just under the number of hours defined by the FCC to legally be considered a network. This allowed Fox to make revenue in ways forbidden to the established networks (for instance, it did not have to adhere to the Financial Interest and Syndication Rules that were in effect at the time), since during its first years it was considered to be merely a large group of stations. By comparison, DuMont had been saddled by numerous regulatory barriers that hampered its potential to grow, most notably a ban on acquiring additional stations, during an era when the FCC had much tighter ownership limits for television stations (limiting broadcasters to a maximum of five stations nationwide) than it did when Fox launched. In addition, Murdoch was more than willing to open his wallet to get and keep programming and talent. DuMont, in contrast, operated on a shoestring budget and was unable to keep the programs and stars it had.\nMost of the other startup networks that launched in later years (such as UPN and The WB) followed Fox's model as well. Furthermore, DuMont operated during a time when the FCC did not require television manufacturers to include UHF capability. To see DuMont's UHF stations, most people had to buy an expensive converter. Even then, the signal quality was marginal at best compared to the signals of VHF stations &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. By the time Fox launched, cable allowed UHF stations to generally be on an equal footing with VHF stations.\nAlthough Fox was growing rapidly as a network and had established itself as a presence, it was still not considered a major competitor to the established \"Big Three\" broadcast networks, ABC, CBS, and NBC. From its launch, Fox had the advantage of offering programs intended to appeal toward a younger demographic \u2013 adults between 18 and 34 years of age \u2013 and that were edgier in content, whereas some programs that were carried by the \"Big Three\" networks attracted an older-skewing audience. Until the early 1990s, when Fox expanded its programming to additional nights and outside prime time, most Fox stations were still essentially formatted as independent stations \u2013 filling their schedules with mainly first-run and acquired programming, and, during prime time, running either syndicated programs or, more commonly, movies on nights when the network did not provide programming. Few Fox stations carried local newscasts during the network's early years, unlike the owned-and-operated stations and affiliates of its established rivals. Those that did were mostly based in larger markets (including some of the network's O&amp;Os) and retained newscasts that had aired for decades. Even then, these news operations were limited to one newscast per day, following the network's prime time lineup.\nOn September 6, 1990, Fox reached an agreement with TCI (the nation's largest cable company at the time) in which TCI systems in markets that were not served by an over-the-air Fox affiliate at the time would become charter affiliates of a cable-only national feed of the network known as Foxnet. The cable-only network launched on June 6, 1991, bringing Fox programming to smaller markets that did not carry a default Fox affiliate at the time; it would manage to reach a total of 1.3\u00a0million subscribers by 1992.\nAs Fox gradually headed towards carrying a full week's worth of programming in prime time through the addition of programming on Thursday and Friday nights at the start of the 1990\u201391 season, the network's added offerings included the scheduling of \"The Simpsons\" opposite veteran NBC sitcom \"The Cosby Show\" as part of Fox's initial Thursday night lineup that fall (along with future hit \"Beverly Hills, 90210\", which would become the network's longest-running drama, airing for ten seasons) after only a half-season of success on Sunday nights. The show performed well in its new Thursday slot, spending four seasons there and helping to launch \"Martin\", another Fox comedy that became a hit when it debuted in August 1992. \"The Simpsons\" returned to Sunday nights in the fall of 1994, and has remained there ever since.\nThe sketch comedy series \"In Living Color\", which debuted in April 1990, created many memorable characters and launched the careers of future movie stars Jim Carrey, Jamie Foxx, Damon Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Keenen Ivory Wayans, guest stars Chris Rock and Tim Meadows, and both members of the show's dance troupe, the \"Fly Girls\", Rosie Perez and Jennifer Lopez. The series also gained international prominence after Fox aired a special live episode in January 1992 as an alternative to the halftime show during Super Bowl XXVI, which was broadcast on CBS, marking the start of Fox's rivalry with the \"Big Three\" networks while popularizing the counterprogramming strategy against the Super Bowl telecast.\nThe early and mid-1990s saw the debuts of several soap opera-style prime time dramas aimed at younger audiences that became quick hits, which, in addition to \"Beverly Hills, 90210\", included its adult-focused spin-off \"Melrose Place\" (which initially had a mediocre ratings performance, before viewership rose significantly midway through its first season following Heather Locklear's addition to the cast), its own short lived spin-off \"Models Inc.\", and family drama \"Party of Five\". The early and mid-1990s also saw the network launch several series aimed at a black audience, which, in addition to \"Martin\", included the sitcom \"Living Single\" and police procedural \"New York Undercover\".\nLuring the NFL and affiliation switches.\nDespite having a few successful shows like the science fiction drama \"The X-Files\", Fox still lacked credibility among viewers. Even those working in television thought of Fox as \"the one that has that cartoon show\" (\"The Simpsons\"). More than 85% of affiliates in 1993 were UHF stations. Fox became a viable competitor to the older networks when it won broadcast television rights to the National Football League (NFL) away from CBS. In December 1993, Fox signed a contract with the NFL to televise games from the National Football Conference (NFC)\u2014which had been airing its games on CBS since 1956\u2014starting with the 1994 season. The initial four-year contract, which Fox bid $1.58\u00a0billion to obtain\u2014while CBS offered $295\u00a0million per year to retain the rights\u2014also included the exclusive U.S. television rights to Super Bowl XXXI in 1997. The network also lured Pat Summerall, John Madden, Dick Stockton, Matt Millen, James Brown, Terry Bradshaw, and behind-the-scenes production personnel, from CBS Sports to staff its NFL coverage.\nShortly afterward, News Corporation began striking affiliation deals with, and later purchasing, more television station groups. On May 23, 1994, Fox agreed to purchase a 20% stake in New World Communications, a television and film production company controlled by investor Ronald Perelman that had just recently entered into broadcasting through its 1993 purchase of seven stations owned by SCI Television. As a result of Fox acquiring a 20% minority interest in the company, New World signed an agreement to switch the affiliations of twelve stations (eight CBS affiliates, three ABC affiliates [ two of which were subsequently placed in a blind trust and then sold directly to Fox due to conflicts with FCC ownership rules ], and one NBC affiliate) that it had either already owned outright or was in the process of acquiring from Citicasters and Argyle Communications at the time to Fox starting in September 1994 and continuing as existing affiliation contracts with their existing major network partners expired.\nThat summer, SF Broadcasting, a joint venture between Fox and Savoy Pictures that was founded in March 1994, purchased four stations from Burnham Broadcasting (three NBC affiliates and one ABC affiliate); through a separate agreement, those stations would also switch to Fox between September 1995 and January 1996 as existing affiliation agreements lapsed. These two deals were not the first instances in which a longtime \"Big Three\" station affiliated with Fox: in Miami, the affiliation moved from WCIX (channel 6) to NBC affiliate WSVN in January 1989 as the result of a complicated six-station affiliation swap in two South Florida markets spurred by NBC's purchase of CBS affiliate WTVJ (channel 4) and CBS's purchase of WCIX. WSVN immediately attracted industry notice for featuring a news-intensive tabloid format uncharacteristic of any Fox affiliate or independent station heretofore, with then-Fox network president Lucie Salhany calling WSVN \"the future of television\" in May 1994. WSVN remains the largest Fox affiliate in terms of market size to have entirely eschewed any prominent on-air branding with the network name.\nThe NFC contract, in fact, was the impetus for the affiliation deal with New World and SF Broadcasting's purchase of the Burnham stations, as Fox sought to improve local coverage of its new NFL package by aligning the network with stations that had more established histories and advertiser value than its charter affiliates. The deals spurred a series of affiliation realignments between all four U.S. television networks involving individual stations and various broadcasting groups such as those between CBS and Group W (whose corporate parent later bought the network in August 1995), and ABC and the E. W. Scripps Company (which owned three Fox affiliates that switched to either ABC or NBC as a result of the New World deal) affecting 30 television markets between September 1994 and September 1996. The two deals also had the side benefit of increasing local news programming on the new Fox affiliates, mirroring the programming format adopted by WSVN upon that station's switch to the network (as well as expanding the number of news-producing stations in Fox's portfolio beyond mainly charter stations in certain large and mid-sized markets).\nWith significant market share for the first time ever and the rights to the NFL, Fox firmly established itself as the nation's fourth major network. Fox Television Stations would acquire New World outright on July 17, 1996, in a $2.48\u00a0billion stock purchase, making the latter's twelve Fox affiliates owned-and-operated stations of the network; the deal was completed on January 22, 1997. Later, in August 2000, Fox bought several stations owned by Chris-Craft Industries and its subsidiaries BHC Communications and United Television for $5.5\u00a0billion (most of these stations were UPN affiliates, although its Minneapolis station KMSP-TV would rejoin Fox in September 2002 as an owned-and-operated station). These purchases, for a time, made Fox Television Stations the largest owner of television stations in the U.S. (a title that has since been assumed by the Sinclair Broadcast Group, one of the network's largest affiliate groups).\nEvolving programming.\nFox completed its prime time expansion to all seven nights on January 19, 1993, with the launch of two additional nights of programming on Tuesdays and Wednesdays (The method of gradually adding nights to the programming schedule that began with the network's April 1987 prime time launch was replicated by The WB and UPN when those networks debuted in January 1995), making it the fifth broadcast network (behind the Dumont network) to air programming on a nightly basis. September 1993 saw the heavy promotion and debut of a short-lived western series that incorporated science-fiction elements, \"The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr.\" However, it was the supernatural investigative drama that debuted immediately following it on Friday nights, \"The X-Files\", that would find long-lasting success, and would become Fox's first series to crack Nielsen's year-end Top 20 most-watched network programs. After several other failed attempts at late night programming following the cancellation of \"The Late Show\" (most notably, the quick failure of \"The Chevy Chase Show\" in 1993), Fox finally found success in that time period with the debut of \"MADtv\" on October 14, 1995; the sketch comedy series became a solid competitor to NBC's \"Saturday Night Live\" for over a decade and was Fox's most successful late night program as well as one of its most successful Saturday night shows, running for 14 seasons until 2009.\nAn attempt to make a larger effort to program Saturday nights by moving \"Married... with Children\" from its longtime Sunday slot and adding a new but short-lived sitcom (\"Love and Marriage\") to the night at the beginning of the 1996\u201397 season backfired with the public, as it resulted in a brief cancellation of \"America's Most Wanted\" that was criticized by law enforcement and public officials, and was roundly rejected by viewers, which brought swift cancellation to the newer series. \"Married...\" quickly returned to Sundays (before moving again to Mondays two months later); both it and \"Martin\" would end their runs at the end of that season. The Saturday schedule was revised in November 1996, to feature one new and one encore episode of \"Cops\", and the revived \"America's Most Wanted: America Fights Back\". \"Cops\" and \"AMW\" remained the anchors of Fox's Saturday lineup, making it the most stable night in American broadcast television for over 14 years; both shows eventually were among the few first-run programs remaining on Saturday evenings across the four major networks after decreasing prime time viewership \u2013 as more people opted to engage in leisure activities away from home rather than watch television on that night of the week led ABC, NBC and CBS to largely abandon first-run series on Saturdays (outside newsmagazines, sports and burned off prime time shows that failed on other nights) in favor of reruns and movies by the mid-2000s. \"America's Most Wanted\" ended its 22-year run on Fox in June 2011, and was subsequently picked up by Lifetime (before being cancelled for good in 2013); \"Cops\", in turn, would move its first-run episodes to Spike in 2013 after 23 seasons (ending its original run on Fox as the network's longest-running prime time program), leaving sports and repeats of reality and drama series as the only programs airing on Fox on Saturday evenings.\nDuring the 1997\u201398 season, Fox had three shows in the Nielsen Top 20 (in terms of total viewers); \"The X-Files\" (which ranked 11th), \"King of the Hill\" (which ranked 15th) and \"The Simpsons\" (which ranked 18th), all of which aired on Sunday nights. Building around its flagship animated comedy \"The Simpsons\", Fox would experience relative success with animated sitcoms in prime time, beginning with the debut of the Mike Judge-produced \"King of the Hill\" in 1997. \"Family Guy\" (the first of three adult-oriented animated series from Seth MacFarlane to air on the network) and \"Futurama\" (from \"Simpsons\" creator Matt Groening) would make their debuts in 1999; however, they were canceled in 2002 and 2003 respectively. Due to strong DVD sales and highly rated cable reruns on Cartoon Network's Adult Swim, Fox later decided to order new episodes of \"Family Guy\", which began airing in 2005. \"Futurama\" would be revived with four direct-to-DVD films between 2007 and 2009 and would return as a first-run series on Comedy Central, where it ran from 2010 to 2013. Less successful efforts included \"The Critic\", starring \"Saturday Night Live\" alumnus Jon Lovitz (which Fox picked up in 1994 after it was cancelled by ABC, only for the series to be cancelled again after its second season), and \"The PJs\" (which moved to The WB in 2000, after Fox cancelled that series after its second season). Other notable shows that debuted in the late 1990s included the quirky David E. Kelley-produced live-action dramedy \"Ally McBeal\", the short-lived game show \"Greed\", and the period comedy \"That '70s Show\", the latter of which became Fox's second-longest-running live-action sitcom, airing for eight seasons.\nThroughout the 1990s and into the next decade, Fox launched a slate of cable channels beginning with the 1994 debuts of general entertainment network FX and movie channel FXM: Movies from Fox (now FX Movie Channel), followed by the debut of Fox News Channel in August 1996. Its sports operations expanded with the acquisition of controlling interests in several regional sports networks (including the Prime Network and SportsChannel) between 1996 and 2000 to form Fox Sports Net (which launched in November 1996), its 2000 purchase of Speedvision (later Speed Channel, which was replaced in the United States by Fox Sports 1 in August 2013; however, it continues to exist in other North American and Caribbean countries as Fox Sports Racing), and the launches of Fox Sports World (later Fox Soccer, which was replaced by FXX in September 2013) and Fox Sports en Espa\u00f1ol (now Fox Deportes) in the early 2000s.\n2000s: Rise to ratings leadership, the \"American Idol\" effect, and fierce rivalry with CBS.\nBy 2000, many staple Fox shows of the 1990s had ended their runs. During the late 1990s and carrying over into the early 2000s, Fox put much of its efforts into producing reality shows many of which were considered to be sensationalistic and controversial in nature \u2013 such as \"Who Wants to Marry a Multi-Millionaire?\", \"Temptation Island\", \"Married by America\", and \"Joe Millionaire\" (which became the first Fox program to crack the Nielsen Top 10), as well as video clip shows such as \"World's Wildest Police Videos\" and \"When Animals Attack!\". After shedding most of these programs, Fox gradually filled its lineup with acclaimed dramas such as \"24\", \"The O.C.\", \"House\", and \"Bones\", and comedies such as \"The Bernie Mac Show\", \"Malcolm in the Middle\", and \"Arrested Development\".\nAs the decade wore on, Fox began surpassing ABC and NBC in the ratings, first in age demographics, then in overall viewership, and placed second behind a resurgent CBS in total viewership, beginning in 2002. Fox hit a major milestone in 2005 when it emerged as the most-watched U.S. broadcast network in the lucrative 18\u201349 demographic for the first time, largely boosted by the strength of the reality singing competition series \"American Idol\". Regarded as the single most dominant program on 21st-century U.S. television, as well as the first Fox show to lead the Nielsen seasonal ratings, \"American Idol\" had peak audiences of up to 38\u00a0million viewers during the 2003 season finale and double-season average audiences of around 31\u00a0million viewers in 2006 and 2007. Subsequently, it leapfrogged over Fox's Big Three competition to become the highest-rated U.S. television program overall starting with the 2003\u201304 season, becoming the first reality singing competition series in the country to reach first place in the seasonal ratings.\n\"American Idol\" remains the most recent American television program to date to lead the national prime time ratings and attract at least 30 million viewers for multiple and consecutive television seasons. It is the most-watched program on American television by seasonal average viewership in the 2000s decade, as well as the most recent program scheduled to have successfully established a graveyard slot on American television since the end of NBC's \"Friends\" in 2004 and the subsequent decline of NBC's previously dominant \"Must See TV\" Thursday timeblock. By 2005, reality television succeeded sitcoms as the most popular form of entertainment in the United States as a result of Fox's rise with \"American Idol\" and NBC's network declines. \"House\", which aired as \"American Idol\"'s lead-out program on Tuesday nights, earned international prominence in the 21st century and became Fox's first prime time drama series (and the network's third program overall) to reach the Nielsen Top 10 beginning 2006.\nBeginning 2004, CBS and Fox, which ranked as the two most-watched broadcast networks in the U.S. during the 2000s, have tended to equal one another in demographic ratings among general viewership, with both networks winning certain demographics by narrow margins; however, while Fox has the youngest-skewing viewer base, CBS is consistently regarded to have the oldest audience demographics among the major broadcast networks. Fox hit a milestone in February 2005 by scoring its first sweeps victory in total viewership and demographic ratings, boosted largely by its broadcast of Super Bowl XXXIX and the strengths of \"American Idol\", \"24\", \"House\", and \"The O.C\".\nIn September 2006, as a result of the increasing number of over-the-air Fox affiliates and the increased availability of digital subchannels carrying Fox in certain markets, Foxnet was discontinued. Then, a sweeping milestone came by the conclusion of the 2007\u201308 season on May 21, 2008, shortly after the widely acclaimed seventh-season finale of \"American Idol\", when Fox outranked longtime leader CBS as the most-watched television network overall in the United States, attributed to the strengths of Super Bowl XLII and its NFL game coverages, \"Idol\" and \"House\" during that season. To date, Fox is the only non-Big Three network to top the overall Nielsen ratings since its inception in the 1950\u201351 season.\nIn the late 2000s, Fox launched a few series that proved to be powerful hits in different respects. In 2007, the network began production on the game shows \"Are You Smarter than a 5th Grader?\" and \"Don't Forget the Lyrics!\"; both shows ran for a total of three seasons each, making them the longest-running game shows in Fox's history. In 2008, the supernatural mystery series \"Fringe\" debuted to moderate ratings but earned critical acclaim during its first season on Tuesdays. Throughout its run, the series developed a large loyal fanbase that turned the show into a cult favorite. In 2009, \"Glee\" premiered to average ratings when its pilot aired as a lead-out program of the eighth-season finale of \"American Idol\", but earned positive reviews from critics. The cast of the series has been acknowledged by Barack Obama and Oprah Winfrey, who have each asked the cast to perform live for various national events.\n2010\u20132017: Network's ratings collapse and revamp in network programming.\nAt the beginning of the 2010s, new comedies \"Raising Hope\" and \"New Girl\" gave Fox its first live-action comedy successes in years. The second season of \"Glee\" delivered that series' highest ratings during the 2010\u201311 season, with viewership peaking during its Super Bowl lead-out episode in February 2011 (marking the most expensive post-Super Bowl episode ever produced on U.S. television). The said show has continuously attracted worldwide media attention that it formed a large, loyal international fanbase. At the same time, Fox's live telecast of the Super Bowl XLV helped Fox emerge as the first U.S. television network to earn an average single-night prime time audience of at least 100\u00a0million viewers.\n\"American Idol\" lost its first place standing among all network prime time programs during the 2011\u201312 finale (falling to second that season behind \"NBC Sunday Night Football\"), ending the longest streak at#1 for a prime-time broadcast network series in American television history, through its eight-year ratings domination in both the Adults 18\u201349 demographic and total viewership. \"Idol\" also remained in the Nielsen Top 10 for eleven years from 2003 to 2013, and became the highest-rated non-sports prime time television program as well as the highest-rated reality series in the United States from 2003 to 2012. these records marked the longest Nielsen ratings streaks of any Fox program in these categories.\nThe 2012 season finale of \"American Idol\" marked the end of the season-long 25th anniversary of the establishment of Fox network, helping it win in the 18\u201349 demographic for the eighth consecutive season, the longest such streak according to Nielsen measurement records (and still standing as of 2025). However, Fox suffered a collapse in viewership during the 2012\u201313 season; \"American Idol\" and \"Glee\" suffered steep ratings declines, while the network as a whole fell to third place (suffering an overall decrease by 22%) in total viewership and to second place in the 18\u201349 demographic (where it remained as of 2014[ [update]]) by the end of the season.\nThe decline in ratings continued into the 2013\u201314 season, with Fox placing fourth among the major networks in total viewership for the first time since 2001. Subsequently, on January 13, 2014, Fox announced that it would abandon its use of the standard concept of greenlighting shows through the initial order of pilot episodes during the designated \"pilot season\" (running from January through April), instead opting to pick up shows directly to series.\nFox scored renewed ratings successes with its February 2014 live telecast of Super Bowl XLVIII, which became the second most-watched television broadcast (by average) in U.S. history, and the lead-out programs that followed this event \u2013 \"New Girl\" and \"Brooklyn Nine-Nine\". Later, in May 2014, Kevin Reilly announced that he would resign as chairman of Fox Entertainment. On July 15, 2014, then-corporate parent 21st Century Fox announced that it would merge the operations of the network and 20th Century Fox Television into the newly created Fox Television Group, with 20th Century Fox Television co-chairpersons Dana Walden and Gary Newman appointed to head the division.\nThe 2014\u201315 season saw the series finale of \"Glee\" and debut of hits in the freshmen dramas \"Gotham\" (based on the Batman mythos) and the Lee Daniels-produced \"Empire\". Ratings for \"Empire\", in particular, increased week-to-week throughout its first season, becoming the network's first successful \"American Idol\" lead-out since \"House\", as well as the first American television program to consistently increase its episode-to-episode viewership during its first five weeks since the 1992 feat set by ABC's \"Roseanne\". \"Empire\" ended its inaugural season as the first American television show ever to increase its episodic viewership on a consistent basis throughout the course of a single season, as well as Fox's fourth program overall (and the first since the 2013 finale of \"American Idol\") to enter the Nielsen Top 10 by the end of the 2014\u201315 season.\nThe 2015\u201316 season marked a notable turnaround for Fox, as it jumped ahead of ABC to third place in nationwide ratings (both in overall viewership and in the 18\u201349 demo) and posted several firsts for the network and on American television. Its improvement was boosted by the transfer of the Miss Universe and Miss USA pageants from NBC, as well as shows such as \"\", \"Empire\" and the return of \"The X-Files\" after its most recent season ending in 2002. \"Grease: Live\" became the first live American television musical special of the 21st century to be broadcast in front of a live studio audience (as well as the first ever live musical special aired by a non-Big Three network on primetime).\nBy 2016, \"Empire\" and \"The X-Files\" ranked in the Nielsen Top 10 for the season, the first season with 2 Fox programs entering the top rankings since the \"American Idol\"-\"House\" tandem of the 2007\u20132008 season (and the first ever season that Fox achieved such rankings without \"American Idol\" or any other reality television show from Fox in the Top 10). The same year also marked the finale of \"American Idol\" in its original run on Fox after airing for fifteen seasons, ending an era of one of the most successful shows in American television history.\nIn February 2017, Fox broadcast Super Bowl LI, which attracted an average 111.3 million viewers\u2014ranking among the top five most-watched Super Bowl games, and the second-highest audience in network history behind Super Bowl XLVIII.\nIn March 2017, Rob Wade was named Fox's new president of alternative entertainment and specials Rob Wade; he had previously worked as a showrunner for \"Dancing with the Stars\", as head of entertainment for BBC Worldwide, and as executive producer of \"America's Got Talent\" and \"The X Factor\".\n2018\u2013present: Sale of studios to Disney, focus on non-scripted and sports programming.\nOn July 27, 2018, in a deal first announced December 2017, and completed March 20, 2019, 21st Century Fox shareholders agreed to sell most of its key assets (including 20th Century Fox and FX Networks) to The Walt Disney Company for $71.3\u00a0billion, following the spin-off of certain businesses. The sale did not include the Fox Broadcasting Company and television stations or the Fox Sports, Fox News, and Fox Business cable channels, which were to be maintained under a company tentatively referred to as \"New Fox\". Because Disney already owns the American Broadcasting Company (ABC), the acquisition of the Fox network by Disney would have been illegal under the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)'s rules prohibiting a merger between any of the four major broadcast networks. As a result of the Disney/Fox deal, and with the merger of CBS and Viacom on December 4, 2019, Fox has become the only major American broadcast network without attachment to any film studio.\nIt was acknowledged that Fox had placed a larger emphasis on its sports programming in its first upfronts since the deal was announced, including the acquisitions of the NFL's \"Thursday Night Football\" package and rights to the FIFA World Cup. It was also noted that Fox had been increasingly pivoting towards programs that could generate large audiences, as opposed to ones that become successful primarily through critical acclaim. On June 27, 2018, WWE announced that \"SmackDown\" would move to Fox on Friday nights beginning October 4, 2019, following its run on USA Network, under a five-year contract valued at $205\u00a0million per-year. The network also began to increase its non-scripted output, announcing the new celebrity music competition series \"The Masked Singer\" (based on the South Korean format \"King of Mask Singer\"), and the new game shows \"Mental Samurai\" and \"Spin the Wheel\" for the 2018\u201319 season.\nIn August 2018, Fox Television Group CEO Dana Walden stated that the network planned to commission and acquire more series from \"independent\" studios not co-owned with the Big Three networks, explaining that the vertical integration of the major broadcast networks (including Fox itself) with associated studios had limited opportunities for outside studios, and cited several top programs that were distributed by third-parties, such as \"The Big Bang Theory\" and \"This Is Us\" (produced by Warner Bros. Television and 20th Television for CBS and NBC respectively). There were also plans for Fox to acquire new pitches directly from their writers, and offer them to outside producers. As part of the transition, Fox aimed to gradually reduce the amount of scripted programming development coming from 20th Television, although stalwarts such as \"The Simpsons\" would remain with the network.\nFollowing the completion of the sale, network head Dana Walden became chairwoman of Disney Television Studios and ABC Entertainment. AMC president Charlie Collier succeeded Gary Newman as chairman and CEO of Fox on November 1, 2018. Newman was expected to temporarily remain with Fox in a transitional role, to oversee the corporate transition. The start of 2019 saw \"The Masked Singer\" premiere to Fox's highest ratings for a non-scripted premiere without an NFL lead-in since 2011, and record the largest-ever Nielsen ratings gain for a non-scripted series after three days of delayed viewership. On January 30, 2019, Fox ordered a second season, while the first-season finale saw an average audience of 11.5\u00a0million viewers.\nWith the completion of Disney's purchase the next day, the \"New Fox\" entity, officially named Fox Corporation, formally began trading on March 19, 2019. At its 2019\u201320 upfronts, Fox announced 10 new scripted series for the upcoming season, with three (\"Almost Family\", \"Bless the Harts\", and \"Prodigal Son\") slated for the fall lineup, as well as the second and third seasons of \"The Masked Singer\" \u2014 scheduled for October 2019 and February 2020 respectively (with the latter premiering after Super Bowl LIV). Fox also established a new in-house studio, Fox Alternative Entertainment, for investments in non-scripted formats. It is led by Rob Wade, while its first production was the second season of \"The Masked Singer\" (after season 1 was produced by Endemol Shine North America).\n\"Thursday Night Football\" finished as the second highest-rated series of the 2018\u201319 television season in the key demographic, behind only \"Sunday Night Football\", while \"The Masked Singer\" finished tied for third with \"The Big Bang Theory\" and \"This Is Us\". In the 2019\u201320, \"Thursday Night Football\" and \"The Masked Singer\" once again finished as the second and third highest-rated programs in the key demographic, and Fox finished the season as the highest-rated network among viewers 18\u201349 (with CBS leading in overall viewers).&lt;ref name=\"S2/3AvgRatings\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Fox repeated this victory in the 2020\u201321 season, but was narrowly beaten by NBC for 2021\u201322 by a tenth of a ratings share. In October 2022, Collier stepped down to join Roku, with Rob Wade promoted to president and CEO of Fox Entertainment. That season, Fox would lose \"Thursday Night Football\" to Amazon Prime Video.\nIn May 2023, Fox dropped its procedural drama \"9-1-1\" after six seasons. It had been the network's scripted tentpole since 2018. As a 20th Television production, ABC would subsequently pick up the series for a seventh season. Its spin-off \"\" would remain on Fox for the time being, with a renewal for a fifth season. In September 2024, it was announced that \"9-1-1: Lone Star\" would conclude after its fifth season; it was the last 20th Television-produced drama airing on the network. Fox would also lose \"SmackDown\" to USA Network in September 2024; as a replacement, Fox would begin a strategy of regular sports programming on Friday nights, beginning with a package of primetime college football games. The new package would leverage Fox's contract extension with the Big Ten Conference, which included options for the network to carry Friday-night games after the addition of west coast teams to the conference.\nOn April 2, 2025, Fox and 20th Television Animation announced a four-season, 15-episode renewal for animated comedies \"The Simpsons\", \"Bob's Burgers\" and \"Family Guy\", alongside \"American Dad!\", marking its return to the network since its debut in 2005, after an 11-year run on TBS that lasted between October 2014 and March 2025.\nProgramming.\nAs of 2015[ [update]], Fox currently provides 17 hours of regularly scheduled network programming each week. The network provides fifteen hours of prime time programming to its owned-and-operated and affiliated stations on Monday through Saturdays from 8:00 to 10:00\u00a0p.m. and Sundays from 7:00\u00a0p.m. to 10:00\u00a0p.m. (all times Eastern and Pacific). An hour of late night programming is also offered on Saturdays from 11:00\u00a0p.m. to 12:00\u00a0am. Eastern and Pacific Time, a former hour of original comedy, but currently a repeat hour for primetime series (though scheduling for that hour varies depending on the market due to late local newscasts airing in the traditional 11:00\u00a0p.m./10:00\u00a0p.m. timeslot on some Fox stations), and the hour-long Sunday morning political discussion show \u2013 and the network's only regular national news program \u2013 \"Fox News Sunday with Shannon Bream\" (airing from 9:00\u00a0a.m. to 10:00\u00a0am. Eastern and Pacific, although the timeslot also varies by market due to local news or public affairs programming).\nSports programming is also provided; usually on weekends, with notable exceptions (albeit not every weekend year-round), and most commonly airing between 11:00\u00a0a.m. and 11:30\u00a0pm. ET (often airing for longer hours during football season in the fall, slightly less during NASCAR and college basketball season in the winter and barely any in the spring and summer afternoons), The Saturday prime time block (along with the Friday prime time block beginning in 2024) is mainly scheduled for sports programming, with encores of shows airing when no sports programming is airing on a given week.\nAdult animation.\nExcept for \"The Critic\", \"The PJs\" and \"Futurama\", which were respectively cancelled in 1995, 2000 and 2003, typically every Sunday night during prime time (unless preempted, usually by sports telecasts), Fox airs a lineup incorporating original adult animation sitcoms, all being produced (or co-produced with Fox for post-2019 works) by the network's original sister company, 20th Television. This block of adult cartoons became a staple of the network airing under the brand \"Animation Domination\" from May 1, 2005, to September 14, 2014, when the network rebranded the block as \"Sunday Funday\" as a result of the re-incorporation of live-action comedy series on the Sunday night lineup after ten years (aside from occasional burn-offs of series aired on other nights during the 7:00\u00a0pm. Eastern/Pacific hour), although animated series remain an integral part of that night's schedule.\nThe first programs to air as part of the \"Animation Domination\" lineup were \"American Dad!\" (which also had its beginnings in the lineup, and moved to TBS in October 2014, until its eventual return back to the network in early-2026), \"Family Guy\" (which returned to the network after a three-year cancellation when \"Animation Domination\" began), \"The Simpsons\" (the longest-running cartoon on Fox, predating the lineup by 16 years), and \"King of the Hill\" (which also predated the lineup by eight years). Once \"King of the Hill\" was cancelled, \"Family Guy\"'s spinoff \"The Cleveland Show\" would air from 2009 to 2013 and Loren Bouchard's next series, \"Bob's Burgers\" would air starting in 2011. Animated shows currently airing as part of the lineup include \"The Simpsons\", \"Family Guy\", \"Bob's Burgers\", \"Krapopolis\", \"Grimsburg\", and \"Universal Basic Guys\", with \"American Dad!\" to return to the network in early-2026 after over a full decade of airing original episodes on TBS. Other shows in the lineup include \"Sit Down, Shut Up\", \"Allen Gregory\", \"Napoleon Dynamite\", \"Bordertown\", \"Bless the Harts\", \"Duncanville\", \"The Great North\", \"Housebroken\", and the live-action/animated hybrid \"Son of Zorn\".\nAn extension of the Sunday prime-time block called \"Animation Domination High-Def\" launched on Saturday late nights in July 2013 (marking the return of first-run programming in that time period since the 2010 cancellation of \"The Wanda Sykes Show\"), with \"ADHD Shorts\", \"Axe Cop\" and \"High School USA!\". Due to low ratings, Fox announced on April 17, 2014, that it would discontinue \"Animation Domination High-Def\"; although the block was slated to end on June 28, 2014, it continued to air in encore form until the start of the 2016\u201317 season, when the hour returned to airing encores of comedies or reality series.\nChildren's programming.\nFox began airing children's programming on September 8, 1990, with the debut of the Fox Children's Network (rebranded as the Fox Kids Network in 1991, and then to simply Fox Kids in 1998), a programming block that aired on Saturday mornings and weekday afternoons. Programming within the Fox Kids block consisted mainly of animated series, although it also featured some live-action series as part of the lineup. Shows featured in the block included \"Bobby's World\", \"Eek! The Cat\", ', \"Spider-Man\", \"The Tick\", \"Fun House\", \"Goosebumps\", \"Casper\", \"Dragon Ball Z\" (the Ocean English dub) and \"Digimon\"; it also aired select shows from Warner Bros. Animation including the popular animated series \"Tiny Toon Adventures\", \"Animaniacs\" and ' (Warner Bros. pulled \"Batman\" and \"Animaniacs\" from the Fox Kids lineup in September 1995, moving both shows, as well as \"Tiny Toons\" \u2013 which had already ended its run \u2013 to the newly launched Kids' WB block on The WB). Fox Kids' most successful series, however, was \"Mighty Morphin Power Rangers\" (from eventual sister company and Fox Kids co-parent Saban Entertainment), which debuted in 1993 and became the block's flagship program until it moved to ABC and Toon Disney in 2002.\nIn October 2001, Fox sold its children's division, Saban Entertainment and Fox Family Worldwide (the parent subsidiary of cable network Fox Family Channel, now Freeform) to The Walt Disney Company for $5.3\u00a0billion. The network relegated the Fox Kids block to Saturdays in January 2002 (turning over the two-hour timeslot held by the weekday block to its owned-and-operated and affiliated stations, rather than retaining the slots and filling them with adult-oriented daytime shows); then on September 14, 2002, as part of a time-lease agreement with 4Kids Entertainment to program the remaining four-hour Saturday morning lineup, Fox Kids was replaced by a new children's program block called FoxBox (which was renamed 4Kids TV in January 2005). Notable programs in that block include \"Yu-Gi-Oh!\", \"\", \"Sonic X\", \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\" (2003), \"Shaman King\" and \"One Piece\".\nFox discontinued the 4Kids TV block on December 27, 2008, due to conflicts between the network and 4Kids Entertainment that were later settled, regarding 4Kids' failure to pay Fox for the programming lease rights, and the network's inability to fulfill a promise guaranteeing clearance on 90% of its stations and to get other stations to carry the block in certain markets where a Fox station declined it (an issue that plagued Fox's children's program blocks since the start of its affiliation deal with New World Communications). Fox had earlier announced, on November 23, that it would no longer carry children's programming in the time period, citing stiff competition from cable channels aimed at the demographic; the network instead turned over two of the four vacant Saturday morning hours to its affiliates to allow them to air local newscasts or educational programs purchased from the syndication market, while it retained the remaining two hours to run a network-managed paid programming block, \"Weekend Marketplace\", which debuted on January 3, 2009.\nOn September 13, 2014, \"Xploration Station\", a two-hour syndicated block produced by Steve Rotfeld Productions, began airing on Fox stations owned by several affiliate groups including Fox Television Stations and Tribune Broadcasting. The block, which complies with guidelines defined by the Children's Television Act, features programs focused on the STEM fields. Stations can choose to either carry \"Xploration Station\", continue to air \"Weekend Marketplace\" (as the Sinclair Broadcast Group chose to do, since it already carries syndicated E/I programming purchased by the company across its Fox affiliates, although Sinclair added the block on most of its Fox affiliates in September 2016) or in case of Birmingham, not at all (since Gray Television carried E/I programs through existing contracts with syndicators of educational program content instead).\nNews.\nUnlike ABC, CBS, and NBC, Fox does not currently air national news programs (morning, evening or overnight, like ABC News, CBS News, and NBC News) or newsmagazines choosing to focus solely on its prime time schedule, sports and other ancillary network programming. The absence of a national news program on the Fox network is despite the fact that Fox Corporation owns the Fox News Channel, which launched in October 1996 and currently maintains near-universal distribution within the United States via pay television providers. Fox News is not structured as a news division of the Fox network, and operates as a technically separate entity within Fox Corporation through the company's Fox News Group subsidiary. However, it does produce some content that is carried by the broadcast network, which is usually separate from the news coverage aired by the cable channel; in particular, FNC anchor Bill Hemmer anchors most prime time news presentations on the Fox network, especially during political news events (which are anchored by Bret Baier on Fox News Channel).\nSpecifically, the Fox network airs coverage of the State of the Union address, presidential debates, national election coverage, as well as live breaking news coverage currently branded as a \"Fox News Special Report\" (also branded as a \"Fox News Alert\" or sometimes a \"Fox News Red Alert\"); carriage of such special coverage of a breaking news story may vary from station to station, and is often limited to events that occur during the network's usual prime time block (for example, unlike the Big Three, Fox does not often provide coverage of major political convention speeches, which usually occur during the 10:00\u00a0p.m. (Eastern Time) hour during which most of its affiliates air local newscasts; however, the majority of Fox's owned-and-operated stations and affiliate groups do carry weekday breaking news briefs). The political discussion show \"Fox News Sunday\" also airs on the Fox network on Sunday mornings and is rebroadcast later in the day on FNC. Fox also operates an affiliate news service called Fox NewsEdge, which launched with Fox News Channel in 1996, and provides national and international news reports, and feature stories for Fox stations to use in their own local newscasts.\nFox first tried its hand at a national news program in prime time with the hour-long weekly newsmagazine \"The Reporters\", which was produced by the same team behind the Fox Television Stations-distributed syndicated tabloid program \"A Current Affair\"; the program ran from 1988 to 1990, when it was cancelled due to low ratings. From 1987 until about 1996, Fox also aired news capsules that aired within its prime time schedule, branded first as \"Fox News Extra\", and later as \"Fox News Updates\", which were produced at New York City O&amp;O WNYW and used their anchors. Another failed attempt occurred in 1993, when Fox launched \"Front Page\" (which included among its five hosts, Ron Reagan and Josh Mankiewicz), in an attempt to capture a younger demographic for a newsmagazine program.\nThe network tried its hand at a newsmagazine again in 1998 with \"Fox Files\", hosted by Fox News Channel anchors Catherine Crier and Jon Scott, as well as a team of correspondents; it lasted a little over a year before being cancelled. Its last attempt at a newsmagazine series occurred during the 2002\u201303 Sweeps period, with \"The Pulse\", hosted by Fox News Channel anchor Shepard Smith. On May 17, 2016, the network aired an interview special with then Fox News primetime anchor Megyn Kelly, \"Megyn Kelly Presents\".\nFox also attempted national morning programs, only the first of which aired on the network itself. Its first venture at such a program was \"Fox After Breakfast\", an hour-long morning news and lifestyle show, hosted by Tom Bergeron, Laurie Hibberd, and Vicki Lawrence, that ran on the network from 1996 to 1998 (Fox aired the program at 9:00\u00a0a.m. \u2013 as opposed to the 7:00\u00a0a.m. to 9:00\u00a0a.m. time slot that NBC, CBS, and ABC air their national morning shows \u2013 to accommodate local morning newscasts that ran in the latter slot on some of its stations); the program originated as \"Breakfast Time\" in 1994 on sister cable channel FX. Fox tried again in 2002 with \"Good Day Live\", a heavily entertainment-focused syndicated offshoot of \"Good Day L.A.\", a news/entertainment/lifestyle program that debuted in 1993 on Los Angeles owned-and-operated station KTTV; the national version of the program was cancelled in 2005. On January 22, 2007, Fox premiered \"The Morning Show with Mike and Juliet\" on its owned-and-operated stations; hosted by Mike Jerrick and Juliet Huddy (then-anchors of Fox News Channel's \"DaySide\"), the show was lighter in format and more entertainment-oriented, though its focus often changed when a major news story occurred. In February 2007, the program was syndicated to other stations including many affiliated with ABC, NBC and CBS in markets where it was not carried by a Fox or MyNetworkTV affiliate; \"The Morning Show\" was cancelled in June 2009.\nSports.\nWhen the network launched, Fox management, having seen the critical role that sports programming, soccer events, in particular had played in the growth of the British satellite service BSkyB, believed that sports \u2013 and specifically, professional football would be the engine that would make Fox a major network the quickest. In 1987, after ABC initially hedged on renewing its contract to broadcast \"Monday Night Football\", Fox made an offer to the National Football League (NFL) to acquire the rights for the same amount that ABC had been paying, about $13\u00a0million per game at the time. However, partly due to the fact that Fox had not yet established itself as a major network, the NFL chose to renew its contract with ABC (where \"Monday Night Football\" remained until its move to sister cable channel ESPN in September 2006).\nSix years later, when the league entered contract negotiations with its television partners, Fox placed a $1.58\u00a0billion bid to obtain broadcast rights to the National Football Conference \u2013 covering four seasons of games, beginning with the 1994 NFL season. The NFL selected the Fox bid on December 18, 1993, stripping CBS of football telecasts for the first time since 1955. The event placed Fox on par with the \"Big Three\" television networks and ushered in an era of growth for the NFL. Fox's acquisition of the NFL rights also quickly led toward the network reaching an affiliation deal with New World Communications to change the affiliations of twelve of its stations to Fox (see above). The rights gave Fox many new viewers and a platform for advertising its other programs.\nWith a sports division now established with the arrival of the NFL, Fox acquired broadcast television rights to the National Hockey League (1994\u201399), Major League Baseball (since 1996) and NASCAR auto racing (since 2001, initially as part of a deal that also involved NBC and TNT).\nFrom 2007 to 2010, Fox aired the Bowl Championship Series\u2014a group of college football bowl games held around New Year's Day, and the BCS National Championship Game (with the exception of any event held at the Rose Bowl Stadium, including the Rose Bowl Game and the Rose Bowl-hosted 2010 BCS National Championship Game, as their organizer maintained a separate contract with ABC). Following the conclusion of the deal, Fox acquired rights to the Big Ten Conference and Pac-12 Conference's newly established football championship games (the latter alternating yearly with ESPN). In 2017, Fox acquired tier 1 rights to the Big Ten Conference.\nIn August 2011, Fox and mixed martial arts promotion Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) reached a multi-year agreement, which included the rights to broadcast four live events in prime time or late night annually, marking the first time that the UFC aired its events on broadcast television. Its first UFC on Fox event, Velasquez vs. Dos Santos, aired on November 12, 2011. This deal ended at the end of 2018, with UFC events moving to ESPN and ESPN+.\nThe network's 2023 telecast of Super Bowl LVII remains the highest-rated U.S. television program on average of all time. Meanwhile, its 2017 telecast of Super Bowl LI remains the record holder for the largest overall audience ever tallied in U.S. television history.\nOn June 13, 2024, Fox announced a multi-year deal to be the sole broadcaster of the IndyCar Series and its subsidiary series Indy NXT with all IndyCar Series races to be broadcast on the network.\nStations.\nFox has 18 owned-and-operated stations, and current and pending affiliation agreements with 226 additional television stations encompassing 50 states, the District of Columbia and three U.S. possessions; through its Fox Television Stations subsidiary, Fox has the most owned-and-operated stations of the major American commercial broadcast networks. The network has a national reach of 95.77% of all households in the United States (or 299,268,292 Americans with at least one television set). Currently, New Hampshire, New Jersey and Delaware are the only U.S. states where Fox does not have a locally licensed affiliate (New Hampshire is served by Boston affiliate WFXT, New Jersey is split between New York City O&amp;O WNYW and Philadelphia O&amp;O WTXF, while Delaware is served by WTXF and Salisbury, Maryland affiliate WBOC-DT2).\nFox largely discontinued analog broadcasts on June 12, 2009, as part of the transition to digital television. As a newer broadcast network, Fox still has a few low-power affiliates, covering markets like Youngstown, Ohio (WYFX-LD). In some markets, including both of the ones mentioned, these stations also maintain simulcasts on a subchannel of a co-owned/managed full-power television station. Fox also maintains a sizeable number of subchannel-only affiliations in cities located outside the 50 largest Nielsen-designated markets that do not have enough full-power stations to support a standalone affiliation or have a low-power station as the only other option as an affiliate, though a couple have appeared in the top 50; the largest subchannel-only Fox affiliate by market size is WSYX-DT3 in Columbus, Ohio, No. 34 by Nielsen.\nNexstar Media Group is Fox's largest affiliate group in terms of overall market and numerical reach, with 42 stations (including some former Fox O&amp;Os that were spun off in 2008 to Local TV, which Tribune Media later acquired in 2013, to finance former Fox parent News Corporation's purchase of \"The Wall Street Journal\"; Nexstar purchased Tribune in the fall of 2019); the Sinclair Broadcast Group is the second largest operator of Fox stations by numerical total, owning or providing services to 26 Fox-affiliated stations.\nFox previously distributed its programming in markets that did not have enough stations to support an affiliate via Foxnet, a cable channel acting as an alternate national feed for small and certain mid-sized U.S. markets (generally those within the bottom 110 Nielsen media markets) that launched in 1991 and operated until its shutdown on September 12, 2006; the channel featured a master schedule of programs acquired from the syndication market and some brokered programming to fill time slots not occupied by Fox network programming. The concept behind Foxnet served as the basis for The WB 100+ Station Group (launched in September 1998 as the cable-only feed of The WB) and The CW Plus (the immediate successor of The WB 100+, which launched in September 2006 as a cable-only/digital multicast feed of The CW), which both allow the customization of localized branding (which Foxnet did not allow its cable partners to do) in addition to allowing affiliates to sell local advertising.\nDifferences between Fox and the \"Big Three\" networks.\nNetwork programming.\nFox's programming schedule differs from the \"Big Three\" networks in several significant ways: the network airs its prime time programming for only two hours on Monday through Saturday evenings and three hours on Sundays, compared to the three hours on Monday through Saturdays (from 8:00 to 11:00\u00a0p.m.) and four hours on Sunday nights (from 7:00 to 11:00\u00a0p.m. Eastern and Pacific Time) programmed by the three longer-established networks, ABC, CBS and NBC. This scheduling is termed as \"common prime\", referring to the programming of prime time content across all of the conventional broadcast networks during the early- and mid-evening hours, while the 10:00\u00a0p.m. (Eastern/Pacific)/9:00 p.m. (Central/Mountain) hour is programmed only by the three older networks.\nFox has traditionally avoided programming the 10:00\u00a0p.m. hour, choosing to cede the time period to its local affiliates for them to program, many of which air local newscasts during that hour; however, some exceptions do exist for select special film presentations, which by virtue of their running time (depending on whether the film's original length, combined with commercial breaks that would be included in the television cut, would exceed a traditional two-hour broadcast timeslot) must spill over into the 10:00\u00a0p.m. hour, overruns from live sports telecasts scheduled to air during prime time and new primetime entertainment programming after primetime (6:30 pm ET) NFL playoff games. However, the network did regularly schedule programming in the 10:00\u00a0p.m. hour on Sunday nights from September 1989 to September 1993 (when that specific time period was turned back over to its affiliates), although it never added programming at that hour on any other night. Fox's original reason for the reduced number of prime time hours was to avoid fulfilling FCC requirements in effect at the time to be considered a network, and to be free of resulting regulations, although these rules have since been relaxed.\nDespite being a major network, in addition to not carrying national morning and evening newscasts, Fox also does not air any network daytime programming (such as soap operas, game shows or talk shows). Because of this, the network's owned-and-operated stations and affiliates handle the responsibility of programming daytime hours with syndicated or locally produced programming (then corporate sister 20th Television distributes several syndicated daytime programs carried by many Fox stations, such as \"Divorce Court\" and \"The Wendy Williams Show\"; Fox Television Stations also test markets certain series from 20th Television and other syndicators such as Warner Bros. Television Distribution that are proposed for national distribution on some of its stations). The network also does not carry network-supplied children's programming on Saturday mornings or late-night programming on Monday through Friday nights. Local affiliates either produce their own programming or run syndicated programs during these time periods. Because of the erratic scheduling of the network's sports programming, many Fox stations choose to run a mix of syndicated programming, infomercials and especially movies to fill weekend afternoon timeslots when a sports event is not scheduled to air.\nIn addition, from the network's inception, Fox has produced two versions of its program promotions for distribution to the network's stations: a standard version incorporating airtimes based on their broadcast in the Eastern/Central or Pacific/Mountain time zones, depending on the feed used by the station (as those seen during network commercial breaks), and versions with \"clean\" end tags to allow stations to include local airtime and station information through graphical insertion and verbal continuity by station promotional announcers during the program logo graphic or prime time menu. This practice\u2014which differs from that long used by ABC, NBC and CBS, which only allow their stations to insert logos within their network promotions\u2014was also later adopted by The WB and UPN (and their successors The CW, and to a lesser extent, MyNetworkTV) for use by their affiliated stations. A third cut of these promos exists for national program advertising carried by cable networks (including Fox's sister cable networks), where the wording \"check local listings\" is placed in the end tag.\nFox is the only broadcast network that currently carries adult animated comedies. This started with \"The Simpsons\" in 1989. This is followed up by \"King of the Hill\" in 1997 (until 2009, with the last remaining four episodes airing on syndication, but is set to return to Hulu for new episodes in 2025), \"Family Guy\" (which was cancelled twice until being picked up by Adult Swim for reruns and was brought back by the network in 2005 thanks to home video sales) and \"Futurama\" in 1999 (until 2003 when it was also picked up by Adult Swim only to be purchased by Comedy Central for new episodes between 2008 and 2013 and returned for new episodes on Hulu in 2023), \"American Dad!\" in 2005 (until 2014 when TBS picked up the series that lasted until March 2025 with the network initially returning the next year), \"The Cleveland Show\" in 2009 (a \"Family Guy\" spinoff that lasted until 2013), \"Bob's Burgers\" in 2011, \"The Great North\" in 2021 (until 2025), \"Krapopolis\" in 2023, \"Grimsburg\" and \"Universal Basic Guys\" in 2024. Although the network has aired other adult animated shows like \"The Critic\", \"The PJs\", \"Sit Down, Shut Up\", \"Allen Gregory\", \"Napoleon Dynamite\", \"Bordertown\", \"Son of Zorn\" (the network's only live-action/animated hybrid sitcom) \"Bless the Harts\", \"Duncanville\", and \"Housebroken\", none had success and were short-lived. While other big-name networks\u2013ABC, CBS, and NBC\u2013have tried to copy the success of Fox with adult animated shows, none were successful.\nNews programming.\nWithin Fox's station body, the quantity of locally produced news programming varies considerably compared to the owned-and-operated and affiliated stations of ABC, NBC, and CBS (which typically carry at least 4\u00bd hours of local newscasts on weekdays and one hour on weekends, which are usually spread across morning, midday, early or late evening timeslots). At minimum, most Fox stations run a late-evening newscast following the network's prime time lineup (at 10:00\u00a0p.m. in the Eastern and Pacific, and 9:00\u00a0p.m. in the Central and Mountain Time Zones), which typically run 30 minutes to one hour in length; besides the fact that the network's stations have more latitude to air an earlier late-evening newscast since Fox does not program that hour, this stems from the fact that several of its charter stations were already airing prime time newscasts as independent stations prior to the network's launch (such as New York City O&amp;O WNYW, which debuted its 10:00\u00a0p.m. newscast in March 1967). Most Fox stations also carry a weekday morning newscast of one to three hours in length at 7:00\u00a0am, as a local alternative to the national morning news programs provided by the \"Big Three\" networks (though mainly in the case of Fox stations that have a news operation and in a few cases, via simulcasts with ABC-, NBC- and CBS-affiliated stations that operate a Fox affiliate, this is often part of a morning news block that runs for four to six hours on average).\nFox has fewer stations that have an independent news operation than those of ABC, NBC and CBS; as of October 2015[ [update]], 70 of Fox's 236 stations (including all 18 owned-and-operated stations) maintain in-house news departments (compared to roughly &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5\u20448\u2013&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7\u20448 of the stations of each of the three other major broadcast networks, whose newscasts are either produced in-house or in conjunction with another station). KVVU (channel 5) in Las Vegas has the highest weekly total of news programming hours among Fox's stations, at 78\u00bd hours.\nMost Fox stations that run a news operation use a newscast-intensive scheduling format that is very similar to an ABC-, NBC-, or CBS-affiliated station which in many cases, may incorporate midday or early-evening newscasts, the latter of which is often extended by a half-hour to compete with the national evening newscasts provided by the \"Big Three\" networks; some Fox stations except for those owned by Fox Television Stations and those formerly owned by Tribune Broadcasting air their early-evening newscasts only on Monday through Friday nights, due to frequent sports event overruns into that daypart on weekends. The first Fox station to adopt such a scheduling format was WSVN in Miami; upon affiliating with the network in January 1989, WSVN retained its existing morning, midday and early evening newscasts, while moving its late newscast from 11:00\u00a0p.m. to 10:00\u00a0p.m. and expanding it to one hour (the station later relaunched an 11:00\u00a0p.m. newscast in 1995), and expanding its weekday morning newscast by two hours. This type of format was later adopted by the former major network stations that switched to Fox between 1994 and 1996, especially those affected by New World and Burnham Broadcasting affiliation deals. Many Fox stations with upstart news departments often do not run a full slate of newscasts initially, usually carrying only a prime time newscast at first, before gradually adding other newscasts over time.\nIn many small to mid-sized markets (largely those ranked outside the 50 largest Nielsen-designated television markets), production of the local Fox affiliate's newscasts is outsourced to an NBC, ABC, or CBS station \u2013 either due to insufficient funds or studio space for a news department or in most cases, as a byproduct of the station being operated through a legal duopoly or a management agreement with a major network affiliate (such as with Cunningham Broadcasting-owned WEMT (channel 39) in Greeneville, Tennessee, which has its newscasts produced by NBC affiliate WCYB-TV (channel 5) through a local marketing agreement with Sinclair Broadcast Group). Fox affiliates that outsource their news production to a major-network affiliate often carry a lesser amount of news programming than is possible with an affiliate with a standalone news department due to the contracting station's preference to avoid having the Fox station's newscasts compete against their own in common timeslots (differing from outsourcing agreements between two same-market ABC, CBS, or NBC affiliates in certain areas, in which both stations may simulcast newscasts in the same timeslots). The lone exceptions to this rule currently are El Paso, Texas affiliate KFOX-TV (channel 14) and WXIN, which respectively began producing newscasts for their CBS-affiliated duopoly partners using resources from their existing news departments in September 2014 (when new sister stations KFOX and KDBC-TV (channel 4) consolidated their operations into a single facility) and January 2015 (when WXIN sister WTTV (channel 4) affiliated with CBS), with the Fox stations maintaining the same amount of news programming that they did beforehand. Another exception is KNPN-LD (channel 26) in St. Joseph, Missouri, which has been the smallest Fox affiliate by market size with an in-house news operation since the station's July 2012 sign-on; News-Press &amp; Gazette Company expanded production of KNPN's newscasts to its sister flagship stations, KNPG-LD (channel 21) and KCJO-LD (channel 30), when they respectively joined NBC and CBS in November 2016 and June 2017, though the former also maintained roughly the same amount of news programming before the conversions (KNPN airs morning, midday and early evening newscasts on weekdays and a nightly late evening newscast; all three stations simulcast the first 90 minutes of the morning newscast, while the remainder of KNPN's newscasts air in separate time slots from those seen on KNPG and KCJO).\nWPGH-TV (channel 53) in Pittsburgh is the largest Fox station by Nielsen market ranking (at #23) that outsources its news programming; NBC affiliate WPXI (channel 11; owned by Cox Media Group) has produced the station's 10:00\u00a0p.m. newscast since 2006, when WPGH shut down its news department following the closure of owner Sinclair Broadcast Group's News Central division. A few Fox affiliates only air syndicated programming in time periods where newscasts would air on other major network stations. The largest Fox station by market size that does not carry news programming is WSYT (channel 68) in Syracuse, New York (which discontinued a 10:00\u00a0p.m. newscast produced by CBS affiliate WTVH (channel 5) in 2006). In Dayton, Ohio, Sinclair Broadcast Group took the unusual step in August 2015 of adopting \"Fox 45 News\" as its universal brand for its news operation in that market, making it appear as if the news department was operated by WRGT-TV, even though it actually belongs to WRGT's virtual duopoly partner, ABC affiliate WKEF, which Sinclair owns outright (newscasts on WKEF would be branded as \"Fox 45 News on ABC22\"); Sinclair used WRGT over WKEF due to the latter's perennial \"also-ran\" reputation in the market in regard to their newscast ratings. WRGT and WKEF have since switched to a new branding model in the summer of 2019 involving a 24/7 web news service known as \"Dayton 24/7 Now\", and in 2021, WRGT's Fox affiliation moved to WKEF's second subchannel (along with a number of other Sinclair or related companies in several other markets), as Sinclair consolidated its network affiliations onto one station in a market to address regulatory concerns.\nRelated services.\nVideo-on-demand services.\nFox maintains several video on demand venues for viewers to watch the network's programming, including a traditional VOD service called Fox on Demand, which is carried on most traditional cable, satellite, streaming, and telecom providers. Fox also streams most of its programming on the streaming video service Hulu, along with traditional streaming via the network's Full Episode portal on Fox.com. The network's mobile and digital media player app was branded as \"Fox Now\", and featured access to a live stream of the network's primetime and sports programming (though not local and syndicated programming for affiliates not owned by the network), along with full-time live streams of their owned cable networks with TV Everywhere authentication through authorized television providers.\nThe most recent episodes of the network's shows are usually made available on the Fox on Demand television service the day after their original broadcast. In addition, fast forwarding capabilities are disabled while viewing content (a commonality for video-on-demand television services provided by the American broadcast networks) and the program's original advertisements that aired during the initial broadcast are included for a week after becoming available on the service, before being replaced by direct response advertising thereafter. Due to restrictions put in place by the network in January 2012 to encourage live or same-week DVR viewing via traditional and cable on demand methods, Hulu and Fox.com both impose an eight-day delay for most viewers to access the most recent episode of any Fox program, restricting day-after-air streaming of its shows on both services to subscribers of certain pay television providers (such as Dish Network and Verizon FiOS) using an ISP account through agreements made with Fox, along with Hulu's free service with advertisements on Yahoo! Stream; however, Hulu offers newer episodes of Fox programs the day after their original broadcast to paid subscribers requiring only a user-determined login.\nIn March 2020, Fox began to stream the full schedule of all of their owned Fox Television Stations through Fox Now. The following month, Fox acquired the ad-supported streaming service Tubi. The service primarily offers content and channels licensed from third-party studios, but later began to add episodes of Fox Entertainment original series (such as \"The Masked Singer\") a week after their television premiere.\nFox discontinued the Fox Now app in July 2023; streaming of the network's programming would continue on other apps instead, such as Hulu, Fox Local, or Tubi. Fox would effectively relaunch Fox Now as Fox One two years later.\nFox HD.\nFox began broadcasting its programming in 720p high definition on September 12, 2004, with that day's slate of NFC football games during week one of the 2004 NFL season. Until March 14, 2016, the network did not display an on-screen logo graphic on the bottom-right corner of the screen, outside a ten-second sweep of a \"Fox HD\" promotional logo (which until the end of 2010, also featured a sponsor tag for DirecTV); instead a trigger in Fox's program delivery system at each station displayed the logo bug of an owned-and-operated or affiliate station in the right-hand corner of the 16:9 screen frame, which disappeared during commercial breaks (the station logo bug would still be triggered even if Fox programming was pre-empted locally due to breaking news, severe weather coverage or special programming, though some stations, such as WGGB-DT2 in Springfield, Massachusetts, did not display a logo or substitute only the \"FOX\" logo alone). However, network or affiliate bugs are not displayed during Fox Sports programming. During some high-profile or live programs such as \"American Idol\" and \"So You Think You Can Dance\", however, Fox forwent the affiliate's logo and displayed its network logo instead, mainly for promotional consideration due to fair use of clips from each series by other media outlets (such as news programs, talk shows, and review and satirical programs that rely on clip content); until 2014, the bug was placed in the safe area. The Sunday political talk program \"Fox News Sunday\" displayed the \"Fox HD\" logo at all times for both that reason and because of many stations airing the program on tape delay later in the morning. Beginning on March 14, 2016, the standard Fox logo with hashtag is now used on all programming, with the station bug flashed for a few moments at the start of a program or coming out of commercial, as is traditionally done with ABC, CBS and NBC stations. In addition, the Fox HD bug was discontinued; although it was still used on \"Fox News Sunday\" until around late 2019-early 2020.\nOn some Fox programs, a hashtag rests above the affiliate's logo (for example, \"#newgirl\" or \"#bones\") to provide viewers reference to the network's official Twitter search tag to find or start discussions during the program being broadcast. In April 2012, additional tags relating to plot points in a given episode (for instance, the \"#saturdaynightGLEEver\" tag for an April 2012 episode of \"Glee\" of that same title) began to also be promoted in this space to both add additional trending topics and spread out more conversations on Twitter. In cases where the Fox bug appears instead of the station's logo bug, the Twitter hashtag is directly above the Fox logo in the safe area. Fox's coverage of the World Series started broadcasting in HD with Game 1 of the 2002 World Series.\nDuring the transitional period from analog to digital television, Fox was the only commercial television network in the United States to air programs in widescreen that were not available in HD (which were identified as being presented in \"Fox High Resolution Widescreen\" from 2001 to 2006). Prior to the launch of its HD feed, some sitcoms and drama series were presented in widescreen standard-definition, with reality, talk and game shows (\"American Idol\" being the first major exception, as it began to be presented in high definition in 2008) later being presented only in widescreen enhanced definition. The children's sports program \"This Week in Baseball\" began airing in widescreen in 2009, while \"Fox News Sunday\" converted to HD when Fox News Channel began operating from its new high-definition facilities in November 2008 (prior to Fox News Channel's conversion to a unified widescreen presentation on both its high-definition and standard-definition feeds in September 2010, it was the final Fox News program to structure its graphics and camera positions for the 4:3 safe area). \"MADtv\" was produced to air only in 4:3 until September 2008, likely due to a combination of stations tape-delaying the program and therefore being unable to offer it via the live network feed in 16:9, and the show's producers not making the switch to the format. The final Fox show to convert to HD was \"Family Guy\" beginning with its September 26, 2010, episode; all programming provided by Fox is now broadcast in widescreen \"and\" in high definition as of 2013[ [update]], and in Dolby Digital 5.1 surround sound.\nFox is unique among American broadcasters as it distributes its HD feed over satellite to the network's affiliates as an MPEG transport stream intended to be delivered bit-for-bit for broadcast transmission. During network programming hours, local commercials are inserted over the feed using a transport stream splicer. Affiliates of most other networks decode compressed satellite network video feeds and then re-encode them for final over-the-air transmission.\nAfter Fox began broadcasting its sports programming with graphics optimized for 16:9 displays rather than the 4:3 safe area in late July 2010, the network asked cable and satellite providers to comply and use the No. 10 Active Format Description flag it now disseminates over Fox programming, which displays content natively broadcast in 16:9 in a letterboxed format suitable for 4:3 television screens to allow any optimized graphical elements to be displayed in full. Subsequently, a number of Fox O&amp;Os and affiliates also began disseminating the AFD No. 10 flag over local news and syndicated programs that the stations broadcast in HD, and have incorporated graphical elements seen during local programs and on-air promos (as well as logo bugs) optimized for the letter boxed presentation.\nBranding.\nStation standardization.\nDuring the early 1990s, Fox began having its stations use a branding structure using a combination of the \"Fox\" name and the station's channel number, often followed by the licensed call letters (for instance, WNYW in New York City, WTTG in Washington, D.C. and WAGA-TV in Atlanta, Georgia, are all branded as \"Fox 5\"). By the mid-to-late 1990s, stations minimized their call letters to be just barely readable while still in compliance with FCC identification requirements. This marked the start of the trend for other networks to apply such naming schemes.\nThe branding scheme has varied in some markets, with some Fox stations using a city or regional name within the branding instead of the channel number (for example, Chicago owned-and-operated station WFLD branded as \"Fox Chicago\" from 1997 to 2012 and Philadelphia O&amp;O WTXF-TV branded as \"Fox Philadelphia\" from 1995 to 2003); a few of the network's stations also minimized use of the \"Fox\" name, opting to use their call letters or a more generic branding (WSVN in Miami, which has branded as \"WSVN 7\" for general use and \"(Channel) 7 News\" for its newscasts since it joined the network in January 1989; KHON-TV (channel 2) in Honolulu, which changed its general branding from \"Fox 2\" to \"KHON 2\" in 2003; WDRB in Louisville, Kentucky, which dropped its \"Fox 41\" brand in favor of branding by its call letters in September 2011; and KVRR (channel 15) in Fargo, North Dakota, which dropped the generic \"Fox\" branding it used in part due to its network of repeater stations throughout eastern North Dakota in favor of branding by its calls in May 2015). Similarly, most of the stations that switched to Fox as a result of its 1994 affiliation deal with New World Communications retained their Big Three-era branding for general or news purposes (with a few exceptions such as WJW in Cleveland, which dropped its CBS-era \"TV8\" and \"Newscenter 8\" brands in 1995, in favor of \"Fox is ei8ht\" as a general brand and \"ei8ht is News\" as the title for its newscasts; likewise that same year, KDFW in Dallas/Fort Worth re-branded itself as \"Fox 4 Texas\" after its newscast name of \"News 4 Texas\" before shortening its ID to simply \"Fox 4\" in 1996 and changing its newscast name to \"Fox 4 News\", both in use since then), before conforming to Fox's station branding conventions when Fox Television Stations acquired New World in 1997.\nA particularly unique situation was with KTVU (channel 2) in Oakland-San Francisco, which as a Fox affiliate under longtime owner Cox Media Group, retained its perennial \"Channel 2\" brand (with limited references as \"Fox Channel 2\" by the early 1990s). In 1996, the station rebranded as \"KTVU Fox 2\" for general purposes (adding the Fox logo on the underside of the top line of its heritage \"Circle Laser 2\" logo as well), while retaining \"(KTVU) Channel 2 News\" as the branding for its newscasts. Fox Television Stations (which traded WFXT in Boston and WHBQ-TV (channel 13) in Memphis station to Cox in 2014, in exchange for KTVU and sister station KICU-TV) instituted the \"KTVU Fox 2\" branding full-time in February 2015, retaining the \"Circle Laser 2\" both within the group's standardized \"boxkite\" logo and in an alternate version (which would become the primary logo through its de-emphasis of the O&amp;O standardization later that year) placed next to a prominent Fox wordmark. Another situation also includes another Fox station KCPQ in Seattle, Washington, which as a Fox affiliate under Tribune Media and Nexstar Media Group, also retained the \"Q13 Fox\" name as well as the \"Q13 News\" name for its newscast until KCPQ dropped the Q13 moniker and rebranded itself to \"Fox 13\" in September 2021, conforming with the branding of other Fox O&amp;O stations after its acquisition by Fox.\nStarting in 2006, more standardization of the O&amp;Os began to take place both on-air and online. All of the network's O&amp;Os began adopting an on-air look more closely aligned with the Fox News Channel, which included a standardized red, white and blue boxkite-style logo augmented by red pillars (which rotated on-air, particularly in the logo bugs seen during newscasts). After News Corporation's acquisition of the social networking site Myspace (which it sold in June 2011 to a consortium that included singer Justin Timberlake among its backers), some Fox O&amp;Os launched websites with identical layouts and similar URL domains under the \"MyFox\" scheme (such as MyFoxDC.com for WTTG). On-air usage of the FNC-inspired logos was reduced in August 2012 (when a new standardized graphics package was implemented, with wordmark bugs being used during newscasts and other programming), while several of the O&amp;Os ceased using the \"MyFox\" domains in 2015; the use of the Fox News Channel boxkite logos in all elements, along with explicit connections with the latter, was drastically reduced since the July 2016 resignation of Roger Ailes from Fox for a more traditional and simpler 'call-channel number' horizontal wordmark style which is more flexible with both traditional television and smaller mobile screens. In 2017, Fox's local newscast music composer, Stephen Arnold Music, released a new news music package, \"Beyond\", that uses none of the Fox News Channel sonic elements associated with the previous Fox O&amp;O music package, and it has rolled out across all Fox O&amp;O local news operations.\nAs of 2017, Fox O&amp;O's with a sister MyNetworkTV station in that market have also begun to play down that network, with many MyNetworkTV O&amp;O's now taking on the branding of \"Fox (channel number) Plus/Xtra/More\", etc., suggesting them as an extension of their higher-profile sister Fox station. Several of these stations now also carry extended newscasts or rebroadcasts of earlier newscasts from their sister stations during primetime, pushing MyNetworkTV's schedule to a late-night offering.\nLogos.\nWhen Fox launched on October 9, 1986, as Fox Broadcasting Company, it used a logo with three squares containing the network's initials (FBC) similar to BBC's current logo from 1997\u2013present in the UK. Below it was a rectangle with the network's full name in the same font. This logo is mostly the same color as the ITV's old logo from 1998 to 2004 in the UK, which was used during the network's first six months in existence and was primarily featured as a network identification slide at the beginning of \"The Late Show with Joan Rivers\". On April 5, 1987, when the network inaugurated its prime time programming, a more familiar logo based on 20th Century Fox's signature logo design was introduced, featuring just the capitalized \"FOX\" name alongside the familiar trademark searchlights and double-pane platform (Fox's owned-and-operated stations used a variant for station identifications from 1987 to 1989, which incorporated both an \"O\" and searchlight in negative space, the latter of which intersected the \"X\" and panes within the otherwise translucent yellow/gold logo; until as late as the mid-1990s, some Fox affiliates that did not license the regulation network logo, or which used CGI to output their station logos with local production houses which tried to emulate the parent network's logo as close as possible, used those that imitated the 20th Century Fox-inspired design in their station logos).\nIn September 1993, the familiar logo was given a more \"hip\" makeover, with the \"FOX\" wordmark overhauled into its current proprietary logotype and the angle changed, removing the tilting (the 1987 logo remained in use during the 1993\u201394 season in print advertisements featured in \"TV Guide\" and other television listings magazines). Starting with the introduction of this logo, the network began displaying an on-screen bug within its programs on the lower right-hand corner of the screen (initially for one minute at the start of each program segment or act, eventually being displayed throughout the program outside commercial breaks, before reverting to the former display format regularly upon the 2009 digital transition). The \"O\" character also underwent a makeover, acquiring its trademark pillar-like bowl, which has since become a major focal point for the logo and Fox advertising in lieu of the searchlight motif. The \"O\" is alternately used as a zero character in the station logo of several Fox affiliates which have a tens channel location, including Phoenix's channel 10, KSAZ-TV, and Sacramento affiliate KTXL-TV, channel 40.\nAnother revised logo was introduced for the 1995\u201396 television season, removing the searchlights, but retaining the two lower panes and adding a third pane atop the logotype. A variant of the original 1993 design was implemented in 1996, excluding the panes underneath the network name, but restoring the searchlights placed behind the \"F\" and \"X\" in the Fox wordmark.\nThe current version of the logo was introduced in 1999, removing the searchlights completely and switching the logo exclusively to a wordmark design. Despite this, the searchlight theme remained an integral part of 21st Century Fox's branding efforts; they are still incorporated into Fox News Channel's logo, and the universal station logo introduced in 2006 by Fox's owned-and-operated stations \u2013 which were retained by the seven former O&amp;Os that Fox Television Stations sold in 2008 to Local TV and had spread to several Fox stations owned by Tribune Broadcasting (including those it acquired through the company's 2013 merger with Local TV; the logo introduced by the O&amp;Os was modified for Tribune's Fox affiliates in 2012 to feature only one searchlight as part of the company's graphical standardizations for those stations) and certain other Fox affiliates not owned or operated by either company. The 1996\u201399 searchlight logo is still used within the logos of a small number of Fox affiliates; the searchlights continued to be featured in the logo of sister channel FX until a rebranding effort in 2008. The screen bug may have been used from 1999 to 2014; when the network upgraded to high-definition, the watermark placement remained at the 480i format. Until March 14, 2016, they did not display the on-screen bug, just the hashtag missing the Fox bug, used on some affiliates.\nFor the 2019\u201320 season, Fox implemented branding elements by Trollb\u00e4ck + Company with the logo mark slightly thickened, along with animations of the mark with its shapes incorporated into advertising and on-air branding elements (including an animation of the abstract shapes morphing into the main Fox logo).\nControversy.\nControversy surrounded the network in 2002 and 2003 over profanity, expressed respectively by Cher and Nicole Richie, aired live during Fox's broadcast of the Billboard Music Awards on its affiliates in the Eastern and Central Time Zones despite the use of five-second audio delays; the indecent material was edited out when the program was broadcast in other time zones from the Mountain Time Zone westward. Both of the obscene instances were condemned by the Parents Television Council, and named by them among the worst instances on television from 2001 to 2004. PTC members filed tens of thousands of complaints to the Federal Communications Commission regarding the broadcasts. A subsequent apology made by Fox representatives was labeled a \"sham\" by PTC president L. Brent Bozell III, who argued that the network could have easily used an audio delay to edit out the obscene language. As the FCC was investigating the broadcasts, in 2004, Fox announced that it would begin extending live broadcast delays to five minutes from its standard five or ten seconds to more easily be able to edit out obscenities uttered over the air. In June 2007, in the case \"Federal Communications Commission v. Fox Television Stations\", the U.S. Second Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that the FCC could not issue indecency fines against Fox because it does not have the authority to fine broadcasters for fleeting expletives, such as in the case of the Billboard Awards. The FCC eventually decided to appeal the Second Circuit Court's finding. The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari and oral arguments in FCC v. Fox, et al., began November 4, 2008.\nThe Parents Television Council has also criticized many popular Fox shows for perceived indecent content, such as \"Family Guy\", \"The Simpsons\", \"American Dad!\", \"Futurama\", \"Cops\", \"Hell's Kitchen\", \"24\", \"House\", \"Married... with Children\", \"Bones\", \"Arrested Development\", \"Prison Break\", \"'Til Death\", \"Malcolm in the Middle\", \"The O.C.\", and \"That '70s Show\". The Council sometimes has gone even as far as to file complaints with the Federal Communications Commission regarding indecent content within Fox programming, having done so for \"That '70s Show\" and \"Married by America\", having successfully been able to get the FCC to fine the network nearly $1\u00a0million for its airing of the latter program. That fine was reduced to $91,000 in January 2009 after an appeal of the fine by Fox was granted as a result of its earlier discovery that the FCC originally claimed to have received 159 complaints regarding the content in \"Married by America\"; it later admitted to only receiving 90, which came from only 23 people. A study of the complaints by blogger Jeff Jarvis deduced that all but two were virtually identical to each other, meaning that the $1.2\u00a0million judgment was based on original complaints written by a total of only three people. On September 21, 2012, the United States Department of Justice dismissed the lawsuit.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46253", "revid": "41002480", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46253", "title": "Fever", "text": "Raised body temperature caused by disease\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nFever or pyrexia in humans is a symptom of an anti-infection defense mechanism that appears with body temperature exceeding the normal range caused by an increase in the body's temperature set point in the hypothalamus. There is no single agreed-upon upper limit for normal temperature: sources use values ranging between in humans.\nThe increase in set point triggers increased muscle contractions and causes a feeling of cold or chills. This results in greater heat production and efforts to conserve heat. When the set point temperature returns to normal, a person feels hot, becomes flushed, and may begin to sweat. Rarely a fever may trigger a febrile seizure, with this being more common in young children. Fevers do not typically go higher than .\nA fever can be caused by many medical conditions ranging from non-serious to life-threatening. This includes viral, bacterial, and parasitic infections\u2014such as influenza, the common cold, meningitis, urinary tract infections, appendicitis, Lassa fever, COVID-19, and malaria. Non-infectious causes include vasculitis, deep vein thrombosis, connective tissue disease, side effects of medication or vaccination, and cancer. It differs from hyperthermia, in that hyperthermia is an increase in body temperature over the temperature set point, due to either too much heat production or not enough heat loss.\nTreatment to reduce fever is generally not required. Treatment of associated pain and inflammation, however, may be useful and help a person rest. Medications such as ibuprofen or paracetamol (acetaminophen) may help with this as well as lower temperature. Children younger than three months require medical attention, as might people with serious medical problems such as a compromised immune system or people with other symptoms. Hyperthermia requires treatment.\nFever is one of the most common medical signs. It is part of about 30% of healthcare visits by children and occurs in up to 75% of adults who are seriously sick. While fever evolved as a defense mechanism, treating a fever does not appear to improve or worsen outcomes. Fever is often viewed with greater concern by parents and healthcare professionals than is usually deserved, a phenomenon known as \"fever phobia.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAssociated symptoms.\nA fever is usually accompanied by sickness behavior, which consists of lethargy, depression, loss of appetite, sleepiness, hyperalgesia, dehydration, and the inability to concentrate. Sleeping with a fever can often cause intense or confusing nightmares, commonly called \"fever dreams\". Mild to severe delirium (which can also cause hallucinations) may also present itself during high fevers.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nHyperthermia.\nHyperthermia is an elevation of body temperature over the temperature set point, due to either too much heat production or not enough heat loss. Hyperthermia is thus not considered fever. Hyperthermia should not be confused with hyperpyrexia (which is a very high fever).\nClinically, it is important to distinguish between fever and hyperthermia as hyperthermia may quickly lead to death and does not respond to antipyretic medications. The distinction may however be difficult to make in an emergency setting, and is often established by identifying possible causes.\nMechanism.\nHypothalamus.\nTemperature is regulated in the hypothalamus. The trigger of a fever, called a pyrogen, results in the release of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). PGE2 in turn acts on the hypothalamus, which creates a systemic response in the body, causing heat-generating effects to match a new higher temperature set point. There are four receptors in which PGE2 can bind (EP1-4), with a previous study showing the EP3 subtype is what mediates the fever response. Hence, the hypothalamus can be seen as working like a thermostat. When the set point is raised, the body increases its temperature through both active generation of heat and retention of heat. Peripheral vasoconstriction both reduces heat loss through the skin and causes the person to feel cold. Norepinephrine increases thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue, and muscle contraction through shivering raises the metabolic rate.\nIf these measures are insufficient to make the blood temperature in the brain match the new set point in the hypothalamus, the brain orchestrates heat effector mechanisms via the autonomic nervous system or primary motor center for shivering. These may be:\nWhen the hypothalamic set point moves back to baseline\u2014either spontaneously or via medication\u2014normal functions such as sweating, and the reverse of the foregoing processes (e.g., vasodilation, end of shivering, and nonshivering heat production) are used to cool the body to the new, lower setting.\nThis contrasts with hyperthermia, in which the normal setting remains, and the body overheats through undesirable retention of excess heat or over-production of heat. Hyperthermia is usually the result of an excessively hot environment (heat stroke) or an adverse reaction to drugs. Fever can be differentiated from hyperthermia by the circumstances surrounding it and its response to anti-pyretic medications.\nIn infants, the autonomic nervous system may also activate brown adipose tissue to produce heat (non-shivering thermogenesis).\nIncreased heart rate and vasoconstriction contribute to increased blood pressure in fever.\nPyrogens.\nA pyrogen is a substance that induces fever. In the presence of an infectious agent, such as bacteria, viruses, viroids, \"etc\"., the immune response of the body is to inhibit their growth and eliminate them. The most common pyrogens are endotoxins, which are lipopolysaccharides (LPS) produced by Gram-negative bacteria such as \"E. coli.\" But pyrogens include non-endotoxic substances (derived from microorganisms other than gram-negative-bacteria or from chemical substances) as well. The types of pyrogens include internal (endogenous) and external (exogenous) to the body.\nThe \"pyrogenicity\" of given pyrogens varies: in extreme cases, bacterial pyrogens can act as superantigens and cause rapid and dangerous fevers. \nEndogenous.\nEndogenous pyrogens are cytokines released from monocytes (which are part of the immune system). In general, they stimulate chemical responses, often in the presence of an antigen, leading to a fever. Whilst they can be a product of external factors like exogenous pyrogens, they can also be induced by internal factors like damage associated molecular patterns such as cases like rheumatoid arthritis or lupus.\nMajor endogenous pyrogens are interleukin 1 (\u03b1 and \u03b2) and interleukin 6 (IL-6). Minor endogenous pyrogens include interleukin-8, tumor necrosis factor-\u03b2, macrophage inflammatory protein-\u03b1 and macrophage inflammatory protein-\u03b2 as well as interferon-\u03b1, interferon-\u03b2, and interferon-\u03b3. Tumor necrosis factor-\u03b1 (TNF) also acts as a pyrogen, mediated by interleukin 1 (IL-1) release. These cytokine factors are released into general circulation, where they migrate to the brain's circumventricular organs where they are more easily absorbed than in areas protected by the blood\u2013brain barrier. The cytokines then bind to endothelial receptors on vessel walls to receptors on microglial cells, resulting in activation of the arachidonic acid pathway.\nOf these, IL-1\u03b2, TNF, and IL-6 are able to raise the temperature setpoint of an organism and cause fever. These proteins produce a cyclooxygenase which induces the hypothalamic production of PGE2 which then stimulates the release of neurotransmitters such as cyclic adenosine monophosphate and increases body temperature.\nExogenous.\nExogenous pyrogens are external to the body and are of microbial origin. In general, these pyrogens, including bacterial cell wall products, may act on Toll-like receptors in the hypothalamus and elevate the thermoregulatory setpoint.\nAn example of a class of exogenous pyrogens are bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS) present in the cell wall of gram-negative bacteria. According to one mechanism of pyrogen action, an immune system protein, lipopolysaccharide-binding protein (LBP), binds to LPS, and the LBP\u2013LPS complex then binds to a CD14 receptor on a macrophage. The LBP-LPS binding to CD14 results in cellular synthesis and release of various endogenous cytokines, e.g., interleukin 1 (IL-1), interleukin 6 (IL-6), and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF\u03b1). A further downstream event is activation of the arachidonic acid pathway.\nNeural circuit mechanism with PGE2 action.\nPGE2 release comes from the arachidonic acid pathway. This pathway (as it relates to fever), is mediated by the enzymes phospholipase A2 (PLA2), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), and prostaglandin E2 synthase. These enzymes ultimately mediate the synthesis and release of PGE2.\nPGE2 is the ultimate mediator of the febrile response. The setpoint temperature of the body will remain elevated until PGE2 is no longer present. PGE2 acts on neurons in the preoptic area (POA) through the prostaglandin E receptor 3 (EP3). EP3-expressing neurons in the POA innervate the dorsomedial hypothalamus (DMH), the rostral raphe pallidus nucleus in the medulla oblongata (rRPa), and the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus. Under normal conditions, EP3-expressing neurons in the POA are important thermoregulatory neurons, which provide continuous inhibitory signals with the transmitter GABA to control sympathetic output neurons in the DMH and rRPa, thereby performing bidirectional regulation of basal body temperature. During infection, PGE2 produced in the brain inhibits the activity of EP3-expressing neurons in the POA to attenuate the inhibition of sympathetic output, and thereby activates the sympathetic output system, which evokes non-shivering thermogenesis to produce body heat and skin vasoconstriction to decrease heat loss from the body surface, leading to fever. It is presumed that the innervation from the POA to the PVN mediates the neuroendocrine effects of fever through the pathway involving pituitary gland and various endocrine organs.\nDiagnosis.\nA range for normal temperatures has been found. Central temperatures, such as rectal temperatures, are more accurate than peripheral temperatures.\nFever is generally agreed to be present if the elevated temperature is caused by a raised set point and:\nIn adults, the normal range of temperatures in healthy individuals is (rectal), (ear), (urine), (oral), and (axillary), with no significant gender differences.\nNormal body temperatures vary depending on many factors, including age, sex, time of day, ambient temperature, activity level, and more. Normal daily temperature variation has been described as 0.5\u00a0\u00b0C (0.9\u00a0\u00b0F). A raised temperature is not always a fever. For example, the temperature rises in healthy people when they exercise, but this is not considered a fever, as the set point is normal. On the other hand, a \"normal\" temperature may be a fever, if it is unusually high for that person; for example, medically frail elderly people have a decreased ability to generate body heat, so a \"normal\" temperature of may represent a clinically significant fever.\nAssociated conditions.\nFever is a common symptom of many medical conditions:\nAdult and pediatric manifestations for the same disease may differ; for instance, in COVID-19, one metastudy describes 92.8% of adults versus 43.9% of children presenting with fever.\nIn addition, fever can result from a reaction to an incompatible blood product.\nTypes.\nVarious patterns of measured patient temperatures have been observed, some of which may be indicative of a particular medical diagnosis:\nAmong the types of intermittent fever are ones specific to cases of malaria caused by different pathogens. These are:\nIn addition, there is disagreement regarding whether a specific fever pattern is associated with Hodgkin's lymphoma\u2014the Pel\u2013Ebstein fever, with patients argued to present high temperature for one week, followed by low for the next week, and so on, where the generality of this pattern is debated.\nPersistent fever that cannot be explained after repeated routine clinical inquiries is called fever of unknown origin. A neutropenic fever, also called febrile neutropenia, is a fever in the absence of normal immune system function. Because of the lack of infection-fighting neutrophils, a bacterial infection can spread rapidly; this fever is, therefore, usually considered to require urgent medical attention. This kind of fever is more commonly seen in people receiving immune-suppressing chemotherapy than in apparently healthy people.\nHyperpyrexia.\nHyperpyrexia is an extreme elevation of body temperature which, depending upon the source, is classified as a core body temperature greater than or equal to ; the range of hyperpyrexia includes cases considered severe (\u2265 40\u00a0\u00b0C) and extreme (\u2265 42\u00a0\u00b0C). It differs from hyperthermia in that one's thermoregulatory system's set point for body temperature is set above normal, then heat is generated to achieve it. In contrast, hyperthermia involves body temperature rising above its set point due to outside factors. The high temperatures of hyperpyrexia are considered medical emergencies, as they may indicate a serious underlying condition or lead to severe morbidity (including permanent brain damage), or to death. A common cause of hyperpyrexia is an intracranial hemorrhage. Other causes in emergency room settings include Malignant Catatonia, sepsis, Kawasaki syndrome, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, drug overdose, serotonin syndrome, and thyroid storm.\nFunction.\nImmune function.\nFever is thought to contribute to host defense, as the reproduction of pathogens with strict temperature requirements can be hindered, and the rates of some important immunological reactions are increased by temperature. Fever has been described in teaching texts as assisting the healing process in various ways, including:\n* increased mobility of leukocytes;\n* enhanced leukocyte phagocytosis;\n* decreased endotoxin effects; and\n* increased proliferation of T cells.\nAdvantages and disadvantages.\nA fever response to an infectious disease is generally regarded as protective, whereas fever in non-infections may be maladaptive. Studies have not been consistent on whether treating fever generally worsens or improves mortality risk. Benefits or harms may depend on the type of infection, health status of the patient and other factors. Studies using warm-blooded vertebrates suggest that they recover more rapidly from infections or critical illness due to fever. In sepsis, fever is associated with reduced mortality.\nManagement.\nFever does not necessarily need to be treated, and most people with a fever recover without specific medical attention. Although it is unpleasant, fever rarely rises to a dangerous level even if untreated. Damage to the brain generally does not occur until temperatures reach , and it is rare for an untreated fever to exceed . Treating fever in people with sepsis does not affect outcomes. Small trials have shown no benefit of treating fevers of or higher of critically ill patients in ICUs, and one trial was terminated early because patients receiving aggressive fever treatment were dying more often.\nAccording to the NIH, the two assumptions which are generally used to argue in favor of treating fevers have not been experimentally validated. These are that (1) a fever is noxious, and (2) suppression of a fever will reduce its noxious effect. Most of the other studies supporting the association of fever with poorer outcomes have been observational in nature. In theory, these critically ill patients and those faced with additional physiologic stress may benefit from fever reduction, but the evidence on both sides of the argument appears to be mostly equivocal.\nConservative measures.\nLimited evidence supports sponging or bathing feverish children with tepid water. The use of a fan or air conditioning may somewhat reduce the temperature and increase comfort. If the temperature reaches the extremely high level of hyperpyrexia, aggressive cooling is required (generally produced mechanically via conduction by applying numerous ice packs across most of the body or direct submersion in ice water). In general, people are advised to keep adequately hydrated. Whether increased fluid intake improves symptoms or shortens respiratory illnesses such as the common cold is not known.\nMedications.\nMedications that lower fevers are called \"antipyretics\". The antipyretic ibuprofen is effective in reducing fevers in children. It is more effective than acetaminophen (paracetamol) in children. Ibuprofen and acetaminophen may safely be used together in children with fevers. The efficacy of acetaminophen by itself in children with fevers has been questioned. Ibuprofen is also superior to aspirin in children with fevers. Additionally, aspirin is not recommended in children and young adults (those under the age of 16 or 19 depending on the country) due to the risk of Reye's syndrome.\nUsing both paracetamol and ibuprofen at the same time or alternating between the two is more effective at decreasing fever than using only paracetamol or ibuprofen. It is not clear if it increases child comfort. Response or nonresponse to medications does not predict whether or not a child has a serious illness.\nWith respect to the effect of antipyretics on the risk of death in those with infection, studies have found mixed results, as of 2019.\nEpidemiology.\nFever is one of the most common medical signs. It is part of about 30% of healthcare visits by children, and occurs in up to 75% of adults who are seriously sick. About 5% of people who go to an emergency room have a fever.\nHistory.\nA number of types of fever were known as early as 460 BC to 370 BC when Hippocrates was practicing medicine including that due to malaria (tertian or every 2 days and quartan or every 3 days). It also became clear around this time that fever was a symptom of disease rather than a disease in and of itself.\nInfections presenting with fever were a major source of mortality in humans for about 200,000 years. Until the late nineteenth century, approximately half of all humans died from infections before the age of fifteen.\nAn older term, febricula (a diminutive form of the Latin word for fever), was once used to refer to a low-grade fever lasting only a few days. This term fell out of use in the early 20th century, and the symptoms it referred to are now thought to have been caused mainly by various minor viral respiratory infections.\nSociety and culture.\nPediatrics.\nFever is often viewed with greater concern by parents and healthcare professionals than might be deserved, a phenomenon known as fever phobia, which is based in both caregiver's and parents' misconceptions about fever in children. Among them, many parents incorrectly believe that fever is a disease rather than a medical sign, that even low fevers are harmful, and that any temperature even briefly or slightly above the oversimplified \"normal\" number marked on a thermometer is a clinically significant fever. They are also afraid of harmless side effects like febrile seizures and dramatically overestimate the likelihood of permanent damage from typical fevers. The underlying problem, according to professor of pediatrics Barton D. Schmitt, is that \"as parents we tend to suspect that our children's brains may melt.\" As a result of these misconceptions parents are anxious, give the child fever-reducing medicine when the temperature is technically normal or only slightly elevated, and interfere with the child's sleep to give the child more medicine.\nOther animals.\nFever is an important metric for the diagnosis of disease in domestic animals. The body temperature of animals, which is taken rectally, is different from one species to another. For example, a horse is said to have a fever above (). In species that allow the body to have a wide range of \"normal\" temperatures, such as camels, whose body temperature varies as the environmental temperature varies, the body temperature which constitutes a febrile state differs depending on the environmental temperature. Fever can also be behaviorally induced by invertebrates that do not have immune-system based fever. For instance, some species of grasshopper will thermoregulate to achieve body temperatures that are 2\u20135\u00a0\u00b0C higher than normal in order to inhibit the growth of fungal pathogens such as \"Beauveria bassiana\" and \"Metarhizium acridum\". Honeybee colonies are also able to induce a fever in response to a fungal parasite \"Ascosphaera apis\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46256", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46256", "title": "Telemetry", "text": "Automatic collection and transmission of data\nTelemetry is the \"in situ\" collection of measurements or other data at remote points and their automatic transmission to receiving equipment (telecommunication) for monitoring. The word is derived from the Greek roots \"tele\", 'far off', and \"metron\", 'measure'. Systems that need external instructions and data to operate require the counterpart of telemetry: telecommand.\nAlthough the term commonly refers to wireless data transfer mechanisms (e.g., using radio, ultrasonic, or infrared systems), it also encompasses data transferred over other media such as a telephone or computer network, optical link or other wired communications like power line carriers. Many modern telemetry systems take advantage of the low cost and ubiquity of GSM networks by using SMS to receive and transmit telemetry data.\nA \"telemeter\" is a physical device used in telemetry. It consists of a sensor, a transmission path, and a display, recording, or control device. Electronic devices are widely used in telemetry and can be wireless or hard-wired, analog or digital. Other technologies are also possible, such as mechanical, hydraulic and optical.\nTelemetry may be commutated to allow the transmission of multiple data streams in a fixed frame.\nHistory.\nThe beginning of industrial telemetry lies in the steam age, although the sensor was not called \"telemeter\" at that time. Examples are James Watt's (1736-1819) additions to his steam engines for monitoring from a (near) distance such as the mercury pressure gauge and the fly-ball governor.\nAlthough the original telemeter referred to a ranging device (the rangefinding telemeter), by the late 19th century the same term had been in wide use by electrical engineers applying it refer to electrically operated devices measuring many other quantities besides distance (for instance, in the patent of an \"Electric Telemeter Transmitter\"). General telemeters included such sensors as the thermocouple (from the work of Thomas Johann Seebeck), the resistance thermometer (by William Siemens based on the work of Humphry Davy), and the electrical strain gauge (based on Lord Kelvin's discovery that conductors under mechanical strain change their resistance) and output devices such as Samuel Morse's telegraph sounder and the relay. In 1889 this led an author in the Institution of Civil Engineers proceedings to suggest that the term for the rangefinder telemeter might be replaced with tacheometer.\nIn the 1930s use of electrical telemeters grew rapidly. The electrical strain gauge was widely used in rocket and aviation research and the radiosonde was invented for meteorological measurements. The advent of World War II gave an impetus to industrial development and henceforth many of these telemeters became commercially viable.\nCarrying on from rocket research, radio telemetry was used routinely as space exploration got underway. Spacecraft are in a place where a physical connection is not possible, leaving radio or other electromagnetic waves (such as infrared lasers) as the only viable option for telemetry. During crewed space missions it is used to monitor not only parameters of the vehicle, but also the health and life support of the astronauts. During the Cold War telemetry found uses in espionage. US intelligence found that they could monitor the telemetry from Soviet missile tests by building a telemeter of their own to intercept the radio signals and hence learn a great deal about Soviet capabilities.\nTypes of telemeter.\nTelemeters are the physical devices used in telemetry. It consists of a sensor, a transmission path, and a display, recording, or control device. Electronic devices are widely used in telemetry and can be wireless or hard-wired, analog or digital. Other technologies are also possible, such as mechanical, hydraulic and optical.\nTelemetering information over wire had its origins in the 19th century. One of the first data-transmission circuits was developed in 1845 between the Russian Tsar's Winter Palace and army headquarters. In 1874, French engineers built a system of weather and snow-depth sensors on Mont Blanc that transmitted real-time information to Paris. In 1901 the American inventor C.\u00a0Michalke patented the selsyn, a circuit for sending synchronized rotation information over a distance. In 1906 a set of seismic stations were built with telemetering to the Pulkovo Observatory in Russia. In 1912, Commonwealth Edison developed a system of telemetry to monitor electrical loads on its power grid. The Panama Canal (completed 1913\u20131914) used extensive telemetry systems to monitor locks and water levels.\nWireless telemetry made early appearances in the radiosonde, developed concurrently in 1930 by Robert Bureau in France and Pavel Molchanov in Russia. Molchanov's system modulated temperature and pressure measurements by converting them to wireless Morse code. The German V-2 rocket used a system of primitive multiplexed radio signals called \"Messina\" to report four rocket parameters, but it was so unreliable that Wernher von Braun once claimed it was more useful to watch the rocket through binoculars.\nIn the US and the USSR, the Messina system was quickly replaced with better systems; in both cases, based on pulse-position modulation (PPM).\nEarly Soviet missile and space telemetry systems which were developed in the late 1940s used either PPM (e.g., the Tral telemetry system developed by OKB-MEI) or pulse-duration modulation (e.g., the RTS-5 system developed by NII-885). In the United States, early work employed similar systems, but were later replaced by pulse-code modulation (PCM) (for example, in the Mars probe Mariner\u00a04). Later Soviet interplanetary probes used redundant radio systems, transmitting telemetry by PCM on a decimeter band and PPM on a centimeter band.\nRelationship to telematics.\nAlthough the two terms are closely related, telemetry and telematics are used differently depending on the field. \nTelemetry refers to the remote measurement and transmission of data and has been traditionally used in highly specialized areas such as: \nTelematics, by contrast, emerged later as a broader, more applied concept that combines telemetry with telecommunications, informatics, and digital fleet platforms. The term is most often used in industries that involve connected, mobile assets, including: \nIn short, telemetry is the enabling technology (remote measurement and data transmission), while telematics describes the integrated, digitalized applications that build on telemetry to deliver business, safety, and operational insights. \nApplications.\nMeteorology.\nWeather balloons use telemetry to transmit meteorological data since 1920.\nOil and gas industry.\nTelemetry is used to transmit drilling mechanics and formation evaluation information uphole, in real time, as a well is drilled. These services are known as Measurement while drilling and Logging while drilling. Information acquired thousands of feet below ground, while drilling, is sent through the drilling hole to the surface sensors and the demodulation software. The pressure wave (sana) is translated into useful information after DSP and noise filters. This information is used for Formation evaluation, Drilling Optimization, and Geosteering.\nMotor racing.\nTelemetry is used in modern motor racing, allowing race engineers to interpret data collected during a test or race and use it to properly tune the car for optimum performance. Systems used in series such as Formula One have become advanced to the point where the potential lap time of the car can be calculated, and this time is what the driver is expected to meet. Examples of measurements on a race car include accelerations (G\u00a0forces) in three axes, temperature readings, wheel speed, and suspension displacement. In Formula One, driver input is also recorded so the team can assess driver performance and (in case of an accident) the FIA can determine or rule out driver error as a possible cause.\nLater developments include two-way telemetry which allows engineers to update calibrations on the car in real time (even while it is out on the track). In Formula One, two-way telemetry surfaced in the early 1990s and consisted of a message display on the dashboard which the team could update. Its development continued until May 2001, when it was first allowed on the cars. By 2002, teams were able to change engine mapping and deactivate engine sensors from the pit while the car was on the track. For the 2003 season, the FIA banned two-way telemetry from Formula One; however, the technology may be used in other types of racing or on road cars.\nOne way telemetry system has also been applied in R/C racing car to get information by car's sensors like: engine RPM, voltage, temperatures, throttle.\nTransportation.\nIn the transportation industry, a Fleet telematics system is used to provide information about a vehicle or driver's performance by collecting data from on-board sensors, such as a GPS tracking unit or a telematics control unit (TCU). This is undertaken for various reasons ranging from staff compliance monitoring, insurance rating, fuel management to predictive maintenance.\nAs part of an Intelligent transportation system, telemetry is used to link traffic counter devices to data recorders to measure traffic flows and vehicle lengths and weights.\nTelemetry is used by the railway industry for measuring the health of trackage. This permits optimized and focused predictive and preventative maintenance. Typically this is done with specialized trains, such as the New Measurement Train used in the United Kingdom by Network Rail, which can check for track defects, such as problems with gauge, and deformations in the rail. Japan uses similar, but quicker trains, nicknamed Doctor Yellow. Such trains, besides checking the tracks, can also verify whether or not there are any problems with the overhead power supply (catenary), where it is installed. Dedicated rail inspection companies, such as Sperry Rail, have their own customized rail cars and rail-wheel equipped trucks, that use a variety of methods, including lasers, ultrasound, and induction (measuring resulting magnetic fields from running electricity into rails) to find any defects.\nAgriculture.\nMost activities related to healthy crops and good yields depend on timely availability of weather and soil data. Therefore, wireless weather stations play a major role in disease prevention and precision irrigation. These stations transmit parameters necessary for decision-making to a base station: air temperature and relative humidity, precipitation and leaf wetness (for disease prediction models), solar radiation and wind speed (to calculate evapotranspiration), water deficit stress (WDS) leaf sensors and soil moisture (crucial to irrigation decisions).\nBecause local micro-climates can vary significantly, such data needs to come from within the crop. Monitoring stations usually transmit data back by terrestrial radio, although occasionally satellite systems are used. Solar power is often employed to make the station independent of the power grid.\nWater management.\nTelemetry is used in water management, including water quality and stream gauging functions. Major applications include AMR (automatic meter reading), groundwater monitoring, leak detection in distribution pipelines and equipment surveillance. Having data available in almost real time allows quick reactions to events in the field. Telemetry control allows engineers to intervene with assets such as pumps and by remotely switching pumps on or off depending on the circumstances.\nDefense, space and resource exploration.\nTelemetry is used in complex systems such as missiles, RPVs, spacecraft, oil rigs, and chemical plants since it allows the automatic monitoring, alerting, and record-keeping necessary for efficient and safe operation. Space agencies such as NASA, ISRO, the European Space Agency (ESA), and other agencies use telemetry and/or telecommand systems to collect data from spacecraft and satellites.\nTelemetry is used in the development of missiles, satellites and aircraft because the system might be destroyed during or after the test. Engineers need critical system parameters to analyze (and improve) the performance of the system. In the absence of telemetry, this data would often be unavailable.\nSpace science.\nTelemetry is used by crewed or uncrewed spacecraft for data transmission. Distances of more than 25.1 billion kilometers (May 2025) have been covered, e.g., by Voyager\u00a01.\nRocketry.\nIn rocketry, telemetry equipment forms an integral part of the rocket range assets used to monitor the position and health of a launch vehicle to determine range safety flight termination criteria (Range purpose is for public safety). Problems include the extreme environment (temperature, acceleration and vibration), the energy supply, antenna alignment and (at long distances, e.g., in spaceflight) signal travel time.\nFlight testing.\nToday nearly every type of aircraft, missiles, or spacecraft carries a wireless telemetry system as it is tested. Aeronautical mobile telemetry is used for the safety of the pilots and persons on the ground during flight tests. Telemetry from an on-board flight test instrumentation system is the primary source of real-time measurement and status information transmitted during the testing of crewed and uncrewed aircraft.\nMilitary intelligence.\nIntercepted telemetry was an important source of intelligence for the United States and UK when Soviet missiles were tested; for this purpose, the United States operated a listening post in Iran. Eventually, the Russians discovered the United States intelligence-gathering network and encrypted their missile-test telemetry signals. Telemetry was also a source for the Soviets, who operated listening ships in Cardigan Bay to eavesdrop on UK missile tests performed in the area.\nEnergy monitoring.\nIn factories, buildings and houses, energy consumption of systems such as HVAC are monitored at multiple locations; related parameters (e.g., temperature) are sent via wireless telemetry to a central location. The information is collected and processed, enabling the most efficient use of energy. Such systems also facilitate predictive maintenance.\nResource distribution.\nMany resources need to be distributed over wide areas. Telemetry is useful in these cases, since it allows the logistics system to channel resources where they are needed, as well as provide security for those assets; principal examples of this are dry goods, fluids, and granular bulk solids.\nDry goods.\nDry goods, such as packaged merchandise, may be tracked and remotely monitored, tracked and inventoried by RFID sensing systems, barcode reader, optical character recognition (OCR) reader, or other sensing devices, coupled to telemetry devices, to detect RFID tags, barcode labels or other identifying markers affixed to the item, its package, or (for large items and bulk shipments) affixed to its shipping container or vehicle. This facilitates knowledge of their location, and can record their status and disposition, as when merchandise with barcode labels is scanned through a checkout reader at point-of-sale systems in a retail store. Stationary or hand-held barcode RFID scanners or Optical reader with remote communications, can be used to expedite inventory tracking and counting in stores, warehouses, shipping terminals, transportation carriers and factories.\nFluids.\nFluids stored in tanks are a principal object of constant commercial telemetry. This typically includes monitoring of tank farms in gasoline refineries and chemical plants, and distributed or remote tanks, which must be replenished when empty (as with gas station storage tanks, home heating oil tanks, or ag-chemical tanks at farms), or emptied when full (as with production from oil wells, accumulated waste products, and newly produced fluids). Telemetry is used to communicate the variable measurements of flow and tank level sensors detecting fluid movements and/or volumes by pneumatic, hydrostatic, or differential pressure; tank-confined ultrasonic, radar or Doppler effect echoes; or mechanical or magnetic sensors.\nBulk solids.\nTelemetry of bulk solids is common for tracking and reporting the volume status and condition of grain and livestock feed bins, powdered or granular food, powders and pellets for manufacturing, sand and gravel, and other granular bulk solids. While technology associated with fluid tank monitoring also applies, in part, to granular bulk solids, reporting of overall container weight, or other gross characteristics and conditions, are sometimes required, owing to bulk solids' more complex and variable physical characteristics.\nMedicine/healthcare.\nTelemetry is used for patients (biotelemetry) who are at risk of abnormal heart activity, generally in a coronary care unit. Telemetry specialists are sometimes used to monitor many patients within a hospital. Such patients are outfitted with measuring, recording and transmitting devices. A data log can be useful in diagnosis of the patient's condition by doctors. An alerting function can alert nurses if the patient is suffering from an acute (or dangerous) condition.\nSystems are available in medical-surgical nursing for monitoring to rule out a heart condition, or to monitor a response to antiarrhythmic medications such as amiodarone.\nA new and emerging application for telemetry is in the field of neurophysiology, or neurotelemetry. Neurophysiology is the study of the central and peripheral nervous systems through the recording of bioelectrical activity, whether spontaneous or stimulated. In neurotelemetry (NT) the electroencephalogram (EEG) of a patient is monitored remotely by a registered EEG technologist using advanced communication software. The goal of neurotelemetry is to recognize a decline in a patient's condition before physical signs and symptoms are present.\nNeurotelemetry is synonymous with real-time continuous video EEG monitoring and has application in the epilepsy monitoring unit, neuro ICU, pediatric ICU and newborn ICU. Due to the labor-intensive nature of continuous EEG monitoring NT is typically done in the larger academic teaching hospitals using in-house programs that include R.EEG Technologists, IT support staff, neurologist and neurophysiologist and monitoring support personnel.\nModern microprocessor speeds, software algorithms and video data compression allow hospitals to centrally record and monitor continuous digital EEGs of multiple critically ill patients simultaneously.\nNeurotelemetry and continuous EEG monitoring provides dynamic information about brain function that permits early detection of changes in neurologic status, which is especially useful when the clinical examination is limited.\nFishery and wildlife research and management.\nTelemetry is used to study wildlife, and has been useful for monitoring threatened species at the individual level. Animals under study can be outfitted with instrumentation tags, which include sensors that measure temperature, diving depth and duration (for marine animals), speed and location (using GPS or Argos packages). Telemetry tags can give researchers information about animal behavior, functions, and their environment. This information is then either stored (with archival tags) or the tags can send (or transmit) their information to a satellite or handheld receiving device. Capturing and marking wild animals can put them at some risk, so it is important to minimize these impacts.\nRetail.\nAt a 2005 workshop in Las Vegas, a seminar noted the introduction of telemetry equipment which would allow vending machines to communicate sales and inventory data to a route truck or to a headquarters. This data could be used for a variety of purposes, such as eliminating the need for drivers to make a first trip to see which items needed to be restocked before delivering the inventory.\nRetailers also use RFID tags to track inventory and prevent shoplifting. Most of these tags passively respond to RFID readers (e.g., at the cashier), but active RFID tags are available which periodically transmit location information to a base station.\nLaw enforcement.\nA telemetry-based Tracking system is useful for tracking persons and property in law enforcement. An ankle collar worn by convicts on probation can warn authorities if a person violates the terms of his or her parole, such as by straying from authorized boundaries or visiting an unauthorized location. Telemetry has also enabled bait cars, where law enforcement can rig a car with cameras and tracking equipment and leave it somewhere they expect it to be stolen. When stolen the telemetry equipment reports the location of the vehicle, enabling a Stolen vehicle recovery process where law enforcement can deactivate the engine and lock the doors when it is stopped by responding officers.\nEnergy providers.\nIn some countries, telemetry is used to measure the amount of electrical energy consumed. The electricity meter communicates with a concentrator, and the latter sends the information through GPRS or GSM to the energy provider's server. Telemetry is also used for the remote monitoring of substations and their equipment. For data transmission, phase line carrier systems operating on frequencies between 30 and 400\u00a0kHz are sometimes used.\nFalconry.\nIn falconry, \"telemetry\" means a small radio transmitter carried by a bird of prey that will allow the bird's owner to track it when it is out of sight.\nTesting.\nTelemetry is used in testing hostile environments which are dangerous to humans. Examples include munitions storage facilities, radioactive sites, volcanoes, deep sea, and outer space.\nCommunications.\nTelemetry is used in many battery operated wireless systems to inform monitoring personnel when the battery power is reaching a low point and the end item needs fresh batteries.\nMining.\nIn the mining industry, telemetry serves two main purposes: the measurement of key parameters from mining equipment and the monitoring of safety practices. The information provided by the collection and analysis of key parameters allows for root-cause identification of inefficient operations, unsafe practices and incorrect equipment usage for maximizing productivity and safety. Further applications of the technology allow for sharing knowledge and best practices across the organization.\nSoftware.\nIn software, telemetry is used to gather data on the use and performance of applications and application components, e.g. how often certain features are used, measurements of start-up time and processing time, hardware, application crashes, and general usage statistics and/or user behavior. In some cases, very detailed data is reported like individual window metrics, counts of used features, and individual function timings.\nThis kind of telemetry can be useful to software developers to receive data from a wide variety of endpoints that can't possibly all be tested in-house, as well as getting data on the popularity of certain features and whether they should be given priority or be considered for removal. Due to concerns about privacy since software telemetry can easily be used to profile users, telemetry in user software is often user choice, commonly presented as an opt-out feature (requiring explicit user action to disable it) or user choice during the software installation process.\nInternational standards.\nAs in other telecommunications fields, international standards exist for telemetry equipment and software. International standards producing bodies include Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) for space agencies, Inter-Range Instrumentation Group (IRIG) for missile ranges, and Telemetering Standards Coordination Committee (TSCC), an organisation of the International Foundation for Telemetering.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46259", "revid": "47586549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46259", "title": "Corinthian order", "text": "Order of classical architecture\nThe Corinthian order (, \"Korinthiak\u00f3s rythm\u00f3s\"; ) is the last developed and most ornate of the three principal classical orders of Ancient Greek architecture and Roman architecture. The other two are the Doric order, which was the earliest, followed by the Ionic order. In Ancient Greek architecture, the Corinthian order follows the Ionic in almost all respects, other than the capitals of the columns, though this changed in Roman architecture.\nA Corinthian capital may be seen as an enriched development of the Ionic capital, though one may have to look closely at a Corinthian capital to see the Ionic volutes (\"helices\"), at the corners, perhaps reduced in size and importance, scrolling out above the two ranks of stylized acanthus leaves and stalks (\"cauliculi\" or \"caulicoles\"), eight in all, and to notice that smaller volutes scroll inwards to meet each other on each side. The leaves may be quite stiff, schematic and dry, or they may be extravagantly drilled and undercut, naturalistic and spiky. The flat abacus at the top of the capital has a concave curve on each face, and usually a single flower (\"rosette\") projecting from the leaves below overlaps it on each face.\nWhen classical architecture was revived during the Renaissance, two more orders were added to the canon: the Tuscan order and the Composite order, known in Roman times, but regarded as a grand imperial variant of the Corinthian. The Corinthian has fluted columns and elaborate capitals decorated with acanthus leaves and scrolls. There are many variations.\nThe name \"Corinthian\" is derived from the ancient Greek city of Corinth, although it was probably invented in Athens.\nDescription.\nGreek Corinthian order.\nThe Corinthian order is named for the Greek city-state of Corinth, to which it was connected in the period. However, according to the architectural historian Vitruvius, the column was created by the sculptor Callimachus, probably an Athenian, who drew acanthus leaves growing around a votive basket of toys, with a slab on top, on the grave of a Corinthian girl.\nIts earliest use can be traced back to the Late Classical Period (430\u2013323 BC). The earliest Corinthian capitals, already in fragments and now lost, were found in Bassae in 1811\u201312; they are dated around 420 BC, and are in a temple of Apollo otherwise using the Ionic. There were three of them, carrying the frieze across the far end of the cella, which was open to the adytum. The Corinthian was probably devised to solve the awkwardness the Ionic capital created at corners by having clear and distinct front or back and side-on faces, a problem only finally solved by Vincenzo Scamozzi in the 16th century.\nA simplified late version of the Greek Corinthian capital is often known as the \"Tower of the Winds Corinthian\" after its use on the porches of the Tower of the Winds in Athens (about 50 BC). There is a single row of acanthus leaves at the bottom of the capital, with a row of \"tall, narrow leaves\" behind. These cling tightly to the swelling shaft, and are sometimes described as \"lotus\" leaves, as well as the vague \"water-leaves\" and palm leaves; their similarity to leaf forms on many ancient Egyptian capitals has been remarked on. The form is usually found in smaller columns, both ancient and modern.\nRoman Corinthian order.\nThe style developed its own model in Roman practice, following precedents set by the Temple of Mars Ultor in the Forum of Augustus (c.\u20092 AD). It was employed in southern Gaul at the Maison Carr\u00e9e, N\u00eemes and at the comparable Temple of Augustus and Livia at Vienne. Other prime examples noted by Mark Wilson Jones are the lower order of the Basilica Ulpia and the Arch of Trajan at Ancona (both of the reign of Trajan, 98\u2013117 AD), the Column of Phocas (re-erected in Late Antiquity but 2nd century in origin), and the Temple of Bacchus at Baalbek (c.\u2009150 AD).\nProportion is a defining characteristic of the Corinthian order: the \"coherent integration of dimensions and ratios in accordance with the principles of \"symmetria\"\" are noted by Mark Wilson Jones, who finds that the ratio of total column height to column-shaft height is in a 6:5 ratio, so that, secondarily, the full height of column with capital is often a multiple of 6 Roman feet while the column height itself is a multiple of 5. In its proportions, the Corinthian column is similar to the Ionic column, though it is more slender, and stands apart by its distinctive carved capital.\nThe abacus upon the capital has concave sides to conform to the outscrolling corners of the capital, and it may have a rosette at the center of each side. Corinthian columns were erected on the top level of the Roman Colosseum, holding up the least weight, and also having the slenderest ratio of thickness to height. Their height to width ratio is about 10:1.\nOne variant is the Tivoli order, found at the Temple of Vesta, Tivoli. The Tivoli order's Corinthian capital has two rows of acanthus leaves and its abacus is decorated with oversize fleurons in the form of hibiscus flowers with pronounced spiral pistils. The column flutes have flat tops. The frieze exhibits fruit festoons suspended between bucrania. Above each festoon has a rosette over its center. The cornice does not have modillions.\nGandharan capitals.\nIndo-Corinthian capitals are capitals crowning columns or pilasters, which can be found in the northwestern Indian subcontinent, and usually combine Hellenistic and Indian elements. These capitals are typically dated to the 1st centuries of our era, and constitute important elements of Greco-Buddhist art of Gandhara.\nThe classical design was often adapted, usually taking a more elongated form, and sometimes being combined with scrolls, generally within the context of Buddhist stupas and temples. Indo-Corinthian capitals also incorporated figures of the Buddha or Bodhisattvas, usually as central figures surrounded, and often in the shade, of the luxurious foliage of Corinthian designs.\nByzantine Empire and medieval Europe.\nThough the term \"Corinthian\" is reserved for columns and capitals that adhere fairly closely to one of the classical versions, vegetal decoration to capitals continued to be extremely common in Byzantine architecture and the various styles of the European Middle Ages, from Carolingian architecture to Romanesque architecture and Gothic architecture. There was considerable freedom in the details and the relationship between column (generally not fluted) and capital. Many types of plant were represented, sometimes realistically, as in the capitals in the chapter house at Southwell Minster in England.\nRenaissance Corinthian order.\nDuring the first flush of the Italian Renaissance, the Florentine architectural theorist Francesco di Giorgio expressed the human analogies that writers who followed Vitruvius often associated with the human form, in squared drawings he made of the Corinthian capital overlaid with human heads, to show the proportions common to both.\nThe Corinthian architrave is divided in two or three sections, which may be equal, or may bear interesting proportional relationships, to one with another. Above the plain, unadorned architrave lies the frieze, which may be richly carved with a continuous design or left plain, as at the U.S. Capitol extension. At the Capitol the proportions of architrave to frieze are exactly 1:1. Above that, the profiles of the cornice mouldings are like those of the Ionic order. If the cornice is very deep, it may be supported by brackets or modillions, which are ornamental brackets used in a series under a cornice.\nThe Corinthian column is almost always fluted, and the flutes of a Corinthian column may be enriched. They may be filleted, with rods nestled within the hollow flutes, or stop-fluted, with the rods rising a third of the way, to where the entasis begins. In French, these are called \"chandelles\" and sometimes terminate in carved wisps of flame, or with bellflowers. Alternatively, beading or chains of husks may take the place of the fillets in the fluting, Corinthian being the most flexible of the orders, with more opportunities for variation.\nElaborating upon an offhand remark when Vitruvius accounted for the origin of its acanthus capital, it became a commonplace to identify the Corinthian column with the slender figure of a young girl; in this mode the classifying French painter Nicolas Poussin wrote to his friend Fr\u00e9art de Chantelou in 1642:\nThe beautiful girls whom you will have seen in N\u00eemes will not, I am sure, have delighted your spirit any less than the beautiful columns of Maison Carr\u00e9e for the one is no more than an old copy of the other.\nSir William Chambers expressed the conventional comparison with the Doric order:\nThe proportions of the orders were by the ancients formed on those of the human body, and consequently, it could not be their intention to make a Corinthian column, which, as Vitruvius observes, is to represent the delicacy of a young girl, as thick and much taller than a Doric one, which is designed to represent the bulk and vigour of a muscular full grown man.\nHistory.\nThe oldest known example of a Corinthian column is in the Temple of Apollo Epicurius at Bassae in Arcadia, c. 450\u2013420 BC. It is not part of the order of the temple itself, which has a Doric colonnade surrounding the temple and an Ionic order within the cella enclosure. A single Corinthian column stands free, centered within the cella. This is a mysterious feature, and archaeologists debate what this shows: some state that it is simply an example of a votive column. A few examples of Corinthian columns in Greece during the next century are all used \"inside\" temples. A more famous example, and the first documented use of the Corinthian order on the exterior of a structure, is the circular Choragic Monument of Lysicrates in Athens, erected c. 334 BC.\nA Corinthian capital carefully buried in antiquity in the foundations of the circular tholos at Epidaurus was recovered during modern archaeological campaigns. Its enigmatic presence and preservation have been explained as a sculptor's model for stonemasons to follow in erecting the temple dedicated to Asclepius. The architectural design of the building was credited in antiquity to the sculptor Polykleitos the Younger, son of the Classical Greek sculptor Polykleitos the Elder.\nThe temple was erected in the 4th century BC. These capitals, in one of the most-visited sacred sites of Greece, influenced later Hellenistic and Roman designs for the Corinthian order. The concave sides of the abacus meet at a sharp keel edge, easily damaged, which in later and post-Renaissance practice has generally been replaced by a canted corner. Behind the scrolls the spreading cylindrical form of the central shaft is plainly visible.\nMuch later, the Roman writer Vitruvius (c.\u200975 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u200915 BC) related that the Corinthian order had been invented by Callimachus, a Greek architect and sculptor who was inspired by the sight of a votive basket that had been left on the grave of a young girl. A few of her toys were in it, and a square tile had been placed over the basket, to protect them from the weather. An acanthus plant had grown through the woven basket, mixing its spiny, deeply cut leaves with the weave of the basket.\nClaude Perrault incorporated a vignette epitomizing the Callimachus tale in his illustration of the Corinthian order for his translation of Vitruvius, published in Paris, 1684. Perrault demonstrates in his engraving how the proportions of the carved capital could be adjusted according to demands of the design, without offending. The texture and outline of Perrault's leaves is dry and tight compared to their 19th-century naturalism at the U.S. Capitol.\nIn Late Antique and Byzantine practice, the leaves may be blown sideways, as if by the wind of Faith. Unlike the Doric and Ionic column capitals, a Corinthian capital has no neck beneath it, just a ring-like astragal molding or a banding that forms the base of the capital, recalling the base of the legendary basket.\nMost buildings (and most clients) are satisfied with just two orders. When orders are superposed one above another, as they are at the Colosseum, the natural progression is from sturdiest and plainest (Doric) at the bottom, to slenderest and richest (Corinthian) at the top. The Colosseum's topmost tier has an unusual order that came to be known as the Composite order during the 16th century. The mid-16th-century Italians, especially Sebastiano Serlio and Jacopo Barozzi da Vignola, who established a canonic version of the orders, thought they detected a \"Composite order\", combining the volutes of the Ionic with the foliage of the Corinthian, but in Roman practice volutes were almost always present.\nIn Romanesque and Gothic architecture, where the Classical system had been replaced by a new aesthetic composed of arched vaults springing from columns, the Corinthian capital was still retained. It might be severely plain, as in the typical Cistercian architecture, which encouraged no distraction from liturgy and ascetic contemplation, or in other contexts it could be treated to numerous fanciful variations, even on the capitals of a series of columns or colonettes within the same system.\nDuring the 16th century, a sequence of engravings of the orders in architectural treatises helped standardize their details within rigid limits: Sebastiano Serlio; the \"Regola delli cinque ordini\" of Giacomo Barozzi da Vignola (1507\u20131573); \"I quattro libri dell'architettura\" of Andrea Palladio, and Vincenzo Scamozzi's \"L'idea dell'architettura universale\", were followed in the 17th century by French treatises with further refined engraved models, such as Perrault's.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46262", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46262", "title": "Nightmare", "text": "Unpleasant dream\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nA nightmare, also known as a bad dream, is an unpleasant dream that can cause a strong emotional response from the mind, typically fear but also despair, anxiety, disgust or sadness. The dream may contain situations of discomfort, psychological or physical terror, or panic. After a nightmare, a person will often awaken in a state of distress and may be unable to return to sleep for a short period of time. Recurrent nightmares may require medical help, as they can interfere with sleeping patterns and cause insomnia.\nNightmares can have physical causes such as sleeping in an uncomfortable position or having a fever, or psychological causes such as stress or anxiety. Eating before going to sleep, which triggers an increase in the body's metabolism and brain activity, can be a potential stimulus for nightmares.\nThe prevalence of nightmares in children (5\u201312 years old) is between 20 and 30%, and prevalence in adults is between 8 and 30%. In common language, the meaning of \"nightmare\" has extended as a metaphor to many bad things, such as a bad situation or a scary monster or person.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"nightmare\" is derived from the Old English , a mythological demon or goblin who torments others with frightening dreams. The term has no connection with the Modern English word for a female horse. The word \"nightmare\" is cognate with the Dutch term and German (dated). \nOriginally, \"mare\" or \"nightmare\" referred more specifically to sleep paralysis, in which an experience of terror and paralysis during sleep can be associated with a sense of pressure on the chest and the dreamed presence of entities often pictured as demons, sometimes sitting on the chest. The words also referred to such a \"demon,\" which was also referred to as a hag and the experience as being \"hag-ridden.\" The meaning of \"nightmare\" had generalized from sleep paralysis to any bad dream by 1829. In other languages, the word for \"bad dream\" similarly evolved in sense from words for \"sleep paralysis,\" often with senses related to the pressure on the chest. For example, French \"cauchemar\" (the first element from old French \"chauchier\" \"to press, trample,\" the second related to \"mare\"); Spanish \"pesadilla\", from \"pesada\" \"weight\"; or Hungarian \"lid\u00e9rcnyom\u00e1s\", from \"nyom\u00e1s\" \"pressure.\"\nHistory and folklore.\nThe sorcerous demons of Iranian mythology known as Divs are likewise associated with the ability to afflict their victims with nightmares.\nThe mare of Germanic and Slavic folklore were thought to ride on people's chests while they sleep, causing nightmares.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThose with nightmares experience abnormal sleep architecture. The impact of having a nightmare during the night has been found to be very similar to that of insomnia. This is thought to be caused by frequent nocturnal awakenings and fear of falling asleep. When awoken from REM sleep by a nightmare, the dreamer can usually recall the nightmare in detail. They may also awaken in a heightened state of distress, with an elevated heart rate or increased perspiration. Nightmare disorder symptoms include repeated awakenings from the major sleep period or naps with detailed recall of extended and extremely frightening dreams, usually involving threats to survival, security, or self-esteem. The awakenings generally occur during the second half of the sleep period.\nClassification.\nAccording to the International Classification of Sleep Disorders-Third Edition (ICSD-3), the nightmare disorder, together with REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) and recurrent isolated sleep paralysis, form the REM-related parasomnias subcategory of the Parasomnias cluster. Nightmares may be idiopathic without any signs of psychopathology or associated with disorders like stress, anxiety, substance abuse, psychiatric illness or PTSD (&gt;80% of PTSD patients report nightmares). As regarding the dream content of the dreams they are usually imprinting negative emotions like sadness, fear or rage. According to the clinical studies the content can include being chased, injury or death of others, falling, natural disasters or accidents. Typical dreams or recurrent dreams may also have some of these topics.\nCause.\nScientific research shows that nightmares may have many causes. In a study focusing on children, researchers were able to conclude that nightmares directly correlate with the stress in children's lives. Children who experienced the death of a family member or a close friend or know someone with a chronic illness have more frequent nightmares than those who are only faced with stress from school or stress from social aspects of daily life.\nA study researching the causes of nightmares focuses on patients who have sleep apnea. The study was conducted to determine whether or not nightmares may be caused by sleep apnea, or being unable to breathe. In the nineteenth century, authors believed that nightmares were caused by not having enough oxygen, therefore it was believed that those with sleep apnea had more frequent nightmares than those without it. The results actually showed that healthy people have more nightmares than sleep apnea patients.\nAnother study supports the hypothesis. In this study, 48 patients (aged 20\u201385 yrs) with obstructive airways disease (OAD), including 21 with and 27 without asthma, were compared with 149 sex- and age-matched controls without respiratory disease. OAD subjects with asthma reported approximately 3 times as many nightmares as controls or OAD subjects without asthma. The evolutionary purpose of nightmares then could be a mechanism to awaken a person who is in danger.\nLucid-dreaming advocate Stephen LaBerge has outlined a possible reason for how dreams are formulated and why nightmares occur. To LaBerge, a dream starts with an individual thought or scene, such as walking down a dimly lit street. Since dreams are not predetermined, the brain responds to the situation by either thinking a good thought or a bad thought, and the dream framework follows from there. If bad thoughts in a dream are more prominent than good thoughts, the dream may proceed to be a nightmare.\nThere is a view, possibly featured in the story \"A Christmas Carol\", that eating cheese before sleep can cause nightmares, but there is little scientific evidence for this. A single, biased study conducted by the British Cheese Board in 2005 argued that consuming cheese could trigger more vivid dreams, but this study was not backed up with sufficient research, and contradicts existing studies which found that consuming dairy products is associated with better overall sleep quality.\nNightmares can also be caused by viewing content in the horror genre, especially right before going to sleep.\nWhile no definitive studies directly link spicy foods to causing nightmares, they may lead to more vivid or remembered dreams due to increased body temperature and metabolism, which can sometimes lead to experiencing nightmares in a similar way that fevers can. This heightened physiological state can disrupt sleep and promote wakefulness, making you more likely to recall any dreams, including disturbing ones, that occur during the night. Eating spicy foods close to bedtime can also lead to digestive discomfort, which can further disturb sleep and contribute to a greater awareness of your dreams.\nSevere nightmares are also likely to occur when a person has a fever; these nightmares are often referred to as fever dreams. \nRecent research has shown that frequent nightmares may precede the development of neurodegenerative diseases, such as Parkinson's disease and dementia.\nTreatment.\nSigmund Freud and Carl Jung seemed to have shared a belief that people frequently distressed by nightmares could be re-experiencing some stressful event from the past. Both perspectives on dreams suggest that therapy can provide relief from the dilemma of the nightmarish experience.\nHalliday (1987) grouped treatment techniques into four classes. Direct nightmare interventions that combine compatible techniques from one or more of these classes may enhance overall treatment effectiveness:\nPost-traumatic stress disorder.\nRecurring post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) nightmares in which traumas are re-experienced respond well to a technique called imagery rehearsal. This involves dreamers coming up with alternative, mastery outcomes to the nightmares, mentally rehearsing those outcomes while awake and then reminding themselves at bedtime that they wish these alternative outcomes should the nightmares recur. Research has found that this technique not only reduces the occurrence of nightmares and insomnia but also improves other daytime PTSD symptoms. The most common variations of imagery rehearsal therapy (IRT) \"relate to the number of sessions, duration of treatment, and the degree to which exposure therapy is included in the protocol\".\nMedication.\nTrials have included hydrocortisone, gabapentin, paroxetine, tetrahydrocannabinol, eszopiclone, Sodium oxybate, and carvedilol.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46264", "revid": "50596879", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46264", "title": "Nadsat", "text": "Fictional language in the novel \"A Clockwork Orange\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nNadsat is a fictional register or argot used by the teenage gang members in Anthony Burgess' dystopian novel \"A Clockwork Orange\". Burgess was a linguist and he used this background to depict his characters as speaking a form of Russian-influenced English. The name comes from the Russian suffix equivalent of \"-teen\" as in \"thirteen\" (, ). Nadsat was also used in Stanley Kubrick's film adaptation of the book.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Quaint,\" said Dr. Brodsky, like smiling, \"the dialect of the tribe. Do you know anything of its provenance, Branom?\" \"Odd bits of old rhyming slang,\" said Dr. Branom\u00a0... \"A bit of gipsy talk, too. But most of the roots are Slav. Propaganda. Subliminal penetration.\"\nDrs. Brodsky and Branom, \"A Clockwork Orange\", page 114.\nDescription.\nNadsat is a mode of speech used by the \"nadsat\", members of the teen subculture in the novel \"A Clockwork Orange\". The narrator and protagonist of the book, Alex, uses it in first-person style to relate the story to the reader. He also uses it to communicate with other characters in the novel, such as his \"droogs\", parents, victims and any authority-figures with whom he comes in contact. Alex is capable of speaking standard English when he wants to. It is not a written language: the sense that readers get is of a transcription of vernacular speech.\nNadsat is English with some borrowed words from Russian. It also contains influences from Cockney rhyming slang, the King James Bible, German, some words of unclear origin and some that Burgess invented. The word \"nadsat\" is the suffix of Russian numerals from 11 to 19 (). The suffix is an almost exact linguistic parallel to the English \"-teen\" and is derived from , meaning 'on' and a shortened form of , the number ten. \"Droog\" is derived from the Welsh word , meaning 'bad', 'naughty' or 'evil' and the Russian word , meaning a 'close friend'. Some of the words are almost childish plays on English words, such as ('egg') and ('apology'), as well as regular English slang \"sod\" and \"snuff it\". The word \"like\" and the expression \"the old\" are often used as fillers or discourse markers.\nThe original 1991 translation of Burgess's book into Russian solved the problem of how to illustrate the Nadsat words by using transliterated, slang English words in places where Burgess had used Russian ones\u00a0\u2013 for example, \"droogs\" became (). Borrowed English words with Russian inflection were widely used in Russian slang, especially among Russian hippies in the 1970s\u20131980s. \nFunction.\nBurgess was a polyglot who loved language in all its forms. However, he realized that if he used contemporary slang, the novel would very quickly become dated, owing to the way in which teenage language is constantly changing. He was therefore forced to invent his own vocabulary, and to set the book in an imaginary future. Burgess was later to point out that, ironically, some of the Nadsat words in the book had been appropriated by American teenagers, \"and thus shoved [his] future into the discardable past.\" His use of Nadsat was pragmatic; he needed his narrator to have a unique voice that would remain ageless, while reinforcing Alex's indifference to his society's norms, and to suggest that youth subculture was independent from the rest of society. In \"A Clockwork Orange\", Alex's interrogators describe the source of his argot as \"subliminal penetration\".\nRussian influences.\nRussian influences play the biggest role in Nadsat. Most of those Russian-influenced words are slightly anglicized loan-words, often maintaining the original Russian pronunciation. One example is the Russian word , which is anglicized to , meaning 'people'. Another Russian word is which is anglicized to , meaning 'grandmother', 'old woman'. Some of the anglicised words are truncated, for example from , 'to understand', or otherwise shortened, for example from , 'person, man' (though the anglicized word chelloveck is also used in the book).\nA further means of constructing Nadsat words is the employment of homophones (known as folk etymology). For example, one Nadsat term which may seem like an English composition, , actually stems from the Russian word for 'good'; , which sounds similar to . In this same manner many of the Russian loan-words become an English\u2013Russian hybrid, with Russian origins, and English spellings and pronunciations. A further example is the Russian word for 'head', , which sounds similar to \"Gulliver\" known from \"Gulliver's Travels\"; became the Nadsat expression for the concept 'head'.\nMany of Burgess's loan-words, such as ('girl') and ('friend'), maintain both their relative spelling and meaning over the course of translation.\nOther influences.\nAdditional words were borrowed from other languages: A (possibly Saudi-owned) hotel was named 'Al Idayyin, an Arabic-sounding variant on \"Holiday Inn\" Hotel chain, while also alluding to the name Aladdin.\nWord derivation by common techniques.\nNadsat's English slang is constructed with common language-formation techniques. Some words are blended, others clipped or compounded. In Nadsat language a 'fit of laughter' becomes a (shortened version of \"guffawing\"); a 'skeleton key' becomes a ('many keys'); and the 'state jail' is blended to the , which has the double entendre , so that its prisoners got there by a staged act of corruption, as revenge by the state, an interpretation that would fit smoothly into the storyline. Many common English slang terms are simply shortened. A \"cancer stick\", which is (or was) a common English-slang expression for a cigarette, is shortened to a .\nRhyming slang.\nNadsat features Cockney rhyming slang.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 2019 looter shooter video game \"Borderlands 3\", all of Vladof's common weapon titles are terms from the Nadsat dictionary.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46265", "revid": "1288446002", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46265", "title": "Atbash", "text": "Substitution cipher\nAtbash (; also transliterated Atba\u0161) is a monoalphabetic substitution cipher originally used to encrypt the Hebrew alphabet. It can be modified for use with any known writing system with a standard collating order.\nEncryption.\nThe Atbash cipher is a particular type of monoalphabetic cipher formed by taking the alphabet (or abjad, syllabary, etc.) and mapping it to its reverse, so that the first letter becomes the last letter, the second letter becomes the second to last letter, and so on. For example, the ISO basic Latin alphabet would work like this:\nBecause there is only one way to perform this, the Atbash cipher provides no communications security, as it lacks any sort of key. If multiple collating orders are available, which one was used in encryption can be used as a key, but this does not provide significantly more security, considering that only a few letters can give away which one was used.\nHistory.\nThe name derives from the first, last, second, and second to last Hebrew letters (Aleph\u2013Taw\u2013Bet\u2013Shin).\nThe Atbash cipher for the modern Hebrew alphabet would be:\nBy shifting the correlation one space to the left or the right, one may derive a variant Batgash (named for Bet\u2013Taw\u2013Gimel\u2013Shin) or Ashbar (for Aleph\u2013Shin\u2013Bet\u2013Reish). Either alternative mapping leaves one letter unsubstituted; respectively Aleph and Taw.\nIn the Bible.\nSeveral biblical words are described by commentators as being examples of Atbash:\nRegarding a potential Atbash switch of a single letter:\nRelationship to the affine cipher.\nThe Atbash cipher can be seen as a special case of the affine cipher.\nUnder the standard affine convention, an alphabet of \"m\" letters is mapped to the numbers 0, 1, ... , \"m\" \u2212 1. (The Hebrew alphabet has \"m\" = 22, and the standard Latin alphabet has \"m\" = 26). The Atbash cipher may then be enciphered and deciphered using the encryption function for an affine cipher by setting \"a\" = \"b\" = (\"m\" \u2212 1):\n formula_1\nThis may be simplified to\nformula_2\nIf, instead, the \"m\" letters of the alphabet are mapped to 1, 2, ..., \"m\", then the encryption and decryption function for the Atbash cipher becomes\n formula_3\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46268", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46268", "title": "Encaustic painting", "text": "Painting technique\nEncaustic painting, also known as hot wax painting, is a form of painting that involves a heated wax medium to which colored pigments have been added. The molten mix is applied to a surface\u2014usually prepared wood, though canvas and other materials are sometimes used. The simplest encaustic medium could be made by adding pigments to wax, though recipes most commonly consist of beeswax and damar resin, potentially with other ingredients. For pigmentation, dried powdered pigments can be used, though some artists use pigmented wax, inks, oil paints or other forms of pigmentation.\nMetal tools and special brushes can be used to shape the medium as it cools. Also, heated metal tools, including spatulas, knives and scrapers, can be used to manipulate the medium after it has cooled onto the surface. Additionally, heat lamps, torches, heat guns, and other methods of applying heat are used by encaustic artists to fuse and bind the medium. Because encaustic medium is thermally malleable, the medium can be also sculpted, and materials can be encased, collaged or layered into the medium.\nA completely unrelated type of \"encaustic painting\", not involving wax at all, is found in British ceramics, after Josiah Wedgwood devised and patented the technique in 1769. This was a mixture of ceramic slip and overglaze \"enamel\" paints used to imitate ancient Greek vase painting, and given a light second firing. Usually the vessel was black and painted in the red of red-figure painting. The technique was copied by other British potteries. Encaustic tiles are not painted at all, but effectively inlaid with contrasting colours of clay for a polychrome pattern.\nHistory.\nEncaustic painting was developed by the ancient Greeks and reached its highest level of technical mastery through the work of the genre painter Pausias in the 4th century BCE.\nThe word encaustic originates from , which means \"burning in\", from \"en\", \"in\" and \"kaiein\", \"to burn\", and this element of heat is necessary for a painting to be called encaustic.\nEncaustice or Encaustike () was the art of painting by burning in the colours.\nThe wax encaustic painting technique was described by the Roman scholar Pliny the Elder in his \"Natural History\" from the 1st Century. The oldest surviving encaustic panel paintings are the Romano-Egyptian Fayum mummy portraits from Egypt, around 100\u2013300, but it was a very common technique in ancient Greek and Roman painting. It continued to be used in early Byzantine icons but was effectively abandoned in the Western Church.\nKut-kut, a lost art of the Philippines, employs sgraffito and encaustic techniques. It was practiced by the Waray people of Samar from 1600 to 1800. Artists in the Mexican muralism movement, such as Diego Rivera, Fernando Leal (artist) and Jean Charlot sometimes used encaustic painting. The Belgian artist James Ensor also experimented with encaustic.\nIn the 20th century, painter Fritz Faiss (1905\u20131981), a student of Paul Klee and Wassily Kandinsky at the Bauhaus, together with Dr. Hans Schmid, rediscovered the so-called Punic wax technique of encaustic painting. Faiss held two German patents related to preparing waxes for encaustic painting. One covered a method for treating beeswax to raise its melting point from . This occurred after boiling the wax in a seawater and soda solution three successive times. The resulting harder wax is the same as the Punic wax referred to in ancient Greek writings on encaustic painting. Other 20th-century North American artists, including Jasper Johns, Tony Scherman, Mark Perlman, John Shaw and Fernando Leal Audirac, have used encaustic techniques.\nEncaustic art has seen a resurgence in popularity since the 1990s, with artists using electric irons, hotplates and heated styli on different surfaces, including card, paper, and even pottery, and wax crayons started to be used as an inexpensive and accessible medium for crafting and art education. The iron makes producing a variety of artistic patterns easier. The medium is not limited to just simple designs; it can also be used to create complex paintings, just as in other media such as oil and acrylic. Although technically difficult to master, attractions of this medium for contemporary artists are its dimensional quality and luminous color.\nEncaustic painters.\nArtists specializing in encaustic painting include the following:\nNotes.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46270", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46270", "title": "New materials in 20th-century art", "text": "New materials in 20th-century art were introduced to art making from the very beginning of the century. The introduction of new materials (and techniques) and heretofore non-art materials helped drive change in art during the 20th century. Traditional materials and techniques were not necessarily displaced in the 20th century. Rather, they functioned alongside innovations that came with the 20th century. Such mainstays as oil-on-canvas painting, and sculpting in traditional materials continued right through the 20th century into the 21st century. Furthermore, even \"traditional\" materials were greatly expanded in the course of the 20th century. The number of pigments available to artists (painters, primarily) has increased both in quantity and quality, by most reckoning. New formulations for traditional materials especially the commercial availability of acrylic paint have become widely used, introducing initial issues over their stability and longevity.\nPablo Picasso, Georges Braque, Kurt Schwitters, Joseph Cornell and others incorporated paper collage and mixed drawing (materials) with paint to fashion their work. Both Picasso and Marcel Duchamp pioneered the use of found objects as material for paintings and sculpture during the 1910s. In the 1940s Jackson Pollock pioneered the use of housepaint, silver and aluminum paint, duco, and various objects for use in his paintings. In the 1950s Robert Rauschenberg included 3-D elements like tires and stuffed animals\nas well as using discarded materials like crushed or flattened cardboard boxes. Yves Klein incorporated live nude models and a symphony orchestra in his performance pieces of his paintings. John Chamberlain used crushed auto parts for sculpture. In the 1960s Pop artists Andy Warhol, Claes Oldenburg, Tom Wesselmann and Roy Lichtenstein made art from commercial products, or art that resembled commercial products like television sets, soup cans, brillo boxes, comic books, household furniture and restaurant items among other things. Edward Kienholz made replicas of actual environments both domestic and commercial, while George Segal made life-size plaster figures in settings using real objects and props. Dan Flavin used electric fluorescent lights and ballasts to create sculpture. In the 1970s Frank Stella introduced honeycombed aluminum and glitter. In the 1980s Julian Schnabel made \"plate paintings\" with broken crockery stuck to the surface and then painted over, Anselm Kiefer and Richard Long used mud, soil or tar in their works. In the 1960s and again in the 1990s artists used excrement notably - the Italian artist Piero Manzoni in 1961 and the British artist Chris Ofili who specialized in using elephant dung in the 1990s. Tracey Emin included her bed, entitled My Bed, in 1999.\nSome innovations concerning materials used in art merely function in a supportive way, and other innovative materials are much more conspicuous. Frank Stella's use of honeycombed aluminum served as a lightweight and strong and very configurable support for imagery. In the sculpture entitled \"Monogram,\" by Robert Rauschenberg, an angora goat assumes a position of central importance.\nEarly 20th century.\nThe advent of Modernism and Modern Art in the first decades of the 20th century inspired artists to test and transcend the boundaries and the limitations of the traditional and conventional forms of art making in search of newer forms and in search of new materials. The innovations of painters like Vincent van Gogh, Paul C\u00e9zanne, Paul Gauguin, Georges Seurat, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, and the French Symbolists provided essential inspiration for the development of modern art by the younger generation of artists in Paris and elsewhere in Europe. Henri Matisse and other young artists revolutionized the Paris art world with \"wild\", multi-colored, expressive, paintings that the critics called Fauvism. Henri Rousseau, Pablo Picasso, Giorgio de Chirico, Amedeo Modigliani, Marc Chagall, Robert Delaunay and scores of young artists in Paris made their first modern paintings venturing toward abstraction and other new ways of formulating figurative, still-life and landscape imagery.\n1900s.\nDuring the first decade of the 20th century modern art developed simultaneously in several different areas in Europe (France, England, Scandinavia, Russia, Germany, Italy), and in the United States. Artists began to formulate different directions of modern art, seemingly unrelated to one another.\nIn printmaking, the linocut was invented by the artists of Die Br\u00fccke in Germany between 1905 and 1913. At first they described their prints as woodcuts, which sounded more respectable. The technique remains popular as a very simple method of printmaking, even suitable for use in schools.\n1910s.\nCubism.\nPablo Picasso, Georges Braque, Juan Gris and other cubist artists introduced new elements and materials like newspaper clippings, fabric, and sheet music into their paintings. Eventually the movement was called Synthetic Cubism developed between 1912 and 1919. Synthetic cubism is characterized by works with different textures, surfaces, collage elements, papier coll\u00e9 and a large variety of subject matter. It was the beginning of collage materials being introduced as an important ingredient of fine art work by the avant-garde.\nConsidered the first work of this new style was Pablo Picasso's \"Still Life with Chair-caning\" (1911\u20131912), which includes oil cloth that was printed to look like chair-caning pasted onto an oval canvas, with text; and rope framing the whole picture. At the upper left are the letters \"JOU\", which appear in many cubist paintings and refers to the newspaper titled \"Le Journal\".\nDada.\nThe Dada movement began during World War I as a protest against the madness and violence of war. Applying shock tactics and anarchy to art the Dadaists pioneered the use of new artistic techniques such as collage, photomontage readymades and the use of found objects. Artists like Marcel Duchamp, Hannah H\u00f6ch, Kurt Schwitters, Francis Picabia, Man Ray and others incorporated into their work random everyday objects often combined with more conventional artist materials. They included photographs, panes of glass, picture frames, eyeglasses, boxes, newspapers, magazines, ticket stubs, metal pipes, bulbs, bottle racks, urinals, bicycle wheels and other objects. Marcel Duchamp created \"The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even,\" working on the piece from 1915 to 1923. He made the work on two panes of glass; with materials such as lead foil, fuse wire, and dust.\n1920s.\nSurrealism.\nDuring the 1930s Surrealist artist M\u00e9ret Oppenheim created sexually charged erotic pieces. Oppenheim's best known piece is \"Object (Le D\u00e9jeuner en fourrure)\" (1936). The sculpture consists of a teacup, saucer and spoon that the artist covered with fur from a Chinese gazelle. It is displayed at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.\nMid 20th century.\n1950s.\nRobert Rauschenberg began to create what became known as his Combine paintings in the early 1950s.\n1960s.\nIn 1960 Yves Klein incorporated live nude models and a symphony orchestra in his performance pieces of his paintings. Klein also made use of Photomontage in the famous pseudo-performance picture of himself diving off a wall onto a Paris street \"Le Saut dans le Vide\" (Leap into the Void. In the 1960s John Chamberlain continued using crushed auto parts for sculpture. Dan Flavin used electric fluorescent lights and ballasts to create his sculpture. In May 1961 Italian artist Piero Manzoni used his own excrement, selling it in cans titled \"Artist's Shit\" (\"Merda d'Artista\"). However the contents of the cans remain a much-disputed enigma, since opening them would destroy the value of the artwork. Various theories about the contents have been proposed, including speculation that it is plaster.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46271", "revid": "47183495", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46271", "title": "Computer painting", "text": ""}
{"id": "46273", "revid": "205121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46273", "title": "Volapuk language", "text": ""}
{"id": "46276", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46276", "title": "Mother's Day", "text": "Celebration honouring mothers\nMother's Day is a celebration honoring the mother of the family or individual, as well as motherhood, maternal bonds, and the influence of mothers in society. It is celebrated on different days in many parts of the world, most commonly in March or May. It complements similar celebrations honoring family members, such as Father's Day, Siblings Day, and Grandparents' Day.\nCountries around the world have a multi-century history of a day to celebrate mothers.\nIn the United States, the modern version of the holiday began in the early 20th century at the initiative of Anna Jarvis. She organized the first Mother's Day service of worship and celebration at Andrews Methodist Episcopal Church in Grafton, West Virginia, which serves as the International Mother's Day Shrine today. It is not directly related to the many traditional celebrations of mothers and motherhood that have existed throughout the world over thousands of years, such as the Greek cult to Cybele, the mother deity Rhea, the Roman festival of Hilaria, or the other Christian ecclesiastical Mothering Sunday celebration (associated with the image of Mother Church). However, in some countries, Mother's Day is still synonymous with these older traditions.\nThe American version of Mother's Day has been criticized for having become too commercialized. Jarvis herself, who began the celebration as a liturgical observance, regretted this commercialism and expressed that this was never her intention. In response, Constance Adelaide Smith successfully advocated for Mothering Sunday as a commemoration of a broader definition of motherhood in many other parts of the English-speaking world.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEstablishment of holiday.\nThe modern holiday was first celebrated in 1907, when Anna Jarvis held the first Mother's Day service of worship at Andrews Methodist Episcopal Church in Grafton, West Virginia. Andrew's Methodist Church now holds the International Mother's Day Shrine. Her campaign to make Mother's Day a recognized holiday in the United States began in 1905, the year her mother, Ann Reeves Jarvis, died. Ann Jarvis had been a peace activist who cared for wounded soldiers on both sides of the American Civil War, and created Mother's Day Work Clubs to address public health issues. She and another peace activist and suffragist, Julia Ward Howe, had been urging for the creation of a \"Mother's Day For Peace\" where mothers would ask that their husbands and sons were no longer killed in wars. Forty years before it became an official holiday, Ward Howe had made her Mother's Day Proclamation in 1870, which called upon mothers of all nationalities to band together to promote the \"amicable settlement of international questions, the great and general interests of peace.\" Anna Jarvis wanted to honor this and to set aside a day to honor all mothers because she believed a mother is \"the person who has done more for you than anyone in the world\".\nIn 1908, the U.S. Congress rejected a proposal to make Mother's Day an official holiday, joking that they would also have to proclaim a \"Mother-in-law's Day\". However, owing to the efforts of Anna Jarvis, by 1911 all U.S. states observed the holiday, with some of them officially recognizing Mother's Day as a local holiday (the first being West Virginia, Jarvis' home state, in 1910). In 1914, Woodrow Wilson signed a proclamation designating Mother's Day, held on the second Sunday in May, as a national holiday to honor mothers.\nAlthough Jarvis, who started Mother's Day as a liturgical service, was successful in founding the celebration, she became resentful of the commercialization of the holiday, and it became associated with the phrase \"Hallmark holiday\". By the early 1920s, Hallmark Cards and other companies had started selling Mother's Day cards. Jarvis believed that the companies had misinterpreted and exploited the idea of Mother's Day, and that the emphasis of the holiday was on sentiment, not profit. As a result, she organized boycotts of Mother's Day and threatened to issue lawsuits against the companies involved. Jarvis argued that people should appreciate and honor their mothers through handwritten letters expressing their love and gratitude, instead of buying gifts and pre-made cards. Jarvis protested at a candy makers' convention in Philadelphia in 1923, and at a meeting of American War Mothers in 1925. By this time, carnations had become associated with Mother's Day, and the selling of carnations by the American War Mothers to raise money angered Jarvis, who was arrested for disturbing the peace.\nIn Britain, Constance Adelaide Smith was inspired to advocate for Mothering Sunday, an already-existing Christian ecclesiastical celebration in which the faithful visit the church in which they received the sacrament of baptism, as an equivalent celebration. She referred to medieval traditions of celebrating Mother Church, 'mothers of earthly homes', Mary, mother of Jesus, and Mother Nature. Her efforts were successful in the British Isles and other parts of the English-speaking world.\nSpelling.\nIn 1912, Anna Jarvis trademarked the phrase \"Second Sunday in May, Mother's Day, Anna Jarvis, Founder\", and created the Mother's Day International Association. She specifically noted that \"Mother's\" should \"be a singular possessive, for each family to honor its own mother, not a plural possessive commemorating all mothers in the world.\" This is also the spelling used by U.S. President Woodrow Wilson in his 1914 presidential proclamation, by the U.S. Congress in relevant bills, and by various U.S. presidents in their proclamations concerning Mother's Day.\nDates around the world.\nWhile the United States holiday was adopted by some other countries, existing celebrations, held on different dates, honoring motherhood have become described as \"Mother's Day\", such as Mothering Sunday in the United Kingdom or, in Greece, the Eastern Orthodox celebration of the presentation of Jesus Christ to the temple (2 February of Julian Calendar). Both the secular and religious Mother Day are present in Greece. Mothering Sunday is often referred to as \"Mother's Day\" even though it is an unrelated celebration.\nIn some countries, the date adopted is one significant to the majority religion, such as Virgin Mary Day in Catholic countries. Other countries selected a date with historical significance. For example, Bolivia's Mother's Day is a fixed date, May 27, commemorating a battle in which women participated to defend their children.\nSome countries, such as Russia, celebrate International Women's Day instead of Mother's Day or simply celebrate both holidays, which is the custom in Ukraine. Kyrgyzstan has recently introduced Mother's Day, but \"year on year International Women's Day is certainly increasing in status\".\nInternational history and tradition.\nIn most countries, Mother's Day is an observance derived from the holiday as it has evolved in the United States, promoted by companies who saw benefit in making it popular. As adopted by other countries and cultures, the holiday has different meanings, is associated with different events (religious, historical or legendary), and is celebrated on different dates.\nIn some cases, countries already had existing celebrations honoring motherhood, and their celebrations then adopted several external characteristics from the US holiday, such as giving carnations and other presents to one's mother.\nThe extent of the celebrations varies greatly. In some countries, it is potentially offensive to one's mother not to mark Mother's Day. In others, it is a little-known festival celebrated mainly by immigrants, or covered by the media as a taste of foreign culture.\nReligion.\nIn certain traditional branches of Christianity, the holiday is strongly associated with revering the Virgin Mary. In some Catholic, Lutheran and Anglican homes, families have a special shrine on their home altar devoted to the Blessed Virgin Mary. In many Eastern Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches, a special prayer service is held in honor of the Theotokos Virgin Mary.\nIn Islam, special attention is paid to mothers. The Prophet Muhammad said in this regard: \u2033The Paradise is beneath mother's feet\u2033\nAlso there is no concept of Mother's Day in Islam, but the Quran teaches that children should give priority to loving their mother over their father.&lt;br&gt;\nQuran the holy book of Muslims has mentioned the status and respect of Mother in many verses: Surah Al-Isra, verse 23, Al-Ahqaf, verse 15, Luqman, verse 14 and Al-Baqarah, verse 233, is one of them.\nIn Hindu tradition, Mother's Day is called \"Mata Tirtha Aunshi\" or \"Mother Pilgrimage fortnight\", and is celebrated in countries with a Hindu population, especially in Nepal, where mothers are honored with special foods. The holiday is observed on the new moon day in the month of Baisakh, i.e., April/May. This celebration is based on the Hindu religion and it pre-dates the creation of the US-inspired celebration by at least a few centuries.\nIn Buddhism, the festival of Ullambana is derived from the story of Maudgalyayana and his mother.\nBy country.\nAlbania.\nIn Albania, as in a number of Balkan and Eastern European countries, Mother's Day is celebrated on 8 March, in conjunction with International Women's Day.\nArab world.\nMother's Day in most Arab countries is celebrated on 21 March. It was introduced in Egypt by journalist Mustafa Amin and was first celebrated in 1956. The practice has since been adopted by other Arab countries.\nArgentina.\nIn Argentina, Mother's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of October. The holiday was originally celebrated on 11 October, the old liturgical date for the celebration of the Maternity of the Blessed Virgin Mary but after the Second Vatican Council, which moved the Virgin Mary festivity to 1 January, the Mother's Day started to be celebrated the third Sunday of October because of popular tradition. Argentina is the only country in the world that celebrates Mother's Day on this date.\nArmenia.\nIn Armenia, Mother's Day is celebrated on 8 March, and on 7 April as Maternity and Beauty Day.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, Mother's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday in May. Australia celebrated Mother\u2019s Day for the first time in 1910 with special church services, however, it was not popularly observed until the 1920s. Because it is autumn in Australia for Mother\u2019s Day, and carnations are a spring flower, white chrysanthemums are the traditional Mother\u2019s Day flower in Australia.\nBangladesh.\nThere is no historical tradition of celebrating Mother's Day () in Bangladesh, and it has become popular in the country due to western influences. It is celebrated on the second Sunday of May and is not a public holiday. Mother's Day was not very popular and in recent times it has been spread more widely by the Millennial and Generation Z communities across the country through social media. Although many religious families do not celebrate it, it is more widespread than ever before. There is a popular phrase used by many parents, including mothers, which is \"Every day is Father's/Mother's Day so you will love your parents every day.\" Most people just wish or pray for their mother, but many from big cities like Dhaka, Chittagong, Khulna, Sylhet, Barishal, Narayangonj, Bogura etc. go to restaurants to celebrate, many also cut cakes. Many others cut cakes at home or order meals online. Some children may give small gifts to their mothers.\nBelarus.\nBelarus celebrates Mother's Day on 14 October. Like other ex-Communist republics, Belarus used to celebrate only International Women's Day on 8 March. Mother's Day in Belarus was officially established by the Belarusian government, and it was celebrated for the first time in 1996. The celebration of the Virgin Mary (the holiday of Protection of the Holy Mother of God) is celebrated on the same day.\nBhutan.\nMother's Day in Bhutan is celebrated on 8 May. It was introduced in Bhutan by the Tourism Council of Bhutan.\nBelgium.\nIn Belgium, Mother's Day (\"Moederdag\" or \"Moederkesdag\" in Dutch and \"F\u00eate des M\u00e8res\" in French) is celebrated on the second Sunday of May. In the week before this holiday children make little presents at primary school, which they give to their mothers in the early morning of Mother's Day. Typically, the father will buy croissants and other sweet breads and pastries and bring these to the mother while she is still in bed \u2013 the beginning of a day of pampering for the mother. There are also many people who celebrate Mother's Day on 15 August instead; these are mostly people around Antwerp, who consider that day (Assumption) the classical Mother's Day and the observance in May an invention for commercial reasons. It was originally established on that day as the result of a campaign by Frans Van Kuyck, a painter and Alderman from Antwerp.\nBolivia.\nIn Bolivia, Mother's Day is celebrated on 27 May. El \"D\u00eda de la Madre Boliviana\" was passed into law on 8 November 1927, during the presidency of Hernando Siles Reyes. The date commemorates the Battle of La Coronilla, which took place on 27 May 1812, during the Bolivian War of Independence, in what is now the city of Cochabamba. In this battle, women fighting for the country's independence were slaughtered by the Spanish army. It is not a public holiday, but all schools hold activities and festivities throughout the day.\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil, Mother's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday of May. The first Mother's Day in Brazil was promoted by Associa\u00e7\u00e3o Crist\u00e3 de Mo\u00e7os de Porto Alegre (Young Men's Christian Association of Porto Alegre) on 12 May 1918. In 1932, then President Get\u00falio Vargas made the second Sunday of May the official date for Mother's Day. In 1947, Archbishop Jaime de Barros C\u00e2mara, Cardinal-Archbishop of Rio de Janeiro, decided that this holiday would also be included in the official calendar of the Catholic Church.\nMother's Day is not an official holiday (see Public holidays in Brazil), but it is widely observed and typically involves spending time with and giving gifts to one's mother. Because of this, it is considered one of the celebrations most related to consumerism in the country, second only to Christmas Day as the most commercially lucrative holiday.\n\"See also Other observances in Canada\"\nCanada.\nMother's Day in Canada is celebrated on the second Sunday in May (it is not a public holiday or bank holiday), and typically involves small celebrations and gift-giving to one's mother, grandmother, or other important female figures in one's family. Celebratory practices are very similar to those of other western nations. A Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois tradition is for Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois men to offer roses or other flowers to the women.\nChina.\nMother's Day is becoming more popular in China. Carnations are a very popular Mother's Day gift and the most sold flowers in relation to the day. In 1997 Mother's Day was set as the day to help poor mothers and to remind people of the poor mothers in rural areas such as China's western region. In the People's Daily, the Chinese government's official newspaper, an article explained that \"despite originating in the United States, people in China accept the holiday without hesitation because it is in line with the country's traditional ethics \u2013 respect for the elderly and filial piety towards parents.\"\nIn recent years, the Communist Party member Li Hanqiu began to advocate for the official adoption of Mother's Day in memory of Meng Mu, the mother of M\u00e8ng Z\u01d0. He formed a non-governmental organization called \"Chinese Mothers' Festival Promotion Society\", with the support of 100 Confucian scholars and lecturers of ethics. Li and the Society want to replace the Western-style gift of carnations with lilies, which, in ancient times, were planted by Chinese mothers when children left home. Mother's Day remains an unofficial festival, except in a small number of cities.\nCosta Rica.\nIn Costa Rica, Mother's Day is celebrated on 15 August. In 1927, at the Nicol\u00e1s Ulloa School in Heredia, Evangelina Sol\u00eds founded an annual event that would celebrate the mothers of the students. It was held around the time of the distribution of midterm notes, in July. Evangelina's reasoning was that mothers should be congratulated for their children's successes. The event gained national traction and was enacted into law in 1932. The final date of 15 August was chosen as it coincided with the celebration of Assumption of Mary, mother of Jesus.\nCzech Republic.\nIn the Czech Republic, Mother's Day is celebrated every second Sunday in May. It started in former Czechoslovakia in 1923. The promoter of this celebration was Alice Masarykov\u00e1. After World War II communists replaced Mother's Day with International Woman's Day, celebrated on 8 March. The former Czechoslovakia celebrated Women's Day until the Velvet Revolution in 1989. After the split of the country in 1993, the Czech Republic started celebrating Mother's Day again.\nEgypt.\nMother's Day in Egypt is celebrated on 21 March, the first day of spring in the northern hemisphere. It was introduced in Egypt by journalist Mustafa Amin in his book \"Smiling America\" (1943). The idea was overlooked at the time. Later Amin heard the story of a widowed mother who devoted her whole life to raising her son until he became a doctor. The son then married and left without showing any gratitude to his mother. Hearing this, Amin became motivated to promote \"Mother's Day\". The idea was first ridiculed by president Gamal Abdel Nasser but he eventually accepted it and Mother's Day was first celebrated on 21 March 1956. The practice has since been copied by other Arab countries.\nWhen Mustafa Amin was arrested and imprisoned, the government changed the name of the holiday from \"Mother's Day\" to \"Family Day\", but they reverted the name after Egyptian mothers wrote to complain. Celebrations continued to be held on the same date and classic songs celebrating mothers remain famous to this day.\nEthiopia.\nMother's Day is celebrated for three days in Ethiopia, after the end of the rainy season. It comes in mid-fall where people enjoy a three-day feast called \"Antrosht\".\nFor the feast, ingredients will be brought by the children for a traditional hash recipe. The ingredients are divided along genders, with girls bringing spices, vegetables, cheese and butter, while the boys bring a lamb or bull. The mother hands out the hash to the family.\nA celebration takes place after the meal. The mothers and daughters anoint themselves using butter on their faces and chests. While honoring their family and heroes, men sing songs.\nEstonia.\nIn Estonia, Mother's Day (\"emadep\u00e4ev\" in Estonian) is celebrated on the second Sunday of May. It is recognized nationally, but is not a public holiday.\nFinland.\nIn Finland, Mother's Day (\"\u00e4itienp\u00e4iv\u00e4\" in Finnish) is celebrated on the second Sunday of May. It is recognized nationally and is a public holiday. It is usually celebrated at homes where children or grandchildren bring Mother's day cards that they have drawn to their mothers and grandmothers. Usually, some food, coffee and cakes are served for guests. Grown up children visit their parents' homes and bring traditionally Mother's day roses or other flowers accompanied by a Mother's day card.\nThe president of Finland honors with medals every year some mothers who have done something exceptional and positive during the year.\nFrance.\nIn France, amidst alarm at the low birth rate, there were attempts in 1896 and 1904 to create a national celebration honoring the mothers of large families. In 1906 ten mothers who had nine children each were given an award recognising \"High Maternal Merit\" (\"Haut m\u00e9rite maternel\"). American World War I soldiers fighting in France popularized the US Mother's Day holiday created by Anna Jarvis. They sent so much mail back to their country for Mother's Day that the Union Franco-Am\u00e9ricaine created a postal card for that purpose. In 1918, also inspired by Jarvis, the town of Lyon wanted to celebrate a \"journ\u00e9e des M\u00e8res\", but instead decided to celebrate a \"Journ\u00e9e Nationale des M\u00e8res de familles nombreuses.\" The holiday was more inspired by anti-depopulation efforts than by the US holiday, with medals awarded to the mothers of large families. The French government made the day official in 1920 as a day for mothers of large families. Since then the French government awards the M\u00e9daille de l'enfance et des familles to mothers of large families.\nIn 1941, by an initiative of Philippe P\u00e9tain, the wartime Vichy government used the celebration in support of their policy to encourage larger families, but all mothers were now honored, even mothers with smaller families.\nIn 1950, after the war, the celebration was reinstated. The law of 24 May 1950 required (in Article 1) that the Republic pay official homage to French Mothers. Article 2 stated it should be celebrated on the last Sunday in May as the \"F\u00eate des M\u00e8res\" (except when Pentecost fell on that day, in which case it was moved to the first Sunday in June). Article 3 stated that all expenditure shall be covered from the budget of the Ministry of Public Health and Population.\nDuring the 1950s, the celebration lost all its patriotic and natalist ideologies, and became heavily commercialized.\nIn 1956, the celebration was given a budget and integrated into the new Code de l'action Sociale et des familles. In 2004 responsibility for the holiday was transferred to the Minister responsible for families.\nGeorgia.\nGeorgia celebrates Mother's Day on 3 March. It was declared by the first President of Georgia Zviad Gamsakhurdia in order to replace the International Women Day, and it was officially approved by the Supreme Council in 1991. Nowadays Georgia celebrates both Mother's Day on 3 March and International Women's Day on 8 March.\nGermany.\nGermany celebrates Mother's Day on the 2nd Sunday in May.\nIn the 1920s, Germany had the lowest birthrate in Europe, and the declining trend was continuing. This was attributed to women's participation in the labor market. At the same time, influential groups in society (politicians of left and right, churchwomen, and feminists) believed that mothers should be honored but could not agree on how to do so. However, all groups strongly agreed on the promotion of the values of motherhood. In 1923, this resulted in the unanimous adoption of \"Muttertag\", the Mother's Day holiday as imported from America. The head of the Association of German Florists cited \"the inner conflict of our \"Volk\" and the loosening of the family\" as his reason for introducing the holiday. He expected that the holiday would unite the divided country. In 1925, the Mother's Day Committee joined the task force for the recovery of the \"volk\", and the holiday stopped depending on commercial interests and began emphasizing the need to increase the population in Germany by promoting motherhood.\nThe holiday was then seen as a means to encourage women to bear more children, which nationalists saw as a way to rejuvenate the nation. The holiday did not celebrate individual women, but an idealized standard of motherhood. The progressive forces resisted the implementation of the holiday because it was backed by so many conservatives and because they saw it as a way to eliminate the rights of working women. \"Die Frau\", the newspaper of the Federation of German Women's Associations, refused to recognize the holiday. Many local authorities adopted their own interpretation of the holiday: it would be a day to support economically larger families or single-mother families. The guidelines for the subsidies had eugenics criteria, but there is no indication that social workers ever implemented them in practice, and subsidies were given preferentially to families in economic need rather than to families with more children or \"healthier\" children.\nWith the Nazi party in power during 1933\u20131945, the situation changed radically. The promotion of Mother's Day increased in many European countries, including the UK and France. From the position of the German Nazi government, the role of mothers was to give healthy children to the German nation. The Nazi party's intention was to create a pure \"Aryan race\" according to nazi eugenics. Among other Mother's Day ideas, the government promoted the death of a mother's sons in battle as the highest embodiment of patriotic motherhood.\nThe Nazis quickly declared Mother's Day an official holiday and put it under the control of the NSV (National Socialist People's Welfare) and the NSF (National Socialist Women's League). This created conflicts with other organizations that resented Nazi control of the holiday, including Catholic and Protestant churches and local women's organizations. Local authorities resisted the guidelines from the Nazi government and continued assigning resources to families who were in economic need, much to the dismay of the Nazi officials.\nIn 1938, the government began issuing an award called Mother's Cross (\"Mutterkreuz\"), according to categories that depended on the number of children a mother had. The medal was awarded on Mother's Day and also on other holidays due to a large number of recipients. The Cross was an effort to encourage women to have more children, and recipients were required to have at least four.\nHungary.\nIn Hungary, Mother's Day is celebrated on the first Sunday of May. It was first celebrated in 1925 by the Hungarian Red Cross Youth.\nIndia.\nThe modern Mother's Day has been assimilated into Indian culture and is celebrated every year on the second Sunday of May. Indians do not celebrate the occasion as a religious event; its celebration is mostly restricted to urban areas where the occasion has been largely commercialized.\nIndonesia.\nIndonesian Mother's Day () is celebrated nationally on 22 December. The date was made an official holiday by President Sukarno under Presidential Decree No. 316/1953, on the 25th anniversary of the 1928 Indonesian Women Congress. The day originally sought to celebrate the spirit of Indonesian women and to improve the condition of the nation. Today, the meaning of Mother's Day has changed, and it is celebrated by expressing love and gratitude to mothers. People present gifts to mothers (such as flowers) and hold surprise parties and competitions, which include cooking and kebaya wearing. People also allow mothers a day off from domestic chores.\nThe holiday is celebrated on the anniversary of the opening day of the first Indonesian Women Congress (\"Kongres Perempuan Indonesia\"), which was held from 22 to 25 December 1928. The Congress took place in a building called Dalem Jayadipuran, which now serves as the office of the Center of History and Traditional Values Preservation (\"Balai Pelestarian Sejarah dan Nilai Tradisional\") in Brigjen Katamso Street, Yogyakarta. The Congress was attended by 30 feminist organizations from 12 cities in Java and Sumatra. In Indonesia, feminist organizations have existed since 1912, inspired by Indonesian heroines of the 19th century, e.g., Kartini, Martha Christina Tiahahu, Cut Nyak Meutia, Maria Walanda Maramis, Dewi Sartika, Nyai Ahmad Dahlan, Rasuna Said, etc. The Congress intended to improve women's rights in education and marriage.\nIndonesia also celebrates the Kartini Day (\"Hari Kartini\") on 21 April, in memory of activist Raden Ajeng Kartini. This is a celebration of the emancipation of women. The observance was instituted at the 1938 Indonesian Women Congress.\nDuring President Suharto's New Order (1965\u20131998), government propaganda used Mother's Day and Kartini Day to inculcate into women the idea that they should be docile and stay at home.\nIran.\nIn Iran, Mother's Day is celebrated on 20 Jumada al-thani. This is the sixth month in the Islamic calendar (a lunar calendar) and every year the holiday falls on a different day of the Gregorian calendar. This is the birthday anniversary of Fatimah, the Islamic prophet Muhammad's only daughter according to Shia Islam. On this day, banners reading \"\"Ya Fatemeah\" (O! Fatemeh)\" are displayed on \"government buildings, private buildings, public streets and car windows.\" Mother's Day was originally observed on 16 December but the date was changed after the Iranian Revolution in 1979. The celebration is both Women's Day (replacing International Women's Day) and Mother's Day.\nIn 1960, the Institute for Women Protection adopted the Western holiday and established it on 25 Azar (16 December), the date the Institute was founded. The Institute's action had the support of Empress Farah Pahlavi, the wife of the last Shah of Persia, who promoted the construction of maternity clinics in remote parts of the country to commemorate the day. Pahlavi regime used the holiday to promote \"gender ideologies\" of the regime. The Shah's government honored and gave awards to women who represented the idealized view of the regime, including mothers who had many healthy children.\nAccording to Shahla Haeri, the Islamic Republic government has used the holiday to \"control and channel women's movements\" and to promote role models for the traditional concept of family. Fatimah is seen by these critics as the chosen model of a woman completely dedicated to certain traditionally sanctioned feminine roles. However, supporters of the choice contend that there is much more to her life story than simply such \"traditional\" roles.\nIreland.\nIn Ireland, Mother's Day is celebrated on the fourth Sunday of Lent, as in the United Kingdom, and has the same roots in Mothering Sunday. The practice died out in Ireland around the late 18th century but was revived around the 1950s due to Americanisation.\nIsrael.\nThe Jewish population of Israel used to celebrate Mother's Day on Shevat 30 of the Jewish calendar, which falls between 30 January and 1 March. The celebration was set as the same date that Henrietta Szold died (13 February 1945). Henrietta had no biological children, but her organization Youth Aliyah rescued many Jewish children from Nazi Germany and provided for them. She also championed children's rights. Szold is considered the \"mother\" of all those children, and that is why her annual remembrance day (\u05d9\u05d5\u05dd \u05d4\u05e9\u05e0\u05d4) was set as Mother's Day (\u05d9\u05d5\u05b9\u05dd \u05d4\u05b8\u05d0\u05b5\u05dd, yom ha'em). The holiday has evolved over time, becoming a celebration of mutual love inside the family, called Family Day (\u05d9\u05d5\u05b9\u05dd \u05d4\u05b7\u05de\u05b4\u05e9\u05b0\u05bc\u05e4\u05b8\u05bc\u05d7\u05b8\u05d4, yom hamishpacha). This holiday is mainly celebrated in preschools with an activity to which parents are invited. Mother's Day is mainly celebrated by children at kindergartens. There are no longer mutual gifts among members of the family, and there is no longer any commercialization of the celebration. It is not an official holiday.\nItaly.\nMother's Day in Italy was celebrated for the first time on 24 December 1933 as the \"Day of the mother and the child\" (\"Giornata della madre e del fanciullo\"). It was instituted by the in order to publicly reward the most prolific Italian women every year.\nAfter World War II, Mother's Day was first celebrated on 12 May 1957 in Assisi, at the initiative of Reverend Otello Migliosi, the parish priest of the Tordibetto church. This celebration was so popular that in the following year Mother's Day was adopted throughout Italy. On 18 December 1958, a proposal was presented to the Italian Senate to make the holiday official.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, was initially commemorated during the Sh\u014dwa period as the birthday of Empress K\u014djun (mother of Emperor Akihito) on 6 March. This was established in 1931 when the Imperial Women's Union was organized. In 1937, the first meeting of \"Praise Mothers\" was held on 8 May, and in 1949 Japanese society adopted the second Sunday of May as the official date for Mother's Day in Japan. Today, people typically give their mothers gifts of flowers such as red carnations and roses. Giving carnations on Mother's Day is the most common in Japan.\nKyrgyzstan.\nIn Kyrgyzstan, Mother's Day is celebrated on 19 May every year. The holiday was first celebrated in 2012. Mothers are also honored on International Women's Day\nLatvia.\nMother's Day in Latvia was celebrated for the first time in 1922. Since 1934, Mother's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday of May. After the end of the Soviet occupation of Baltic states celebration was resumed in 1992. Mothers are also honored on International Women's Day.\nLithuania.\nMother's Day in Lithuania was celebrated for the first time in 1928. In Lithuania, Mother's Day is celebrated on the first Sunday of May.\nMalawi.\nIn Malawi, Mother's Day is a public holiday. The day is observed on 15 October or the following workday. It is celebrated on the UN's World Rural Women's Day.\nMaldives.\nIn the Maldives, Mother's Day is celebrated on 13 May. The day is celebrated in different ways. Children give gifts and spend time with their mothers. Daughters give their mothers cards and handmade gifts and sons give their mothers gifts and flowers. Maldivians love to celebrate Mother's day, and they have it specially written on their calendar.\nMalta.\nThe first mention of Mother's Day in Malta occurred during the Radio Children's Programmes run by Frans H. Said in May 1961. Within a few years, Mother's Day became one of the most popular dates in the Maltese calendar. In Malta, this day is commemorated on the second Sunday in May. Mothers are invariably given gifts and invited for lunch, usually at a good quality restaurant.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, the government of \u00c1lvaro Obreg\u00f3n imported the Mother's Day holiday from the US in 1922, and the newspaper \"Exc\u00e9lsior\" held a massive promotional campaign for the holiday that year. The conservative government tried to use the holiday to promote a more conservative role for mothers in families, but that perspective was criticized by the socialists as promoting an unrealistic image of a woman who was not good for much more than breeding.\nIn the mid-1930s, the leftist government of L\u00e1zaro C\u00e1rdenas promoted the holiday as a \"patriotic festival\". The C\u00e1rdenas government tried to use the holiday as a vehicle for various efforts: to stress the importance of families as the basis for national development; to benefit from the loyalty that Mexicans felt towards their mothers; to introduce new morals to Mexican women; and to reduce the influence that the church and the Catholic right exerted over women. The government sponsored the holiday in the schools. However, ignoring the strict guidelines from the government, theatre plays were filled with religious icons and themes. Consequently, the \"national celebrations\" became \"religious fiestas\" despite the efforts of the government.\nSoledad Orozco Garc\u00eda, the wife of President Manuel \u00c1vila Camacho, promoted the holiday during the 1940s, resulting in an important state-sponsored celebration. The 1942 celebration lasted a full week and included an announcement that all women could reclaim their pawned sewing machines from the Monte de Piedad at no cost.\nDue to Orozco's promotion, the Catholic National Synarchist Union (UNS) took heed of the holiday around 1941. Shop-owner members of the Party of the Mexican Revolution (now the Institutional Revolutionary Party) observed a custom allowing women from humble classes to pick a free Mother's Day gift from a shop to bring home to their families. The Synarchists worried that this promoted both materialism and the idleness of lower classes, and in turn, reinforced the systemic social problems of the country. Currently this holiday practice is viewed as very conservative, but the 1940s' UNS saw Mother's Day as part of the larger debate on the modernization that was happening at the time. This economic modernization was inspired by US models and was sponsored by the state. The fact that the holiday was originally imported from the US was seen as evidence of an attempt at imposing capitalism and materialism in Mexican society.\nThe UNS and the clergy of the city of Le\u00f3n interpreted the government's actions as an effort to secularize the holiday and to promote a more active role for women in society. They concluded that the government's long-term goal was to cause women to abandon their traditional roles at home in order to spiritually weaken men. They also saw the holiday as an attempt to secularize the cult to the Virgin Mary, inside a larger effort to dechristianize several holidays. The government sought to counter these claims by organizing widespread masses and asking religious women to assist with the state-sponsored events in order to \"depaganize\" them. The clergy preferred to promote 2 July celebration of the Sant\u00edsima Virgen de la Luz, the patron of Le\u00f3n, Guanajuato, in replacement of Mother's Day. In 1942, at the same time as Soledad's greatest celebration of Mother's Day, the clergy organized the 210th celebration of the Virgin Mary with a large parade in Le\u00f3n.\nThere is a consensus among scholars that the Mexican government abandoned its revolutionary initiatives during the 1940s, including its efforts to influence Mother's Day.\nToday the \"D\u00eda de las Madres\" is an unofficial holiday in Mexico held each year on 10 May, the day on which it was first celebrated in Mexico.\nIn Mexico, to show affection and appreciation to the mother, it is traditional to start the celebration with the famous song \"Las Ma\u00f1anitas\", either a cappella, with the help of a mariachi or a contracted trio. Families usually gather to celebrate, trying to spend as much time as possible with mothers to honor them. They bring some dishes and eat together or visit a restaurant.\nMyanmar.\nIn Myanmar, Mothers' Day (the plural form of mother is used as an official title) is celebrated on the full moon day of Pyatho, the tenth month of the Myanmar calendar, which usually falls in January. At the proposal and initiative of U Thukha, who put a lot of effort into founding this day, it was first celebrated in Mandalay on the full moon day of Pyatho in 1995, but it was officially added to the Myanmar calendar in 1997, two years after its first celebration.\nPeople who are away from home, send postcards or phone their mothers to express love and gratitude and those who live with their mother, give her personal service, like bathing or shampooing, and usually take her to pagodas.\nNepal.\nIn Nepal, there is a festival equivalent to Mother's Day, called Mata Tirtha Aunsi (\"Mother Pilgrimage New Moon\"), or Mata Tirtha Puja (\"Mother Pilgrimage Worship\"). It is celebrated according to the lunar calendar. It falls on the last day of the dark fortnight in the month of Baishakh which falls in April\u2013May (in 2015, it will occur on 18 April). The dark fortnight lasts for 15 days from the full moon to the new moon. This festival is observed to commemorate and honor mothers, and it is celebrated by giving gifts to mothers and remembering mothers who are no more.\nTo honor mothers who have died, it is the tradition to go on a pilgrimage to the Mata Tirtha ponds, located 6\u00a0km to the southwest of downtown Kathmandu. The nearby Mata Tirtha village is named after these ponds. Previously, the tradition was observed primarily by the Newar community and other people living in the Kathmandu Valley. Now this festival is widely celebrated across the country.\nMany tragic folklore legends have been created, suggesting different reasons why this pond became a pilgrimage site. The most popular version says that, in ancient times, the mother of a shepherd died, and he made offerings to a nearby pond. There he saw the face of his mother in the water, with her hand taking the offerings. Since then, many people have visited the pond, hoping to see their deceased mother's face. Pilgrims believe that they will bring peace to their mothers' souls by visiting the sacred place. There are two ponds. The larger one is for ritual bathing. The smaller one is used to \"look upon mother's face\", and is fenced by iron bars to prevent people from bathing in it.\nTraditionally, in the Kathmandu valley the South-Western corner is reserved for women and women-related rituals, and the North-Eastern is for men and men-related rituals. The worship place for Mata Tirtha Aunsi is located in Mata Tirtha in the South-Western half of the valley, while the worship place for Gokarna Aunsi, the equivalent celebration for deceased fathers is located in Gokarna, Nepal, in the North-Eastern half. This division is reflected in many aspects of the life in Kathmandu valley.\nMother's Day is known as Aama ko Mukh Herne Din in Nepali, which literally means \"day to see mother's face\". In Nepal Bhasa, the festival is known as M\u0101m y\u0101 Khw\u0101 Swayegu, which can be translated as \"to look upon mother's face\".\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, Mother's Day was introduced as early as 1910 by the Dutch branch of the Salvation Army. The Royal Dutch Society for Horticulture and Botany, a group protecting the interest of Dutch florists, worked to promote the holiday; they hoped to emulate the commercial success achieved by American florists. They were imitating the campaign already underway by florists in Germany and Austria, but they were aware that the traditions had originated in the US.\nFlorists launched a major promotional effort in 1925. This included the publication of a book of articles written by famous intellectuals, radio broadcasts, newspapers ads, and the collaboration of priests and teachers who wanted to promote the celebration for their own reasons. In 1931 the second Sunday of May was adopted as the official celebration date. In the mid-1930s the slogan \"Moederdag \u2013 Bloemendag\" (Mother's Day \u2013 Flowers' Day) was coined, and the phrase was popular for many years. In the 1930s and 1940s \"Mother's Day cakes\" were given as gifts in hospitals and to the Dutch Queen, who is known as the \"mother of the country\". Other trade groups tried to cash in on the holiday and to give new meaning to the holiday in order to promote their own wares as gifts.\nRoman Catholic priests complained that the holiday interfered with the honoring of the Virgin Mary, the divine mother, which took place during the whole month of May. In 1926 Mother's Day was celebrated on 7 July in order to address these complaints. Catholic organizations and priests tried to Christianize the holiday, but those attempts were rendered futile around the 1960s when the church lost influence and the holiday was completely secularized.\nIn later years, the initial resistance disappeared, and even leftist newspapers stopped their criticism and endorsed Mother's Day.\nIn the 1980s, the American origin of the holiday was still not widely known, so feminist groups who opposed the perpetuation of gender roles sometimes claimed that Mother's Day was invented by Nazis and celebrated on the birthday of Klara Hitler, Hitler's mother.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, Mother's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday in May. Mother's Day is not a public holiday. The New Zealand tradition is to send or give cards and gifts, and for children to serve their mothers breakfast in bed.\nNicaragua.\nIn Nicaragua, the \"D\u00eda de la Madre\" has been celebrated on 30 May since the early 1940s. The date was chosen by President Anastasio Somoza Garc\u00eda because it was the birthday of Casimira Sacasa, his wife's mother.\nNorth Korea.\nMother's Day is celebrated on 16 November as a public holiday in North Korea. The date takes its significance from the First National Meeting of Mothers held in 1961, for which Kim Il Sung, the leader of the country, published a work called \"The Duty of Mothers in the Education of Children\". The date was designated as Mother's Day in May 2012 by the Presidium of the Supreme People's Assembly but only became a public holiday and appeared on the North Korean calendar starting in 2015.\nNorway.\nMother's Day was first celebrated on 9 February 1919 and was initially organized by religious institutions. Later it has become a family day, and the mother is often treated to breakfast in bed, flowers and cake.\nIt has gradually become a major commercial event, with special pastries, flowers and other presents offered by retailers. Day-cares and primary schools often encourage children to make cards and other gifts.\nPakistan.\nIn Pakistan, Mother's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday of May. Media channels celebrate with special shows. Individuals honor their mothers by giving gifts and commemorative articles. Individuals who have lost their mothers pray and pay their respects to their loved ones lost. Schools hold special programs in order to acknowledge the efforts of their mothers.\nPanama.\nIn Panama, Mother's Day is celebrated on 8 December, the same day as the Feast of the Immaculate Conception. This date was suggested in 1930 by the wife of Panama's President Florencio Harmodio Arosemena. 8 December was adopted as Mother's Day under Law 69, which was passed the same year.\nAccording to another account, in 1924 the Rotary Club of Panama asked that Mother's Day be celebrated on 11 May. Politician An\u00edbal D. R\u00edos changed the proposal so that the celebration would be held on 8 December. He then established Mother's Day as a national holiday on that date.\nParaguay.\nIn Paraguay, Mother's Day is celebrated on 15 May, the same day as the \"Dia de la Patria\", which celebrates the independence of Paraguay. This date was chosen to honor the role played by Juana Mar\u00eda de Lara in the events of 14 May 1811 that led to Paraguay's independence.\nIn 2008, the Paraguayan Minister of Culture, Bruno Barrios, lamented this coincidence because, in Paraguay, Mother's Day is much more popular than independence day and the independence celebration goes unnoticed. As a result, Barrios asked that the celebration be moved to the end of the month. A group of young people attempted to gather 20,000 signatures to ask the Parliament to move Mother's Day. In 2008, the \"Comisi\u00f3n de festejos\" (Celebration Committee) of the city of Asunci\u00f3n asked that Mother's Day be moved to the second Sunday of May.\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, Mother's Day is officially celebrated on the second Sunday of May, but it is not a public holiday. Although not a traditional Filipino holiday, the occasion owes its popularity to American Colonial Period influence.\nAccording to a 2008 article by the Philippine News Agency, in 1921 the Ilocos Norte Federation of Women's Clubs asked to declare the first Monday of December as Mother's Day \"to honor these fabulous women who brought forth God's children into this world.\" In response, Governor-General Charles Yeater issued Circular No. 33 declaring the celebration. In 1937 President Manuel L. Quezon issued Presidential Proclamation No. 213, changing the name of the occasion from \"Mother's Day\" to \"Parent's Day\" to address the complaints that there wasn't a \"Father's Day\". In 1980 President Ferdinand Marcos issued Presidential Proclamation No. 2037 proclaiming the date as both Mother's Day and Father's Day. In 1988 President Corazon Aquino issued Presidential Proclamation No. 266, changing Mother's Day to the second Sunday of May, and Father's Day to the third Sunday of June, discontinuing the traditional date. In 1998 President Joseph Estrada returned both celebrations to the first Monday of December.\nPortugal.\nIn Portugal, the \"Dia da M\u00e3e\" (\"Mother's Day\") is an unofficial holiday held each year on the first Sunday of May (sometimes coinciding with Labour Day). In the weeks leading up to this Sunday, school children spend a few hours a day preparing a gift for their mothers, aided by their school teachers. In general, mothers receive gifts from their family members and this day is meant to be celebrated with the whole family.\nIt used to be celebrated on 8 December, the same date as the Conception of the Virgin celebration.\nRomania.\nIn Romania, Mother's Day has been celebrated on the first Sunday of May since 2010. Law 319/2009 made both Mother's Day and Father's Day official holidays in Romania. The measure was passed thanks to campaign efforts from the Alliance Fighting Discrimination Against Fathers (TATA). Previously, Mother's Day was celebrated on 8 March, as part of International Women's Day (a tradition dating back to when Romania was part of the Eastern bloc). Today, Mother's Day and International Women's Day are two separate holidays, with International Women's Day being held on its original date of 8 March.\nRussia.\nTraditionally Russia had celebrated International Women's Day and Mother's Day on 8 March, an inheritance from the Soviet Union, and a public holiday.\nWomen's Day was first celebrated on the last Sunday in February in 1913 in Russia.\nIn 1917, demonstrations marking International Women's Day in Saint Petersburg on the last Sunday in February (which fell on 8 March on the Gregorian calendar) initiated the February Revolution. Following the October Revolution later that year, the Bolshevik Alexandra Kollontai persuaded Vladimir Lenin to make it an official holiday in the Soviet Union, and it was established, but was a working day until 1965.\nOn 8 May 1965, by the decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, International Women's Day was declared a non-working day in the Soviet Union \"in commemoration of the outstanding merits of Soviet women in communistic construction, in the defense of their Fatherland during the Great Patriotic War, in their heroism and selflessness at the front and in the rear, and also marking the great contribution of women to strengthening friendship between peoples, and the struggle for peace. But still, women's day must be celebrated as are other holidays.\"\nSamoa.\nIn Samoa, Mother's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday in May, and as a recognised national holiday on the Monday following.\nSingapore.\nIn Singapore, Mother's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday of May. It is not recognized as a holiday by the government.\nSlovakia.\nCzechoslovakia celebrated only Women's Day until the Velvet Revolution in 1989. After the country split in 1993, Slovakia started celebrating both Women's Day and Mother's Day. The politicization of Women's Day has affected the official status of Mother's Day. Center-right parties want Mother's Day to replace Women's Day, and social-democrats want to make Women's Day an official holiday. Currently, both days are festive, but they are not \"state holidays\". In the Slovak Republic, Mother's Day is celebrated every second Sunday in May.\nSouth Africa.\nIn South Africa, Mother's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday of May. It is not recognized as a holiday by the government. The tradition is to give cards and gifts and to serve mothers breakfast in bed or to go out to lunch together as a family.\nSouth Korea.\nIn South Korea, Parents' Day (\uc5b4\ubc84\uc774\ub0a0, \"Eobeoinal\") is celebrated annually on May 8. Unlike Mother's Day, which is focused solely on mothers, Parents' Day honors both mothers and fathers. The holiday was established as an official national observance in 1973, replacing the separate celebrations of Mother's Day and Father's Day that had been observed earlier. Typical customs include giving carnations, writing letters, and spending time with one's parents.\nSouth Sudan.\nIn South Sudan, Mother's Day is celebrated on the first Monday in July. The president Salva Kiir Mayardit proclaimed Mother's Day as the first Monday in July after handing over from Sudan. Children in South Sudan are presenting mothers with gifts and flowers. The first Mother's Day was held in that country on 2 July 2012.\nSpain.\nIn Spain, Mother's Day or D\u00eda de la Madre is celebrated on the first Sunday of May. The weeks leading up to this Sunday, school children spend a few hours a day preparing a gift for their mothers, aided by their school teachers. In general, mothers receive gifts from their family members &amp; this day is meant to be celebrated with the whole family. It is also said to be celebrated in May, as May is the month dedicated to the Virgin Mary (mother of Jesus) according to Catholicism. The idea of a month dedicated specifically to Mary can be traced back to baroque times. Although it wasn't always held during May, Mary Month included thirty daily spiritual exercises honoring Mary.\nIn 1925 the Valencian poet Julio Men\u00e9ndez Garc\u00eda published a \"Hymn to Mother\" in a pamphlet in which he proposed the celebration of Mother's Day in all Spanish-speaking countries. The official declaration was never produced, but at that time the initiative was adopted at a local level on different dates; thus, for example, in Madrid, Mother's Day was celebrated on 4 October 1926.\nIn 1939 the Youth Front of FET y de las JONS party, promoted the celebration of Mother's Day coinciding with the feast of the Immaculate Conception, on 8 December.\nIn the early 1960s, on the initiative of a chain of department stores (Galer\u00edas Preciados), which copied the custom established in Cuba, Mother's Day was also celebrated on the first Sunday of May (El Corte Ingl\u00e9s, the great competitor of Galer\u00edas Preciados, celebrated the holiday in December). The two dates, May and December, coexisted until 1965 when the ecclesiastical authorities chose to celebrate the festival in May, within the month consecrated to the Virgin, to recover the authentic character of the Day of the Immaculate Conception.\nSri Lanka.\nIn Sri Lanka, Mother's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday of May.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, Mother's Day was first celebrated in 1919, by an initiative of the author Cecilia B\u00e5\u00e5th-Holmberg. It took several decades for the day to be widely recognized. Swedes born in the early nineteen hundreds typically did not celebrate the day because of the common belief that the holiday was invented strictly for commercial purposes. This was in contrast to Father's Day, which has been widely celebrated in Sweden since the late 1970s. Mother's Day in Sweden is celebrated on the last Sunday in May. A later date was chosen to allow everyone to go outside and pick flowers.\nSwitzerland.\nIn Switzerland, the \"r\u00e8gle de Pentec\u00f4te\" law allows Mother's Day to be celebrated a week late if the holiday falls on the same day as Pentecost. In 2008, merchants declined to move the date.\nTaiwan.\nIn Taiwan, Mother's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday of the month of May, coinciding with Buddha's birthday and the traditional ceremony of \"washing the Buddha\". In 1999 the Taiwanese government established the second Sunday of May as Buddha's birthday, so they would be celebrated in the same day.\nSince 2006, the Tzu Chi, the largest charity organization in Taiwan, celebrates the Tzu Chi Day, Mother's Day and Buddha's birthday all together, as part of a unified celebration and religious observance.\nThailand.\nMother's day in Thailand is celebrated on the birthday of the Queen Mother of Thailand, Sirikit (12 August). The holiday was first celebrated around the 1980s as part of the campaign by the Prime Minister of Thailand Prem Tinsulanonda to promote Thailand's Royal family. Father's Day is celebrated on the late King Bhumibol Adulyadej's birthday.\nUkraine.\nUkraine celebrates Mother's Day () on the second Sunday of May. In Ukraine, Mother's Day officially became a holiday in 1999 and has been celebrated since 2000. Ukrainian society also celebrates International Women's Day, a holiday adopted under the Soviet Union that remained a tradition in Ukraine after its collapse.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom celebrates Mother's Day on the Fourth Sunday in Lent (). In the United Kingdom, the holiday has its roots in the religious Mothering Sunday celebration and was originally unrelated to the international Mother's Day holiday. Most historians believe that Mothering Sunday evolved from a medieval practice of visiting one's mother church annually on Laetare Sunday.\nUnited States.\nThe United States celebrates Mother's Day on the second Sunday in May. In 1872 Julia Ward Howe called for women to join in support of disarmament and asked for 2 June 1872, to be established as a \"Mother's Day for Peace\". Her 1870 \"Appeal to womanhood throughout the world\" is sometimes referred to as Mother's Day Proclamation. But Howe's day was not for honouring mothers but for organizing pacifist mothers against war. In the 1880s and 1890s there were several further attempts to establish an American \"Mother's Day\", but these did not succeed beyond the local level.\nIn the United States, Mother's Day remains one of the biggest days for sales of flowers, greeting cards, and the like; Mother's Day is also the biggest holiday for dining out and for long-distance telephone calls. Moreover, churchgoing is also popular on Mother's Day, yielding the highest church attendance after Christmas Eve and Easter. Many worshippers celebrate the day with carnations, coloured if the mother is living and white if she is dead.\nIt is possible that the holiday would have withered over time without the support and continuous promotion of the florist industry. Other holidays from the same time, such as Children's Day and Temperance Sunday, do not have the same level of popularity.\nNotes.\nCitations.\nEnstam, Elizabeth York. \"The Dallas equal suffrage association, political style, and popular culture: grassroots strategies of the Woman Suffrage Movement, 1913\u20131919.\" \"Journal of Southern History\" 68.4 (2002):817+. Student Resources in Context. Web. 14 November 2014.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46279", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46279", "title": "Ukrainian language", "text": "East Slavic language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nUkrainian (, ) is an East Slavic language, spoken primarily in Ukraine. It is the first (native) language of a large majority of Ukrainians.\nWritten Ukrainian uses the Ukrainian alphabet, a variant of the Cyrillic script. The standard language is studied by the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine and Potebnia Institute of Linguistics. Comparisons are often made between Ukrainian and Russian, another East Slavic language, yet there is more mutual intelligibility with Belarusian, and a closer lexical distance to West Slavic Polish and South Slavic Bulgarian.\nUkrainian is a descendant of Old East Slavic, a language spoken in the medieval state of Kievan Rus\u02b9. In the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, the language developed into Ruthenian, where it became an official language, before a process of Polonization began in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. By the 18th century, Ruthenian diverged into regional variants, and the modern Ukrainian language developed in the territory of present-day Ukraine. Russification saw the Ukrainian language banned as a subject from schools and as a language of instruction in the Russian Empire, and continued in various ways in the Soviet Union. Even so, the language continued to see use throughout the country, and remained particularly strong in Western Ukraine.\nLinguistic development.\nTheories.\nSpecific developments that led to a gradual change of the Old East Slavic vowel system into the system found in modern Ukrainian began around the 12th/13th century (that is, still at the time of the Kievan Rus\u02b9) with a lengthening and raising of the Old East Slavic mid vowels \"e\" and \"o\" when followed by a consonant and a weak yer vowel that would eventually disappear completely, for example Old East Slavic \u043a\u043e\u0442\u044a /k\u0254t\u0259/ &gt; Ukrainian \u043a\u0456\u0442 /kit/ 'cat' (via transitional stages such as /ko\u02d1t\u0259\u0306/, /ku\u02d1t(\u0259\u0306)/, /ky\u02d1t/ or similar) or Old East Slavic \u043f\u0435\u0447\u044c /p\u02b2\u025bt\u0283\u02b2\u0259/ &gt; Ukrainian \u043f\u0456\u0447 /pit\u0283/ 'oven' (via transitional stages such as /p\u02b2e\u02d1t\u0283\u02b2\u0259\u0306/, /p\u02b2i\u02d1t\u0283\u02b2/ or similar). This raising and other phonological developments of the time, such as the merger of the Old East Slavic vowel phonemes \u0438 /i/ and \u044b /\u0268/ into the specifically Ukrainian phoneme /\u026a ~ e/, spelled with \u0438 (in the 13th/14th centuries), and the fricativisation of the Old East Slavic consonant \u0433 /g/, probably first to /\u0263/ (in the 13th century), with /\u0266/ as a reflex in Modern Ukrainian, did not happen in Russian. Only the fricativisation of Old East Slavic \u0433 /g/ occurred in Belarusian, where the present-day reflex is /\u0263/.\nAhatanhel Krymsky and Aleksey Shakhmatov assumed the existence of the common spoken language of Eastern Slavs only in prehistoric times. According to them the diversification of the Old East Slavic language took place in the 8th or early 9th century.\nRussian linguist Andrey Zaliznyak stated that the Old Novgorod dialect differed significantly from that of other dialects of Kievan Rus\u02b9 during the 11th\u201312th century, but started becoming more similar to them around the 13th\u201315th centuries. The modern Russian language hence developed from the fusion of this Novgorod dialect and the common dialect spoken by the other Kievan Rus\u02b9, whereas the modern Ukrainian and Belarusian languages developed from dialects which did not differ from each other in a significant way.\nUkrainian linguist Stepan Smal-Stotsky denies the existence of a common Old East Slavic language at any time in the past. Similar points of view were shared by Yevhen Tymchenko, Vsevolod Hantsov, Olena Kurylo, Ivan Ohienko and others. According to this theory, the dialects of East Slavic tribes evolved gradually from the common Proto-Slavic language without any intermediate stages during the 6th through 9th centuries. The Ukrainian language was formed by convergence of tribal dialects, mostly due to an intensive migration of the population within the territory of today's Ukraine in later historical periods. This point of view was also supported by George Shevelov's phonological studies, which argue that specific features were already recognizable in the southern dialects of Old East Slavic (seen as ancestors to Ukrainian) as far back as these varieties can be documented.\nOrigins and developments during medieval times.\nAs a result of close Slavic contacts with the remnants of the Scythian and Sarmatian population north of the Black Sea, lasting into the early Middle Ages, the appearance of the voiced fricative \u03b3/\u0433 (romanized \"h\"), in modern Ukrainian and some southern Russian dialects is explained by the assumption that it initially emerged in Scythian and related eastern Iranian dialects, from earlier common Proto-Indo-European \"*g\" and \"*g\u02b0\".\nDuring the 13th century, when German settlers were invited to Ukraine by the princes of the Kingdom of Ruthenia, German words began to appear in the language spoken in Ukraine. Their influence would continue under Poland not only through German colonists but also through the Yiddish-speaking Jews. Often such words involve trade or handicrafts. Examples of words of German or Yiddish origin spoken in Ukraine include (\"roof\"), (\"pipe\"), (\"market\"), (\"furrier\"), and (\"master\" or \"craftsman\").\nDevelopments under Poland and Lithuania.\nIn the 13th century, eastern parts of Rus (including Moscow) came under Tatar rule until their unification under the Tsardom of Muscovy, whereas the south-western areas (including Kyiv) were incorporated into the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. For the following four centuries, the languages of the two regions evolved in relative isolation from each other. Direct written evidence of the existence of the Ukrainian language dates to the late 16th century. By the 16th century, a peculiar official language formed: a mixture of the liturgical standardised language of Old Church Slavonic, Ruthenian and Polish. The influence of the latter gradually increased relative to the former two, as the nobility and rural large-landowning class, known as the szlachta, was largely Polish-speaking. Documents soon took on many Polish characteristics superimposed on Ruthenian phonetics.\nPolish\u2013Lithuanian rule and education also involved significant exposure to Latin. Much of the influence of Poland on the development of the Ukrainian language has been attributed to this period, and is reflected in multiple words and constructions used in everyday Ukrainian speech that were taken from Polish or Latin. Examples of Polish words adopted from this period include \"zavzhdy\" (always; taken from old Polish word \"zaw\u017cdy\") and \"obitsiaty\" (to promise; taken from Polish \"obieca\u0107\") and from Latin (via Polish) \"raptom\" (suddenly) and \"meta\" (aim or goal).\nSignificant contact with Tatars and Turks resulted in many Turkic words, particularly those involving military matters and steppe industry, being adopted into the Ukrainian language. Examples include \"torba\" (bag) and \"tyutyun\" (tobacco).\nBecause of the substantial number of loanwords from Polish, German, Czech and Latin, early modern vernacular Ukrainian (\"prosta mova\", \"simple speech\") had more lexical similarity with West Slavic languages than with Russian or Church Slavonic. By the mid-17th century, the linguistic divergence between the Ukrainian and Russian languages had become so significant that there was a need for translators during negotiations for the Treaty of Pereyaslav, between Bohdan Khmelnytsky, head of the Zaporozhian Host, and the Russian state.\nBy the 18th century, Ruthenian had diverged into regional variants, developing into the modern Belarusian, Rusyn, and Ukrainian languages.\nChronology.\nThe accepted chronology of Ukrainian divides the language into Old Ukrainian, Middle Ukrainian, and Modern Ukrainian. Shevelov explains that much of this is based on the character of contemporary written sources, ultimately reflecting socio-historical developments, and he further subdivides the Middle period into three phases:\nUkraine marks the Day of Ukrainian Writing and Language on 9 November, the Eastern Orthodox feast day of Nestor the Chronicler.\nHistory of the spoken language.\nRus\u02b9 and Kingdom of Ruthenia.\nThe era of Kievan Rus\u02b9 (c. 880\u20131240) is the subject of some linguistic controversy, as the language of much of the literature was purely or heavily Old Church Slavonic. Some theorists see an early Ukrainian stage in language development here, calling it Old Ruthenian; others term this era Old East Slavic. Russian theorists tend to amalgamate Rus\u02b9 to the modern nation of Russia, and call this linguistic era Old Russian. However, according to Russian linguist Andrey Zaliznyak (2012), people from the Novgorod Republic did not call themselves \"Rus\u02b9\" until the 14th century; earlier Novgorodians reserved the term \"Rus\u02b9\" for the Kiev, Pereyaslavl and Chernigov principalities. At the same time as evidenced by contemporary chronicles, the ruling princes and kings of Galicia\u2013Volhynia and Kiev called themselves \"people of Rus\u02b9\" (in foreign sources called \"Ruthenians\"), and Galicia\u2013Volhynia has alternately been called the Principality or Kingdom of Ruthenia.\nAlso according to Andrey Zaliznyak, the Novgorodian dialect differed significantly from that of other dialects of Kievan Rus during the 11th\u201312th century, but \nstarted becoming more similar to them around 13th\u201315th centuries. The modern Russian language hence developed from the fusion of this Novgorodian dialect and the common dialect spoken by the other Kievan Rus, whereas the modern Ukrainian and Belarusian languages developed from the dialects which did not differ from each other in a significant way.\nIn the Grand Duchy of Lithuania (c. 1349\u20131569).\nDuring the 14th century, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania gradually established control over most of present-day Ukraine, except for Galicia, which would end up within the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland (since 1434 largely administered as the Ruthenian Voivodeship). Local autonomy of both rule and language was a marked feature of Lithuanian rule. In the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, administration evolved largely upon the legacy of Kievan Rus' law. Old East Slavic became the language of the chancellery, known as \"Chancery Slavonic\", and gradually evolved into the Ruthenian language. Ruthenian would be the prevailing language in the Lithuanian Metrica of the 15th and 16th century, and the original language of the Statutes of Lithuania (1529, 1566, and 1588), that were only later translated into Latin, and then Polish.\nIn the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland (1569\u20131648).\nPolish rule, which came later, was accompanied by a more assimilationist policy. By the 1569 Union of Lublin that formed the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, a significant part of Ukrainian territory was moved from Lithuanian rule to Polish administration, resulting in cultural Polonization and visible attempts to colonize Ukraine by the Polish nobility.\nMany Ukrainian nobles learned the Polish language and converted to Catholicism during that period in order to maintain their lofty aristocratic position. Lower classes were less affected because literacy was common only in the upper class and clergy. The latter were also under significant Polish pressure after the Union with the Catholic Church. Most of the educational system was gradually Polonized. In Ruthenia, the language of administrative documents gradually shifted towards Polish.\nUkrainian culture and language flourished in the sixteenth and first half of the 17th century, when Ukraine was part of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, albeit in spite of being part of the PLC, not as a result. Among many schools established in that time, the Kyiv-Mohyla Collegium (the predecessor of the modern Kyiv-Mohyla Academy), founded by the Orthodox Metropolitan Peter Mogila, was the most important. At that time languages were associated more with religions: Catholics spoke Polish, and members of the Orthodox church spoke Ruthenian. As witnessed by contemporary documents, such as the lexicon of Pamvo Berynda, there was a strong mutual influence between Church Slavonic literary varieties and the common speech of Ukraine during that time.\nPolish has had heavy influences on Ukrainian, particularly in Western Ukraine. The southwestern Ukrainian dialects are transitional to Polish. As the Ukrainian language developed further, some borrowings from Tatar and Turkish occurred. Other languages which influenced Ukrainian speech during that time were Latin and Greek.\nIn the Cossack Hetmanate and Tsarist Russia until 1800.\nWhen the Cossack Hetmanate arose in the mid-17th century, Polish remained a language of administration in the Hetmanate, and most Cossack officers and Polish nobles (two groups which overlapped a lot) still communicated with each other using a combination of Latin, Polish and Ruthenian. On the other hand, the language barrier between Cossack officers and Muscovite officials had become so great that they needed translators to understand each other during negotiations, and hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky 'had letters in Muscovite dialect translated into Latin, so that he could read them.'\nThe 1654 Pereiaslav Agreement between Cossack Hetmanate and Alexis of Russia divided Ukraine between the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth and the Tsardom of Russia. During the following century, both monarchies became increasingly intolerant of Ukrainian own cultural and political aspirations. Ukrainians found themselves in a colonial situation. The Russian centre adopted the name \"Little Russia\" for Ukraine and \"Little Russian\" for the language, an expression that originated in Byzantine Greek and may originally have meant \"old, original, fundamental Russia\", and had been in use since the 14th century. Ukrainian high culture went into a long period of steady decline. The Kyiv-Mohyla Academy was taken over by the Russian Empire. Most of the remaining Ukrainian schools also switched to Polish or Russian in the territories controlled by these respective countries, which was followed by a new wave of Polonization and Russification of the native nobility. Gradually the official language of Ukrainian provinces under Poland was changed to Polish, while the upper classes in the Russian part of Ukraine used Russian.\nIn Austrian Galicia and Lodomeria (1772\u20131918).\nAfter the 1772 First Partition of Poland, when the lands annexed by the Austrian Habsburg monarchy were reorganised as the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria, the Habsburg administration was initially surprised to find out that, apart from Poles, there were a lot of other people living in it whom they began calling \"Ruthenen\" (\"Ruthenians\" or \"Rusyny\"). They differed from the Poles in that the vast majority of them adhered to the Greek Catholic faith (organised as the Ruthenian Uniate Church) rather than Roman Catholic, and that their liturgical language was Church Slavonic rather than Latin. Most of them had not received much education; they used Ruthenian only as a spoken language, few could read or write, and those who did more often used Polish or (increasingly) German instead. As Empress Maria Theresa had introduced a general compulsory education (\"Allgemeiner Schulzwang\") in 1774, and enacted it in newly-acquired Galicia and Lodomeria in 1777, the decision was made to produce Polish and Ruthenian textbooks that were used in elementary schools for those language communities. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Language is the property of a people, and no one should forget the speech of their own folk.\"\n\u2013 Ivan Mohylnytsky, \"Information on the Ruthenian Language\" (1829)\nAlthough some Ruthenian parish schools were established in some villages, and some printed primers and catechisms in Ruthenian were distributed there, the effects of Ruthenian-language education achieved very little until 1815. That year, Ivan Mohylnytsky, a Przemy\u015bl eparchy canon who contributed to the establishment of a strong network of Ruthenian parish schools and a teacher training school, published a catechism at the Royal University of Buda entitled \"Christian Learning in the Case of the Common Catechism for Parish Children\". He followed this up in 1823 by a \"Grammar of the Slovene\u2013Ruthenian language\" (never published), and in 1829 by his treatise \"Information on the Ruthenian Language\" (published both in Polish as \"Rozprawa o i\u0119zyku ruskim\" and in Ruthenian as \"\u0412\u0456\u0434\u043e\u043c\u0456\u0441\u0442\u044c \u043e \u0440\u0443\u0441\u043a\u043e\u043c \u044f\u0437\u044b\u0446\u0456\"), which represents the first scholarly study arguing that Ruthenian was a language in its own right, separate from Polish, Russian, and Church Slavonic. On the other hand, new educational regulations in 1818 determined that schools that were exclusively attended by children of Greek Catholic parents were to receive instruction in Ruthenian, whereas schools attended by children of both Roman Catholic and Greek Catholic parents had Polish as the medium of instruction. Nevertheless, pupils at Ruthenian-instruction schools had to learn Polish as a second language as well.\nIn higher education, Ruthenian was not valued as an equal language, and students were expected to learn and use Latin and Polish instead. Students training to become Greek Catholic priests at the University of Lviv did receive instruction in Ruthenian in the so-called \"Studium ruthenum\" according to Austrian regulations between 1787 and 1809, but it was not a fully-fledged course; instead, it was regarded as a temporary measure for students who did not yet know Latin. Both its professors and alumni received only half the salary of their counterparts from the \"Studium latinum\", the number of students steadily decreased over the decades, and in 1809 the Ruthenians themselves requested the \"Studium ruthenum\" to be abandoned.\nIn the first few decades of the Austrian period in Galicia, there was also confusion amongst both the Habsburg administration and educated Ruthenians about which variety of written Ruthenian to use: late Church Slavonic, literary Russian, traditional written Ruthenian, or something close to how Ruthenian was actually spoken in Galicia at that time. The Habsburg Imperial censor for Slavic publications, Jernej Kopitar (himself from Slovenia), encouraged Ruthenian authors to base their written language on the Ruthenian vernacular, and from December 1833 onwards, to write Ruthenian in a Latin alphabet rather than Cyrillic. This initiated a discussion on Ruthenian identity, later called the \"First Alphabet War\" or \"Blizzard\". Although most Ruthenian intellectuals did respond by increasingly basing their writings on spoken Ruthenian, the majority of them defended the use Cyrillic over concerns of Polonisation. Nevertheless, they could not agree on various standardisation issues; three different Ruthenian grammars were published between 1834 and 1848, and none of them was widely adopted. Before 1848, no Ruthenian dictionaries were produced, no Ruthenian-language periodical press existed within Habsburg Galicia, and Ruthenian played no role as language of administration.\nThe Revolutions of 1848 in the Austrian Empire changed everything: the native languages of most populations in the Empire, including Ruthenian, were accorded official status, and all laws in the Danubian monarchy would be published in these languages from 1 October 1849 onwards. Ruthenian would henceforth be used in local administration in the \"Landesgesetzbl\u00e4tter\". From 1849 onwards, various official periodicals were established in Ruthenian, and the Interior Ministry stipulated in July 1849 that street signs in Lviv had to include Ruthenian versions. In October 1852, the Ministry of Justice also decreed that Ruthenian could be used by parties involved in legal issues in their communication with the courts of law, although it would take until 1861 to allow these letters to employ \"skoropys\" Cyrillic rather than Latin script (or the Muscovite \"gra\u017edanka\" variety of Cyrillic). In the post-1848 era, there were some contradictory developments, some of which countered Polonisation in the sphere of education, while others stimulated further Polonisation in the sphere of administration. Similarly, Galician Russophilia or Moscophilia strived towards ever greater assimilation of Ruthenian towards the so-called \"Great Russian\" language as used in Moscow, which still heavily leaned on Church Slavonic. Both the Habsburg administration and Greek Catholic Church raised concerns that these were \"barely comprehensible\" to the common people of Galicia and hampered the \"development of the Ruthenian language\", adding that Orthodox Imperial Russia was a threat to the overwhelmingly Catholic Habsburg realm. \nMatters once again came to a head in May 1859, when the Polish governor of Galicia Go\u0142uchowski recommended Czech linguist Josef Jire\u010dek's proposal for a Ruthenian Latin alphabet, leading to the \"Second Alphabet War\" or \"Blizzard\". Ruthenian intellectuals almost unanimously rejected the proposal for fear of Polonisation, leading the government to overreact by banning the \"Russian script\" (meaning the Muscovite \"gra\u017edanka\") in July 1859, which Ruthenian writers generally ignored. By March 1861, the Habsburg State Ministry essentially conceded defeat by stating that the Ruthenians themselves were responsible for developing their own language, and that it was not up to the government. Around the same time, however, Ruthenian intellectuals became acquainted with the writings of Ukrainian intellectuals from \"Little Russia\" in the Russian Empire, such as poet Taras Shevchenko (died 1861), who was fiercely anti-Russian and Ukrainophile, leading many Galician Ruthenians to abandon their earlier Russophilia. In between the pro-Polish and pro-Russian tendencies, the Ruthenian language in Galicia would gradually develop into an independent literary and intellectual written language in the second half of the 19th century, when it was increasingly called \"Ukrainian\".\nIn the Russian Empire.\nDuring the 19th century, a revival of Ukrainian self-identification manifested in the literary classes of both Russian-Empire Dnieper Ukraine and Austrian Galicia. The Brotherhood of Sts Cyril and Methodius in Kyiv applied an old word for the Cossack motherland, \"Ukrajina\", as a self-appellation for the nation of Ukrainians, and \"Ukrajins\u02b9ka mova\" for the language. Many writers published works in the Romantic tradition of Europe demonstrating that Ukrainian was not merely a language of the village but suitable for literary pursuits.\nHowever, in the Russian Empire expressions of Ukrainian culture and especially language were repeatedly persecuted for fear that a self-aware Ukrainian nation would threaten the unity of the empire. In 1804 Ukrainian as a subject and language of instruction was banned from schools. In 1811, by order of the Russian government, the Kyiv-Mohyla Academy was closed.\nIn 1847 the Brotherhood of St Cyril and Methodius was terminated. The same year Taras Shevchenko was arrested, exiled for ten years, and banned for political reasons from writing and painting. In 1862 Pavlo Chubynsky was exiled for seven years to Arkhangelsk. The Ukrainian magazine \"Osnova\" was discontinued. In 1863, the tsarist interior minister Pyotr Valuyev proclaimed in his decree that \"there never has been, is not, and never can be a separate Little Russian language\".\nAlthough the name of Ukraine is known since 1187, it was not applied to the language until the mid-19th century. The linguonym \"Ukrainian language\" appears in Yakub Holovatsky's book from 1849, listed there as a variant name of the \"Little Russian language\". In a private letter from 1854, Taras Shevchenko lauds \"our splendid Ukrainian language\". Valuyev's decree from 1863 derides the \"Little Russian\" language throughout, but also mentions \"the so-called Ukrainian language\" once. In Galicia, the earliest applications of the term \"Ukrainian\" to the language were in the hyphenated names \"Ukrainian-Ruthenian\" (1866, by Paulin \u015awi\u0119cicki) or \"Ruthenian-Ukrainian\" (1871, by Panteleimon Kulish and Ivan Puluj), with non-hyphenated \"Ukrainian language\" appearing shortly thereafter (in 1878, by Mykhailo Drahomanov).\nA following ban on Ukrainian books led to Alexander II's secret Ems Ukaz, which prohibited publication and importation of most Ukrainian-language books, public performances and lectures, and even banned the printing of Ukrainian texts accompanying musical scores. A period of leniency after 1905 was followed by another strict ban in 1914, which also affected Russian-occupied Galicia.\nFor much of the 19th century the Austrian authorities demonstrated some preference for Polish culture, but the Ukrainians were relatively free to partake in their own cultural pursuits in Halychyna and Bukovina, where Ukrainian was widely used in education and official documents. The suppression by Russia hampered the literary development of the Ukrainian language in Dnipro Ukraine, but there was a constant exchange with Halychyna, and many works were published under Austria and smuggled to the east.\nBy the time of the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the collapse of Austro-Hungary in 1918, Ukrainians were ready to openly develop a body of national literature, institute a Ukrainian-language educational system, and form an independent state (the Ukrainian People's Republic, shortly joined by the West Ukrainian People's Republic). During this brief independent statehood the stature and use of Ukrainian greatly improved.\nSpeakers in the Russian Empire.\nIn the Russian Empire Census of 1897 the following picture emerged, with Ukrainian being the second most spoken language of the Russian Empire. According to the Imperial census's terminology, the Russian language (\"\u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0456\u0439\") was subdivided into Ukrainian (\u041c\u0430\u043b\u043e\u0440\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0456\u0439, 'Little Russian'), what is known as Russian today (\u0412\u0435\u043b\u0438\u043a\u043e\u0440\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0456\u0439, 'Great Russian'), and Belarusian (\u0411\u0463\u043b\u043e\u0440\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0456\u0439, 'White Russian').\nThe following table shows the distribution of settlement by native language (\"\u043f\u043e \u0440\u043e\u0434\u043d\u043e\u043c\u0443 \u044f\u0437\u044b\u043a\u0443\") in 1897 in Russian Empire governorates (\"guberniyas\") that had more than 100,000 Ukrainian speakers.\nAlthough in the rural regions of the Ukrainian provinces, 80% of the inhabitants said that Ukrainian was their native language in the Census of 1897 (for which the results are given above), in the urban regions only 32.5% of the population claimed Ukrainian as their native language. For example, in Odesa (then part of the Russian Empire), at the time the largest city in the territory of current Ukraine, only 5.6% of the population said Ukrainian was their native language.\nUntil the 1920s the urban population in Ukraine grew faster than the number of Ukrainian speakers. This implies that there was a (relative) decline in the use of Ukrainian language. For example, in Kyiv, the number of people stating that Ukrainian was their native language declined from 30.3% in 1874 to 16.6% in 1917.\nSoviet era.\nDuring the seven-decade-long Soviet era, the Ukrainian language held the formal position of the principal local language in the Ukrainian SSR. However, practice was often a different story: Ukrainian always had to compete with Russian, and the attitudes of the Soviet leadership towards Ukrainian varied from encouragement and tolerance to de facto banishment.\nOfficially, there was no state language in the Soviet Union until the very end when it was proclaimed in 1990 that Russian language was the all-Union state language and that the constituent republics had rights to declare additional state languages within their jurisdictions. Still it was implicitly understood in the hopes of minority nations that Ukrainian would be used in the Ukrainian SSR, Uzbek would be used in the Uzbek SSR, and so on. However, Russian was used as the lingua franca in all parts of the Soviet Union and a special term, \"a language of inter-ethnic communication\", was coined to denote its status.\nKhrushchev thaw.\nAfter the death of Stalin (1953), a general policy of relaxing the language policies of the past was implemented (1958 to 1963). The Khrushchev era which followed saw a policy of relatively lenient concessions to development of the languages at the local and republic level, though its results in Ukraine did not go nearly as far as those of the Soviet policy of Ukrainianization in the 1920s. Journals and encyclopedic publications advanced in the Ukrainian language during the Khrushchev era, as well as transfer of Crimea under Ukrainian SSR jurisdiction.\nYet, the 1958 school reform that allowed parents to choose the language of primary instruction for their children, unpopular among the circles of the national intelligentsia in parts of the USSR, meant that non-Russian languages would slowly give way to Russian in light of the pressures of survival and advancement. The gains of the past, already largely reversed by the Stalin era, were offset by the liberal attitude towards the requirement to study the local languages (the requirement to study Russian remained).\nParents were usually free to choose the language of study of their children (except in few areas where attending the Ukrainian school might have required a long daily commute) and they often chose Russian, which reinforced the resulting Russification. In this sense, some analysts argue that it was not the \"oppression\" or \"persecution\", but rather the \"lack of protection\" against the expansion of Russian language that contributed to the relative decline of Ukrainian in the 1970s and 1980s. According to this view, it was inevitable that successful careers required a good command of Russian, while knowledge of Ukrainian was not vital, so it was common for Ukrainian parents to send their children to Russian-language schools, even though Ukrainian-language schools were usually available.\nThe number of students in Russian-language in Ukraine schools was constantly increasing, from 14 percent in 1939 to more than 30 percent in 1962.\nShelest period.\nThe Communist Party leader from 1963 to 1972, Petro Shelest, pursued a policy of defending Ukraine's interests within the Soviet Union. He proudly promoted the beauty of the Ukrainian language and developed plans to expand the role of Ukrainian in higher education. He was removed, however, after only a brief tenure, for being too lenient on Ukrainian nationalism.\nShcherbytsky period.\nThe new party boss from 1972 to 1989, Volodymyr Shcherbytsky, purged the local party, was fierce in suppressing dissent, and insisted Russian be spoken at all official functions, even at local levels. His policy of Russification was lessened only slightly after 1985.\nGorbachev and perebudova.\nThe management of dissent by the local Ukrainian Communist Party was more fierce and thorough than in other parts of the Soviet Union. As a result, at the start of the Mikhail Gorbachev reforms perebudova and hlasnist\u2019 (Ukrainian for \"perestroika\" and \"glasnost\"), Ukraine under Shcherbytsky was slower to liberalize than Russia itself.\nAlthough Ukrainian still remained the native language for the majority in the nation on the eve of Ukrainian independence, a significant share of ethnic Ukrainians were russified. In Donetsk there were no Ukrainian language schools and in Kyiv only a quarter of children went to Ukrainian language schools.\nThe Russian language was the dominant vehicle, not just of government function, but of the media, commerce, and modernity itself. This was substantially less the case for western Ukraine, which escaped the artificial famine, Great Purge, and most of Stalinism. And this region became the center of a hearty, if only partial, renaissance of the Ukrainian language during independence.\nIndependence in the modern era.\nSince 1991, Ukrainian has been the official state language in Ukraine, and the state administration implemented government policies to broaden the use of Ukrainian. The educational system in Ukraine has been transformed over the first decade of independence from a system that is partly Ukrainian to one that is overwhelmingly so. The government has also mandated a progressively increased role for Ukrainian in the media and commerce.\nIn the 2001 census, 67.5% of the country's population named Ukrainian as their native language (a 2.8% increase from 1989), while 29.6% named Russian (a 3.2% decrease). For many Ukrainians (of various ethnic origins), the term \"native language\" may not necessarily associate with the language they use more frequently. The overwhelming majority of ethnic Ukrainians consider the Ukrainian language \"native\", including those who often speak Russian.\nAccording to the official 2001 census data, 92.3% of Kyiv region population responded \"Ukrainian\" to the \"native language\" (\"ridna mova\") census question, compared with 88.4% in 1989, and 7.2% responded \"Russian\". \nIn 2019, the law of Ukraine \"On protecting the functioning of the Ukrainian language as the state language\" was approved by the parliament, formalizing rules governing the usage of the language and introducing penalties for violations.\nLiterature and literary language.\nThe literary Ukrainian language, which was preceded by Old East Slavic literature, may be subdivided into two stages: during the 12th to 18th centuries what in Ukraine is referred to as \"Old Ukrainian\", but elsewhere, and in contemporary sources, is known as the Ruthenian language, and from the end of the 18th century to the present what in Ukraine is known as \"Modern Ukrainian\", but elsewhere is known as just Ukrainian.\nInfluential literary figures in the development of modern Ukrainian literature include the philosopher Hryhorii Skovoroda, Ivan Kotlyarevsky, Mykola Kostomarov, Mykhailo Kotsiubynsky, Shevchenko, Ivan Franko, and Lesia Ukrainka. The earliest literary work in the Ukrainian language was recorded in 1798 when Kotlyarevsky, a playwright from Poltava in southeastern Ukraine, published his epic poem, \"Eneyida\", a burlesque in Ukrainian, based on Virgil's \"Aeneid\". His book was published in vernacular Ukrainian in a satirical way to avoid being censored, and is the earliest known Ukrainian published book to survive through Imperial and, later, Soviet policies on the Ukrainian language.\nKotlyarevsky's work and that of another early writer using the Ukrainian vernacular language, Petro Artemovsky, used the southeastern dialect spoken in the Poltava, Kharkiv and southern Kyiv regions of the Russian Empire. This dialect would serve as the basis of the Ukrainian literary language when it was developed by Shevchenko and Kulish in the mid 19th century. In order to raise its status from that of a dialect to that of a language, various elements from folklore and traditional styles were added to it.\nThe Ukrainian literary language developed further when the Russian state banned the use of the Ukrainian language, prompting many of its writers to move to the western Ukrainian region of Galicia which was under more liberal Austrian rule; after the 1860s the majority of Ukrainian literary works were published in Austrian Galicia. During this period Galician influences were adopted in the Ukrainian literary language, particularly with respect to vocabulary involving law, government, technology, science, and administration.\nCurrent usage.\nThe use of the Ukrainian language is increasing after a long period of decline. Although there are almost fifty million ethnic Ukrainians worldwide, including 37.5 million in Ukraine in 2001 (77.8% of the total population at the time), the Ukrainian language is prevalent mainly in western and central Ukraine. In Kyiv, both Ukrainian and Russian are spoken, a notable shift from the recent past when the city was primarily Russian-speaking.\nThe shift is believed to be caused mainly by an influx of migrants from western regions of Ukraine but also by some Kyivans opting to use the language they speak at home more widely in public settings. Public signs and announcements in Kyiv are displayed in Ukrainian. In southern and eastern Ukraine, Russian is the prevalent language in most large and some small cities. According to the Ukrainian Census of 2001, 87.8% of people living in Ukraine were fluent in Ukrainian.\nIn August 2022, a survey in Ukraine by Rating Group found that 85% said they speak Ukrainian or Ukrainian and Russian at home, 51% only Ukrainian, an increase from 61% and 44% in February 2014. In the same survey, 76% considered Ukrainian their native language (), up from 57% in July 2012, including 30% of Russian speakers.\nPopular culture.\nMusic.\nUkrainian has become popular in other countries through movies and songs performed in the Ukrainian language. The most popular Ukrainian rock bands, such as Okean Elzy, Vopli Vidopliassova, and BoomBox perform regularly in tours across Europe, Israel, North America and especially Russia. In countries with significant Ukrainian populations, bands singing in the Ukrainian language sometimes reach top places on the charts, such as Enej (a band from Poland). Other notable Ukrainian-language bands are The Ukrainians from the United Kingdom, Klooch from Canada, Ukrainian Village Band from the United States, and the Kuban Cossack Choir from the Kuban region in Russia.\nCinema.\nThe 2010s saw a revival of Ukrainian cinema. The top Ukrainian-language films (by IMDb rating) are:\nArgots.\nOleksa Horbach's 1951 study of argots analyzed historical primary sources (argots of professionals, thugs, prisoners, homeless, school children, etc.) paying special attention to etymological features of argots, word formation and borrowing patterns depending on the source-language (Church Slavonic, Russian, Czech, Polish, Romani, Greek, Romanian, Hungarian, German).\nDialects.\nSeveral modern dialects of Ukrainian exist.\nNeighbouring countries.\nAll the countries neighbouring Ukraine (except for Hungary) historically have regions with a sizable Ukrainian population and therefore Ukrainian language speakers. Ukrainian is an official minority language in Belarus, Romania, and Moldova.\nUkrainian diaspora.\nUkrainian is also spoken by a large \u00e9migr\u00e9e population, particularly in Canada, the United States, and several countries of South America like Brazil, Argentina, and Paraguay. The founders of this population primarily emigrated from Galicia, which used to be part of Austro-Hungary before World War I, and belonged to Poland between the World Wars. The language spoken by most of them is the Galician dialect of Ukrainian from the first half of the 20th century. Compared with modern Ukrainian, the vocabulary of Ukrainians outside Ukraine reflects less influence of Russian, but often contains many loanwords from the local language.\nMost of the countries where it is spoken are ex-USSR, where many Ukrainians have migrated. Canada and the United States are also home to a large Ukrainian population. Broken up by country (to the nearest thousand):\nUkrainian is declaratively proclaimed as one of three official languages of the breakaway Moldovan region of Transnistria.\nUkrainian is widely spoken within the 400,000-strong (in 1994) Ukrainian community in Brazil. It is the official language in Prudent\u00f3polis alongside Portuguese.\n \"Cyrillic letters in this article are romanized using scientific transliteration.\"\nLanguage structure.\nGrammar.\nUkrainian is a fusional, nominative\u2013accusative, satellite-framed language. It exhibits T\u2013V distinction, and is null-subject. The canonical word order of Ukrainian is SVO. Other word orders are common due to the free word order enabled by Ukrainian's inflectional system.\nNouns have one of 3 genders: masculine, feminine, neuter; nouns decline for:\nAdjectives agree with nouns in gender, case, and number.\nVerbs conjugate for:\nUkrainian verbs come in aspect pairs: perfective, and imperfective. Pairs are usually formed by a prepositional prefix and occasionally a root change. The past tense agrees with its subject in number and gender (but \"not\" person), having developed from the perfect participle.\nThe Old East Slavic and Russian \"o\" in syllables ending in a consonant, often correspond to a Ukrainian \"i\", as in \"pod\" \u2192 \"pid\" (\u043f\u0456\u0434, 'under'). Thus, in the declension of nouns, the \"o\" can re-appear when it is no longer located in a closed syllable, such as \"rik\" (\u0440\u0456\u043a, 'year') (nom): \"rotsi\" (loc) (\u0440\u043e\u0446\u0456). Similarly, some words can have \"\u0456\" in some cases when most of the cases have \"o\", for example \"\u0441\u043b\u043e\u0432\u043e\" (nominative singular), \"\u0441\u043b\u043e\u0432\u0430\" (nominative plural) but \"\u0441\u043bi\u0432\" (genitive plural).\nUkrainian case endings are somewhat different from Old East Slavic, and the vocabulary includes a large overlay of Polish terminology. Russian \"na pervom eta\u017ee\" 'on the first floor' is in the locative (prepositional) case. The Ukrainian corresponding expression is \"na per\u0161omu poversi\" (\u043d\u0430 \u043f\u0435\u0440\u0448\u043e\u043c\u0443 \u043f\u043e\u0432\u0435\u0440\u0441\u0456). \"-omu\" is the standard locative (prepositional) ending, but variants in \"-im\" are common in dialect and poetry, and allowed by the standards bodies. The \"kh\" of Ukrainian \"poverkh\" (\u043f\u043e\u0432\u0435\u0440\u0445) has mutated into \"s\" under the influence of the soft vowel \"i\" (\"k\" is similarly mutable into \"c\" in final positions).\nPhonology.\nThe Ukrainian language has six vowels, , , , , , .\nA number of the consonants come in three forms: hard, soft (palatalized) and long, for example, , , and or , , and .\nThe letter \u27e8\u0433\u27e9 represents the voiced glottal fricative , often transliterated as Latin \"h\". It is the voiced equivalent of English . Russian speakers from Ukraine often use the soft Ukrainian in place of Russian , which comes from northern dialects of Old East Slavic. The Ukrainian alphabet has the additional letter \u27e8\u0491\u27e9 for , which appears in a few native words such as \"grynd\u017eoly\" 'sleigh' and \"gudzyk\" 'button'. However, appears almost exclusively in loan words, and is usually simply written \u27e8\u0433\u27e9. For example, loanwords from English on public signs usually use \u27e8\u0433\u27e9 for both English \"g\" and \"h\".\nAnother phonetic divergence between the Ukrainian and Russian languages is the pronunciation of Cyrillic \u27e8\u0432\u27e9 \"v/w\". While in standard Russian it represents , in many Ukrainian dialects it denotes (following a vowel and preceding a consonant (cluster), either within a word or at a word boundary, it denotes the allophone , and like the off-glide in the English words \"flow\" and \"cow\", it forms a diphthong with the preceding vowel). Native Russian speakers will pronounce the Ukrainian \u27e8\u0432\u27e9 as , which is one way to tell the two groups apart. As with \u27e8\u0433\u27e9 above, Ukrainians use \u27e8\u0432\u27e9 to render both English \"v\" and \"w\"; Russians occasionally use \u27e8\u0443\u27e9 for \"w\" instead.\nUnlike Russian and most other modern Slavic languages, Ukrainian does not have final devoicing.\nAlphabet.\nUkrainian is written in a version of Cyrillic, consisting of 33 letters, representing 38 phonemes; an apostrophe is also used. Ukrainian orthography is based on the phonemic principle, with one letter generally corresponding to one phoneme, although there are a number of exceptions. The orthography also has cases where the semantic, historical, and morphological principles are applied.\nThe modern Ukrainian alphabet is the result of a number of proposed alphabetic reforms from the 19th and early 20th centuries, in Ukraine under the Russian Empire, in Austrian Galicia, and later in Soviet Ukraine. A unified Ukrainian alphabet (the \"Skrypnykivka\", after Mykola Skrypnyk) was officially established at a 1927 international Orthographic Conference in Kharkiv, during the period of Ukrainization in Soviet Ukraine. But the policy was reversed in the 1930s, and the Soviet Ukrainian orthography diverged from that used by the diaspora. The Ukrainian letter ge \"\u0491\" was banned in the Soviet Union from 1933 until the period of Glasnost in 1990.\nThe letter \u0449 represents two consonants . The combination of with some of the vowels is also represented by a single letter ( = \u044f, = \u0454, or = \u0457, = \u044e), while = \u0439\u043e and the rare regional = \u0439\u0438 are written using two letters. These iotated vowel letters and a special soft sign change a preceding consonant from hard to soft. An apostrophe is used to indicate the hardness of the sound in the cases when normally the vowel would change the consonant to soft; in other words, it functions like the yer in the Russian alphabet.\nA consonant letter is doubled to indicate that the sound is doubled, or long.\nThe phonemes and do not have dedicated letters in the alphabet and are rendered with the digraphs \u0434\u0437 and \u0434\u0436, respectively. is equivalent to English \"ds\" in \"pods\", is equivalent to \"j\" in \"jump\".\nAs in Russian, the acute accent may be used to denote vowel stress.\nOrthography.\nSpelling search, which began in the late 18th century with the emergence of modern literary language, led to the emergence of several spelling options. In particular, there was the spelling system of Oleksii Pavlovskyi, the spelling version of \"Mermaid of the Dniester\" (1837), Kulishivka (P. Kulish's spelling system), Drahomanivka (produced in Kyiv in the 1870s by a group of cultural figures led by linguist P. Zhytetskyi, which included and M. Drahomanov), Zhelekhivka (system of Yevhen Zhelekhovskyi (1886), enshrined in the \"Ruthenian Grammar\" by Smal-Stotskyi and Theodore Gartner 1893).\nBorys Hrinchenko used some corrections in the fundamental four-volume \"Dictionary of the Ukrainian Language\" (1907\u20131909). Most of the spelling rules (practically based on phonetics \u2013 \"write as you hear\") used in Hrinchenko's dictionary are still valid. Hrinchenko's work became an informal spelling and model for Ukrainian writers and publications from 1907 until the creation of the first official Ukrainian spelling in 1918.\nOn 17 January 1918, the Central Rada of Ukraine issued the \"Main Rules of Ukrainian orthography\", which, however, did not cover the entire scope of the language. On 17 May 1919, the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences approved the \"Main Rules of Ukrainian Orthography\", which became the basis for all subsequent revisions and amendments.\nOn 23 July 1925, the Council of People's Commissars of the USSR decided to organize a State Commission for the Organization of Ukrainian Spelling (State Spelling Commission). It included more than 20 academics from the USSR, who also expressed a desire to invite representatives of Western Ukraine: Smal-Stotskyi, Volodymyr Hnatiuk and Vasyl Simovych.\nAfter almost a year of work in April 1926, the \"Project of Ukrainian Spelling\" was published to acquaint the general public with the new system. After several months of discussion and consideration of the project at the All-Ukrainian Spelling Conference (26 May \u2013 6 June 1927), the Ukrainian orthography of 1928 was adopted in accordance with the RNC resolution of 6 September 1928. It went down in history as \"Kharkiv\" or \"Skrypnik orthography\" \u2013 from the place of creation, or from the surname of Skrypnyk.\nIn 1929, Hryhorii Holoskevych published the \"Ukrainian Spelling Dictionary\" (about 40,000 words), agreed with the full spelling produced by the State Spelling Commission and approved by the People's Commissar for Education (6 September 1928).\nIn 1933, a spelling commission headed by Andrii Khvylia branded the Ukrainian orthography of 1928 as \"nationalist\", immediately stopped publishing any dictionaries, and without any discussion, in a very short time (five months), created a new spelling that unified as never before the Ukrainian and Russian languages. The letter \u0491 was removed from the alphabet, and Ukrainian scientific terminology was revised and harmonized with Russian-Ukrainian dictionaries (the Institute of Ukrainian Scientific Language was abolished in 1930). This version of the spelling was approved by the resolution of the People's Commissar of Education of the USSR of 5 September 1933.\nSome minor changes were made in the spelling of 1946 and 1959 (published the following year). It was connected with the document \"The rules of Russian spelling and punctuation\", published in 1956. From 1960 until 1990, the 1960 edition was the official standard.\nAfter the beginning of \"perestroika\", the issue of improving Ukrainian spelling became relevant again: the editing of the spelling code was started by the Orthographic Commission at the LMM of the USSR Academy of Sciences. The project was also discussed in the newly established Ukrainian Language Society. T. Shevchenko (headed by Dmytro Pavlychko). The new version was approved on 14 November 1989, and published in 1990. The main achievements were the restoration of the letter \u0491 and the accusative case (in Soviet times it was optional and was called the \"accusative form\").\nToday, despite the existence of the official spelling of the Ukrainian language, it is not the only spelling standard in use. Even in Ukraine itself, many publishers and publications use other versions of the spelling, which either tend to \"skrypnykivka\", or else differ from the official rules of transmission of words of foreign origin.\nOn 22 May 2019, the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine approved a new version of the orthography prepared by the Ukrainian National Commission on Spelling. The new edition brought to life some features of orthography in 1928, which were part of the Ukrainian orthographic tradition. At the same time, the commission was guided by the understanding that the language practice of Ukrainians in the second half of the 20th to the beginning of the 21st century has already become part of the Ukrainian orthographic tradition.\nVocabulary.\n\"The Dictionary of the Ukrainian Language\", in 11 volumes, contains 253,000 entries. Lexical card catalog of the Ukrainian Institute of Language Studies has six million cards. As mentioned at the top of the article, Ukrainian is most closely related lexically to Belarusian, and is also closer to Polish than to Russian (for example, \u043c\u043e\u0436\u043b\u0438\u0432\u0456\u0441\u0442\u044c, \"mozhlyvist\u02b9\", \"possibility\", and Polish \"mo\u017cliwo\u015b\u0107\", but Russian \u0432\u043e\u0437\u043c\u043e\u0436\u043d\u043e\u0441\u0442\u044c, \"vozmozhnost\u02b9\").\nFalse cognates with Russian.\nThe standard Ukrainian language which is based on the Kyiv\u2013Poltava dialect has a plethora of false friends with the standard Russian language which is based on the dialect of Moscow. Many people intentionally do or do not use them, causing their language shift into what is known as Surzhyk, where the meaning of some words mimicking Russian could be understood out of context rather than their literal meaning in Ukrainian.\nClassification.\nUkrainian has varying degrees of mutual intelligibility with other Slavic languages. It is closely related to other East Slavic languages with high levels of mutual intelligibility. Ukrainian is considered to be most closely related to Belarusian.\nThe separation of the East Slavic languages is considered to be relatively recent. In the 19th century, the question of whether the Ukrainian, Belarusian and Russian languages were dialects of a single language or three separate languages was actively discussed, with the debate affected by linguistic and political factors. The political situation (Ukraine and Belarus being mainly part of the Russian Empire at the time) and the historical existence of the medieval state of Kievan Rus\u02b9, which occupied large parts of these three nations, led to the creation of the common classification known later as the East Slavic languages. The underlying theory of the grouping is their descent from a common ancestor. In modern times, Ukrainian, Russian, and Belarusian are usually listed by linguists as separate languages.\nThe Ukrainians were predominantly peasants and petits bourgeois. In 1897, 93% of Ukrainians were peasants. As a result, the Ukrainian language was mostly vernacular and few earlier literary works from the period can be found. In the cities, Ukrainian coexisted with Church Slavonic\u2014a literary language of religion that evolved from Old Church Slavonic\u2014and later Polish and Russian, both languages which were more often used in formal writing and communication during that time.\nDifferences from other Slavic languages.\nThe Ukrainian language has the following similarities with and differences from other Slavic languages:\nUnlike all other Slavic languages, Ukrainian has a synthetic future (also termed inflectional future) tense which developed through the erosion and cliticization of the verb \"to have\" (or possibly \"to take\"): \"pysat-ymu\" (infinitive-future-1st sg.) \"I will write\". Although the inflectional future (based on the verb 'to have') is characteristic of Romance languages, Ukrainian linguist A. Danylenko argues that Ukrainian differs from Romance in the choice of auxiliary, which should be interpreted as 'to take' and not 'to have.' He states that Late Common Slavic (LCS) had three verbs with the same Proto-Indo-European root : \nThe three verbs became conflated in East Slavic due to morphological overlap, in particular of *im\u011bti \"to have\" and *jati \"to take\" as exemplified in the Middle Ukrainian homonymic imut\u2019 from both im\u011bti (&lt; *j\u012dm\u011bti) and jati (&lt; *j\u0119ti). Analogous grammaticalization of the type take (\"to take\", \"to seize\") &gt; future is found in Chinese and Hungarian.\nSample text.\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in Ukrainian:\u0412\u0441\u0456 \u043b\u044e\u0434\u0438 \u043d\u0430\u0440\u043e\u0434\u0436\u0443\u044e\u0442\u044c\u0441\u044f \u0432\u0456\u043b\u044c\u043d\u0438\u043c\u0438 \u0456 \u0440\u0456\u0432\u043d\u0438\u043c\u0438 \u0443 \u0441\u0432\u043e\u0457\u0439 \u0433\u0456\u0434\u043d\u043e\u0441\u0442\u0456 \u0442\u0430 \u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u0430\u0445. \u0412\u043e\u043d\u0438 \u043d\u0430\u0434\u0456\u043b\u0435\u043d\u0456 \u0440\u043e\u0437\u0443\u043c\u043e\u043c \u0456 \u0441\u043e\u0432\u0456\u0441\u0442\u044e \u0456 \u043f\u043e\u0432\u0438\u043d\u043d\u0456 \u0434\u0456\u044f\u0442\u0438 \u0443 \u0432\u0456\u0434\u043d\u043e\u0448\u0435\u043d\u043d\u0456 \u043e\u0434\u0438\u043d \u0434\u043e \u043e\u0434\u043d\u043e\u0433\u043e \u0432 \u0434\u0443\u0441\u0456 \u0431\u0440\u0430\u0442\u0435\u0440\u0441\u0442\u0432\u0430.The romanization of the text into Latin alphabet:\"Vsi lyudy narodzhuyut\u02b9sya vil\u02b9nymy i rivnymy u svoyiy hidnosti ta pravakh. Vony nadileni rozumom i sovistyu i povynni diyaty u vidnoshenni odyn do odnoho v dusi braterstva.\"Article 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in English:All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46280", "revid": "50641168", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46280", "title": "Father's Day", "text": "Celebration honoring fathers\nFather's Day is a day set aside for honoring one's father, as well as fatherhood, paternal bonds, and the influence of fathers in society. \"Father's Day\" complements similar celebrations honoring family members, such as Mother's Day and, in some countries, Siblings Day, and Grandparents' Day. The day is held on various dates across the world, and different regions maintain their own traditions of honoring fatherhood.\nIn Catholic countries of Europe, it has been celebrated on 19 March as Saint Joseph's Day since the Middle Ages. In the United States, Father's Day was founded in the state of Washington by Sonora Smart Dodd in 1910. Father's Day is a recognized public holiday in Lithuania and some parts of Spain and was regarded as such in Italy until 1977. It is a national holiday in Samoa, and equivalently in South Korea, where it is celebrated as Parents' Day.\nHistory.\nFor centuries, the Eastern Orthodox Church has appointed the second Sunday before Nativity as the Sunday of the Forefathers to commemorate the ancestors of Christ according to the flesh, starting with Adam and emphasizing the patriarch Abraham, to whom God said,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed\u2014\u200a\nThis feast can fall between 11 and 17 December. This feast includes the ancestors of Mary, mother of Jesus and various prophets.\nA customary day for the celebration of fatherhood in Catholic Europe is known to date back to at least 1508. It is usually celebrated on 19 March, as the feast day of Saint Joseph, who is referred to as the fatherly \"Nutritor Domini\" (\"Nourisher of the Lord\") in Catholicism and \"the putative father of Jesus\" in southern European tradition. This celebration was brought to the Americas by the Spanish and Portuguese. The Catholic Church actively supported the custom of a celebration of fatherhood on St. Joseph's Day from either the last years of the 14th century or from the early 15th century, apparently on the initiative of the Franciscans.\nIn the Coptic Orthodox Church, the celebration of fatherhood is also observed on St Joseph's Day, but the Copts observe this on 20 July. The Coptic celebration may date back to the fifth century.\nIn the United States, whether to celebrate this day nationwide or not is a matter for debate. In 1908, Grace Golden Clayton proposed the day to honor those men who had died in a mining accident in the US. Though it was not accepted then, in 1909 Sonora Smart Dodd, who along with her five brothers was raised by her father alone, after attending Mother's Day in a church, convinced the Spokane Ministerial Association to celebrate Father's Day nationwide.\nIn addition to Father's Day, International Men's Day is celebrated in many countries on 19 November in honor of both men and boys.\nSpelling.\n\"Father's Day\" is spelled as a singular possessive following the precedent established by its predecessor, Mother's Day. In 1912, Anna Jarvis trademarked the phrase \"Second Sunday in May, Mother's Day, Anna Jarvis, Founder.\" Jarvis specifically noted that \"Mother's\" should \"be a singular possessive, for each family to honor its own mother, not a plural possessive commemorating all mothers in the world.\"\nDates.\nThe following is a list of when Father's Day is celebrated, in order of date of observance.\nAfrican traditions.\nAlgeria.\nIn Algeria, the third Sunday in June is the dedicated day to celebrate the Father's Day.\nEgypt.\nIn Egypt, Father's Day is celebrated on 21 June of every year.\nKenya.\nIn Kenya, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.\nMorocco.\nIn Morocco, the third Sunday in June is the dedicated day to celebrate the Father's Day.\nMozambique.\nIn Mozambique, Father's Day is observed on 19 March every year.\nNigeria.\nIn Nigeria, the third Sunday in June is the dedicated day to celebrate Father's Day.\nSeychelles.\nIn Seychelles, Father's Day is celebrated on 16 June and is not a public holiday.\nSouth Africa.\nIn South Africa, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June. It is not a public holiday.\nSouth Sudan.\nIn South Sudan, Father's Day is celebrated on the last Monday of August. President Salva Kiir Mayardit proclaimed it before 27 August 2012. First celebrated on 27 August 2012, Father's Day was not celebrated in South Sudan in 2011 (due to the country's independence).\nSudan.\nIn Sudan, Father's Day (\u0639\u064a\u062f \u0627\u0644\u0623\u0628), is celebrated on 21 June.\nAsian traditions.\nBangladesh.\nIn Bangladesh there is no historical tradition of celebrating Father's Day (Bengali/Bangla: \u09ac\u09be\u09ac\u09be/\u0986\u09ac\u09cd\u09ac\u09c1 \u09a6\u09bf\u09ac\u09b8, \"Baba/abbu dibosh\") and has been popularized by Western influences in the country. It is celebrated on the third Sunday of June, and is not a public holiday. Father's Day was not very popular and had been made more widespread by the Millennial and Generation Z communities all over the country through social media in recent times. Even though many religious families do not celebrate it, it is more widespread than ever. There is a popular phrase used by many parents: \"Every day is father's/mother's day, so you shall love your parents everyday.\" Most people just wish their father a happy father's day, but many people from big cities go to a restaurant to celebrate, and many even have cake. Many others cut the cake at home or order food online. Some children may give small gifts to their father.\nChina.\nIn the People's Republic of China, there is no official Father's Day. Some people celebrate on the third Sunday of June, according to the tradition of the United States. Father's Day is also celebrated in the special administrative regions. In Hong Kong, it is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday. In Macau, Father's Day (\"Dia do Pai\") is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.\nIndia.\nFather's Day is not an original custom of India but is rather followed by the influence of the western world. It is observed on the third Sunday of June. This event is not a public holiday. The day is usually celebrated only in larger cities like Mumbai, New Delhi, Chennai, Bengaluru, Pune, Kolkata, Jaipur, Lucknow and others. It is a huge holiday in the North Eastern state of Nagaland and Kerala where prayers are held in church on Sunday Services. After this day was first observed in the United States in 1908 and gradually gained popularity, Indian metropolitan cities, much later, followed suit by recognising this event. In India, the day is usually celebrated with children giving gifts such as greeting cards, electronic gadgets, shirts, gold necklaces, coffee mugs or books to their fathers.\nIndonesia.\nIn Indonesia, Father's Day is celebrated on 12 November and is not a public holiday. Father's Day in Indonesia was first declared in 2006 in Surakarta City Hall attended by hundreds of people from various community groups, including people from community of inter-religion communication. Because of its recent declaration, there is not much hype about the celebration, compared to the celebration of Mother's Day on 22 December. Google also created its doodle for Indonesia in 2019 and 2020.\nIran.\nIn Iran before the revolution, the 24th of Esfand, Reza Shah's birthday, was called Father's Day based on the Iranian calendar. After the revolution of 1979, this day was changed to the 13th of Rajab, the birthday of Ali bin Abi Talib, the first imam of Shiites. Zoroastrians also celebrate Shahrivargan as Father's Day.\nIsrael.\nIn Israel, Father's Day is usually celebrated as part of Family Day on 30 Shevat, though some celebrate on 1 May together with Workers' Day or Labor Day.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, Father's Day () is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday. Common presents are sake, shochu, fashion items, some kinds of gourmet food, sports equipment and various sweets.\nKazakhstan.\nSince 2012, Kazakhstan celebrates Defender of the Fatherland Day () to commemorate the foundation of the armed forces. It is also called Army Day and it is celebrated on 7 May. Kazakh society perceives it as 'a men's day' and honoring men so it is vaguely a celebration of fathers.\nMalaysia.\nIn Malaysia, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.\nMongolia.\nThe Mongolian Men's Association began the celebration of Father's Day on 8 August 2005.\nNepal.\nThe Nepalese Hindus as well as the Newars in Nepal honors fathers on the day of \"Kushe aunsi\" (), which occurs in late August or early September, depending on the year, since it depends on the lunar calendar. According to Hindu calendar, the festival falls on the new moon day of Bhadra month. It is also known as \"Gokarna Aunsi\" or \"Pitri Tirpani Aunsi\".\nIn recent years, Nepalese non\u2013Hindus have also adopted the \"Kushe Aunsi\" day. It is commonly known as () or \"Abu ya Khwa Swoyegu\" in Nepal Bhasa. The celebration of the festival has been modernized in some ways in recent years. Children worship their father on this day, put tika on his forehead and give him sweets, delicacies and gifts as a part of celebration. In return, the father blesses good fortune to his children.\nOn the new moon day (\"Amavasya\"), it is traditional to pay respect to one's deceased father; Hindus go to the Shiva temple of Gokarneswor Mahadev, in Gokarna, a suburb of Kathmandu while Buddhists go to Jana Bahal (Seto Machhendranath or white Tara) temple in Kathmandu.\nTraditionally, in the Kathmandu Valley, the south-western corner is reserved for women and women-related rituals, and the north-eastern is for men and men-related rituals. The worship place for \"Mata Tirtha Aunsi\" ('Mother Pilgrimage New Moon') is located in Mata Tirtha in the south-western half of the valley, while the worship place for \"Gokarna Aunsi\" is located in the north-eastern half. This division is reflected in many aspects of the life in the Kathmandu Valley.\nPakistan.\nFather's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June. The Rutgers WPF launched a campaign titled 'Greening Pakistan\u00a0\u2013 Promoting Responsible Fatherhood' on Father's Day (Sunday, 18 June 2017) across Pakistan to promote active fatherhood and responsibility for the care and upbringing of children. Father's Day is not a public holiday in Pakistan.\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, Father's Day is officially celebrated every third Sunday of June according to a recent presidential proclamation, but it is not a public holiday. It is more widely observed by the public on the third Sunday of June perhaps due to American influence and as proclaimed in 1988 by Philippine President Corazon Aquino.\nUnder Proclamation No. 58, series of 1998, issued by then Philippine President Joseph Ejercito Estrada, the first Monday of December of every year was designated as Mother's Day and Father's Day, expressly repealing the third Sunday of June observance.\nSingapore.\nIn Singapore, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June but is not a public holiday.\nSouth Korea.\nIn South Korea, Parents' Day () is celebrated on 8 May and is not a public holiday. Setting Parents' Day as a national holiday and holding a pan-national event is intended to inherit and develop traditional ethical standards such as filial piety and senior citizens' ideology. Regardless of age or gender, this day is also an opportunity to reaffirm that traditional filial piety is a crucial norm and cultural value in modern society. The ceremony to mark Parents' Day as an anniversary and put on carnations stems from a Christian culture. As Western religions and cultures entered, this holiday, which was introduced together, became the most traditional holiday combined with Confucian filial piety in the process of establishing itself.\nSri Lanka.\nFather's Day (Sinhala: ; Tamil: ) is observed on the third Sunday of June. It is not a public holiday. Many schools hold special events to honor fathers.\nSyria.\nIn Syria, Father's Day is celebrated annually on June 21. This date aligns with the summer solstice and is observed in several Arab countries, including Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Palestine, and the United Arab Emirates.\nTaiwan.\nIn Taiwan, Father's Day is not an official holiday, but is widely observed on 8 August, the eighth day of the eighth month of the year. In Mandarin Chinese, the pronunciation of the number eight is \"b\u0101\", and the pronunciation is very similar to the character (\"b\u00e0\"), which means \"pa\" or \"dad\". The eighth day of the eighth month () is a pun for dad (). Taiwan, therefore, sometimes refer to 8 August as \"B\u0101b\u0101 Holiday\" as a pun for \"Dad's Holiday\" () or the more formal \"Father's Day\" ().\nThailand.\nIn Thailand, Father's Day is celebrated annually on 5 December, which is the birthday of King Bhumibol Adulyadej (Rama IX). Both Father's Day and Mother's Day are recognized as national public holidays in Thailand. Traditionally, Thai people honor their fathers and grandfathers by presenting them with a canna flower, which is regarded as a symbol of masculinity. However, this practice has become less common in recent years. On this day, many Thais wear yellow to pay tribute to the King, as yellow represents Monday, the day of the week on which the King was born.\nA central aspect of the celebration involves large gatherings at Sanam Luang, the royal ceremonial ground in front of the Grand Palace in Bangkok, where people would traditionally assemble to listen to the King's annual address. Many remain into the evening for a national candle-lighting ceremony, during which participants demonstrate their loyalty and reverence for the monarch. Similar ceremonies are held across the country in towns and villages, and even abroad in Thai communities and embassies.\nFather's Day began to gain widespread national popularity in the 1980s, largely due to a campaign initiated by Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda, who aimed to promote loyalty to the Thai royal family. In parallel, Mother's Day in Thailand is observed on 12 August, which marks the birthday of Queen Sirikit, King Bhumibol Adulyadej's consort.\nTurkey.\nIn Turkey, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday in June and is not a public holiday.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nIn the United Arab Emirates, Father's Day is celebrated on 21 June.\nEuropean traditions.\nRoman Catholicism.\nIn the Roman Catholic tradition, fathers are celebrated on Saint Joseph's Day (commonly called the Feast of Saint Joseph), 19 March, though in certain countries Father's Day has become a secular celebration. It is also common for Catholics to honor their \"spiritual father\", their parish priest, on Father's Day.\nAustria.\nIn Austria, Father's Day (\"Vatertag\") is celebrated on the second Sunday of June and it is not a public holiday.\nBelarus.\nIn Belarus Father's Day is celebrated on 21 October.\nBelgium.\nIn Belgium, Father's Day (\"Vaderdag\"/\"F\u00eate des P\u00e8res\") is celebrated on the second Sunday of June or 14 June, and it is not a public holiday, except for Antwerp where it is celebrated on 19 March.\nBulgaria.\nIn Bulgaria, Father's Day is celebrated on 26 December and it is not a public holiday. According to the Eastern Orthodox tradition, fathers are celebrated on Saint Joseph's Day \u2013 one day after Christmas.\nCroatia.\nIn Croatia, according to the Roman Catholic tradition, fathers are celebrated on Saint Joseph's Day (\"Dan svetog Josipa\"), 19 March. It is not a public holiday.\nDenmark.\nIn Denmark, Father's Day (\"Fars dag\") is celebrated on 5 June. It coincides with Constitution Day.\nEstonia.\nIn Estonia, Father's Day (\"Isadep\u00e4ev\") is celebrated on the second Sunday of November. It is an established flag flying day and a national holiday.\nFinland.\nIn Finland, Father's Day (; ) is celebrated on the second Sunday of November. It is an established flag flying day.\nFrance.\nIn France lighter manufacturer Flaminaire introduced the idea of Father's Day first in 1949 for commercial reasons. Director Marcel Quercia wanted to sell their lighter in France. In 1950, they introduced \"la F\u00eate des P\u00e8res\", which would take place every third Sunday of June (following the American example). Their slogan is \"Nos papas nous l'ont dit, pour la f\u00eate des p\u00e8res, ils d\u00e9sirent tous un Flaminaire\" (Our dads told us, for Father's Day, they all want a Flaminaire). In 1952, the holiday was officially decreed. A national Father's Day committee was set up to give a prize for fathers who deserved it most (originally, candidates were nominated by the social services of each town hall's/mayor's office); This complements \"la F\u00eate des M\u00e8res\" (Mother's Day) which was made official in France in 1928 and added to the calendar in Vichy in 1941.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, Father's Day (\"Vatertag\") is celebrated differently from other parts of the world, as it is celebrated on Ascension Day (the Thursday forty days after Easter), which is a federal holiday. Regionally, it is also called gentlemen's day, \"Herrentag\" or M\u00e4nnertag (men's day). It is a tradition for groups of males (young and old but usually excluding pre-teenage boys) to do a hiking tour with one or more smaller wagons, ', pulled by manpower. In the wagons are wine or beer bottles (according to the region) and traditional regional food, '. Many men use this holiday as an opportunity to get drunk. According to the Federal Statistical Office of Germany, alcohol-related traffic accidents triple on this day. The tradition of Father's Day is especially prevalent in Eastern Germany.\nThese traditions are probably rooted in Christian Ascension Day's processions to the farmlands, which has been celebrated since the 18th century. Men would be seated in a wooden cart and carried to the village's plaza, and the mayor would award a prize to the father who had the most children, usually with a big piece of ham. In the late 19th century the religious component was progressively lost, especially in urban areas such as Berlin, and groups of men organized walking excursions with beer and ham. By the 20th century, alcohol consumption had become a major part of the tradition. Many people will take the following Friday off work, and some schools are closed on that Friday as well; many people then use the resulting four-day-long weekend for a short vacation.\nGreece.\nIn Greece, Father's Day () is officially celebrated on the third Sunday of June. The SYGAPA association, which supports the needs of divorced fathers, raises awareness and advocates for the father's role in society, also organizes various events on the day across the country.\nHungary.\nIn Hungary, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.\nIceland.\nIn Iceland, Father's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday of November.\nItaly.\nIn Italy, according to the Roman Catholic tradition, Father's Day is celebrated on Saint Joseph's Day, commonly called the Feast of Saint Joseph (\"Festa di San Giuseppe\"), 19 March. It was a public holiday until 1977.\nLatvia.\nIn Latvia, Father's Day (\"T\u0113vu diena\") is celebrated on the second Sunday of September and is not a public holiday. In Latvia people did not always celebrate this day because of the USSR's influence with its own holidays. This day in Latvia was officially born in 2008 when it was celebrated and marked in the calendar for the first time on 14 September (second Sunday of September) to promote the idea that man as the father must be satisfied and proud of his family and children, also, the father is important to gratitude and loving words from his family for devoted to continuous altruistic concerns. Because this day is new to the country it does not have established unique traditions, but people borrow ideas from other countries' Father's Day traditions to congratulate fathers in Latvia.\nLithuania.\nIn Lithuania, Father's Day (\"T\u0117vo diena\") is celebrated on the first Sunday of June and is a public holiday.\nMalta.\nMalta has followed the international trend and celebrates Father's Day on the third Sunday in June. As in the case of Mother's Day, the introduction of Father's Day celebrations in Malta was encouraged by Frans H Said (Uncle Frans of the children's radio programs). The first mention of Father's Day was in June 1977, and the day is now part of the local events calendar.\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands (including its constituent countries in the Caribbean), Father's Day (\"Vaderdag\") is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday. Traditionally, as on Mother's Day, fathers get breakfast in bed made by their children and families gather together and have dinner, usually at the grandparents' house. In recent years, families also started having dinner out, and as on Mother's Day, it is one of the busiest days for restaurants. At school, children handcraft presents for their fathers. Consumer goods companies have all sorts of special offers for fathers: socks, ties, electronics, suits, and men's healthcare products.\nNorway.\nIn Norway, Father's Day (\"Farsdag\"), is celebrated on the second Sunday of November. It is not a public holiday.\nPoland.\nIn Poland, Father's Day () is celebrated on 23 June and is not a public holiday. Google recognized Poland in its Father's Day 2019 Doodle.\nPortugal.\nFather's Day (\"Dia do Pai\") is celebrated on 19 March (see Roman Catholic tradition below) in Portugal. It is not a bank and public holiday.\nRomania.\nThe law instituting the celebration of Father's Day in Romania passed on 29 September 2009, and stated that Father's Day will be celebrated annually on the second Sunday of May. The first time it was celebrated was on 9 May 2010.\nRussia.\nRussia continues the Soviet Union's tradition of celebrating Defender of the Fatherland Day on 23 February. It is usually called \"Man's Day\" and it is considered the Russian equivalent of Father's Day. In 2021, President Vladimir Putin established the Father's Day as falling on the third Sunday of October.\nSlovakia.\nIn Slovakia, Father's Day () is celebrated on the third Sunday of June. It is not a public holiday.\nSpain.\nFather's Day (\"El D\u00eda del Padre\") is observed on the feast day of Saint Joseph, which is 19 March. It is celebrated as a public holiday in some regions of Spain.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, Father's Day (\"Fars dag\"), is celebrated on the second Sunday of November but is not a public holiday.\nSwitzerland.\nIn most of Switzerland the holiday is celebrated on the first Sunday of June; in Ticino, the Italian speaking canton, it is an official public holiday, celebrated on 19 March.\nTurkey.\nIn Turkey, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday in June and is not a public holiday.\nUkraine.\nIn Ukraine, Father's Day () is celebrated on the third Sunday of June. It is not a public holiday.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June. The day does not have a long tradition; Steve Roud, in \"The English Year\" (2006), states that it entered British popular culture \"sometime after the Second World War, not without opposition\".\nNorth American traditions.\nBahamas, Barbados, Belize, Cuba and Puerto Rico.\nFather's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, Father's Day () is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday. Father's Day typically involves spending time with one's father or the father figures in one's life. Small family gatherings and the giving of gifts may be part of the festivities organized for Father's Day.\nCentral America (except for Belize).\nIn Costa Rica, the Social Christian Unity Party presented a bill to change the celebration of Father's Day from the third Sunday of June to 19 March, the day of Saint Joseph. That was to give tribute to this saint, who gave his name to the capital of the country San Jos\u00e9, Costa Rica, so family heads will be able to celebrate Father's Day at the same time as the Feast of Saint Joseph the Worker. The official date is still the third Sunday of June.\nDominican Republic.\nIn Dominican Republic, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of July and is not a public holiday.\nHaiti.\nIn Haiti, Father's Day (\"F\u00eate des p\u00e8res\") is celebrated on the last Sunday of June and is not a public holiday. Fathers are recognized and celebrated on this day with cards, gifts, breakfast, lunch, brunch or early Sunday dinner; whether enjoying the day at the beach or mountains, spending family time or doing favorite activities.\nChildren exclaim \"\"bonne f\u00eate papa\", while everyone wishes all fathers \"bonne F\u00eate des P\u00e8res\"\" (Happy Father's Day).\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday. Father's Day typically involves spending time with one's father or the father figures in one's life. Small family gatherings and the giving of gifts may be part of the festivities organized for Father's Day.\nTrinidad and Tobago.\nIn Trinidad and Tobago, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday.\nUnited States.\nIn the US, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June. Typically, families gather to celebrate the father figures in their lives. Schools (if in session) and other children's programs commonly have activities to make Father's Day gifts.\nOceanian traditions.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, Father's Day is celebrated on the first Sunday of September, which is the first Sunday of spring in Australia. Most families present fathers with gifts and cards, and share a meal. It is not a public holiday.\nThe idea of Father's Day wasn't initially well received in Australia in the 1910s and 1920s. Many thought it was either unnecessary or undermined a father's assumed \u201csupremacy\u201d as head of the household. Newspapers at the time printed satirical poems and critical editorials of the new tradition. Father's Day was originally observed in June, matching the USA date, with church services and the wearing of a red flower. In June 1925, Janet Heyden of Sydney (who also advocated for Mother's Day celebrations in Australia) began collecting donations to bring cheer to elderly men in nursing/charity homes. While Mother's Day became instantly popular, it wasn't until the 1930s that Father's Day came to be popularly celebrated in Australia on the first Sunday in September. The Father's Day Council of Australia was established in 1957 and continues to honour distinguished fathers with an annual Australian Father of the Year award. Father's Day traditions in Australia include school crafts with handmade gifts and cards from younger children, taking dad out for lunch, BBQs, and outdoor family activities. Public schools often hold a Father's Day gift stall with inexpensive presents for fathers, grandfathers, carers, or other role-models.\nYMCA Victoria continues the tradition of honoring the role fathers and father figures play in parenting through the annual awarding of Local Community Father of the Year in 32 municipalities in Victoria. The Father's Day Council of Victoria also annually recognizes fathers in the Victorian Father of the Year Award.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, Father's Day is celebrated on the first Sunday of September and it is not a public holiday. Father's Day was first observed at St Matthew's Church, Auckland on 14 July 1929 and first appeared in commercial advertising the following year. By 1931 other churches had adopted the day and in 1935 much of Australia moved to mark the day at the beginning of September. New Zealand followed this, with a Wellington advert in 1937 and a Christchurch Salvation Army service in 1938.\nSamoa.\nIn Samoa, Father's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday in August, and is a recognized national holiday on the Monday following.\nFiji.\nIn Fiji, Father's Day is celebrated in September. Fathers Day is usually on the first Sunday and then the Father's Day for some Christian denominations is usually celebrated on the second Sunday.\nSouth American traditions.\nArgentina.\nFather's Day in Argentina is celebrated on the third Sunday of June.\nAttempts have been made to change the date to 24 August, to commemorate the day on which the \"Father of the Nation\", Jos\u00e9 de San Mart\u00edn, became a father. In 1953, the proposal to celebrate Father's Day in all educational establishments on 24 August, in honor of Jos\u00e9 de San Mart\u00edn, was raised to the General Direction of Schools of Mendoza Province. The day was celebrated for the first time in 1958, on the third Sunday of June, but it was not included in the school calendars due to pressure from several groups.\nSchools in the Mendoza Province continued to celebrate Father's Day on 24 August, and in 1982 the provincial governor passed a law declaring Father's Day in the province to be celebrated on that day.\nIn 2004, a proposal to change the date to 24 August was presented to the Argentine Chamber of Deputies as a single, unified project.\nBolivia.\nIn Bolivia Father's Day (\"D\u00eda del padre\", in Spanish) is celebrated on 19 March (Saint Joseph Day). People usually give a present to their fathers and spend time with them.\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil Fathers' Day (\"Dia dos Pais\", in Portuguese a plural form) is celebrated three months after Mother's Day, on the second Sunday of August. Publicist Sylvio Bhering picked the day in honor of Saint Joachim, patron of fathers. While it is not an official holiday (see Public holidays in Brazil), it is widely observed and typically involves spending time with and giving gifts to one's father or father figure.\nChile.\nIn Chile Father's Day (\"D\u00eda del padre\", in Spanish) is officially celebrated on 19 June.\nColombia.\nIn Colombia, Father's Day (\"D\u00eda del padre\", in Spanish) is celebrated on the third Sunday of June. In 2022, it was officially celebrated on 26 June to avoid coinciding with the second round of the presidential elections.\nParaguay.\nIn Paraguay, Father's Day is typically celebrated with a traditional banquet of Paraguayan food like chipa, mbeju, bori, soyo and sopa paraguaya. In Paraguay Father's Day is a very important day, and is celebrated with much fervor.\nPeru.\nIn Peru, Father's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of June and is not a public holiday. People usually give a present to their fathers and spend time with them mostly during a family meal.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n \n "}
{"id": "46284", "revid": "36112485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46284", "title": "Milton Berle", "text": "American comedian and actor (1908\u20132002)\nMilton Berle (born Mendel Berlinger; ; July 12, 1908 \u2013 March 27, 2002) was an American actor and comedian. His career as an entertainer spanned over eight decades, first in silent films and on stage as a child actor, then in radio, movies and television. As the host of NBC's \"Texaco Star Theatre\" (1948\u20131953), he was the first major American television star and was known to millions of viewers as \"Uncle Miltie\" and \"Mr. Television\" during the first Golden Age of Television. He was honored with two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his work in both radio and TV.\nEarly life.\nMilton Berle was born into a Jewish family in a five-story walkup in the Harlem neighborhood of Manhattan. His given name was Mendel Berlinger, but he chose Milton Berle as his professional name when he was 16. His father, Moses Berlinger (1872\u20131938), was of German-Jewish descent and worked as a paint and varnish salesman. His mother, Sarah (Sadie) Glantz Berlinger (1877\u20131954), who was of Polish-Jewish ancestry, changed her name to Sandra Berle when Milton became famous. He had three older brothers. For many years, the latter two worked on Berle's TV production staff while Phil was a programming executive at NBC.\nChild actor.\nBerle entered show business in 1913 at the age of five when he won a children's Charlie Chaplin contest. He also worked as a child model and was \"Buster Brown\" for Buster Brown shoes. He appeared as a child actor in silent films. He claimed \"The Perils of Pauline\" as his first film appearance, playing the character of a young boy, although this has never been independently verified. In \"Milton Berle: An Autobiography\", he explained that the director told him that he would portray a little boy who would be thrown from a moving train. He said, \"I was scared shitless, even when he went on to tell me that Pauline would save my life. This is exactly what happened, except that at the crucial moment they threw a bundle of rags instead of me from the train. I bet there are a lot of comedians around today who are sorry about that.\"\nBy Berle's account, he continued to play child roles in other films: \"Bunny's Little Brother\", \"Tess of the Storm Country\", \"Birthright\", \"Love's Penalty\", \"Divorce Coupons\" and \"Ruth of the Range\". Berle recalled, \"There were even trips out to Hollywood\u2014the studios paid\u2014where I got parts in \"Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm\", with Mary Pickford; \"The Mark of Zorro\", with Douglas Fairbanks, Sr.; and \"Tillie's Punctured Romance\", with Charlie Chaplin, Mabel Normand and Marie Dressler.\" However, Berle's claim to have appeared in \"Tillie's Punctured Romance\" has been disputed by film historians including Glenn Mitchell, who in his book, \"The Chaplin Encyclopedia\", writes that Berle's alleged role was most likely played by child actor Gordon Griffith.\nIn 1916, Berle enrolled in the Professional Children's School.\nCareer.\nVaudeville.\nAround 1920 at age 12, Berle made his stage debut in a revival of the musical comedy \"Florodora\" in Atlantic City, New Jersey, which later moved to Broadway. By the time he was 16, he was working as a master of ceremonies in vaudeville. He is also known to have played small bit parts in several silent films in the 1910s and 1920s, although his presence in some is disputed (see Filmography, below). In 1932, he starred in Earl Carrol's Vanities, a Broadway musical. By the early 1930s, he was a successful stand-up comedian, patterning himself after one of vaudeville's top comics, Ted Healy.\nRising star.\nIn 1933, Berle was hired by producer Jack White to star in the theatrical featurette \"Poppin' the Cork\", a topical musical comedy concerning the repealing of Prohibition. Berle also co-wrote the score for this film, which was released by Educational Pictures. Berle continued to dabble in songwriting: with Ben Oakland and Milton Drake, he wrote the title song for the RKO Radio Pictures release \"Li'l Abner\" (1940), an adaptation of Al Capp's comic strip, featuring Buster Keaton as Lonesome Polecat. Berle co-wrote a Spike Jones B-side, \"Leave the Dishes in the Sink, Ma\".\nRadio.\nFrom 1934 to 1936, Berle appeared frequently on \"The Rudy Vallee Hour\" and attracted publicity as a regular on \"The Gillette Original Community Sing\", a Sunday night comedy-variety program broadcast on CBS from September 6, 1936, to August 29, 1937. In 1939, he was the host of \"Stop Me If You've Heard This One\" with panelists spontaneously finishing jokes sent in by listeners.\nIn the late 1940s, he canceled well-paying nightclub appearances to expand his radio career. \"Three Ring Time\", a comedy-variety show sponsored by Ballantine Ale, was followed by a 1943 program sponsored by Campbell's Soups. The audience participation show \"Let Yourself Go\" (1944\u20131945) could best be described as \"slapstick radio\", with studio audience members acting out long-suppressed urges\u2014often directed at host Berle. \"Kiss and Make Up\" on CBS in 1946 featured the problems of contestants decided by a jury from the studio audience with Berle as the judge. Berle also made guest appearances on many comedy-variety radio programs during the 1930s and 1940s.\nScripted by Nat Hiken and Aaron Ruben, \"The Milton Berle Show\" also featured Arnold Stang, later a familiar face as Berle's TV sidekick. Others in the cast were Pert Kelton, Mary Schipp, Jack Albertson, Arthur Q. Bryan, Ed Begley, Brazilian singer Dick Farney and announcer Frank Gallop. Sponsored by Philip Morris, it aired on NBC from March 11, 1947, until April 13, 1948. It ran for an additional season (with new sponsor Texaco), keeping the same format but running concurrently with Berle's better known TV series, from September 22, 1948, to June 15, 1949.\nBerle later described this series as \"the best radio show I ever did ... a hell of a funny variety show\". It served as a springboard for Berle's emergence as television's first major star.\nMr. Television.\nBerle first appeared on television in 1929 in an experimental broadcast in Chicago which he hosted in front of 129 people. He would return to television 20 years later.\nBerle would revive the structure and routines of his vaudeville act for his debut on commercial TV, hosting The \"Texaco Star Theatre\" on June 8, 1948, over the NBC Television Network. They did not settle on Berle as the permanent host right away; he was originally part of a rotation of hosts (Berle himself had only a four-week contract). Jack Carter was the host for August. Berle was named the permanent host that fall. Berle's highly visual style, characterized by vaudeville slapstick and outlandish costumes, proved ideal for the new medium. Berle modeled the show's structure and skits directly from his vaudeville shows and hired writer Hal Collins to revive his old routines.\nBerle dominated Tuesday night television for the next several years, reaching the number one slot in the Nielsen ratings with as much as a 97% share of the viewing audience. Berle and the show each won Emmy Awards after the first season. Fewer movie tickets were sold on Tuesdays. Some theaters, restaurants, and other businesses shut down for the hour or closed for the evening so their customers would not miss Berle's antics. Berle's autobiography notes that in Detroit, \"an investigation took place when the water levels took a drastic drop in the reservoirs on Tuesday nights between 9 and 9:05. It turned out that everyone waited until the end of the \"Texaco Star Theatre\" before going to the bathroom.\"\nTelevision sales more than doubled after \"Texaco Star Theatre\"'s debut, reaching two million in 1949. Berle's stature as the medium's first superstar earned him the sobriquet \"Mr. Television\". He also earned another nickname after ending a 1949 broadcast with a brief ad-libbed remark to children watching the show: \"Listen to your Uncle Miltie and go to bed\". Francis Craig and Kermit Goell's \"Near You\" became the theme song that closed Berle's TV shows.\nBerle risked his newfound TV stardom at its zenith to challenge Texaco when the sponsor tried to prevent black performers from appearing on his show:\nI remember clashing with the advertising agency and the sponsor over my signing the Four Step Brothers for an appearance on the show. The only thing I could figure out was that there was an objection to black performers on the show, but I couldn't even find out who was objecting. \"We just don't like them,\" I was told, but who the hell was \"we?\" Because I was riding high in 1950, I sent out the word: \"If they don't go on, I don't go on.\" At ten minutes of eight\u2014minutes before showtime\u2014I got permission for the Step Brothers to appear. If I broke the color-line policy or not, I don't know, but later on, I had no trouble booking Bill Robinson or Lena Horne.\nBerle's mother Sadie was often in the audience for his broadcasts; she had long served as a \"plant\" to encourage laughter from his stage show audiences. Her unique, \"piercing, roof-shaking laugh\" would stand out, especially when Berle made an entrance in an outrageous costume. After feigning surprise he would \"ad-lib\" a response; for example: \"Lady, you've got all night to make a fool of yourself. I've only got an hour!\"\nBerle asked NBC to switch from live broadcasts to film, which would have made possible reruns (and residual income from them); he was angered when the network refused. However, NBC did consent to make a kinescope of each show. Later, Berle was offered 25% ownership of the TelePrompTer Corporation by its inventor, Irving Berlin Kahn, if he would replace cue cards with the new device on his program. He turned down the offer.\nA frequent user of tranquilizers, Berle frequently endorsed Miltown on his show and became one of its leading advocates in 1950s America. Due to his promotion of the drug, Berle was dubbed \"Uncle Miltown\" by \"Time\" magazine.\nFor Berle's contribution to television, he was inducted to the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1960.\nBerle's imperious, abrasive and controlling manner on the show was the inspiration for the 1957 CBS Playhouse 90 production of \"The Comedian\". starring Mickey Rooney as egomanaical TV comic Sammy Hogarth, who ran his weekly show through explosive tantrums, intimidation, bullying and cruelty. Writer Ernest Lehman had been assigned to profile Berle for a magazine, and captured Berle's high-handedness so completely that the magazine declined to run it, but suggested he fictionalize it and recast it as a novella. When it was picked up for the show, Rod Serling wrote the teleplay. John Frankenheimer directed the live production which received considerable acclaim. The cast included Edmond O'Brien, Kim Hunter and jazz singer Mel Torm\u00e9 in his first dramatic role, portraying Hogarth's spineless brother Lester. While some speculated the play was based on Jackie Gleason's loud, controlling personality, Berle, aware the production echoed his own reputation, was quoted as saying, \"I wasn't that bad\". The episode won two Emmy Awards.\nTV decline.\nIn 1951, NBC signed Berle to an unprecedented 30-year exclusive television contract at a million dollars a year.\nIn 1953, Texaco pulled out of sponsorship of the show but Buick picked it up, prompting a renaming as \"The Buick-Berle Show\". The program's format was changed to include the backstage preparations for the variety show. Critics generally approved of the changes, but Berle's ratings continued to fall, and Buick pulled out after two seasons. In addition, \"Berle's persona had shifted from the impetuous and aggressive style of the \"Texaco Star Theater\" days to a more cultivated but less distinctive personality, leaving many fans somehow unsatisfied.\"\nBy the time the again-renamed \"Milton Berle Show\" finished its only full season (1955\u201356), Berle was already becoming history\u2014though his final season was host to two of Elvis Presley's earliest television appearances, April 3 and June 5, 1956. The final straw during that last season may have come from CBS's scheduling \"The Phil Silvers Show\" opposite Berle. Silvers was one of Berle's best friends in show business and had come to CBS's attention in an appearance on Berle's program. \"Bilko's\" creator-producer, Nat Hiken, had been one of Berle's radio writers.\nBerle knew that NBC had already decided to cancel his show before Presley appeared. He later hosted the first television version of the popular radio variety series, The \"Kraft Music Hall\" from 1958 to 1959, but NBC was finding increasingly fewer showcases for its one-time superstar. By 1960, he was reduced to hosting a bowling program, \"Jackpot Bowling\", delivering his quips and interviewing celebrities between the efforts of that week's bowling contestants.\nLife after \"The Milton Berle Show\".\nIn Las Vegas, Berle played to packed showrooms at Caesars Palace, the Sands, the Desert Inn, and other casino hotels. Berle had appeared at the El Rancho, the first Las Vegas Strip full service resort, starting in the late 1940s. In addition to constant club appearances, Berle performed on Broadway in Herb Gardner's \"The Goodbye People\" in 1968. He also became a commercial spokesman for the thriving Lum's restaurant chain.\nHe appeared in numerous films, including \"Always Leave Them Laughing\" (released in 1949, shortly after his TV debut) with Virginia Mayo and Bert Lahr; \"Let's Make Love\" with Marilyn Monroe and Yves Montand; \"It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World;\" \"The Loved One;\" \"The Oscar;\" \"Who's Minding the Mint?;\" \"Lepke;\" Woody Allen's \"Broadway Danny Rose;\" and \"Driving Me Crazy\".\nFreed in part from the obligations of his NBC contract, Berle was signed in 1966 to a new weekly variety series on ABC. Unrelated to the 1950s Texaco Star show, the new 1966 ABC series, also called \"The Milton Berle Show,\" made its debut on September 9, 1966, and ABC announced its cancellation within two months. The show failed to capture a large audience and was canceled after half a season, with the final show running on January 6, 1967. Berle later appeared as guest villain Louie the Lilac on ABC's \"Batman\" series. Other appearances included stints on \"The Barbara Stanwyck Show\", \"The Lucy Show\", \"The Jackie Gleason Show\", \"Get Smart\", \"Laugh-In\", \"The Sonny &amp; Cher Comedy Hour\", \"The Hollywood Palace\", \"Ironside\", \"F Troop\", \"Fantasy Island\", \"The Mod Squad\", \"I Dream of Jeannie\", \"CHiPs\", \"The Muppet Show,\" and \"The Jack Benny Program\".\nLike his contemporary Jackie Gleason, Berle proved a solid dramatic actor and was acclaimed for several such performances, most notably his lead role in \"Doyle Against the House\" on \"The Dick Powell Show\" in 1961, a role for which he received an Emmy nomination. He also played the part of a blind survivor of an airplane crash in \"Seven in Darkness\", the first in ABC's \"Movie of the Week\" series. He also played a dramatic role as a talent agent in \"The Oscar\" (1966) and was one of the few actors in that movie to get good notices from critics.\nDuring this period, Berle was named to the \"Guinness Book of World Records\" for the greatest number of charity performances made by a show-business performer. Unlike the high-profile shows done by Bob Hope to entertain the troops, Berle did more shows, over a period of 50 years, on a lower-profile basis. Berle received an award for entertaining at stateside military bases in World War I as a child performer, in addition to traveling to foreign bases during World War II and the Vietnam War. The first charity telethon (for the Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation) was hosted by Berle in 1949. A permanent fixture at charity benefits in the Hollywood area, he was instrumental in raising millions for charitable causes.\nLate career.\nOn April 14, 1979, Berle guest-hosted NBC's \"Saturday Night Live\". Berle's long-standing reputation for taking control of an entire television production\u2014whether invited to do so or not\u2014was a cause of stress on the set. In addition, he appeared skeptical about the show's satirical bent. One of the show's writers, Rosie Shuster, described the rehearsals for the Berle \"SNL\" show and the telecast as \"watching a comedy train accident in slow motion on a loop.\" Upstaging, camera mugging, doing spit-takes, inserting old comedy bits, and climaxing the show with a maudlin performance of \"September Song\" complete with a pre-arranged standing ovation (something producer Lorne Michaels had never sanctioned) resulted in Berle being banned from hosting the show again. The episode was also barred from being rerun until surfacing in 2003 because Michaels thought it brought down the show's reputation.\nAs a guest star on \"The Muppet Show\", Berle was memorably upstaged by the heckling theater critics Statler and Waldorf. \nThe Statler and Waldorf puppets were reportedly inspired by a recurring character named Sidney Spritzer, portrayed by comedian Irving Benson, who regularly heckled Berle from a theater box seat during episodes of The Milton Berle Show in the 1960s. Berle later made a cameo appearance in \"The Muppet Movie\" (1979), playing a used car salesman who trades Fozzie Bear\u2019s 1951 Studebaker for a station wagon.\nIn 1974, Berle had a minor altercation with a younger actor/comedian Richard Pryor when both appeared as guests on \"The Mike Douglas Show\". At the time, Berle was discussing the emotional fallout from an experience he had with impregnating a woman to whom he was not married, having to then decide whether or not they would keep the child. During his talk, Pryor let out a laugh, to which Berle took exception and confronted him, stating, \"I wish, I wish, Richard, that I could have laughed at that time at your age when I was your age, the way you just laughed now, but I just couldn't ... I told you this nine years ago, and now I'll tell you on the air in front of millions of people: Pick your spots, baby.\" This prompted Pryor to mockingly quip back, \"All right, sweetheart\" in a Humphrey Bogart voice.\nAnother well-known incident of upstaging occurred during the 1982 Emmy Awards, when Berle and Martha Raye were the presenters of the Emmy for Outstanding Writing. Berle was reluctant to give up the microphone as the award's numerous recipients from \"Second City Television\" (SCTV) flooded the stage. Berle interrupted actor/writer Joe Flaherty's acceptance speech several times, with comments like, \"Hurry up, we're 15 minutes over.\" After Flaherty made a joke about the size of the \"SCTV\" crew rivaling \"Hill Street Blues\", Berle replied sarcastically, \"That's funny.\" Flaherty's follow-up response of \"Sorry, Uncle Miltie ... go to sleep,\" flustered Berle.\nIn 1984, Berle appeared in drag in the video for \"Round and Round\" by the 1980s metal band Ratt (his nephew Marshall Berle was then their manager). He also made a brief appearance in the band's \"Back For More\" video as a motorcyclist.\nIn 1985, he appeared on NBC's \"Amazing Stories\" (created by Steven Spielberg) in the episode \"Fine Tunin'\". In it, friendly aliens from space receive TV signals from the Earth of the 1950s and travel to Hollywood in search of their idols, Lucille Ball, Jackie Gleason, The Three Stooges, Burns and Allen, and Milton Berle. When Berle realizes the aliens are doing his old material, Uncle Miltie is thunderstruck: \"Stealing from Berle? Is that even possible?\" Speaking gibberish, Berle is the only person able to communicate directly with the aliens.\nOne of Berle's most popular performances in his later years was guest-starring in 1992 in \"The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air\" alongside Will Smith as womanizing, wise-cracking patient Max Jakey. Most of his dialogue was improvised and he shocked the studio audience by mistakenly blurting out a curse word. He also appeared in an acclaimed and Emmy-nominated turn on \"Beverly Hills, 90210\" as an aging comedian befriended by Steve Sanders, who idolizes him, but is troubled by his bouts of senility due to Alzheimer's disease. He also voiced the Prince of Darkness, the main antagonist in the Canadian animated television anthology special \"The Real Story of Au Clair De La Lune\". He appeared in 1995 as a guest star in an episode of \"The Nanny\" as her lawyer and great uncle.\nIn 1994, Berle released a fitness videotape titled \"Milton Berle's Low Impact/High Comedy Workout\" which was targeted towards seniors.\nBerle was again on the receiving end of an onstage gibe at the 1993 MTV Video Music Awards when RuPaul responded to Berle's reference to having once worn dresses himself (during his old television days) with the quip that Berle now wore diapers. A surprised Berle replied by recycling a line he had delivered to Henny Youngman on his \"Hollywood Palace\" show in 1966: \"Oh, we're going to ad lib? I'll check my brain and we'll start even.\"\nBerle offstage.\nIn 1947, Milton Berle was one of the founding members of the Friars Club of Beverly Hills at the old Savoy Hotel on Sunset Boulevard. In 1961, the club moved to Beverly Hills. The Friars is a private show business club famous for its celebrity members and roasts, where a member is mocked by his club friends in good fun.\nBerle avoided consuming drugs and alcohol, but was an avid cigar smoker, womanizer, and gambler; primarily gambling on horse racing. His proclivity for the latter may have been responsible for Berle's never equaling the wealth of many of his contemporaries.\nAlthough Berle \"worked clean\" for his entire career, excluding the Friars Club private celebrity roasts, he reportedly used profane language extensively in private.\nPurported penis size.\nBerle was famous within show business for the rumored size of his penis. Phil Silvers once told a story about standing next to Berle at a urinal, glancing down, and quipping, \"You'd better feed that thing, or it's liable to turn on you!\" In the short story \"A Beautiful Child\", Truman Capote quoted Marilyn Monroe as saying, \"Christ! Everybody says Milton Berle has the biggest schlong in Hollywood.\" At a memorial service for Berle at the New York Friars' Club, Freddie Roman solemnly announced, \"On May 1st and May 2nd, his penis will be buried\". In 2023, on episode 1478 of \"WTF with Marc Maron\", Arnold Schwarzenegger recalled how he joked during Berle's eulogy, saying, \"Look, even though the son of a bitch is dead, they still had a difficult time putting the top on his casket\".\nRadio shock jock Howard Stern barraged Berle with an array of penis questions during his appearances on Stern's morning talk show in 1988 and 1996. In Berle's 1988 appearance, when fielding phone calls, Stern purposely asked his producer to air only callers whose questions dealt with Berle's penis. In his autobiography, Berle tells of a man who accosted him in a steam bath and challenged him to compare sizes, leading a bystander to remark, \"Go ahead, Milton, just take out enough to win\". Berle attributed this line to comedian Jackie Gleason and said, \"It was maybe the funniest spontaneous line I ever heard\". In the oral history \"Live From New York: An Uncensored History of Saturday Night Live\", \"SNL\" writer Alan Zweibel describes how Berle opened his bathrobe in his dressing room to show his penis size to Zweibel, only to have cast member Gilda Radner walk into an uncomfortable scene.\nPersonal life.\nAfter twice marrying and divorcing showgirl Joyce Mathews, Berle married publicist Ruth Cosgrove (n\u00e9e Rosenthal) in 1953; she died of cancer in 1989. In 1989, Berle stated that his mother was behind the breakup of his marriages to Mathews. He also said that she managed to damage his previous relationships: \"My mother never resented me going out with a girl, but if I had more than three dates with one girl, Mama found some way to break it up.\" He married a fourth time in 1992 to Lorna Adams, a fashion designer 30 years his junior. He had three children, Victoria (adopted by Berle and Mathews), William (adopted by Berle and Cosgrove) and a biological son, Bob Williams, with showgirl Junior Standish \"(n\u00e9e\" Jean Dunne Arthur; 1925\u20132006). Berle had two stepdaughters from his marriage to Adams. He also had three grandchildren.\nBerle's autobiography contains many tales of his sexual exploits. He claimed relationships with numerous famous women including Marilyn Monroe and Betty Hutton, columnist Dorothy Kilgallen, and evangelist Aimee Semple McPherson. The veracity of some of these claims has been questioned. The McPherson story, in particular, has been challenged by McPherson's biographer and her daughter, among others.\nBerle was a Christian Scientist for twenty years. Oscar Levant, when queried by Jack Paar about Berle's adoption of Christian Science, quipped, \"Our loss is their loss.\"\nBerle was a Democrat who endorsed Lyndon B. Johnson in the 1964 United States presidential election.\nFinal role and death.\nBerle guest-starred as Uncle Leo in the \"Kenan &amp; Kel\" special \"Two Heads Are Better than None\", which premiered in 2000. This would be his last acting role.\nIn April 2001, Berle announced that a malignant tumor had been found in his colon, but he had declined surgery. Berle's wife said the tumor was growing so slowly that it would take 10 to 12 years to affect him in any significant or life-threatening way. However, one year after the announcement, on March 27, 2002, Berle died in Los Angeles from colon cancer. He died on the same day as Dudley Moore and Billy Wilder.\nBerle reportedly left arrangements to be buried with his second wife, Ruth, at Mount Sinai Memorial Park Cemetery in Burbank, but his body was cremated and interred at Hillside Memorial Park Cemetery in Culver City. (Warren Cowan, Berle's publicist, told \"The New York Times\", \"I only know he told me he bought plots at Hillside, and it was his idea.\") Many celebrities showed up to his funeral. In addition to his third wife, Lorna Adams, Berle was survived by his three children and extended family.\nSelected filmography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46286", "revid": "712163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46286", "title": "Long John Silver's", "text": "Restaurant chain\nLong John Silver's, formerly known as Long John Silver's Seafood Shoppes and sometimes abbreviated as LJS, is an American chain of fast-food restaurants that specializes in seafood. The brand's name is derived from the character of the same name from Robert Louis Stevenson's novel \"Treasure Island\".\nIn November 2022, Long John Silver's was acquired by Four Oaks Partners, a group of investors led by Bob Jenkins, himself a Long John Silver's franchisee and president of Charter Foods.\nIn October 2025, Long John Silver's rebranded themselves as a chicken and seafood restaurant, revealing a new logo with chicken front and center. According to Christopher Caudill, this change was made to let their \"best-kept secret\" out. The change was also made to bring in more customers as a response to a rise in the popularity of chicken across the United States.\nHistory.\nLong John Silver's was founded in 1969 by Jim Patterson in Lexington, Kentucky. The original location, on 301 Southland Drive, was previously the Cape Codder seafood carry-out restaurant. The original Cape Codder concrete block building was redesigned by architect Druce Henn, who created the New England style of Long John Silver's early chain restaurants. That original location is now a styling salon.\nEarlier restaurants were known for their Cape Cod style buildings, blue roofs with square cupolas, wood benches/tables, lobster pots, and ship's wheels. Later, more nautically themed decorations were added such as seats made to look like nautical flags.\nThe restaurant chain arrived in Singapore in 1983 and has had a continuous presence in the country ever since. It remains one of 30 countries outside of the United States to have Long John Silver's outlets.\nEarly restaurants also featured separate entrance and exit doors, a corridor-like waiting line area, deep fryers with food heaters that were transparent so customers could view the food to be served, and wrought iron 'sword' door handles. These buildings had dock-like walkways, lined with pilings and thick ropes.\nLong John Silver's was acquired by Jerrico in 1988. Jerrico was taken private in 1989 through a highly leveraged management buyout, and one year later, the other restaurant concepts were divested to focus on Long John Silver's.\nAfter struggling for the next several years under its heavy debt load, Jerrico Inc. filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in June 1998. In September 1999, A&amp;W announced to acquire the chain out of bankruptcy. As a result, Yorkshire Global Restaurants was formed.\nIn 2000, Yorkshire Global Restaurants agreed to test multi-branded locations with Louisville, Kentucky-based Tricon Global, owner of the KFC, Pizza Hut, and Taco Bell chains.\nThe parent company of Long John Silver's and A&amp;W, Yorkshire was acquired by Tricon Global and Tricon was renamed Yum! Brands, Inc in May 2002. By January 2011, Yum! announced it was seeking a buyer for its Long John Silver's and A&amp;W All-American Restaurants divisions, citing poor sales and a desire to shift its focus to international expansion.\nIn September 2011, Yum! announced the impending sale of Long John Silver's to LJS Partners \u2013 a group consisting of franchisees and other private investors.\nIn July 2013, the Center for Science in the Public Interest, a nutrition and health policy watchdog group, named Long John Silver's \"Big Catch\" meal the worst restaurant meal in America, noting that it contained 33 grams of trans fat, 19 grams of saturated fat, 1,320 calories, and almost 3,700 milligrams of sodium. The company announced that it had eliminated trans fats from its menu by January 2014.\nIn March 2015, James O'Reilly, who had previously worked for KFC (another Yum! Brands holding), was appointed as the CEO. He stated that he expected the chain to maintain its 1,132 stores, refocus its marketing following negative press about the fat and sodium content of the menu, and looked to the possibility of future expansion.\nOn May 22, 2018, Long John Silver's announced the acquisition of 76 franchised restaurants, primarily owned and renovated by ServUS, located primarily in Indiana. On October 19, 2019, Warren W. Rosenthal, former president of Jerrico and developer of 1,350 Long John Silver's restaurants, died, aged 96.\nOn January 18, 2021, Long John Silver's announced Blain Shortreed to take over as CEO.\nLocations.\nUnited States.\nThe chain has hundreds of restaurants in over 35 states.\nCanada.\nLong John Silver's expanded to Canada in the 1970s, but did not last long there. It returned in 2003 with one restaurant opening in Peterborough, Ontario, only to close down in 2006.\nSingapore.\nSingapore has remained as Long John Silver's most dominant international market.\nIndonesia.\nThe first Long John Silver's restaurant opened in Indonesia in May 2023 and plans to open up further outlets in the country. Indonesia is also the first country to have the chain as of its Asian expansion.\nMalaysia.\nLong John Silver's operated in Malaysia for some time, but shut down due to declining sales and being downplayed by competitors and rivals such as KFC and local seafood restaurants. However, as of the chain's Asian expansion, it is planning on returning. It opened a location in Putrajaya in February 2024.\nTaiwan.\nLong John Silver's operated in Taiwan for some time but shut down by 2009.\nUnited Kingdom.\nA location opened at Walsall in the United Kingdom in 2004, but it has since been closed.\nPhilippines.\nLong John Silver's operated in Philippines at SM City Manila for a time but shut down in 2019 due to declining sales and low demand. It is planning on returning as part of the chain's Asian expansion.\nSaudi Arabia.\nLong John Silver's was in Saudi Arabia for some time. However, similar to restaurants like Dairy Queen, Taco Bell and Red Lobster, it was not popular and shut down in the country.\nThailand.\nLong John Silver's existed in Thailand for some time but shut down by 2020. In 2023, the company stated that they are planning to return to the country as part of the chain's Asian expansion. It returned to Thailand in 2024, with the first store opening in Mega Bangna shopping center.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nLong John Silver's shut down in United Arab Emirates due to bad sales.\nOther countries.\nThe chain also formerly had outlets in Vietnam, Cambodia, China, Australia, South Korea, Qatar, Oman, Bahrain, Hong Kong, Kuwait and Japan. It will also soon come to Myanmar, Brunei and Laos.\nOverall locations.\nCurrent\nFormer\nPlanned\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46288", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46288", "title": "Star Trek/Star Fleet", "text": ""}
{"id": "46289", "revid": "47154815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46289", "title": "Xerxes I", "text": "King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire from 486 to 465 BC\nXerxes I ( ; c.\u2009518 \u2013 August 465 BC), commonly known as Xerxes the Great, was a Persian ruler who served as the fourth King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire, reigning from 486 BC until his assassination in 465 BC. He was the son of Darius the Great and Atossa, a daughter of Cyrus the Great. \nIn Western history, Xerxes is best known for his invasion of Greece in 480 BC, which ended in Persian defeat. Xerxes was designated successor by Darius over his elder brother Artobazan and inherited a large, multi-ethnic empire upon his father's death. He consolidated his power by crushing revolts in Egypt and Babylon, and renewed his father's campaign to subjugate Greece and punish Athens and its allies for their interference in the Ionian Revolt. In 480 BC, Xerxes personally led a large army and crossed the Hellespont into Europe. He achieved victories at Thermopylae and Artemisium before capturing and razing Athens. His forces gained control of mainland Greece north of the Isthmus of Corinth until their defeat at the Battle of Salamis. Fearing that the Greeks might trap him in Europe, Xerxes retreated with the greater part of his army back to Asia, leaving behind Mardonius to continue his campaign. Mardonius was defeated at Plataea the following year, effectively ending the Persian invasion.\nAfter returning to Persia, Xerxes dedicated himself to large-scale construction projects, many of which had been left unfinished by his father. He oversaw the completion of the Gate of All Nations, the Apadana and the Tachara at Persepolis, and continued the construction of the Palace of Darius at Susa. He also maintained the Royal Road built by his father. In 465 BC, Xerxes and his heir Darius were assassinated by Artabanus, the commander of the royal bodyguard. He was succeeded by his third son, who took the throne as Artaxerxes I.\nEtymology.\n\"X\u00e9rx\u0113s\" () is the Greek and Latin (\"Xerxes\", \"Xerses\") transliteration of the Old Iranian \"X\u0161aya-\u1e5b\u0161\u0101\" (\"ruling over heroes\"), which can be seen by the first part \"x\u0161aya\", meaning \"ruling\", and the second \"\u1e5b\u0161\u0101\", meaning \"hero, man\". The name of Xerxes was known in Akkadian as \"\u1e2ai-\u0161i-\u02be-ar-\u0161\u00e1\" and in Aramaic as \"\u1e25\u0161y\u02ber\u0161\". Xerxes would become a popular name among the rulers of the Achaemenid Empire.\nEarly life.\nParentage and birth.\nXerxes' father was Darius the Great (r.\u2009522\u00a0\u2013\u00a0486\u00a0BC), the incumbent monarch of the Achaemenid Empire, albeit himself not a member of the family of Cyrus the Great, the founder of the empire. Xerxes' mother was Atossa, a daughter of Cyrus. Darius and Atossa married in 522 BC, and Xerxes was born around 518 BC.\nUpbringing and education.\nAccording to the Greek dialogue First Alcibiades, which describes typical upbringing and education of Persian princes, they were raised by eunuchs. Starting at the age of seven, they learned how to ride and hunt; after reaching the age of fourteen, they were each taught by four teachers from aristocratic backgrounds, who taught them how to be \"wise, just, prudent, and brave.\" Persian princes also learned the basics of the Zoroastrian religion, and were taught to be truthful, to be courageous, and to have self-restraint. The dialogue further added that \"fear, for a Persian, is the equivalent of slavery.\" At the age of 16 or 17, they began their mandatory 10 years of national service, which included practicing archery and javelin, competing for prizes, and hunting. Afterwards, they served in the military for around 25 years, after which they were elevated to the status of elders and advisers to the king. Families in this time, including Xerxes', would intermarry.\nThis account of education among the Persian elite is supported by Xenophon's description of the 5th-century BC Achaemenid prince Cyrus the Younger, with whom he was well-acquainted. Stoneman suggests that this was the type of upbringing and education that Xerxes experienced. It is unknown if Xerxes ever learned to read or write, with the Persians favoring oral history over written literature. Stoneman suggests that Xerxes' upbringing and education was possibly not much different from that of the later Iranian kings, such as Abbas the Great, king of the Safavid Empire in the 17th-century AD. Starting from 498 BC, Xerxes resided in the royal palace of Babylon.\nAccession to the throne.\nWhile Darius was preparing for another war against Greece, a revolt began in Egypt in 486\u00a0BC due to heavy taxes and the deportation of craftsmen to build the royal palaces at Susa and Persepolis. The king was required by Persian law to choose a successor before setting out on dangerous expeditions; when Darius decided to leave for Egypt (487\u2013486\u00a0BC), he prepared his tomb at Naqsh-e Rustam (five kilometers from his royal palace at Persepolis) and appointed Xerxes, his eldest son by Atossa, as his successor. However, Darius could not lead the campaign due to his failing health; he died in October 486\u00a0BC at the age of 64.\nArtobazan claimed that he should take the crown as the eldest of all Darius's children, while Xerxes argued for his own claim on the grounds that he was the son of Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus, and that Cyrus had won the Persians their freedom. Xerxes' claim was supported by a Spartan king in exile who was present in Persia at the time, the Eurypontid king Demaratus, who also argued that the eldest son did not universally have the best claim to the crown, citing Spartan law, which stated that the first son born while the father is king was the heir to the kingship. Some modern scholars also view the unusual decision of Darius to give the throne to Xerxes as a result of his consideration of the particular prestige that Cyrus the Great and his daughter Atossa enjoyed. Artobazan was born to \"Darius the subject\", while Xerxes was the eldest son \"born in the purple\" after Darius' rise to the throne. Furthermore, while Artobazan's mother was a commoner, Xerxes' mother was the daughter of the founder of the Achaemenid Empire.\nXerxes was crowned and succeeded his father in October\u2013December 486\u00a0BC when he was about 32 years old. The transition of power to Xerxes was smooth, due again in part to the great authority of Atossa and his accession to royal power was not challenged by any person at court or in the Achaemenian family, or by any subject nation.\nConsolidation of power.\nAt the time of Xerxes' accession, trouble was brewing in some of his domains. A revolt occurred in Egypt, which seemed dangerous enough for Xerxes to personally lead the army to restore order (which also gave him the opportunity to begin his reign with a military campaign). Xerxes suppressed the revolt in January 484 BC and appointed his full-brother Achaemenes as satrap of Egypt, replacing the previous satrap Pherendates, who was reportedly killed during the revolt. The suppression of the Egyptian revolt expended the army, which had been mobilized by Darius over the previous three years. Xerxes, therefore, had to raise another army for his expedition into Greece, which took another four years. There was also unrest in Babylon, which revolted at least twice against Xerxes during his reign. The first revolt broke out in June or July of 484 BC and was led by a rebel of the name Bel-shimanni. Bel-shimmani's revolt was short-lived; Babylonian documents written during his reign only account for a period of two weeks.\nTwo years later, Babylon produced another rebel leader, Shamash-eriba. Beginning in the summer of 482 BC, Shamash-eriba seized Babylon itself and other nearby cities, such as Borsippa and Dilbat, and was only defeated in March 481 BC after a lengthy siege of Babylon. The precise cause of the unrest in Babylon is uncertain. It may have been due to tax increases. Prior to these revolts, Babylon had occupied a special position within the Achaemenid Empire; the Achaemenid kings had held the titles of \"King of Babylon\" and \"King of the Lands,\" implying that they perceived Babylonia as a somewhat separate entity within their empire, united with their own kingdom in a personal union. After the revolts, however, Xerxes dropped \"King of Babylon\" from his titulature and divided the previously large Babylonian satrapy (accounting for most of the Neo-Babylonian Empire's territory) into smaller sub-units.\nBased on texts written by classical authors, it is often assumed that Xerxes enacted a brutal vengeance on Babylon following the two revolts. According to ancient writers, Xerxes destroyed Babylon's fortifications and damaged the temples in the city. The Esagila was allegedly subject to great damage, and Xerxes allegedly carried the statue of Marduk away from the city, possibly bringing it to Iran and melting it down (classical authors hold that the statue was made entirely of gold, which would have made melting it down possible). Modern historian Am\u00e9lie Kuhrt considers it unlikely that Xerxes destroyed the temples, but believes that the story of him doing so may derive from an anti-Persian sentiment among the Babylonians. It is doubtful if the statue was removed from Babylon at all and some have even suggested that Xerxes did remove a statue from the city, but that this was the golden statue of a man rather than the statue of the god Marduk. Though mentions of it are lacking considerably compared to earlier periods, contemporary documents suggest that the Babylonian New Year's Festival continued in some form during the Achaemenid period. Because the change in rulership from the Babylonians themselves to the Persians and due to the replacement of the city's elite families by Xerxes following its revolt, it is possible that the festival's traditional rituals and events had changed considerably.\nCampaigns.\nInvasion of the Greek mainland.\nDarius died while in the process of preparing a second army to invade the Greek mainland, leaving to his son the task of punishing the Athenians, Naxians, and Eretrians for their interference in the Ionian Revolt, the burning of Sardis, and their victory over the Persians at Marathon. Xerxes initially wanted to avoid a major war with Greece, but was convinced otherwise by his fathers generals headed by his cousin Mardonius, who accused him of timidity. From 483\u00a0BC, Xerxes prepared his expedition: The Xerxes Canal was dug through the isthmus of the peninsula of Mount Athos, provisions were stored in the stations on the road through Thrace, and two pontoon bridges later known as Xerxes' Pontoon Bridges were built across the Hellespont. Soldiers of many nationalities served in the armies of Xerxes from all over his multi-ethnic massive sized empire and beyond, including the Medes, Saka, Elamites, Assyrians, Phoenicians, Babylonians, Egyptians, Jews, Arabs Macedonians, Thracians, Paeonians, Achaean Greeks, Ionian Greeks, Aegean Greeks, Aeolian Greeks, Greeks from Pontus, Colchians, Sindhis and many more.\nAccording to the Greek historian Herodotus, Xerxes's first attempt to bridge the Hellespont ended in failure when a storm destroyed the flax and papyrus cables of the bridges. In retaliation, Xerxes ordered the Hellespont (the strait itself) whipped three hundred times, and had fetters thrown into the water. Xerxes's second attempt to bridge the Hellespont was successful. The Carthaginian invasion of Sicily deprived Greece of the support of the powerful monarchs of Syracuse and Agrigentum; ancient sources assume Xerxes was responsible, modern scholarship is skeptical. Many smaller Greek states, moreover, took the side of the Persians, especially Thessaly, Thebes and Argos. Xerxes was victorious during the initial battles.\nXerxes set out in the spring of 480\u00a0BC from Sardis with a fleet and army which Herodotus estimated was roughly one million strong along with 10,000 elite warriors named the Immortals. More recent estimates place the Persian force at around 60,000 combatants.\nBattle of Thermopylae and destruction of Athens.\nAt the Battle of Thermopylae, a small force of Greek warriors led by King Leonidas of Sparta resisted the much larger Persian forces, but were ultimately defeated. According to Herodotus, the Persians broke the Spartan phalanx after a Greek man called Ephialtes betrayed his country by telling the Persians of another pass around the mountains. At Artemisium, large storms had destroyed ships from the Greek side and so the battle stopped prematurely as the Greeks received news of the defeat at Thermopylae and retreated.\nAfter Thermopylae, Athens was captured. Most of the Athenians had abandoned the city and fled to the island of Salamis before Xerxes arrived. A small group attempted to defend the Athenian Acropolis, but they were defeated. Xerxes ordered the Destruction of Athens and burnt the city, leaving an archaeologically attested destruction layer, known as the Perserschutt. The Persians thus gained control of all of mainland Greece to the north of the Isthmus of Corinth.\nBattles of Salamis and Plataea.\nXerxes was induced, by the message of Themistocles (against the advice of Artemisia of Halicarnassus), to attack the Greek fleet under unfavourable conditions, rather than sending a part of his ships to the Peloponnesus and awaiting the dissolution of the Greek armies. The Battle of Salamis (September, 480\u00a0BC) was won by the Greek fleet, after which Xerxes set up a winter camp in Thessaly.\nAccording to Herodotus, fearing that the Greeks might attack the bridges across the Hellespont and trap his army in Europe, Xerxes decided to retreat back to Asia, taking the greater part of the army with him. Another cause of the retreat might have been that the continued unrest in Babylon, a key province of the empire, required the king's personal attention.\nHe left behind a contingent in Greece to finish the campaign under Mardonius, who according to Herodotus had suggested the retreat in the first place. This force was defeated the following year at Plataea by the combined forces of the Greek city states, ending the Persian offensive on Greece for good.\nConstruction projects.\nAfter his military blunders in Greece, Xerxes returned to Persia and oversaw the completion of the many construction projects left unfinished by his father at Susa and Persepolis. He oversaw the building of the Gate of All Nations and the Hall of a Hundred Columns at Persepolis, which are the largest and most imposing structures of the palace. He oversaw the completion of the Apadana, the Tachara (Palace of Darius) and the Treasury, all started by Darius, as well as having his own palace built which was twice the size of his father's. His taste in architecture was similar to that of Darius, though on an even more gigantic scale. He had colorful enameled brick laid on the exterior face of the Apadana. He also maintained the Royal Road built by his father and completed the Susa Gate and built a palace in Susa.\nDeath and succession.\nIn August 465\u00a0BC, likely between 4 and 8 August, Artabanus, the commander of the royal bodyguard and the most powerful official in the Persian court, assassinated Xerxes with the help of a eunuch, Aspamitres. Although the Hyrcanian Artabanus bore the same name as the famed uncle of Xerxes, his rise to prominence was due to his popularity in religious quarters of the court and harem intrigues. He put his seven sons in key positions and had a plan to dethrone the Achaemenids.\nGreek historians give differing accounts of events. According to Ctesias (in Persica 20), Artabanus then accused the Crown Prince Darius, Xerxes's eldest son, of the murder and persuaded another of Xerxes's sons, Artaxerxes, to avenge the patricide by killing Darius. But according to Aristotle (in Politics 5.1311b), Artabanus killed Darius first and then killed Xerxes. After Artaxerxes discovered the murder, he killed Artabanus and his sons. Participating in these intrigues was the general Megabyzus, whose decision to switch sides probably saved the Achaemenids from losing their control of the Persian throne.\nReligion.\nWhile there is no general consensus in scholarship as to whether Xerxes and his predecessors had been influenced by Zoroastrianism, it is well established that Xerxes was a firm believer in Ahura Mazda, whom he saw as the supreme deity. However, Ahura Mazda was also worshipped by adherents of the (Indo-)Iranian religious tradition. On his treatment of other religions, Xerxes followed the same policy as his predecessors: he appealed to local religious scholars, made sacrifices to local deities, and destroyed temples in cities and countries that caused disorder.\nWives and children.\nBy queen Amestris:\nBy unknown wives or mistresses:\nReception.\nXerxes' presentation in Greek and Roman sources is largely negative and this set the tone for most subsequent depictions of him within the western tradition. Xerxes is a central character of Aeschylus' play \"The Persians\", first performed in Athens in 472 BC, only seven years after his invasion of Greece. The play presents him as an effeminate figure and his hubristic effort to bring both Asia and Europe under his control leads to the ruin of both himself and his kingdom.\nHerodotus's \"Histories\", written later in the fifth century BC, centre on the Persian Wars, with Xerxes as a major figure. Some of Herodotus' information is spurious. Pierre Briant has accused him of presenting a stereotyped and biased portrayal of the Persians. Richard Stoneman regards his portrayal of Xerxes as nuanced and tragic, compared to the vilification that he suffered at the hands of the Macedonian king Alexander the Great (r.\u2009336\u00a0\u2013\u00a0323\u00a0BC).\nXerxes is identified with the king Ahasuerus in the biblical Book of Esther, which some scholars, including Eduard Schwartz, William Rainey Harper, and Michael V. Fox, consider to be historical romance. There is nothing close to a consensus, however, as to what historical event provided the basis for the story.\nXerxes is the protagonist of the opera \"Serse\" by the German-English Baroque composer George Frideric Handel. It was first performed in the King's Theatre London on 15 April 1738. The famous aria opens the opera.\nThe murder of Xerxes by Artabanus (\"Artabano\"), execution of crown prince Darius (\"Dario\"), revolt by Megabyzus (\"Megabise\"), and subsequent succession of Artaxerxes I is romanticised by the Italian poet Metastasio in his opera libretto \"Artaserse\" (1730), which was first set to music by Leonardo Vinci, and subsequently by other composers such as Johann Adolf Hasse and Johann Christian Bach.\nThe historical novel \"Xerxes of de Hoogmoed\" (1919) by Dutch writer Louis Couperus describes the Persian wars from the perspective of Xerxes. Though the account is fictionalised, Couperus nevertheless based himself on an extensive study of Herodotus. The English translation \"Arrogance: The Conquests of Xerxes\" by Frederick H. Martens appeared in 1930.\nLater generations' fascination with ancient Sparta, particularly the Battle of Thermopylae, has led to Xerxes' portrayal in works of popular culture. He was played by David Farrar in the film \"The 300 Spartans\" (1962), where he is portrayed as a cruel, power-crazed despot and an inept commander. He also features prominently in the graphic novels \"300\" and ' by Frank Miller, as well as the film adaptation \"300\" (2007) and its sequel ' (2014), as portrayed by Brazilian actor Rodrigo Santoro, in which he is represented as a giant man with androgynous qualities, who claims to be a god-king. This portrayal attracted controversy, especially in Iran. Ken Davitian plays Xerxes in \"Meet the Spartans\", a parody of the first \"300\" movie replete with sophomoric humour and deliberate anachronisms. Similarly, a highly satirized depiction of Xerxes based on his portrayal in \"300\" appears in the \"South Park\" episode \"D-Yikes!\"\nOther works dealing with the Persian Empire or the Biblical story of Esther have also featured or alluded to Xerxes, such as the video game \"Assassin's Creed Odyssey\" and the film \"One Night with the King\" (2006), in which Ahasuerus (Xerxes) was portrayed by British actor Luke Goss. He is the leader of the Persian Empire in the video game \"Civilization II\" and \"III\" (along with Scheherazade), although \"Civilization IV\" replaces him with Cyrus the Great and Darius I. He reappears as a Leader in \"Civilization VII\". In the \"Age of Empires\", Xerxes featured as a short swordsman.\nGore Vidal, in his historical fiction novel \"Creation\" (1981), describes at length the rise of the Achaemenids, especially Darius I, and presents the life and death circumstances of Xerxes. Vidal's version of the Persian Wars, which diverges from the orthodoxy of the Greek histories, is told through the invented character of Cyrus Spitama, a half-Greek, half-Persian, and grandson of the prophet Zoroaster. Thanks to his family connection, Cyrus is brought up in the Persian court after the murder of Zoroaster, becoming the boyhood friend of Xerxes, and later a diplomat who is sent to India, and later to Greece, and who is thereby able to gain privileged access to many leading historical figures of the period.\nXerxes (Ahasuerus) is portrayed by Richard Egan in the 1960 film \"Esther and the King\" and by Joel Smallbone in the 2013 film, \"The Book of Esther\". In at least one of these films, the events of the Book of Esther are depicted as taking place upon Xerxes' return from Greece.\nXerxes plays an important background role (never making an appearance) in two short works of alternate history taking place generations after his complete victory over Greece. These are: \"Counting Potsherds\" by Harry Turtledove in his anthology \"Departures\" and \"The Craft of War\" by Lois Tilton in \"Alternate Generals\" volume 1 (edited by Turtledove).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nModern sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46290", "revid": "25511559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46290", "title": "Xerxes II", "text": "Ruler of the Achaemenid Empire in 424 BC\nXerxes II ( ; ; ; died 424\u00a0BC) was a Persian king who was very briefly a ruler of the Achaemenid Empire, as the son and successor of Artaxerxes I.\nAfter a reign of forty-five days\u2014where he only had control over the Persian heartlands\u2014he was assassinated in 424 BC by his half-brother Sogdianus, who in turn was murdered by Darius II six months later. He is an obscure historical figure known primarily from the writings of Ctesias. He was the only legitimate son of Artaxerxes I and Damaspia, and is known to have served as crown prince.\nReign.\nThe last inscription mentioning Artaxerxes I being alive can be dated to 424 BC. He succeeded to the throne but two of his illegitimate brothers claimed the throne for themselves. The first was Sogdianus, Artaxerxes I's son by his concubine Alogyne of Babylon. The second was Darius II, Artaxerxes I's son by his concubine Cosmartidene of Babylon, who was married to their common half-sister Parysatis, daughter of Artaxerxes I and his concubine Andia of Babylon.\nXerxes II was only recognized as king in Persia and Sogdianus in Elam. Ochus' first inscription as Darius II can be dated to January 10, 423 BC. He was already satrap of Hyrcania and was soon recognized by Media, Babylonia and Egypt. Xerxes II only ruled forty-five days. He was murdered while drunk by Sogdianus, with help from Pharnacyas and Menostanes, who had great influence over him according to Ctesias. Sogdianus gained the support of his regions, but was killed a few months later. Darius II became the sole ruler of the Persian Empire and reigned until 404 BC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46291", "revid": "1046348", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46291", "title": "Xerxes", "text": "Xerxes ( ) may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "46296", "revid": "11049176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46296", "title": "Jassy", "text": "Jassy may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "46299", "revid": "50065786", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46299", "title": "Menelaus", "text": "King of Sparta, husband of Helen of Troy\nIn Greek mythology, Menelaus (; , \"Men\u00e9laos\") was a Greek king of Mycenaean (pre-Dorian) Sparta. According to the \"Iliad\", the Trojan War began as a result of Menelaus's wife, Helen, fleeing to Troy with the Trojan prince Paris. Menelaus was a central figure in the Trojan War, leading the Spartan contingent of the Greek army, under his elder brother Agamemnon, king of Mycenae. Prominent in both the \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\", Menelaus was also popular in Greek vase painting and Greek tragedy, the latter more as a hero of the Trojan War than as a member of the doomed House of Atreus.\nDescription.\nIn the account of Dares the Phrygian, Menelaus was described as \"of moderate stature, auburn-haired, and handsome. He had a pleasing personality.\"\nFamily.\nMenelaus was a descendant of Pelops son of Tantalus. He was the younger brother of Agamemnon, and the husband of Helen of Troy. According to the usual version of the story, followed by the \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\" of Homer, Agamemnon and Menelaus were the sons of Atreus, king of Mycenae, and Aerope, daughter of the Cretan king Catreus. However, according to another tradition, Agamemnon and Menelaus were the sons of Atreus's son Pleisthenes, with their mother being Aerope, Cleolla, or Eriphyle. According to this tradition Pleisthenes died young, with Agamemnon and Menelaus being raised by Atreus. Agamemnon and Menelaus had a sister Anaxibia (or Astyoche) who married Strophius, the son of Crisus.\nAccording to the \"Odyssey\", Menelaus had only one child by Helen, a daughter named Hermione; and an illegitimate son, Megapenthes, by a slave. Other sources mention other sons of Menelaus by either Helen, or slaves. A scholiast on Sophocles's \"Electra\" quotes Hesiod as saying that after Hermione, Helen also bore Menelaus a son Nicostratus, while according to a \"Cypria\" fragment, Menelaus and Helen had a son Pleisthenes. The mythographer Apollodorus, tells us that Megapenthes's mother was a slave \"Pieris, an Aetolian, or, according to Acusilaus, ... Tereis\", and that Menelaus had another illegitimate son Xenodamas by another slave girl, Cnossia, while according to the geographer Pausanias, Megapenthes \"and\" Nicostratus were sons of Menelaus by a slave. The scholiast on \"Iliad\" 3.175 mentions Nicostratus and Aethiolas as two sons of Helen (by Menelaus?) worshipped by the Lacedaemonians and another son of Helen by Menelaus, Maraphius, from whom descended the Persian Maraphions.\nMythology.\nAccession and reign.\nAlthough early authors, such as Aeschylus, refer in passing to Menelaus's early life, detailed sources are quite late, post-dating 5th-century BC Greek tragedy. According to these sources, Menelaus's father, Atreus, had been feuding with his brother Thyestes over the throne of Mycenae. After a back-and-forth struggle that featured adultery, incest, and cannibalism, Thyestes gained the throne after his son Aegisthus murdered Atreus. As a result, Atreus's sons, Menelaus and Agamemnon, went into exile. They first stayed with King Polypheides of Sicyon, and later with King Oeneus of Calydon. But when they thought the time was ripe to dethrone Mycenae's hostile ruler, they returned. Assisted by King Tyndareus of Sparta, they drove Thyestes away, and Agamemnon took the throne for himself.\nWhen it was time for Tyndareus's stepdaughter Helen to marry, many kings and princes came to seek her hand. Among the contenders were Odysseus, Menestheus, Ajax the Great, Patroclus, and Idomeneus. Most offered opulent gifts. Tyndareus would accept none of the gifts, nor would he send any of the suitors away for fear of offending them and giving grounds for a quarrel. Odysseus promised to solve the problem in a satisfactory manner if Tyndareus would support him in his courting of Tyndareus's niece Penelope, the daughter of Icarius. Tyndareus readily agreed, and Odysseus proposed that, before the decision was made, all the suitors should swear a most solemn oath to defend the chosen husband in any quarrel. Then it was decreed that straws were to be drawn for Helen's hand. The suitor who won was Menelaus (Tyndareus, not to displease the mighty Agamemnon offered him another of his daughters, Clytaemnestra). The rest of the suitors swore their oaths, and Helen and Menelaus were married, Menelaus becoming a ruler of Sparta with Helen after Tyndareus and Leda abdicated the thrones.\nTheir supposed palace (\u1f00\u03bd\u03ac\u03ba\u03c4\u03bf\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd) has been discovered (the excavations started in 1926 and continued until 1995) in Pellana, Laconia, to the north-west of modern (and classical) Sparta. Other archaeologists consider that Pellana is too far away from other Mycenaean centres to have been the \"capital of Menelaus\".\nAccording to tradition Menelaus founded the port-city Menelai Portus on the coast of Marmarica in Northern Africa.\nTrojan War.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to legend, in return for awarding her a golden apple inscribed \"to the fairest,\" Aphrodite promised Paris the most beautiful woman in all the world. After concluding a diplomatic mission to Sparta during the latter part of which Menelaus was absent to attend the funeral of his maternal grandfather Catreus in Crete, Paris ran off to Troy with Helen despite his brother Hector's prohibition. Invoking the oath of Tyndareus, Menelaus and Agamemnon raised a fleet of a thousand ships and went to Troy to secure Helen's return; the Trojans refused, providing a \"casus belli\" for the Trojan War.\nHomer's \"Iliad\" is the most comprehensive source for Menelaus's exploits during the Trojan War. In Book 3, Menelaus challenges Paris to a duel for Helen's return. Menelaus soundly beats Paris, but before he can kill him and claim victory, Aphrodite spirits Paris away inside the walls of Troy. In Book 4, while the Greeks and Trojans squabble over the duel's winner, Athena inspires the Trojan Pandarus to shoot Menelaus with his bow and arrow. However, Athena never intended for Menelaus to die and she protects him from the arrow of Pandarus. Menelaus is wounded in the abdomen, and the fighting resumes. Later, in Book 17, Homer gives Menelaus an extended \"aristeia\" as the hero retrieves the corpse of Patroclus from the battlefield.\nAccording to Hyginus, Menelaus killed eight men in the war, and was one of the Greeks hidden inside the Trojan Horse. During the sack of Troy, Menelaus killed Deiphobus, who had married Helen after the death of Paris.\nThere are four versions of Menelaus's and Helen's reunion on the night of the sack of Troy:\nAfter the war.\nBook 4 of the \"Odyssey\" provides an account of Menelaus's return from Troy and his homelife in Sparta. When visited by Odysseus's son Telemachus, Menelaus recounts his voyage home. As happened to many Greeks, Menelaus's homebound fleet was blown by storms to Crete and Egypt where they were becalmed, unable to sail away. They trapped Proteus and forced him to reveal how to make the voyage home. Once back in Sparta, he and Helen are shown to be reconciled and have a harmonious married life\u2014he holding no grudge at her having run away with a lover and she feeling no restraint in telling anecdotes of her life inside besieged Troy. Menelaus does seem to be pained that he and Helen have no male heir, and is shown to be fond of Megapenthes and Nicostratus, his sons by slave women. According to Euripides's \"Helen\", Menelaus is reunited with Helen after death, on the Isle of the Blessed.\nIn vase painting.\nMenelaus appears in Greek vase painting in the 6th to 4th centuries BC, such as: Menelaus's reception of Paris at Sparta; his retrieval of Patroclus's corpse; and his reunion with Helen.\nIn Greek tragedy.\nMenelaus appears as a character in a number of 5th-century Greek tragedies: Sophocles's \"Ajax\", and Euripides's \"Andromache\", \"Helen\", \"Orestes\", \"Iphigenia at Aulis\", and \"The Trojan Women\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46301", "revid": "166386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46301", "title": "Menelaus of Alexandria", "text": "Greek mathematician and astronomer (c. 70\u2013140)\nMenelaus of Alexandria (; , \"Menelaos ho Alexandreus\"; c. 70 \u2013 140\u00a0CE) was a Greek mathematician and astronomer, the first to recognize geodesics on a curved surface as natural analogs of straight lines.\nLife and works.\nAlthough very little is known about Menelaus's life, it is supposed that he lived in Rome, where he probably moved after having spent his youth in Alexandria. He was called \"Menelaus of Alexandria\" by both Pappus of Alexandria and Proclus, and a conversation of his with Lucius, held in Rome, is recorded by Plutarch.\nPtolemy (2nd century\u00a0CE) also mentions, in his work \"Almagest\" (VII.3), two astronomical observations made by Menelaus in Rome in January of the year 98. These were occultations of the stars Spica and Beta Scorpii by the moon, a few nights apart. Ptolemy used these observations to confirm precession of the equinoxes, a phenomenon that had been discovered by Hipparchus in the 2nd century\u00a0BCE.\nIn the 10th-century \"Kit\u0101b al-Fihrist\" [\"The Book Catalogue\"] by Ibn al-Nad\u012bm, six books by Menelaus are mentioned: the \"Book of Spherical Propositions\" (\"Sphaerica\"), \"On the Knowledge of the Weights and Distribution of Different Bodies\", The \"Elements of Geometry\" in three books, and \"The Book on the Triangle\". Only the first of these, \"Sphaerica\", survives today in Arabic translation. Composed of three books, it deals with the geometry of the sphere and its application in astronomical measurements and calculations. The book introduces the concept of spherical triangle (figures formed of three great circle arcs, which he named \"trilaterals\") and proves Menelaus' theorem on collinearity of points on the edges of a triangle (which may have been previously known) and its analog for spherical triangles. It was later translated by the sixteenth century astronomer and mathematician Francesco Maurolico.\nThe lunar crater Menelaus is named after him.\nBibliography.\nThe titles of a few books by Menelaus have been preserved:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46308", "revid": "45546143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46308", "title": "Treaty of Paris", "text": "Treaty of Paris may refer to one of many treaties signed in Paris, France:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "46310", "revid": "4869326", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46310", "title": "Lobster", "text": "Family of large marine crustaceans\nLobsters are malacostracan decapod crustaceans of the family Nephropidae or its synonym Homaridae. They have long bodies with muscular tails and live in crevices or burrows on the sea floor. Three of their five pairs of legs have claws, including the first pair, which are usually much larger than the others. Highly prized as seafood, lobsters are economically important and are often one of the most profitable commodities in the coastal areas they populate.\nCommercially important species include two species of \"Homarus\" from the northern Atlantic Ocean and scampi (which look more like a shrimp, or a \"mini lobster\")\u2014the Northern Hemisphere genus \"Nephrops\" and the Southern Hemisphere genus \"Metanephrops\".\nDistinction.\nAlthough several other groups of crustaceans have the word \"lobster\" in their names, the unqualified term \"lobster\" generally refers to the clawed lobsters of the family Nephropidae. Clawed lobsters are not closely related to langustas (spinys and slipper lobsters), which have no claws (chelae), or to squat lobsters. The most similar living relatives of clawed lobsters are the reef lobsters and the three families of freshwater crayfish.\nDescription.\nBody.\nLobsters are invertebrates with a hard protective exoskeleton. Like most arthropods, lobsters must shed to grow, which leaves them vulnerable. During the shedding process, several species change color. Lobsters have eight walking legs; the front three pairs bear claws, the first of which are larger than the others. The front pincers are also biologically considered legs, so they belong in the order Decapods (\"ten-footed\"). Although lobsters are largely bilaterally symmetrical like most other arthropods, some genera possess unequal, specialized claws.\nLobster anatomy includes two main body parts: the cephalothorax and the abdomen. The cephalothorax fuses the head and the thorax, both of which are covered by a chitinous carapace. The lobster's head bears antennae, antennules, mandibles, the first and second maxillae. The head also bears the (usually stalked) compound eyes. Because lobsters live in murky environments at the bottom of the ocean, they mostly use their antennae as sensors. The lobster eye has a reflective structure above a convex retina. In contrast, most complex eyes use refractive ray concentrators (lenses) and a concave retina. The lobster's thorax is composed of maxillipeds, appendages that function primarily as mouthparts, and pereiopods, appendages that serve for walking and for gathering food. The abdomen includes pleopods (also known as \"swimmerets\"), used for swimming, as well as the tail fan, composed of uropods and the telson.\nLobsters, like snails and spiders, have blue blood due to the presence of hemocyanin, which contains copper. In contrast, vertebrates, and many other animals have red blood from iron-rich hemoglobin. Lobsters possess a green hepatopancreas, called the tomalley by chefs, which functions as the animal's liver and pancreas.\nLobsters of the family Nephropidae are similar in overall form to several other related groups. They differ from freshwater crayfish in lacking the joint between the last two segments of the thorax, and they differ from the reef lobsters of the family Enoplometopidae in having full claws on the first three pairs of legs, rather than just one. The distinctions from fossil families such as the Chilenophoberidae are based on the pattern of grooves on the carapace.\nAnalysis of the neural gene complement revealed extraordinary development of the chemosensory machinery, including a profound diversification of ligand-gated ion channels and secretory molecules.\nColoring.\nTypically, lobsters are dark colored, either bluish-green or greenish-brown, to blend in with the ocean floor, but they can be found in many colors. Lobsters with atypical coloring are extremely rare, accounting for only a few of the millions caught every year, and due to their rarity, they usually are not eaten, instead being released back into the wild or donated to aquariums. Often, in cases of atypical coloring, there is a genetic factor, such as albinism or hermaphroditism. Special coloring does not appear to affect the lobster's taste once cooked; except for albinos, all lobsters possess astaxanthin, which is responsible for the bright red color lobsters turn after being cooked.\nLongevity.\nLobsters live up to an estimated 45 to 50 years in the wild, although determining age is difficult: it is typically estimated from size and other variables. Newer techniques may lead to more accurate age estimates.\nResearch suggests that lobsters may not slow down, weaken, or lose fertility with age and that older lobsters may be more fertile than younger lobsters. This longevity may be due to telomerase, an enzyme that repairs long repetitive sections of DNA sequences at the ends of chromosomes, referred to as telomeres. Telomerase is expressed by most vertebrates during embryonic stages but is generally absent from adult stages of life. However, unlike most vertebrates, lobsters express telomerase as adults through most tissue, which has been suggested to be related to their longevity. Telomerase is especially present in green spotted lobsters, whose markings are thought to be produced by the enzyme interacting with their shell pigmentation. Lobster longevity is limited by their size. Moulting requires metabolic energy, and the larger the lobster, the more energy is needed; 10 to 15% of lobsters die of exhaustion during moulting, while in older lobsters, moulting ceases and the exoskeleton degrades or collapses entirely, leading to death.\nLike many decapod crustaceans, lobsters grow throughout life and can add new muscle cells at each moult. Lobster longevity allows them to reach impressive sizes. According to \"Guinness World Records\", the largest lobster ever caught was in Nova Scotia, Canada, weighing .\nEcology.\nLobsters live in all oceans, on rocky, sandy, or muddy bottoms from the shoreline to beyond the edge of the continental shelf, contingent largely on size and age. Smaller, younger lobsters are typically found in crevices or in burrows under rocks and do not typically migrate. Larger, older lobsters are more likely to be found in deeper seas, migrating back to shallow waters seasonally.\nLobsters are omnivores and typically eat live prey such as fish, mollusks, other crustaceans, worms, and some plant life. They scavenge if necessary and are known to resort to cannibalism in captivity. However, when lobster skin is found in lobster stomachs, this is not necessarily evidence of cannibalism because lobsters eat their shed skin after moulting. While cannibalism was thought to be nonexistent among wild lobster populations, it was observed in 2012 by researchers studying wild lobsters in Maine. These first known instances of lobster cannibalism in the wild are theorized to be attributed to a local population explosion among lobsters caused by the disappearance of many of the Maine lobsters' natural predators.\nIn general, lobsters are long and move by slowly walking on the sea floor. However, they swim backward quickly when they flee by curling and uncurling their abdomens. A speed of has been recorded. This is known as the caridoid escape reaction.\nSymbiotic animals of the genus \"Symbion\", the only known member of the phylum Cycliophora, live exclusively on lobster gills and mouthparts. Different species of \"Symbion\" have been found on the three commercially important lobsters of the North Atlantic Ocean: \"Nephrops norvegicus\", \"Homarus gammarus\", and \"Homarus americanus\".\nAs food.\nLobster is commonly served boiled or steamed in the shell. Diners crack the shell with lobster crackers and fish out the meat with lobster picks. The meat is often eaten with melted butter and lemon juice. Lobster is also used in soup, bisque, lobster rolls, \"cappon magro\", and dishes such as lobster Newberg and lobster Thermidor.\nCooks primarily boil or steam live lobsters. When a lobster is cooked, its shell's color changes from brown to orange because the heat from cooking breaks down a protein called crustacyanin, which suppresses the orange hue of the chemical astaxanthin, which is also found in the shell.\nAccording to the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the mean level of mercury in American lobster between 2005 and 2007 was 0.107ppm. (The FDA has set a maximum permissible level of\nmethylmercury in seafood to 1 ppm.)\nHistory.\nHumans are claimed to have eaten lobster since early history. Large piles of lobster shells near areas populated by fishing communities attest to the crustacean's extreme popularity during this period. Evidence indicates that lobster was being consumed as a regular food product in fishing communities along the shores of Britain, South Africa, Australia, and Papua New Guinea years ago. Lobster became a significant source of nutrients among European coastal dwellers. Historians suggest lobster was an important secondary food source for most European coastal dwellers, and it was a primary food source for coastal communities in Britain during this time.\nLobster became a popular mid-range delicacy during the mid to late Roman period. The price of lobster could vary widely due to various factors, but evidence indicates that lobster was regularly transported inland over long distances to meet popular demand. A mosaic found in the ruins of Pompeii suggests that the spiny lobster was of considerable interest to the Roman population during the early imperial period.\nLobster was a popular food among the Moche people of Peru between 50 CE and 800 CE. Besides its use as food, lobster shells were also used to create a light pink dye, ornaments, and tools. A mass-produced lobster-shaped effigy vessel dated to this period attests to lobster's popularity at this time, though the purpose of this vessel has not been identified.\nThe Viking period saw an increase in lobster and other shellfish consumption among northern Europeans. This can be attributed to the overall increase in marine activity due to the development of better boats and the increasing cultural investment in building ships and training sailors. The consumption of marine life went up overall in this period, and the consumption of lobster went up in accordance with this general trend.\nUnlike fish, however, lobster had to be cooked within two days of leaving salt water, limiting the availability of lobster for inland dwellers. Thus lobster, more than fish, became a food primarily available to the relatively well-off, at least among non-coastal dwellers.\nLobster is first mentioned in cookbooks during the medieval period. \"Le Viandier de Taillevent,\" a French recipe collection written around 1300, suggests that lobster (also called saltwater crayfish) be \"Cooked in wine and water, or in the oven; eaten in vinegar.\" \"Le Viandier de Taillevent\" is considered to be one of the first \"haute cuisine\" cookbooks, advising on how to cook meals that would have been quite elaborate for the period and making usage of expensive and hard to obtain ingredients. Though the original edition, which includes the recipe for lobster, was published before the birth of French court cook Guillaume Tirel, Tirel later expanded and republished this recipe collection, suggesting that the recipes included in both editions were popular among the highest circles of French nobility, including King Philip VI. The inclusion of a lobster recipe in this cookbook, especially one which does not make use of other more expensive ingredients, attests to the popularity of lobster among the wealthy. \nThe French household guidebook \"Le M\u00e9nagier de Paris\", published in 1393, includes no less than five recipes including lobster, which vary in elaboration. A guidebook intended to provide advice for women running upper-class households, \"Le M\u00e9nagier de Paris\" is similar to its predecessor in that it indicates the popularity of lobster as a food among the upper classes.\nThat lobster was first mentioned in cookbooks during the 1300s and only mentioned in two during this century should not be taken as an implication that lobster was not widely consumed before or during this time. Recipe collections were virtually non-existent before the 1300s, and only a handful exist from the medieval period.\nDuring the early 1400s, lobster was still a popular dish among the upper classes. During this time, influential households used the variety and variation of species served at feasts to display wealth and prestige. Lobster was commonly found among these spreads, indicating that it continued to be held in high esteem among the wealthy. In one notable instance, the Bishop of Salisbury offered at least 42 kinds of crustaceans and fish at his feasts over nine months, including several varieties of lobster. However, lobster was not a food exclusively accessed by the wealthy. The general population living on the coasts made use of the various food sources provided by the ocean, and shellfish especially became a more popular source of nutrition. Among the general population, lobster was generally eaten boiled during the mid-15th century, but the influence of the cuisine of higher society can be seen in that it was now also regularly eaten cold with vinegar. The inland peasantry would still have generally been unfamiliar with lobster during this time.\nLobster continued to be eaten as a delicacy and a general staple food among coastal communities until the late 17th century. During this time, the influence of the Church and the government regulating and sometimes banning meat consumption during certain periods continued to encourage the popularity of seafood, especially shellfish, as a meat alternative among all classes. Throughout this period, lobster was eaten fresh, pickled, and salted. From the late 17th century onward, developments in fishing, transportation, and cooking technology allowed lobster to more easily make its way inland, and the variety of dishes involving lobster and cooking techniques used with the ingredient expanded. However, these developments coincided with a decrease in the lobster population, and lobster increasingly became a delicacy food, valued among the rich as a status symbol and less likely to be found in the diet of the general population.\nThe American lobster was not originally popular among European colonists in North America. This was partially due to the European inlander's association of lobster with barely edible salted seafood and partially due to a cultural opinion that seafood was a lesser alternative to meat that did not provide the taste or nutrients desired. It was also due to the extreme abundance of lobster at the time of the colonists' arrival, which contributed to a general perception of lobster as an undesirable peasant food. The American lobster did not achieve popularity until the mid-19th century when New Yorkers and Bostonians developed a taste for it, and commercial lobster fisheries only flourished after the development of the lobster smack, a custom-made boat with open holding wells on the deck to keep the lobsters alive during transport.\nBefore this time, lobster was considered a poverty food or as a food for indentured servants or lower members of society in Maine, Massachusetts, and the Canadian Maritimes. Some servants specified in employment agreements that they would not eat lobster more than twice per week, however there is limited evidence for this. American lobster was initially deemed worthy only of being used as fertilizer or fish bait, and until well into the 20th century, it was not viewed as more than a low-priced canned staple food.\nAs a crustacean, lobster remains a taboo food in the dietary laws of Judaism and certain streams of Islam.\nGrading.\nCaught lobsters are graded as new-shell, hard-shell, or old-shell. Because lobsters that have recently shed their shells are the most delicate, an inverse relationship exists between the price of American lobster and its flavor. New-shell lobsters have paper-thin shells and a worse meat-to-shell ratio, but the meat is very sweet. However, the lobsters are so delicate that even transport to Boston almost kills them, making the market for new-shell lobsters strictly local to the fishing towns where they are offloaded. Hard-shell lobsters with firm shells but less sweet meat can survive shipping to Boston, New York, and even Los Angeles, so they command a higher price than new-shell lobsters. Meanwhile, old-shell lobsters, which have not shed since the previous season and have a coarser flavor, can be shipped by air anywhere in the world and arrive alive, making them the most expensive.\nKilling methods and animal welfare.\nSeveral methods are used for killing lobsters. The most common way of killing lobsters is by placing them live in boiling water, sometimes after being placed in a freezer for a period. Boiling lobsters has been banned in several jurisdictions, including Switzerland, New Zealand, and parts of Italy. In Italy, offenders face fines of up to \u20ac495.\nAnother method is to split the lobster or sever the body in half lengthwise. To effectively kill the lobster quickly, the whole lobster must be split in two (not just its head, as is the practice in some restaurants). Lobsters may also be killed or immobilized immediately before boiling by a stab into the brain (pithing), in the belief that this will stop suffering. However, a lobster's brain operates from not one but several ganglia, and disabling only the frontal ganglion does not usually result in death. Lobsters can be killed by electrocution prior to cooking with a device called the CrustaStun. Another method of rendering a lobster unconscious, chilling, has not been found to be effective.\nBoiled alive.\nBoiling has been deemed to cause extreme suffering in lobsters, which continue to show intense brain activity for 30 to 150 seconds after immersion in boiling water. Slowly raising the water temperature may also cause pain in crustaceans over a longer period of time.\nIn 2021, a study conducted by experts from the London School of Economics concluded there was \"strong scientific evidence decapod crustaceans and cephalopod molluscs are sentient\". As of 2025, boiling lobsters alive remains common practice in the UK, although lawyers have argued that it could be considered illegal under animal welfare legislation. Lobsters in the UK have been legally recognized as sentient beings since the introduction of the Animal Welfare (Sentience) Act 2022.\nLegal status.\nNorway, Austria, New Zealand and some Australian territories also place restrictions on the inhumane treatment of lobsters. Cities in Germany and Italy also have explicitly banned the practice of boiling lobsters alive.\nSwitzerland.\nIn 2018, Switzerland was the first country to ban the live boiling of lobsters. In Switzerland lobsters need to be knocked out, or killed instantly, before they are boiled. They also receive other forms of protection while in transit.\nRecognition of the sentience of European lobsters.\nA 2021 London School of Economics report found strong evidence to suggest that lobsters can experience pain. Dr Jonathan Birch, Principal Investigator on the project, said, \"After reviewing over 300 scientific studies, we concluded that cephalopod molluscs and decapod crustaceans should be regarded as sentient, and should therefore be included within the scope of animal welfare law.\"\nFollowing the publication of the report, octopuses, crabs and lobsters are now protected under stronger animal welfare legislation in the UK (under the Animal Welfare (Sentience) Bill).\nFishery and aquaculture.\nLobsters are caught using baited one-way traps with a color-coded marker buoy to mark cages. Lobster is fished in water between , although some lobsters live at . Cages are of plastic-coated galvanized steel or wood. A lobster fisher may tend to as many as 2,000 traps. \nIn the United States, conservation measures include a federal law prohibiting the purchase, sale, transport, shipment, or possession of any lobster that is less than 3 1/4 inches or more than 5 inches in length, or that are egg-bearing. American lobstermen are required to mark egg-bearing female lobsters with a V-notch, a small, painless slit made to the tail that indicates to future trappers that fertile lobsters must always be thrown back into the sea upon capture.\nAround the year 2000, owing to overfishing and high demand, lobster aquaculture expanded.\nSpecies.\nThe fossil record of clawed lobsters extends back at least to the Valanginian age of the Cretaceous (140 million years ago). This list contains all 54 extant species in the family Nephropidae:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n*\"Acanthacaris caeca\" \n*\"Acanthacaris tenuimana\" \n*\"Dinochelus ausubeli\" \n*\"Eunephrops bairdii\" \n*\"Eunephrops cadenasi\" \n*\"Eunephrops luckhursti\" \n*\"Eunephrops manningi\" \n*\"Homarinus capensis\" \u2013 Cape lobster\n*\"Homarus americanus\" \u2013 American lobster\n*\"Homarus gammarus\" \u2013 European lobster\n*\"Metanephrops andamanicus\" \u2013 Andaman lobster\n*\"Metanephrops arafurensis\" \n*\"Metanephrops armatus\" \n*\"Metanephrops australiensis\" \u2013 Australian scampi\n*\"Metanephrops binghami\" \u2013 Caribbean lobster\n*\"Metanephrops boschmai\" \u2013 Bight lobster\n*\"Metanephrops challengeri\" \u2013 New Zealand scampi\n*\"Metanephrops formosanus\" \n*\"Metanephrops japonicus\" \u2013 Japanese lobster\n*\"Metanephrops mozambicus\" \n*\"Metanephrops neptunus\" \n*\"Metanephrops rubellus\" \n*\"Metanephrops sagamiensis\" \n*\"Metanephrops sibogae\" \n*\"Metanephrops sinensis\" \u2013 China lobster\n*\"Metanephrops taiwanicus\" \n*\"Metanephrops thomsoni\" \n*\"Metanephrops velutinus\" \n*\"Nephropides caribaeus\" \n*\"Nephrops norvegicus\" \u2013 Norway lobster, Dublin Bay prawn, langoustine\n*\"Nephropsis acanthura\" \n*\"Nephropsis aculeata\" \u2013 Florida lobsterette\n*\"Nephropsis agassizii\" \n*\"Nephropsis atlantica\" \n*\"Nephropsis carpenteri\" \n*\"Nephropsis ensirostris\" \n*\"Nephropsis holthuisii\" \n*\"Nephropsis malhaensis\" \n*\"Nephropsis neglecta\" \n*\"Nephropsis occidentalis\" \n*\"Nephropsis rosea\" \n*\"Nephropsis serrata\" \n*\"Nephropsis stewarti\" \n*\"Nephropsis suhmi\" \n*\"Nephropsis sulcata\" \n*\"Thaumastocheles dochmiodon\" \n*\"Thaumastocheles japonicus\" \n*\"Thaumastocheles zaleucus\" \n*\"Thaumastochelopsis brucei\" \n*\"Thaumastochelopsis wardi\" \n*\"Thymopides grobovi\" \n*\"Thymopides laurentae\" \n*\"Thymops birsteini\" \n*\"Thymopsis nilenta\" \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46311", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46311", "title": "Flounder", "text": "Group of flatfish species\nFlounders are a group of flatfish species. They are demersal fish, found at the bottom of oceans around the world; some species will also enter estuaries.\nTaxonomy.\nThe name \"flounder\" is used for several only distantly related species, though all are in the suborder Pleuronectoidei (families Achiropsettidae, Bothidae, Pleuronectidae, Paralichthyidae, and Samaridae). Some of the better known species that are important in fisheries are:\nEye migration.\nLarval flounder are born with one eye on each side of their head, but as they grow from the larval to juvenile stage through metamorphosis, one eye migrates to the other side of the body. As a result, both eyes are then on the side which faces up. The side to which the eyes migrate is dependent on the species type. As an adult, a flounder changes its habits and camouflages itself by lying on the bottom of the ocean floor as protection against predators.\nHabitat.\nFlounders ambush their prey, feeding at soft muddy areas of the sea bottom, near bridge piles, docks, and coral reefs.\nA flounder's diet consists mainly of fish spawn, crustaceans, polychaetes and small fish. Flounder typically grow to a length of , and as large as . Their width is about half their length. Male \"Platichthys\" have been found up to off the coast of northern Sardinia, sometimes with heavy encrustations of various species of barnacle.\nFluke, a type of flounder, are being farm raised in open water by Mariculture Technologies in Greenport, New York.\nThreats.\nWorld stocks of large predatory fish and large ground fish, including sole and flounder, were estimated in 2003 to be only about 10% of pre-industrial levels, largely due to overfishing. Most overfishing is due to the extensive activities of the fishing industry. Current estimates suggest that approximately 30 million flounder (excluding sole) are alive in the world today. In the Gulf of Mexico, along the coast of Texas, research indicates the flounder population could be as low as 15 million due to heavy overfishing and industrial pollution.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46313", "revid": "687767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46313", "title": "Globalization", "text": "Spread of world views, products, ideas, capital and labor\nGlobalization is the process of increasing interdependence and integration among the economies, markets, societies, and cultures of different countries worldwide. This is made possible by the reduction of barriers to international trade, the liberalization of capital movements, the development of transportation, and the advancement of information and communication technologies. The term \"globalization\" first appeared in the early 20th century (supplanting an earlier French term ). It developed its current meaning sometime in the second half of the 20th century, and came into popular use in the 1990s to describe the unprecedented international connectivity of the post\u2013Cold War world.\nThe origins of globalization can be traced back to the 18th and 19th centuries, driven by advances in transportation and communication technologies. These developments increased global interactions, fostering the growth of international trade and the exchange of ideas, beliefs, and cultures. While globalization is primarily an economic process of interaction and integration, it is also closely linked to social and cultural dynamics. Additionally, disputes and international diplomacy have played significant roles in the history and evolution of globalization, continuing to shape its modern form. Though many scholars place the origins of globalization in modern times, others trace its history to long before the European Age of Discovery and voyages to the New World, and some even to the third millennium BCE. Large-scale globalization began in the 1820s, and in the late 19th century and early 20th century drove a rapid expansion in the connectivity of the world's economies and cultures. The term \"global city\" was subsequently popularized by sociologist Saskia Sassen in her work \"The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo\" (1991).\nGlobalization describes the growing interdependence of the world's economies, cultures, and populations, brought about by cross-border trade in goods and services, technology, and flows of investment, people, and information. Countries have built economic partnerships to facilitate these movements over many centuries.\nEconomically, globalization involves goods, services, data, technology, and the economic resources of capital. The expansion of global markets liberalizes the economic activities of the exchange of goods and funds. Removal of cross-border trade barriers has made the formation of global markets more feasible. Advances in transportation, like the steam locomotive, steamship, jet engine, and container ships, and developments in telecommunication infrastructure such as the telegraph, the Internet, mobile phones, and smartphones, have been major factors in globalization and have generated further interdependence of economic and cultural activities around the globe.\nBetween 1990 and 2010, globalization progressed rapidly, driven by the information and communication technology revolution that lowered communication costs, along with trade liberalization and the shift of manufacturing operations to emerging economies (particularly China). In 2000, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) identified four basic aspects of globalization: trade and transactions, capital and investment movements, migration and movement of people, and the dissemination of knowledge. Globalizing processes affect and are affected by business and work organization, economics, sociocultural resources, and the natural environment. Academic literature commonly divides globalization into three major areas: economic globalization, cultural globalization, and political globalization.\nProponents of globalization point to economic growth and broader societal development as benefits, while opponents claim globalizing processes are detrimental to social well-being due to ethnocentrism, environmental consequences, and other potential drawbacks.\nGlobalization, characterized by the increased flow of goods, services, capital, people, and ideas across borders, leads to greater global interdependence by integrating national economies, societies, and cultures. This process, intensified since the 1980s by technological advancements and reduced trade barriers, has profound effects on businesses, cultures, politics, and living standards worldwide.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology and usage.\nThe word \"globalization\" was used in the English language as early as the 1930s, but only ever in the context of education, and the term failed to gain traction. Over the next few decades, the term was occasionally used by other scholars and media, but it was not clearly defined. One of the first uses of a term resembling the more common meaning and usage of the modern word was by French economist Fran\u00e7ois Perroux in his essays from the early 1960s (in his French works he used the similar yet distinct term , translated as mundialization). Theodore Levitt is sometimes inaccurately cited as having invented the term in the mid-1980s, although he can more confidently be credited with popularizing the term and bringing it into the mainstream business audience during that time.\nThough often treated as synonyms, in French, globalization is seen as a stage following , a stage that implies the dissolution of national identities and the abolishment of borders within the world network of economic exchanges.\nSince its inception, the concept of globalization has inspired competing definitions and interpretations. Its antecedents date back to the great movements of trade and empire across Asia and the Indian Ocean from the 15th century onward.\nIn 1848, Karl Marx noticed the increasing level of national interdependence brought on by capitalism, and predicted the universal character of the modern world society. He states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the world market given a cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in every country. To the great chagrin of Reactionists, it has drawn from under the feet of industry the national ground on which it stood. All old-established national industries have been destroyed or are daily being destroyed. . . . In place of the old local and national seclusion and self-sufficiency, we have intercourse in every direction, universal inter-dependence of nations.\nSociologists Martin Albrow and Elizabeth King define globalization as \"all those processes by which the people of the world are incorporated into a single world society.\" In \"The Consequences of Modernity\", Anthony Giddens writes: \"Globalization can thus be defined as the intensification of worldwide social relations which link distant localities in such a way that local happenings are shaped by events occurring many miles away and vice versa.\" In 1992, Roland Robertson, professor of sociology at the University of Aberdeen and an early writer in the field, described globalization as \"the compression of the world and the intensification of the consciousness of the world as a whole.\"\nIn \"Global Transformations\", David Held and his co-writers state:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although in its simplistic sense globalization refers to the widening, deepening and speeding up of global interconnection, such a definition begs further elaboration. ... Globalization can be on a continuum with the local, national and regional. At one end of the continuum lie social and economic relations and networks which are organized on a local and/or national basis; at the other end lie social and economic relations and networks which crystallize on the wider scale of regional and global interactions. Globalization can refer to those spatial-temporal processes of change which underpin a transformation in the organization of human affairs by linking together and expanding human activity across regions and continents. Without reference to such expansive spatial connections, there can be no clear or coherent formulation of this term. ... A satisfactory definition of globalization must capture each of these elements: extensity (stretching), intensity, velocity and impact.\nHeld and his co-writers' definition of globalization in that same book as \"transformation in the spatial organization of social relations and transactions\u2014assessed in terms of their extensity, intensity, velocity and impact\u2014generating transcontinental or inter-regional flows\" was called \"probably the most widely-cited definition\" in the 2014 DHL Global Connectiveness Index.\nSwedish journalist Thomas Larsson, in his book \"The Race to the Top: The Real Story of Globalization\", states that globalization:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...is the process of world shrinkage, of distances getting shorter, things moving closer. It pertains to the increasing ease with which somebody on one side of the world can interact, to mutual benefit, with somebody on the other side of the world.\nPaul James defines globalization with a more direct and historically contextualized emphasis:\nGlobalization is the extension of social relations across world-space, defining that world-space in terms of the historically variable ways that it has been practiced and socially understood through changing world-time.\nManfred Steger, professor of global studies and research leader in the Global Cities Institute at RMIT University, identifies four main empirical dimensions of globalization: economic, political, cultural, and ecological. A fifth dimension\u2014the ideological\u2014cutting across the other four. The ideological dimension, according to Steger, is filled with a range of norms, claims, beliefs, and narratives about the phenomenon itself.\nJames and Steger stated that the concept of globalization \"emerged from the intersection of four interrelated sets of 'communities of practice' (Wenger, 1998): academics, journalists, publishers/editors, and librarians.\" They note the term was used \"in education to describe the global life of the mind\"; in international relations to describe the extension of the European Common Market, and in journalism to describe how the \"American Negro and his problem are taking on a global significance\". They have also argued that four forms of globalization can be distinguished that complement and cut across the solely empirical dimensions. According to James, the oldest dominant form of globalization is embodied globalization, the movement of people. A second form is agency-extended globalization, the circulation of agents of different institutions, organizations, and polities, including imperial agents. Object-extended globalization, a third form, is the movement of commodities and other objects of exchange. He calls the transmission of ideas, images, knowledge, and information across world-space disembodied globalization, maintaining that it is currently the dominant form of globalization. James holds that this series of distinctions allows for an understanding of how, today, the most embodied forms of globalization such as the movement of refugees and migrants are increasingly restricted, while the most disembodied forms such as the circulation of financial instruments and codes are the most deregulated.\nThe journalist Thomas L. Friedman popularized the term \"flat world\", arguing that globalized trade, outsourcing, supply-chaining, and political forces had permanently changed the world, for better and worse. He asserted that the pace of globalization was quickening and that its impact on business organization and practice would continue to grow.\nEconomist Takis Fotopoulos defined \"economic globalization\" as the opening and deregulation of commodity, capital, and labor markets that led toward the present neoliberal globalization. He used \"political globalization\" to refer to the emergence of a transnational \u00e9lite and a phasing out of the nation-state. Meanwhile, he used \"cultural globalization\" to reference the worldwide homogenization of culture. Other of his usages included \"ideological globalization\", \"technological globalization\", and \"social globalization\".\nLechner and Boli (2012) define globalization as more people across large distances becoming connected in more and different ways.\n\"Globophobia\" is used to refer to the fear of globalization, though it can also mean the fear of balloons.\nHistory.\nThere are both distal and proximate causes that can be traced in the historical factors affecting globalization. Large-scale globalization began in the 19th century.\nArchaic.\nThe phrase \"Archaic globalization\" conventionally refers to a phase in the history of globalization including globalizing events and developments from the time of the earliest civilizations until roughly the 1600s CE. This term covers the relationships between communities and states and how they developed through the geographical spread of ideas and social norms at both local and regional levels.\nIn this schema, three main prerequisites are posited for globalization to occur:\nAlso posited is a \"multi-polar\" nature to archaic globalization, which involved the active participation of non-Europeans. Because it predated the Great Divergence in the nineteenth century, where Western Europe pulled ahead of the rest of the world in terms of industrial production and economic output, archaic globalization was a phenomenon that was driven not only by Europe but also by other economically developed Old World centers such as Gujarat, Bengal, coastal China, and Japan.\nThe German historical economist and sociologist Andre Gunder Frank argues that a form of globalization began with the rise of trade links between Sumer and the Indus Valley civilization in the third millennium BCE. This archaic globalization continued during the Hellenistic Age, when commercialized urban centers enveloped the axis of Greek culture that reached from India to Spain, including Alexandria and the other Alexandrine cities. Early on, the geographic position of Greece, Greek demographics and the necessity of importing wheat encouraged Greek city-states to found outpost colonies\nand to engage in maritime trade.\nTrade in ancient Greece was largely unrestricted: the state controlled only the supply of grain. Greek style, culture and art spread in a \"form of Mediterranean globalization\".\nTrade on the Silk Road became a significant factor in the development of civilizations from China to the Indian subcontinent, Persia, Europe, and Arabia, opening long-distance political and economic interactions between them. Though silk was certainly the major trade-item from China, common goods such as salt and sugar were traded as well; and religions, syncretic philosophies, and various technologies, as well as diseases, also traveled along the Silk Routes. In addition to economic trade, the Silk Road served as a means of carrying out cultural trade among the civilizations along its network. The movement of people, such as refugees, artists, craftsmen, missionaries, robbers, and envoys, resulted in the exchange of religions, art, languages, and new technologies. From around 3000 BCE to 1000 CE, connectivity within Afro-Eurasia was centered upon the Indo-Mediterranean region, with the Silk Road later rising in importance with the Mongol Empire's consolidation of Asia in the 13th century CE.\nEarly modern.\n\"Early modern\" or \"proto-globalization\" covers a period of the history of globalization roughly spanning the years between 1600 and 1800. The concept of \"proto-globalization\" was first introduced by historians A. G. Hopkins and Christopher Bayly. The term describes the phase of increasing trade links and cultural exchange that characterized the period immediately preceding the advent of high \"modern globalization\" in the late 19th century. This phase of globalization was characterized by the rise of maritime European empires, in the 15th and 17th centuries, first the Portuguese Empire (1415) followed by the Spanish Empire (1492), and later the Dutch and British Empires. In the 17th century, world trade developed further when chartered companies like the British East India Company (founded in 1600) and the Dutch East India Company (founded in 1602, often described as the first multinational corporation in which stock was offered) were established.\nAn alternative view from historians Dennis Flynn and Arturo Giraldez, postulated that: globalization began with the first circumnavigation of the globe under the Magellan-Elcano expedition which preluded the rise of global silver trade.\nEarly modern globalization is distinguished from modern globalization on the basis of expansionism, the method of managing global trade, and the level of information exchange. The period is marked by the shift of hegemony to Western Europe, the rise of larger-scale conflicts between powerful nations such as the Thirty Years' War, and demand for commodities, most particularly slaves. The triangular trade made it possible for Europe to take advantage of resources within the Western Hemisphere. The transfer of animal stocks, plant crops, and epidemic diseases associated with Alfred W. Crosby's concept of the Columbian exchange also played a central role in this process. European, Middle Eastern, Indian, Southeast Asian, and Chinese merchants were all involved in early modern trade and communications, particularly in the Indian Ocean region.\nModern.\nAccording to economic historians Kevin O'Rourke, Leandro Prados de la Escosura and Guillaume Daudin, several factors promoted globalization in the period 1815\u20131870:\nDuring the 19th century, globalization approached its form as a direct result of the Industrial Revolution. Industrialization allowed standardized production of household items using economies of scale while rapid population growth created sustained demand for commodities. In the 19th century, steamships reduced the cost of international transportation significantly and railroads made inland transportation cheaper. The transportation revolution occurred some time between 1820 and 1850. More nations embraced international trade. Globalization in this period was decisively shaped by nineteenth-century imperialism such as in Africa and Asia.\nContemporary.\nAfter World War II, work by politicians led to the agreements of the Bretton Woods Conference, in which major governments laid down the framework for international monetary policy, commerce, and finance, and the founding of several international institutions intended to facilitate economic growth by lowering trade barriers. Initially, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) led to a series of agreements to remove trade restrictions. GATT's successor was the World Trade Organization (WTO), which provided a framework for negotiating and formalizing trade agreements and a dispute resolution process. Exports nearly doubled from 8.5% of total gross world product in 1970 to 16.2% in 2001. The approach of using global agreements to advance trade stumbled with the failure of the Doha Development Round of trade negotiation. Many countries then shifted to bilateral or smaller multilateral agreements, such as the 2011 United States\u2013Korea Free Trade Agreement.\nThe invention of shipping containers in 1956 helped advance the globalization of commerce. Since the 1970s, aviation has become increasingly affordable to middle classes in developed countries. Open skies policies and low-cost carriers have helped to bring competition to the market. In the 1990s, the growth of low-cost communication networks cut the cost of communicating between countries. More work can be performed using a computer without regard to location. This included accounting, software development, and engineering design.\nStudent exchange programs became popular after World War II, and are intended to increase the participants' understanding and tolerance of other cultures, as well as improving their language skills and broadening their social horizons. Between 1963 and 2006, the number of students studying in a foreign country increased 9 times.\nSince the 1980s, modern globalization has spread rapidly through the expansion of capitalism and neoliberal ideologies. The implementation of neoliberal policies has allowed for the privatization of public industry, deregulation of laws or policies that interfered with the free flow of the market, as well as cut-backs to governmental social services. These neoliberal policies were introduced to many developing countries in the form of structural adjustment programs (SAPs) that were implemented by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). These programs required that the country receiving monetary aid would open its markets to capitalism, privatize public industry, allow free trade, cut social services like healthcare and education and allow the free movement of giant multinational corporations. These programs allowed the World Bank and the IMF to become global financial market regulators that would promote neoliberalism and the creation of free markets for multinational corporations on a global scale.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th century, the connectedness of the world's economies and cultures grew very quickly. This slowed down from the 1910s onward due to the World Wars and the Cold War, but picked up again in the 1980s and 1990s. The revolutions of 1989 and subsequent liberalization in many parts of the world resulted in a significant expansion of global interconnectedness. The migration and movement of people can also be highlighted as a prominent feature of the globalization process. In the period between 1965 and 1990, the proportion of the labor force migrating approximately doubled. Most migration occurred between the developing countries and least developed countries (LDCs). As economic integration intensified workers moved to areas with higher wages and most of the developing world oriented toward the international market economy. The collapse of the Soviet Union not only ended the Cold War's division of the world \u2013 it also left the United States its sole policeman and an unfettered advocate of free market. It also resulted in the growing prominence of attention focused on the movement of diseases, the proliferation of popular culture and consumer values, the growing prominence of international institutions like the UN, and concerted international action on such issues as the environment and human rights. Other developments as dramatic were the Internet's becoming influential in connecting people across the world; As of \u00a02012[ [update]], more than 2.4 billion people\u2014over a third of the world's human population\u2014have used the services of the Internet. Growth of globalization has never been smooth. One influential event was the late 2000s recession, which was associated with lower growth (in areas such as cross-border phone calls and Skype usage) or even temporarily negative growth (in areas such as trade) of global interconnectedness.\nThe China\u2013United States trade war, starting in 2018, negatively affected trade between the two largest national economies. The economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic included a massive decline in tourism and international business travel as many countries temporarily closed borders. The 2021\u20132022 global supply chain crisis resulted from temporary shutdowns of manufacturing and transportation facilities, and labor shortages. Supply problems incentivized some switches to domestic production. The economic impact of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine included a blockade of Ukrainian ports and international sanctions on Russia, resulting in some de-coupling of the Russian economy with global trade, especially with the European Union and other Western countries.\nModern consensus for the last 15 years regards globalization as having run its course and gone into decline. A common argument for this is that trade has dropped since its peak in 2008, and never recovered since the Great Recession. New opposing views from some economists have argued such trends are a result of price drops and in actuality, trade volume is increasing, especially with agricultural products, natural resources and refined petroleum. The 21st century melting of the Arctic will also affect global trade, as it is paving the way for shorter trade routes.\nEconomic globalization.\nEconomic globalization is the increasing economic interdependence of national economies across the world through a rapid increase in cross-border movement of goods, services, technology, and capital. Whereas the globalization of business is centered around the diminution of international trade regulations as well as tariffs, taxes, and other impediments that suppresses global trade, economic globalization is the process of increasing economic integration between countries, leading to the emergence of a global marketplace or a single world market. Depending on the paradigm, economic globalization can be viewed as either a positive or a negative phenomenon. Economic globalization comprises: globalization of production; which refers to the obtainment of goods and services from a particular source from locations around the globe to benefit from difference in cost and quality. Likewise, it also comprises globalization of markets; which is defined as the union of different and separate markets into a massive global marketplace. Economic globalization also includes competition, technology, and corporations and industries.\nCurrent globalization trends can be largely accounted for by developed economies integrating with less developed economies by means of foreign direct investment, the reduction of trade barriers as well as other economic reforms, and, in many cases, immigration.\nInternational standards have made trade in goods and services more efficient. An example of such standard is the intermodal container. Containerization dramatically reduced the costs of transportation, supported the post-war boom in international trade, and was a major element in globalization. International standards are set by the International Organization for Standardization, which is composed of representatives from various national standards organizations.\nA multinational corporation, or worldwide enterprise, is an organization that owns or controls the production of goods or services in one or more countries other than their home country. It can also be referred to as an international corporation, a transnational corporation, or a stateless corporation.\nA free-trade area is the region encompassing a trade bloc whose member countries have signed a free-trade agreement (FTA). Such agreements involve cooperation between at least two countries to reduce trade barriers\u00a0\u2013 import quotas and tariffs\u00a0\u2013 and to increase trade of goods and services with each other.\nIf people are also free to move between the countries, in addition to a free-trade agreement, it would also be considered an open border. Arguably, the most significant free-trade area in the world is the European Union, a politico-economic union of 27 member states that are primarily located in Europe. The EU has developed European Single Market through a standardized system of laws that apply in all member states. EU policies aim to ensure the free movement of people, goods, services, and capital within the internal market,\nTrade facilitation looks at how procedures and controls governing the movement of goods across national borders can be improved to reduce associated cost burdens and maximize efficiency while safeguarding legitimate regulatory objectives.\nGlobal trade in services is also significant. For example, in India, business process outsourcing has been described as the \"primary engine of the country's development over the next few decades, contributing broadly to GDP growth, employment growth, and poverty alleviation\".\nWilliam I. Robinson's theoretical approach to globalization is a critique of Wallerstein's World Systems Theory. He believes that the global capital experienced today is due to a new and distinct form of globalization which began in the 1980s. Robinson argues not only are economic activities expanded across national boundaries but also there is a transnational fragmentation of these activities. One important aspect of Robinson's globalization theory is that production of goods are increasingly global. This means that one pair of shoes can be produced by six countries, each contributing to a part of the production process.\nCultural globalization.\nCultural globalization refers to the transmission of ideas, meanings, and values around the world in such a way as to extend and intensify social relations. This process is marked by the common consumption of cultures that have been diffused by the Internet, popular culture media, and international travel. This has added to processes of commodity exchange and colonization which have a longer history of carrying cultural meaning around the globe. The circulation of cultures enables individuals to partake in extended social relations that cross national and regional borders. The creation and expansion of such social relations is not merely observed on a material level. Cultural globalization involves the formation of shared norms and knowledge with which people associate their individual and collective cultural identities. It brings increasing interconnectedness among different populations and cultures.\nCross-cultural communication is a field of study that looks at how people from differing cultural backgrounds communicate, in similar and different ways among themselves, and how they endeavor to communicate across cultures. Intercultural communication is a related field of study.\nCultural diffusion is the spread of cultural items\u2014such as ideas, styles, religions, technologies, languages etc.\nCultural globalization has increased cross-cultural contacts, but may be accompanied by a decrease in the uniqueness of once-isolated communities. For example, sushi is available in Germany as well as Japan, but Euro-Disney outdraws the city of Paris, potentially reducing demand for \"authentic\" French pastry. Globalization's contribution to the alienation of individuals from their traditions may be modest compared to the impact of modernity itself, as alleged by existentialists such as Jean-Paul Sartre and Albert Camus. Globalization has expanded recreational opportunities by spreading pop culture, particularly via the Internet and satellite television. The cultural diffusion can create a homogenizing force, where globalization is seen as synonymous with homogenizing force via connectedness of markets, cultures, politics and the desire for modernizations through imperial countries sphere of influence.\nReligions were among the earliest cultural elements to globalize, being spread by force, migration, evangelists, imperialists, and traders. Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, and more recently sects such as Mormonism are among those religions which have taken root and influenced endemic cultures in places far from their origins.\nGlobalization has strongly influenced sports. For example, the modern Olympic Games has athletes from more than 200 nations participating in a variety of competitions. The FIFA World Cup is the most widely viewed and followed sporting event in the world, exceeding even the Olympic Games; a ninth of the entire population of the planet watched the 2006 FIFA World Cup Final.\nThe term globalization implies transformation. Cultural practices including traditional music can be lost or turned into a fusion of traditions. Globalization can trigger a state of emergency for the preservation of musical heritage. Archivists may attempt to collect, record, or transcribe repertoires before melodies are assimilated or modified, while local musicians may struggle for authenticity and to preserve local musical traditions. Globalization can lead performers to discard traditional instruments. Fusion genres can become interesting fields of analysis.\nMusic has an important role in economic and cultural development during globalization. Music genres such as jazz and reggae began locally and later became international phenomena. Globalization gave support to the world music phenomenon by allowing music from developing countries to reach broader audiences. Though the term \"World Music\" was originally intended for ethnic-specific music, globalization is now expanding its scope such that the term often includes hybrid subgenres such as \"world fusion\", \"global fusion\", \"ethnic fusion\", and worldbeat.\nBourdieu claimed that the perception of consumption can be seen as self-identification and the formation of identity. Musically, this translates into each individual having their own musical identity based on likes and tastes. These likes and tastes are greatly influenced by culture, as this is the most basic cause for a person's wants and behavior. The concept of one's own culture is now in a period of change due to globalization. Also, globalization has increased the interdependency of political, personal, cultural, and economic factors.\nA 2005 UNESCO report showed that cultural exchange is becoming more frequent from Eastern Asia, but that Western countries are still the main exporters of cultural goods. In 2002, China was the third largest exporter of cultural goods, after the UK and US. Between 1994 and 2002, both North America's and the European Union's shares of cultural exports declined while Asia's cultural exports grew to surpass North America. Related factors are the fact that Asia's population and area are several times that of North America. Americanization is related to a period of high political American clout and of significant growth of America's shops, markets and objects being brought into other countries.\nSome critics of globalization argue that it harms the diversity of cultures. As a dominating country's culture is introduced into a receiving country through globalization, it can become a threat to the diversity of local culture. Some argue that globalization may ultimately lead to Westernization or Americanization of culture, where the dominating cultural concepts of economically and politically powerful Western countries spread and cause harm to local cultures.\nGlobalization is a diverse phenomenon that relates to a multilateral political world and to the increase of cultural objects and markets between countries. The Indian experience particularly reveals the plurality of the impact of cultural globalization.\nTransculturalism is defined as \"seeing oneself in the other\". Transcultural is in turn described as \"extending through all human cultures\" or \"involving, encompassing, or combining elements of more than one culture\". Children brought up in transcultural backgrounds are sometimes called third-culture kids.\nPolitical globalization.\nPolitical globalization refers to the growth of the worldwide political system, both in size and complexity. That system includes national governments, their governmental and intergovernmental organizations as well as government-independent elements of global civil society such as international non-governmental organizations and social movement organizations. One of the key aspects of the political globalization is the declining importance of the nation-state and the rise of other actors on the political scene.\nWilliam R. Thompson has defined it as \"the expansion of a global political system, and its institutions, in which inter-regional transactions (including, but certainly not limited to trade) are managed\". \nPolitical globalization is one of the three main dimensions of globalization commonly found in academic literature, with the two other being economic globalization and cultural globalization.\nIntergovernmentalism is a term in political science with two meanings. The first refers to a theory of regional integration originally proposed by Stanley Hoffmann; the second treats states and the national government as the primary factors for integration. Multi-level governance is an approach in political science and public administration theory that originated from studies on European integration. Multi-level governance gives expression to the idea that there are many interacting authority structures at work in the emergent global political economy. It illuminates the intimate entanglement between the domestic and international levels of authority.\nSome people are citizens of multiple nation-states. Multiple citizenship, also called dual citizenship or multiple nationality or dual nationality, is a person's citizenship status, in which a person is concurrently regarded as a citizen of more than one state under the laws of those states.\nIncreasingly, non-governmental organizations influence public policy across national boundaries, including humanitarian aid and developmental efforts. Philanthropic organizations with global missions are also coming to the forefront of humanitarian efforts; charities such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Accion International, the Acumen Fund (now Acumen) and the Echoing Green have combined the business model with philanthropy, giving rise to business organizations such as the Global Philanthropy Group and new associations of philanthropists such as the Global Philanthropy Forum. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation projects include a current multibillion-dollar commitment to funding immunizations in some of the world's more impoverished but rapidly growing countries. The Hudson Institute estimates total private philanthropic flows to developing countries at US$59 billion in 2010.\nAs a response to globalization, some countries have embraced isolationist policies. For example, the North Korean government makes it very difficult for foreigners to enter the country and strictly monitors their activities when they do. Aid workers are subject to considerable scrutiny and excluded from places and regions the government does not wish them to enter. Citizens cannot freely leave the country.\nGlobalization and gender.\nGlobalization has been a gendered process where giant multinational corporations have outsourced jobs to low-wage, low skilled, quota free economies like the ready made garment industry in Bangladesh where poor women make up the majority of labor force. Despite a large proportion of women workers in the garment industry, women are still heavily underemployed compared to men. Most women that are employed in the garment industry come from the countryside of Bangladesh triggering migration of women in search of garment work. It is still unclear as to whether or not access to paid work for women where it did not exist before has empowered them. The answers varied depending on whether it is the employers perspective or the workers and how they view their choices. Women workers did not see the garment industry as economically sustainable for them in the long run due to long hours standing and poor working conditions. Although women workers did show significant autonomy over their personal lives including their ability to negotiate with family, more choice in marriage, and being valued as a wage earner in the family. This did not translate into workers being able to collectively organize themselves in order to negotiate a better deal for themselves at work.\nAnother example of outsourcing in manufacturing includes the maquiladora industry in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico where poor women make up the majority of the labor force. Women in the maquiladora industry have produced high levels of turnover not staying long enough to be trained compared to men. A gendered two tiered system within the maquiladora industry has been created that focuses on training and worker loyalty. Women are seen as being untrainable, placed in un-skilled, low wage jobs, while men are seen as more trainable with less turnover rates, and placed in more high skilled technical jobs. The idea of training has become a tool used against women to blame them for their high turnover rates which also benefit the industry keeping women as temporary workers.\nOther dimensions.\nScholars also occasionally discuss other, less common dimensions of globalization, such as environmental globalization (the internationally coordinated practices and regulations, often in the form of international treaties, regarding environmental protection) or military globalization (growth in global extent and scope of security relationships). Those dimensions, however, receive much less attention the three described above, as academic literature commonly subdivides globalization into three major areas: economic globalization, cultural globalization and political globalization.\nMovement of people.\nAn essential aspect of globalization is movement of people, and state-boundary limits on that movement have changed across history. The movement of tourists and business people opened up over the last century. As transportation technology improved, travel time and costs decreased dramatically between the 18th and early 20th century. For example, travel across the Atlantic Ocean used to take up to 5 weeks in the 18th century, but around the time of the 20th century it took a mere 8 days. Today, modern aviation has made long-distance transportation quick and affordable.\nTourism is travel for pleasure. The developments in technology and transportation infrastructure, such as jumbo jets, low-cost airlines, and more accessible airports have made many types of tourism more affordable. At any given moment half a million people are in the air. International tourist arrivals surpassed the milestone of 1 billion tourists globally for the first time in 2012.\nA visa is a conditional authorization granted by a country to a foreigner, allowing them to enter and temporarily remain within, or to leave that country. Some countries \u2013 such as those in the Schengen Area \u2013 have agreements with other countries allowing each other's citizens to travel between them without visas (for example, Switzerland is part of a Schengen Agreement allowing easy travel for people from countries within the European Union). The World Tourism Organization announced that the number of tourists who require a visa before traveling was at its lowest level ever in 2015.\nImmigration is the international movement of people into a destination country of which they are not natives or where they do not possess citizenship in order to settle or reside there, especially as permanent residents or naturalized citizens, or to take-up employment as a migrant worker or temporarily as a foreign worker. According to the International Labour Organization, as of 2014[ [update]] there were an estimated 232 million international migrants in the world (defined as persons outside their country of origin for 12 months or more) and approximately half of them were estimated to be economically active (i.e. being employed or seeking employment). International movement of labor is often seen as important to economic development. For example, freedom of movement for workers in the European Union means that people can move freely between member states to live, work, study or retire in another country.\nGlobalization is associated with a dramatic rise in international education. The development of global cross-cultural competence in the workforce through ad-hoc training has deserved increasing attention in recent times. More and more students are seeking higher education in foreign countries and many international students now consider overseas study a stepping-stone to permanent residency within a country. The contributions that foreign students make to host nation economies, both culturally and financially has encouraged major players to implement further initiatives to facilitate the arrival and integration of overseas students, including substantial amendments to immigration and visa policies and procedures.\nA transnational marriage is a marriage between two people from different countries. A variety of special issues arise in marriages between people from different countries, including those related to citizenship and culture, which add complexity and challenges to these kinds of relationships. In an age of increasing globalization, where a growing number of people have ties to networks of people and places across the globe, rather than to a current geographic location, people are increasingly marrying across national boundaries. Transnational marriage is a by-product of the movement and migration of people.\nMovement of information.\nBefore electronic communications, long-distance communications relied on mail. Speed of global communications was limited by the maximum speed of courier services (especially horses and ships) until the mid-19th century. The electric telegraph was the first method of instant long-distance communication. For example, before the first transatlantic cable, communications between Europe and the Americas took weeks because ships had to carry mail across the ocean. The first transatlantic cable reduced communication time considerably, allowing a message and a response in the same day. Lasting transatlantic telegraph connections were achieved in the 1865\u20131866. The first wireless telegraphy transmitters were developed in 1895.\nThe Internet has been instrumental in connecting people across geographical boundaries. For example, Facebook is a social networking service which has more than 1.65 billion monthly active users as of 2016[ [update]].\nGlobalization can be spread by Global journalism which provides massive information and relies on the internet to interact, \"makes it into an everyday routine to investigate how people and their actions, practices, problems, life conditions, etc. in different parts of the world are interrelated. possible to assume that global threats such as climate change precipitate the further establishment of global journalism.\"\nGlobalization and disease.\nIn the current era of globalization, the world is more interdependent than at any other time. Efficient and inexpensive transportation has left few places inaccessible, and increased global trade has brought more and more people into contact with animal diseases that have subsequently jumped species barriers (see zoonosis).\nCoronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated COVID-19, first appeared in Wuhan, China in November 2019. More than 180 countries have reported cases since then. As of \u00a0, 2020[ [update]], the U.S. has the most confirmed active cases in the world. More than 3.4 million people from the worst-affected countries entered the U.S. in the first three months since the inception of the COVID-19 pandemic. This has caused a detrimental impact on the global economy, particularly for SME's and Microbusinesses with unlimited liability/self-employed, leaving them vulnerable to financial difficulties, increasing the market share for oligopolistic markets as well as increasing the barriers of entry.\nMeasurement.\nOne index of globalization is the \"KOF Index of Globalization\", which measures three important dimensions of globalization: economic, social, and political. Another is the A.T. Kearney / Foreign Policy Magazine Globalization Index.\nMeasurements of economic globalization typically focus on variables such as trade, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), Gross Domestic Product (GDP), portfolio investment, and income. However, newer indices attempt to measure globalization in more general terms, including variables related to political, social, cultural, and even environmental aspects of globalization.\nThe DHL Global Connectedness Index studies four main types of cross-border flow: trade (in both goods and services), information, people (including tourists, students, and migrants), and capital. It shows that the depth of global integration fell by about one-tenth after 2008, but by 2013 had recovered well above its pre-crash peak. The report also found a shift of economic activity to emerging economies.\nSupport and criticism.\nReactions to processes contributing to globalization have varied widely with a history as long as extraterritorial contact and trade. Philosophical differences regarding the costs and benefits of such processes give rise to a broad-range of ideologies and social movements. Proponents of economic growth, expansion, and development, in general, view globalizing processes as desirable or necessary to the well-being of human society.\nAntagonists view one or more globalizing processes as detrimental to social well-being on a global or local scale; this includes those who focus on social or natural sustainability of long-term and continuous economic expansion, the social structural inequality caused by these processes, and the colonial, imperialistic, or hegemonic ethnocentrism, cultural assimilation and cultural appropriation that underlie such processes.\nGlobalization tends to bring people into contact with foreign people and cultures. Xenophobia is the fear of that which is perceived to be foreign or strange. Xenophobia can manifest itself in many ways involving the relations and perceptions of an ingroup towards an outgroup, including a fear of losing identity, suspicion of its activities, aggression, and desire to eliminate its presence to secure a presumed purity.\nCritiques of globalization generally stem from discussions surrounding the impact of such processes on the planet as well as the human costs. They challenge directly traditional metrics, such as GDP, and look to other measures, such as the Gini coefficient or the Happy Planet Index, and point to a \"multitude of interconnected fatal consequences\u2013social disintegration, a breakdown of democracy, more rapid and extensive deterioration of the environment, the spread of new diseases, increasing poverty and alienation\" which they claim are the unintended consequences of globalization. Others point out that, while the forces of globalization have led to the spread of western-style democracy, this has been accompanied by an increase in inter-ethnic tension and violence as free market economic policies combine with democratic processes of universal suffrage as well as an escalation in militarization to impose democratic principles and as a means to conflict resolution.\nOn 9 August 2019, Pope Francis denounced isolationism and hinted that the Catholic Church will embrace globalization at the October 2019 Amazonia Synod, stating \"the whole is greater than the parts. Globalization and unity should not be conceived as a sphere, but as a polyhedron: each people retains its identity in unity with others\"\nPublic opinion.\nAs a complex and multifaceted phenomenon, globalization is considered by some as a form of capitalist expansion which entails the integration of local and national economies into a global, underregulated market economy. A 2005 study found a large increase in articles negative towards globalization in the years prior. In 1998, negative articles outpaced positive by two to one. The number of newspaper articles showing negative framing rose from about 10% in 1991 to 55% in 1999. This increase occurred during a period when the number of articles concerning globalization nearly doubled.\nInternational polls have shown that residents of Africa and Asia tend to view globalization more favorably than residents of Europe or North America. In Africa, a Gallup poll found 70% viewed globalization favorably. The BBC found that 50% of people believed that economic globalization was proceeding too rapidly, while 35% believed it was too slow.\nIn 2004, Philip Gordon stated that \"a clear majority of Europeans believe that globalization can enrich their lives, while believing the European Union can help them take advantage of globalization's benefits while shielding them from its negative effects\". The main opposition consisted of socialists, environmental groups, and nationalists. Residents of the EU did not appear to feel threatened by globalization in 2004. The EU job market was more stable and workers were less likely to accept wage/benefit cuts. Social spending was much higher than in the US. In a Danish poll in 2007, 76% responded that globalization is a good thing.\nA 1993 US survey showed more than 40% of respondents were unfamiliar with the concept of globalization. When the survey was repeated in 1998, 89% had a polarized view of globalization as being either good or bad. Discourse on globalization, which began in the financial community, shifted to a heated debate between proponents and disenchanted students and workers. Polarization increased dramatically after the establishment of the WTO in 1995; this event and subsequent protests led to a large-scale anti-globalization movement.\nInitially, college educated workers were likely to support globalization. Less educated workers, who were more likely to compete with immigrants and workers in developing countries, tended to be opponents. The situation changed after the Great Recession. According to a 1997 poll 58% of college graduates said globalization had been good for the US. By 2008 only 33% thought it was good. Respondents with high school education also became more opposed.\nAccording to Takenaka Heizo and Chida Ryokichi, as of 1998[ [update]] there was a perception in Japan that the economy was \"Small and Frail\". However, Japan was resource-poor and used exports to pay for its raw materials. Anxiety over their position caused terms such as \"internationalization\" and \"globalization\" to enter everyday language. However, Japanese tradition was to be as self-sufficient as possible, particularly in agriculture.\nMany in developing countries see globalization as a positive force that lifts them out of poverty. Those opposing globalization typically combine environmental concerns with nationalism. Opponents consider governments as agents of neo-colonialism that are subservient to multinational corporations. Much of this criticism comes from the middle class; the Brookings Institution suggested this was because the middle class perceived upwardly mobile low-income groups as threatening to their economic security.\nEconomics.\nThe literature analyzing the economics of free trade is extremely rich with extensive work having been done on the theoretical and empirical effects. Though it creates winners and losers, the broad consensus among economists is that free trade is a large and unambiguous net gain for society. In a 2006 survey of 83 American economists, \"87.5% agree that the U.S. should eliminate remaining tariffs and other barriers to trade\" and \"90.1% disagree with the suggestion that the U.S. should restrict employers from outsourcing work to foreign countries.\"\nQuoting Harvard economics professor N. Gregory Mankiw, \"Few propositions command as much consensus among professional economists as that open world trade increases economic growth and raises living standards.\" In a survey of leading economists, none disagreed with the notion that \"freer trade improves productive efficiency and offers consumers better choices, and in the long run these gains are much larger than any effects on employment.\" Most economists would agree that although increasing returns to scale might mean that certain industry could settle in a geographical area without any strong economic reason derived from comparative advantage, this is not a reason to argue against free trade because the absolute level of output enjoyed by both \"winner\" and \"loser\" will increase with the \"winner\" gaining more than the \"loser\" but both gaining more than before in an absolute level.\nIn the book \"The End of Poverty\", Jeffrey Sachs discusses how many factors can affect a country's ability to enter the world market, including government corruption; legal and social disparities based on gender, ethnicity, or caste; diseases such as AIDS and malaria; lack of infrastructure (including transportation, communications, health, and trade); unstable political landscapes; protectionism; and geographic barriers. Jagdish Bhagwati, a former adviser to the U.N. on globalization, holds that, although there are obvious problems with overly rapid development, globalization is a very positive force that lifts countries out of poverty by causing a virtuous economic cycle associated with faster economic growth. However, economic growth does not necessarily mean a reduction in poverty; in fact, the two can coexist. Economic growth is conventionally measured using indicators such as GDP and GNI that do not accurately reflect the growing disparities in wealth. Additionally, Oxfam International argues that poor people are often excluded from globalization-induced opportunities \"by a lack of productive assets, weak infrastructure, poor education and ill-health;\" effectively leaving these marginalized groups in a poverty trap. Economist Paul Krugman is another staunch supporter of globalization and free trade with a record of disagreeing with many critics of globalization. He argues that many of them lack a basic understanding of comparative advantage and its importance in today's world.\nThe flow of migrants to advanced economies has been claimed to provide a means through which global wages converge. An IMF study noted a potential for skills to be transferred back to developing countries as wages in those a countries rise. Lastly, the dissemination of knowledge has been an integral aspect of globalization. Technological innovations (or technological transfer) are conjectured to benefit most developing and least developing countries (LDCs), as for example in the adoption of mobile phones.\nThere has been a rapid economic growth in Asia after embracing market orientation-based economic policies that encourage private property rights, free enterprise and competition. In particular, in East Asian developing countries, GDP per head rose at 5.9% a year from 1975 to 2001 (according to 2003 Human Development Report of UNDP). Like this, the British economic journalist Martin Wolf says that incomes of poor developing countries, with more than half the world's population, grew substantially faster than those of the world's richest countries that remained relatively stable in its growth, leading to reduced international inequality and the incidence of poverty.\nCertain demographic changes in the developing world after active economic liberalization and international integration resulted in rising general welfare and, hence, reduced inequality. According to Wolf, in the developing world as a whole, life expectancy rose by four months each year after 1970 and infant mortality rate declined from 107 per thousand in 1970 to 58 in 2000 due to improvements in standards of living and health conditions. Also, adult literacy in developing countries rose from 53% in 1970 to 74% in 1998 and much lower illiteracy rate among the young guarantees that rates will continue to fall as time passes. Furthermore, the reduction in fertility rate in the developing world as a whole from 4.1 births per woman in 1980 to 2.8 in 2000 indicates improved education level of women on fertility, and control of fewer children with more parental attention and investment. Consequently, more prosperous and educated parents with fewer children have chosen to withdraw their children from the labor force to give them opportunities to be educated at school improving the issue of child labor. Thus, despite seemingly unequal distribution of income within these developing countries, their economic growth and development have brought about improved standards of living and welfare for the population as a whole.\nPer capita gross domestic product (GDP) growth among post-1980 globalizing countries accelerated from 1.4 percent a year in the 1960s and 2.9 percent a year in the 1970s to 3.5 percent in the 1980s and 5.0 percent in the 1990s. This acceleration in growth seems even more remarkable given that the rich countries saw steady declines in growth from a high of 4.7 percent in the 1960s to 2.2 percent in the 1990s. Also, the non-globalizing developing countries seem to fare worse than the globalizers, with the former's annual growth rates falling from highs of 3.3 percent during the 1970s to only 1.4 percent during the 1990s. This rapid growth among the globalizers is not simply due to the strong performances of China and India in the 1980s and 1990s\u201418 out of the 24 globalizers experienced increases in growth, many of them quite substantial.\nThe globalization of the late 20th and early 21st centuries has led to the resurfacing of the idea that the growth of economic interdependence promotes peace. This idea had been very powerful during the globalization of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and was a central doctrine of classical liberals of that era, such as the young John Maynard Keynes (1883\u20131946).\nSome opponents of globalization see the phenomenon as a promotion of corporate interests. They also claim that the increasing autonomy and strength of corporate entities shapes the political policy of countries. They advocate global institutions and policies that they believe better address the moral claims of poor and working classes as well as environmental concerns. Economic arguments by fair trade theorists claim that unrestricted free trade benefits those with more financial leverage (i.e. the rich) at the expense of the poor.\nGlobalization allows corporations to outsource manufacturing and service jobs from high-cost locations, creating economic opportunities with the most competitive wages and worker benefits. Critics of globalization say that it disadvantages poorer countries. While it is true that free trade encourages globalization among countries, some countries try to protect their domestic suppliers. The main export of poorer countries is usually agricultural productions. Larger countries often subsidize their farmers (e.g., the EU's Common Agricultural Policy), which lowers the market price for foreign crops.\nGlobal democracy.\nDemocratic globalization is a movement towards an institutional system of global democracy that would give world citizens a say in political organizations. This would, in their view, bypass nation-states, corporate oligopolies, ideological non-governmental organizations (NGO), political cults and mafias. One of its most prolific proponents is the British political thinker David Held. Advocates of democratic globalization argue that economic expansion and development should be the first phase of democratic globalization, which is to be followed by a phase of building global political institutions. Francesco Stipo, Director of the United States Association of the Club of Rome, advocates unifying nations under a world government, suggesting that it \"should reflect the political and economic balances of world nations. A world confederation would not supersede the authority of the State governments but rather complement it, as both the States and the world authority would have power within their sphere of competence\". Former Canadian Senator Douglas Roche, O.C., viewed globalization as inevitable and advocated creating institutions such as a directly elected United Nations Parliamentary Assembly to exercise oversight over unelected international bodies.\nGlobal civics.\nGlobal civics suggests that civics can be understood, in a global sense, as a social contract between global citizens in the age of interdependence and interaction. The disseminators of the concept define it as the notion that we have certain rights and responsibilities towards each other by the mere fact of being human on Earth. World citizen has a variety of similar meanings, often referring to a person who disapproves of traditional geopolitical divisions derived from national citizenship. An early incarnation of this sentiment can be found in Socrates, whom Plutarch quoted as saying: \"I am not an Athenian, or a Greek, but a citizen of the world.\" In an increasingly interdependent world, world citizens need a compass to frame their mindsets and create a shared consciousness and sense of global responsibility in world issues such as environmental problems and nuclear proliferation.\nBaha'i-inspired author Meyjes, while favoring the single world community and emergent global consciousness, warns of globalization as a cloak for an expeditious economic, social, and cultural Anglo-dominance that is insufficiently inclusive to inform the emergence of an optimal world civilization. He proposes a process of \"universalization\" as an alternative.\nCosmopolitanism is the proposal that all human ethnic groups belong to a single community based on a shared morality. A person who adheres to the idea of cosmopolitanism in any of its forms is called a cosmopolitan or cosmopolite. A cosmopolitan community might be based on an inclusive morality, a shared economic relationship, or a political structure that encompasses different nations. The cosmopolitan community is one in which individuals from different places (e.g. nation-states) form relationships based on mutual respect. For instance, Kwame Anthony Appiah suggests the possibility of a cosmopolitan community in which individuals from varying locations (physical, economic, etc.) enter relationships of mutual respect despite their differing beliefs (religious, political, etc.).\nCanadian philosopher Marshall McLuhan popularized the term \"Global Village\" beginning in 1962. His view suggested that globalization would lead to a world where people from all countries will become more integrated and aware of common interests and shared humanity.\nInternational cooperation.\nMilitary cooperation\u00a0\u2013 Past examples of international cooperation exist. One example is the security cooperation between the United States and the former Soviet Union after the end of the Cold War, which astonished international society. Arms control and disarmament agreements, including the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (see START I, START II, START III, and New START) and the establishment of NATO's Partnership for Peace, the Russia NATO Council, and the G8 Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, constitute concrete initiatives of arms control and de-nuclearization. The US\u2013Russian cooperation was further strengthened by anti-terrorism agreements enacted in the wake of 9/11.\nEnvironmental cooperation\u00a0\u2013 One of the biggest successes of environmental cooperation has been the agreement to reduce chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) emissions, as specified in the Montreal Protocol, in order to stop ozone depletion. The most recent debate around nuclear energy and the non-alternative coal-burning power plants constitutes one more consensus on what not to do. Thirdly, significant achievements in IC can be observed through development studies.\nEconomic cooperation\u00a0\u2013 One of the biggest challenges of globalization in contemporary times is that many believe the progress made in the past decades is now being undone. The backsliding of globalization has led to the coinage of the term \"slobalization\". Slobalization is a new, slower pattern of globalization.\nAnti-globalization movement.\nAnti-globalization, or counter-globalization, consists of a number of criticisms of globalization but, in general, is critical of the globalization of corporate capitalism. The movement is also commonly referred to as the alter-globalization movement, anti-globalist movement, anti-corporate globalization movement, or movement against neoliberal globalization. Opponents of globalization argue that power and respect in terms of international trade between the developed and underdeveloped countries of the world are unequally distributed. The diverse subgroups that make up this movement include some of the following: trade unionists, environmentalists, anarchists, land rights and indigenous rights activists, organizations promoting human rights and sustainable development, opponents of privatization, and anti-sweatshop campaigners.\nIn \"The Revolt of the Elites and the Betrayal of Democracy\", Christopher Lasch analyzed the widening gap between the top and bottom of the social composition in the United States. For him, our epoch is determined by a social phenomenon: the revolt of the elites, in reference to \"The Revolt of the Masses\" (1929) by the Spanish philosopher Jos\u00e9 Ortega y Gasset. According to Lasch, the new elites, i.e. those who are in the top 20% in terms of income, through globalization which allows total mobility of capital, no longer live in the same world as their fellow-citizens. In this, they oppose the old bourgeoisie of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, which was constrained by its spatial stability to a minimum of rooting and civic obligations. Globalization, according to the sociologist, has turned elites into tourists in their own countries. The denationalization of business enterprise tends to produce a class who see themselves as \"world citizens, but without accepting ... any of the obligations that citizenship in a polity normally implies\". Their ties to an international culture of work, leisure, information \u2013 make many of them deeply indifferent to the prospect of national decline. Instead of financing public services and the public treasury, new elites are investing their money in improving their voluntary ghettos: private schools in their residential neighborhoods, private police, garbage collection systems. They have \"withdrawn from common life\". Composed of those who control the international flows of capital and information, who preside over philanthropic foundations and institutions of higher education, manage the instruments of cultural production and thus fix the terms of public debate. So, the political debate is limited mainly to the dominant classes and political ideologies lose all contact with the concerns of the ordinary citizen. The result of this is that no one has a likely solution to these problems and that there are furious ideological battles on related issues. However, they remain protected from the problems affecting the working classes: the decline of industrial activity, the resulting loss of employment, the decline of the middle class, increasing the number of the poor, the rising crime rate, growing drug trafficking, the urban crisis.\nD.A. Snow et al. contend that the anti-globalization movement is an example of a new social movement, which uses tactics that are unique and use different resources than previously used before in other social movements.\nOne of the most infamous tactics of the movement is the Battle of Seattle in 1999, where there were protests against the World Trade Organization's Third Ministerial Meeting. All over the world, the movement has held protests outside meetings of institutions such as the WTO, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, the World Economic Forum, and the Group of Eight (G8). Within the Seattle demonstrations the protesters that participated used both creative and violent tactics to gain the attention towards the issue of globalization.\nOpposition to capital market integration.\nCapital markets have to do with raising and investing money in various human enterprises. Increasing integration of these financial markets between countries leads to the emergence of a global capital marketplace or a single world market. In the long run, increased movement of capital between countries tends to favor owners of capital more than any other group; in the short run, owners and workers in specific sectors in capital-exporting countries bear much of the burden of adjusting to increased movement of capital.\nThose opposed to capital market integration on the basis of human rights issues are especially disturbed by the various abuses which they think are perpetuated by global and international institutions that, they say, promote neoliberalism without regard to ethical standards. Common targets include the World Bank (WB), International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the World Trade Organization (WTO) and free trade treaties like the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA), the Multilateral Agreement on Investment (MAI) and the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). In light of the economic gap between rich and poor countries, movement adherents claim free trade without measures in place to protect the under-capitalized will contribute only to the strengthening the power of industrialized nations (often termed the \"North\" in opposition to the developing world's \"South\").\nAnti-corporatism and anti-consumerism.\nCorporatist ideology, which privileges the rights of corporations (artificial or juridical persons) over those of natural persons, is an underlying factor in the recent rapid expansion of global commerce. In recent years, there have been an increasing number of books (Naomi Klein's 2000 \"No Logo\", for example) and films (\"e.g. The Corporation\" &amp; \"Surplus\") popularizing an anti-corporate ideology to the public.\nA related contemporary ideology, consumerism, which encourages the personal acquisition of goods and services, also drives globalization. Anti-consumerism is a social movement against equating personal happiness with consumption and the purchase of material possessions. Concern over the treatment of consumers by large corporations has spawned substantial activism, and the incorporation of consumer education into school curricula. Social activists hold materialism is connected to global retail merchandizing and supplier convergence, war, greed, anomie, crime, environmental degradation, and general social malaise and discontent. One variation on this topic is activism by \"postconsumers\", with the strategic emphasis on moving \"beyond\" addictive consumerism.\nGlobal justice and inequality.\nGlobal justice.\nThe global justice movement is the loose collection of individuals and groups\u2014often referred to as a \"movement of movements\"\u2014who advocate fair trade rules and perceive current institutions of global economic integration as problems. The movement is often labeled an anti-globalization movement by the mainstream media. Those involved, however, frequently deny that they are anti-globalization, insisting that they support the globalization of communication and people and oppose only the global expansion of corporate power. The movement is based in the idea of social justice, desiring the creation of a society or institution based on the principles of equality and solidarity, the values of human rights, and the dignity of every human being. Social inequality within and between nations, including a growing global digital divide, is a focal point of the movement. Many nongovernmental organizations have now arisen to fight these inequalities that many in Latin America, Africa and Asia face. A few very popular and well known non-governmental organizations (NGOs) include: War Child, Red Cross, Free The Children and CARE International. They often create partnerships where they work towards improving the lives of those who live in developing countries by building schools, fixing infrastructure, cleaning water supplies, purchasing equipment and supplies for hospitals, and other aid efforts.\nSocial inequality.\nThe economies of the world have developed unevenly, historically, such that entire geographical regions were left mired in poverty and disease while others began to reduce poverty and disease on a wholesale basis. From around 1980 through at least 2011, the GDP gap, while still wide, appeared to be closing and, in some more rapidly developing countries, life expectancies began to rise. If we look at the Gini coefficient for world income, since the late 1980s, the gap between some regions has markedly narrowed\u2014between Asia and the advanced economies of the West, for example\u2014but huge gaps remain globally. Overall equality across humanity, considered as individuals, has improved very little. Within the decade between 2003 and 2013, income inequality grew even in traditionally egalitarian countries like Germany, Sweden and Denmark. With a few exceptions\u2014France, Japan, Spain\u2014the top 10 percent of earners in most advanced economies raced ahead, while the bottom 10 percent fell further behind. By 2013, 85 multibillionaires had amassed wealth equivalent to all the wealth owned by the poorest half (3.5 billion) of the world's total population of 7 billion.\nCritics of globalization argue that globalization results in weak labor unions: the surplus in cheap labor coupled with an ever-growing number of companies in transition weakened labor unions in high-cost areas. Unions become less effective and workers their enthusiasm for unions when membership begins to decline. They also cite an increase in the exploitation of child labor: countries with weak protections for children are vulnerable to infestation by rogue companies and criminal gangs who exploit them. Examples include quarrying, salvage, and farm work as well as trafficking, bondage, forced labor, prostitution and pornography.\nWomen often participate in the workforce in precarious work, including export-oriented employment. Evidence suggests that while globalization has expanded women's access to employment, the long-term goal of transforming gender inequalities remains unmet and appears unattainable without regulation of capital and a reorientation and expansion of the state's role in funding public goods and providing a social safety net. Furthermore, the intersectionality of gender, race, class, can be overlooked by scholars and commentators when assessing the impact of globalization.\nIn 2016, a study published by the IMF posited that neoliberalism, the ideological backbone of contemporary globalized capitalism, has been \"oversold\", with the benefits of neoliberal policies being \"fairly difficult to establish when looking at a broad group of countries\" and the costs, most significantly higher income inequality within nations, \"hurt the level and sustainability of growth.\"\nAnti-global governance.\nBeginning in the 1930s, opposition arose to the idea of a world government, as advocated by organizations such as the World Federalist Movement (WFM). Those who oppose global governance typically do so on objections that the idea is unfeasible, inevitably oppressive, or simply unnecessary. In general, these opponents are wary of the concentration of power or wealth that such governance might represent. Such reasoning dates back to the founding of the League of Nations and, later, the United Nations.\nEnvironmentalist opposition.\nEnvironmentalism is a broad philosophy, ideology and social movement regarding concerns for environmental conservation and improvement of the health of the environment. Environmentalist concerns with globalization include issues such as global warming, global water supply and water crises, inequity in energy consumption and energy conservation, transnational air pollution and pollution of the world ocean, overpopulation, world habitat sustainability, deforestation, biodiversity loss and species extinction.\nOne critique of globalization is that natural resources of the poor have been systematically taken over by the rich and the pollution promulgated by the rich is systematically dumped on the poor. Some argue that Northern corporations are increasingly exploiting resources of less wealthy countries for their global activities while it is the South that is disproportionately bearing the environmental burden of the globalized economy. Globalization is thus leading to a type of\" environmental apartheid\".\nHelena Norberg-Hodge, the director and founder of Local Futures/International Society for Ecology and Culture, criticizes globalization in many ways. In her book \"Ancient Futures\", Norberg-Hodge claims that \"centuries of ecological balance and social harmony are under threat from the pressures of development and globalization.\" She also criticizes the standardization and rationalization of globalization, as it does not always yield the expected growth outcomes. Although globalization takes similar steps in most countries, scholars such as Hodge claim that it might not be effective to certain countries and that globalization has actually moved some countries backward instead of developing them.\nA related area of concern is the pollution haven hypothesis, which posits that, when large industrialized nations seek to set up factories or offices abroad, they will often look for the cheapest option in terms of resources and labor that offers the land and material access they require (see Race to the bottom). This often comes at the cost of environmentally sound practices. Developing countries with cheap resources and labor tend to have less stringent environmental regulations, and conversely, nations with stricter environmental regulations become more expensive for companies as a result of the costs associated with meeting these standards. Thus, companies that choose to physically invest in foreign countries tend to (re)locate to the countries with the lowest environmental standards or weakest enforcement.\nThe European Union\u2013Mercosur Free Trade Agreement, which would form one of the world's largest free trade areas, has been denounced by environmental activists and indigenous rights campaigners. The fear is that the deal could lead to more deforestation of the Amazon rainforest as it expands market access to Brazilian beef.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46316", "revid": "50838494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46316", "title": "Chowder", "text": "Category of soups\nChowder is a type of thick soup prepared with milk or cream, a roux, and seafood or vegetables. Oyster crackers or saltines may accompany chowders as a side item, and cracker pieces may be dropped atop the dish. \nClam chowder from New England is typically made with chopped clams and diced potatoes, in a mixed cream and milk base, often with a small amount of butter. Other common chowders include seafood chowder, which often consists of fish, clams, and other types of shellfish; lamb or veal chowder made with barley; corn chowder, which uses corn instead of clams; various fish chowders; and potato chowder, which is often made with cheese. Fish, corn, and clam chowders are popular in North America, especially Atlantic Canada and New England.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the term \"chowder\" is obscure. One possible source is the French word \"chaudron\", the French word for cauldron, the type of cooking or heating stove on which the first chowders were probably cooked. \"Chodier\" was also a name for a cooking pot in the Creole language of the French Caribbean islands. Additionally, a Portuguese, Brazilian, Galician and Basque fish and shellfish stew is known as \"caldeirada\" which appears to have a similar etymology. \nAnother possible source of the word \"chowder\" could be the French dish called \"chaudr\u00e9e\" (sometimes spelled \"chauder\u00e9e\"), which is a thick fish soup from the coastal regions of Charente-Maritime and Vend\u00e9e. Yet another etymology could be the Quebecois French word \"chaudi\u00e8re\", which means \"bucket\".\nIn the sixteenth century in Cornwall and Devon the dialectal word \"jowter\" was used to describe hawkers, particularly fishmongers, which later turned into \"chowder\" and \"chowter\". However, this is not cited by the Oxford English Dictionary as a possible source due to controversy regarding the origins of the dish itself. The earliest citation the \"OED\" gives for the word used in its current sense of a fish-based stew is American.\nHistory.\nChowder as it is known today originated as a shipboard dish, and was thickened with the use of hardtack. Chowder was brought to North America with immigrants from England and France and seafarers more than 250 years ago. It became popular for its flavour, and is now used widely for its simple preparation.\nAn early description of chowder is found in the journal kept by the young botanist Joseph Banks, who visited English and French Labrador fisheries in 1766. Banks gives an account of chowder, which he described as \"Peculiar to this Country\", and its preparation. Even though it was unfamiliar, he stated that \"when well made a Luxury that the rich Even in England at Least in my opinion might be fond of It is a Soup made with a small Quantity of salt Pork cut into Small Slices a good deal of fish and Biscuit Boyled for about an hour\".\nChowder was not utterly unfamiliar in England at the time, as in \"Sir Launcelot Greaves\" (1762) Tobias Smollett has one character state, \"My head sings and simmers like a pot of chowder\". A Manx sailor in his memoirs recalls a meal made aboard a British ship on a voyage through the Caribbean in 1786: \"...we frequently served up a mess called \"chowder\", consisting of a mixture of fresh fish, salt pork, pounded biscuit and onions; and which, when well seasoned and stewed, we found to be an excellent palatable dish.\" Cookbooks of the period included recipes for \"Chowder, a Sea Dish\" which might be thicker than a soup: in 1830 an English baked dish made with salmon and potato was called a chowder.\nIn 1890, in the magazine \"American Notes and Queries\", it was said that the dish was of French origin. Among French settlers in Canada, it was a custom to stew clams and fish laid in courses with bacon, sea biscuits, and other ingredients in a bucket called a \"chaudi\u00e8re\". The Native Americans adopted it as \"chawder\", and the name (and the dish) eventually became \"chowder\" in the United States. After the Revolutionary war, the fourth of July was celebrated with picnics, fireworks, dances and dinners. The foods served varied according to the customs of each region. Chowder was one of the dishes commonly served for the celebrations in the northern United States.\nIn the United States, early chowder making is traced to New England. It was a bowl of simmering chowder by the seaside that provided in its basic form \"sustenance of body and mind\u00a0\u2013 a marker of hearth and home, community, family and culture\". It evolved along the coastal shoreline of New England as a \"congerie\" of simple things, very basic and cooked simply. It is a simple dish of salt and pepper, potatoes and onion, pork and fish, cream and hard crackers, and not a sophisticated dish of the elite. Its simplicity made it attractive and it became a regional dish of the New Englanders, and their favourite recipe was \"chowder master\". \"Symbolically, functionally, mnemonically or dynamically\" chowder has become a community-defining symbol for New Englanders. Etta M. Madden and Martha L. Finch observe that chowder provides \"visceral memories that provided feelings of familiarity, comfort and continuity\".\nA recipe formulated and published in 1894 by Charles Ranhofer, a famous chef of Delmonico's restaurant, was called \"Chowder de Lucines\" and had ingredients of pork, clams, potato (sliced to a seven sixteenths-inch size), onion, parsley, tomato, crackers garnished by thyme, salt and pepper. Others in the same family, totally different from the New England clam chowder, are: \"Fulton Market style\", introduced in 1904 and made from clams, tomatoes, allspice, cloves, red pepper, and Worcester sauce; a \"Vegetable Clam Chowder\" introduced in 1929 and made of clams, chopped onions, diced carrots, stewed tomatoes, and thyme; \"Coney Island Clam Chowder\"; \"New York Clam Chowder\"; and \"Manhattan Clam Chowder\", a late entry after 1930.\nIn most cases, particularly in the Maritime Provinces, Canadian chowder is thinner and more seafood-forward than its creamier American counterparts.\nTypes.\nChowder is a soup with cream or milk mixed with ingredients such as potatoes, sweet corn, smoked haddock, clams and prawns, etc. Some cream-style chowders do not use cream, and are instead prepared using milk and a roux to thicken them. Some of the popular variations are clam chowder and potatoes; seafood chowder; spiced haddock chowder; Irish fish chowder with soda bread; crayfish chowder; clam chowder with cod; British seaside chowder with saffron; thick smoked-haddock chowder; Raymond Blanc's light shellfish chowder; New England\u2013style clam chowder traditionally served with oyster crackers; smoked haddock chowder with leeks and sweetcorn; clam, broad bean and salami chowder; and many more. Chowder can be a comfort food, especially during the winter months.\nBermuda fish.\nConsidered a national dish of Bermuda, the primary ingredients in Bermuda fish chowder include fish, tomato, and onion that is seasoned with black rum and a sherry pepper sauce. The dish is of British origin, and was brought to the New World by the colonists.\nClam.\nClam chowder is prepared with clams, diced potato, onion, and sometimes celery. It may be prepared as a cream-style or broth-style soup. Several variations of clam chowder exist, including New England clam chowder, which is a cream-style soup; Manhattan clam chowder, a broth-style soup prepared using tomato, vegetables and clams; Rhode Island clam chowder is a broth-style soup without dairy, and alternatively also includes stewed tomatoes which is known as red chowder; New Jersey clam chowder; Delaware clam chowder; Hatteras clam chowder; and Minorcan clam chowder. In Connecticut clam chowder, milk is used instead of cream. New England clam chowder is made in a diverse variety of styles.\nClam chowder may be prepared with fresh, steamed or canned clams. The \"clam liquor\" from steamed or canned clams may be retained for use in the soup, and fresh or bottled clam juice may be used. January 21 is National New England Clam Chowder Day in the United States.\nIn the late 1800s clam chowder was introduced in New Zealand as an \"American\" dish and has become integral to New Zealand cuisine. A variant of New Zealand clam chowder is \"pipi chowder\", also known as \"pipi soup\" made with New Zealand surf clams. \"Pipi\" comes from the indigenous Maori name for the shellfish. Although there are variations in ingredients, all New Zealand seafood chowders are made in the style of New England chowders, always with milk and/or cream.\nCorn.\nCorn chowder is similar in consistency to New England clam chowder, with corn being used instead of clams. Additional vegetables that may be used in its preparation include potatoes, celery and onion. Some are prepared using meats, such as chicken or bacon. Corn chowder may be prepared with fresh, frozen, or canned corn.\nFish.\nFish chowder is prepared with fish such as salmon or cod, and is similar to clam chowder in ingredients and texture. Ingredients used in fish chowder may include potato, onion, celery, carrot, corn and bacon.\nSmoked salmon.\nA popular dish in Pacific Northwest cuisine, smoked salmon chowder gets its red color from tomato paste and is prepared with celery, garlic, leeks, chives, potatoes and Alaskan smoked salmon. The best known smoked salmon chowders are made at Pike Place Market and by Ivar's Salmon House, both in Seattle, Washington.\nSouthern Illinois.\nSouthern Illinois chowder, also referred to as \"downtown chowder\", is a thick stew or soup that is very different from the New England and Manhattan chowders. The main ingredients are beef, chicken, tomatoes, cabbage, lima beans, and green beans. Traditionally, squirrel meat was a common addition. Southern Illinois chowder is a hearty dish that has been described as being closer in style to burgoo and Brunswick stew than coastal chowders.\nSeafood.\nSeafood chowder is prepared with various types of seafood as a primary ingredient, and may be prepared as a broth- or cream-style chowder. It is a popular menu item in New Zealand using ready-prepared mixed seafood, called \"seafood marinara\", \"marinara mix\", or simply \"marinara\". These terms to describe mixed seafood are unique to New Zealand, Australia, and South Africa and not to be confused with the meaning of \"marinara\" as in marinara sauce.\nSpiced haddock.\nSpiced haddock chowder is made with haddock fillets, carrot, potato, plain flour, bay leaves, peppercorns, mustard, and spices added to milk and cooked in a pot with butter.\nOther types.\nThe White Castle restaurant serves a potato-and-bacon chowder.\nUse of preserved clams.\nIn North America, as people moved west, some homemade preparations of traditional chowder used canned or bottled clams when fresh clams were not available. In some places the ingredients were modified based upon other locally available foods such as salmon, corn and chicken.\nCommercial varieties.\nMass-produced, canned varieties of chowder are manufactured and purveyed to consumers, such as Campbell's and Progresso New England Clam Chowder, among other brands.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46318", "revid": "50065202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46318", "title": "Portable soup", "text": "18th/19th century dehydrated food\nPortable soup was a form of dehydrated food of English origin used in the 18th and 19th centuries. It was a precursor of meat extract and bouillon cubes, and of industrially dehydrated and instant food. It is also known as pocket soup or veal glue. It is essentially a partially dehydrated broth and a solid counterpart of the \"glace de viande\" (meat glaze) used in French cuisine. It was long a staple of British seamen, military and explorers, as it would keep for many months or even a year. In this context, it was considered a filling and nutritious dish.\nProcess.\nPortable soup was made from a slow-cooked beef or veal broth (often 6 to 8 hours), reduced, degreased to remove the fat (which may spoil and become rancid over time) and then reduced repeatedly until it solidified into a jelly. Once it was sufficiently gelatinous to hold its form, it was placed on pieces of flannel or unglazed earthenware dishes and rotated regularly to dry it further. Historically, this was a seasonal process attempted only in the winter when humidity was low. Once dry, it was wrapped in paper and stored in boxes.\nHistory.\nHugh Plat.\nIn the late sixteenth century, Sir Hugh Plat wrote, in his unpublished notes, of portable soup as a potential military rations for the army and navy, describing it as meat broth boiled down to a thick and dry paste which he called \"gelly\". Plat's basic recipe was to boil the feet or legs of beef cattle for a long time to make \"a good broath\" which was then strained and boiled down to \"a strong &amp; stiff gelly\". This in turn was dried on clean cloths in a windy place out of the sun, cut with wire into pieces, powdered with flour to stop the pieces from sticking, and stored in wooden boxes.\nMade in March, it would \"keepe all the yeere\" (keep all year). Alternatively, the dry jelly could be \"stamped\" into shape with a wooden die, like the \"Genoa Paste\" of quinces familiar to Plat and other cooks of the time. He instructed that no sugar or salt should be added to the jelly because such taste would be concentrated by the boiling process, although he speculated that saffron might add colour, and that rosewater could also be added at this stage. He wondered whether baked flour or grated bread could be incorporated to make the jelly \"serve as bread and meate the better\", and whether the addition of isinglass would make it stiffer. The jelly was variously described by Plat as a \"Victual for Warr\", \"dry gelly carried to the sea\", and a food for soldiers on the march. Plat envisaged using this jelly either as the base for soup, or \"neat\" as a concentrated food. Reconstitution as soup simply involved dissolving a piece of the jelly in hot water to make \"good broath\", and, because jelly and water alone would be rather bland, adding such flavourings as were available or to taste \u2013 sugar, salt, liquorice, aniseed, or other \"convenient spice\".\nPlat emphasised the utility of the jelly as field rations, for \"a soldier may satisfie his hunger herwith, whilst hee is in his march\". He recommended that a leg of beef or veal be boiled with every 6 or 8 neats' (cows') feet to produce a jelly which would more easily dissolve in the mouth.\nThe existence of portable soups (called \"bouillons en tablettes\" in French) is also mentioned, in 1690, in Antoine Fureti\u00e8re's \"Dictionnaire universel\", under the article \"Tablette\": \"\". (\"We have seen consomm\u00e9s reduced into tablets, or broth to carry in your pocket\".)\nMrs Dubois.\nAs a mass-produced product, portable soup is generally held to have been invented by Mrs Dubois, a London tavern keeper who, with William Cookworthy, won a contract to manufacture it for the Royal Navy in 1756. Mrs Dubois was described as \"a person of good character and circumstances\". She operated from a tavern, at the Golden Head, in Three Kings Court in Fleet Street. She may have been the widow of a French chef and tavern keeper; but, by 1757, she had a new husband, Edward Bennet, son of a Sheffield knife-grinder. The contract with the navy was alluded to in advertising material long after it had lapsed; Benjamin Piper, successor in the business, announced he was \"Successor to Messieurs Bennet and Dubois, The original Portable Soup-Makers to His Majesty\u2019s Royal Navy\" while one Vigor, successor to Piper, used the same rubric on his flyers. The naval authorities hoped that portable soup would prevent scurvy among their crews. They therefore allotted a daily ration to each sailor beginning in the 1750s. Captain Cook was convinced of its efficacy and carried it on both his South Seas voyages.\nNaval usage.\nCaptain Charles Douglas, HMS Emerald wrote to the Admiralty from Sheerness 5 April 1769 requesting an additional quantity of Portable soup conducive to the welfare of the people for his voyage to Lapland [to observe the Transit of Venus, only it was cloudy].\nExpeditions.\nLewis and Clark carried portable soup on their 1804\u20131806 expedition into the territory of the newly acquired Louisiana Purchase. According to his letter from Fredericktown, Ohio, on 15 April 1803, Lewis purchased the soup from Francois Baillet, a cook in Philadelphia. He paid $289.50 for the 193 pounds of portable soup stored in \"32 canisters\". Lewis carried it with him overland to the embarkation point on the Ohio River.\nDecline.\nBy 1815, with the publication of physician Gilbert Blane's \"On the Comparative Health of the British Navy from 1779 to 1814\", the efficacy of portable soup for promoting the health of sailors was found lacking. Opinion shifted in favour of canned meats, a process invented in France in 1806, and the proliferation of meat extract, invented by Justus von Liebig. \nA similar product, portable gelatin, was developed by American inventor Peter Cooper in 1845, as a staple meal or dessert for families.\nNevertheless, as late as 1881 portable soup was still being described by the \"Household Cyclopedia\" as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;exceedingly convenient for private families, for by putting one of the cakes in a saucepan with about a quart of water, and a little salt, a basin of good broth may be made in a few minutes."}
{"id": "46319", "revid": "48071828", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46319", "title": "Asparagus", "text": "Species of flowering plant in the family Asparagaceae\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAsparagus (Asparagus officinalis) or garden asparagus is a perennial flowering plant species in the genus \"Asparagus\" native to Eurasia. Widely cultivated as a vegetable crop, its young shoots are used as a spring vegetable.\nDescription.\nAsparagus is an herbaceous, perennial plant growing typically to tall, with stout stems with much-branched, feathery foliage. It has been known to grow as long as . The 'leaves' are needle-like cladodes (modified stems) in the axils of scale leaves; they are long and broad, and clustered in fours, up to 15, together, in a rose-like shape. The root system, often referred to as a 'crown', is adventitious; the root type is fasciculated.\nThe flowers are bell-shaped, greenish-white to yellowish, long, with six tepals partially fused together at the base; they are produced singly or in clusters of two or three in the junctions of the branchlets. It is usually dioecious, with male and female flowers on separate plants, but sometimes hermaphrodite flowers are found. The fruit is a small red berry in diameter, which is toxic to humans.\nAsparagus grown natively to the western coasts of Europe (from northern Spain to northwest Germany, north Ireland, and Great Britain) are treated as \"A. officinalis\" subsp. \"prostratus\" (Dumort.) Corb., distinguished by its low-growing, often prostrate stems growing to only high, and shorter cladodes long. Some authors treat it as a distinct species, \"A. prostratus\" Dumort.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"asparagus\" derives from classical Latin but the plant was once known in English as \"sperage\", from the Medieval Latin \"sparagus\". This term itself derives from the - \"asp\u00e1ragos\", a variant of - \"asph\u00e1ragos\". The Greek terms are of uncertain provenance; the former form admits the possibility of a Proto-Indo-European root meaning \"to jerk, scatter,\" directly or via a Persian descendant meaning \"twig, branch\"; but the Ancient Greek word itself, meaning \"gully, chasm,\" seems to be of Pre-Greek origin instead.\nAsparagus was corrupted by folk etymology in some places to \"sparrow grass\"; indeed, John Walker wrote in 1791 that \"\"Sparrowgrass\" is so general that \"asparagus\" has an air of stiffness and pedantry\".\nThe name 'sparrow grass' was still in common use in rural East Anglia, England well into the twentieth century.\nTaxonomy.\nAsparagus was once classified in the lily family, as were the related \"Allium\" species onions and garlic. Genetic research currently places lilies, \"Allium\", and asparagus in three separate families: the Liliaceae, Amaryllidaceae, and Asparagaceae, respectively. The latter two are part of the order Asparagales.\nAsparagus populations grown natively to the western coasts of Europe are treated as the subspecies group of \"prostratus\" (Dumort.) Corb..\nDistribution and habitat.\nSources differ as to the plant's native range, but generally include most of Europe and western temperate Asia. \nCultivation.\nSince asparagus often originates in maritime habitats, it thrives in soils that are too saline for normal weeds to grow. Thus, a little salt was traditionally used to suppress weeds in beds intended for asparagus; this has the disadvantage that the soil cannot be used for anything else. Some regions and gardening zones are better-suited for growing asparagus than others, such as the west coast of North America and other more maritime, \"Mediterranean\" environments. The fertility of the soil is a large factor. \"Crowns\" are planted in winter, and the first shoots appear in spring; the first pickings or \"thinnings\" are known as sprue asparagus. Sprue has thin stems.\nA breed of \"early-season asparagus\" that can be harvested two months earlier than usual was announced by a UK grower in early 2011. This variety does not need to lie dormant and blooms at , rather than the usual .\nPurple asparagus differs from its green and white counterparts in having high sugar and low fibre levels. Purple asparagus was originally developed in Italy, near the city of Albenga and commercialized under the variety name 'Violetto d' Albenga'. Purple asparagus can also turn green while being cooked due to its sensitivity to heat.\nCompanion planting.\nAsparagus is said to be a useful companion plant for tomatoes, as the tomato plant repels the asparagus beetle. Asparagus may repel some harmful root nematodes that affect tomato plants.\nProduction.\nIn 2023, world production of asparagus was 8.6 million tonnes, with China accounting for 87% of the total (table). \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nUses.\nThe genome of the species has been sequenced as a model to study the evolution of sex chromosomes in plants and dioecy.\nNutrition.\nRaw asparagus is 93% water, 4% carbohydrates, 2% protein, and contains negligible fat (table). In a reference amount of , raw asparagus supplies 20 calories, and is a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value) of vitamin K (35% DV), and a moderate source (11\u201313% DV) of iron, and the B vitamins, thiamine, riboflavin, and folate, with no other micronutrients in significant content (table).\nCulinary.\nOnly young asparagus shoots (\"spears\") are commonly eaten: once the buds start to open (\"ferning out\"), the shoots quickly turn woody. The shape of edible spears can vary according to variety; typical shapes are long thin spears from 8mm to 24mm diameter, no longer than 22cm. The roots contain starch.\nThe shoots are prepared and served in a number of ways around the world, typically as an appetizer or vegetable side dish. In Asian-style cooking, asparagus is often stir-fried. Cantonese restaurants in the United States often serve asparagus stir-fried with chicken, shrimp, or beef. It may also be quickly grilled over charcoal or hardwood embers, and is also used as an ingredient in some stews and soups. \nAsparagus can also be pickled and stored for several years. Some brands label shoots prepared in this way as \"marinated\".\nStem thickness indicates the age of the plant (and not the age of the stalk), with the thicker stems coming from older plants. Older, thicker stalks can be woody, although peeling the skin at the base removes the tough layer. Peeled asparagus will poach much faster. The bottom portion of asparagus often contains sand and soil, so thorough cleaning is generally advised before cooking. \nMale plants tend to produce spears that are smaller and thinner, while female plants tend produce larger and thicker spears. The thickness of stalks is not an indication of their tenderness; they are thick or thin from the moment they sprout from the ground.\nGreen asparagus is eaten worldwide, and the availability of imports throughout the year has made it less of a delicacy than it once was. In Europe, according to one source, the \"asparagus season is a highlight of the foodie calendar\"; in the UK this traditionally begins on 23 April and ends on Midsummer Day. In Europe the short growing season and high demand leads to a relatively high price for local produce, although asparagus is also imported.\nOnly seasonally on the menu, asparagus dishes are advertised outside many restaurants, usually from late April to June. For the French style, asparagus is often boiled or steamed and served with Hollandaise sauce, white sauce, melted butter or most recently with olive oil and Parmesan cheese. Tall, narrow asparagus cooking pots allow the shoots to be steamed gently, their tips staying out of the water.\nIn western Himalayan regions, such as Nepal and north-western India, Ornithogalum pyrenaicum, known as \"wild asparagus,\" is harvested as a seasonal vegetable delicacy known as \"kurilo\" or \"jhijhirkani\".\nWhite asparagus.\nWhite asparagus is produced by applying a blanching technique while the asparagus shoots are growing: the shoots are covered with soil as they grow, i.e. earthed up; without exposure to sunlight, there is no photosynthesis and the shoots remain white. The locally cultivated so-called \"white gold\" or \"edible ivory\" asparagus, also referred to as \"the royal vegetable\", is believed to be less bitter and more tender than unblanched green. Freshness is valued, and the lower ends of white asparagus must be peeled.\nDuring the German \"Spargelsaison\" or \"Spargelzeit\" (\"asparagus season\" or \"asparagus time\"), the asparagus season that traditionally finishes on 24 June, roadside stands and open-air markets sell about half of the country's white asparagus consumption.\nIn culture.\nAsparagus has been used as a vegetable owing to its distinct flavor, and in medicine due to its diuretic properties and its purported function as an aphrodisiac. It is pictured as an offering on an Egyptian frieze dating to 3000 BC. In ancient times, it was also known in Syria and in the Iberian Peninsula. Greeks and Romans ate it fresh when in season, and dried the vegetable for use in winter. Emperor Augustus coined the expression \"faster than cooking asparagus\" for quick action.\nA recipe for cooking asparagus is given in one of the oldest surviving collections of recipes (Apicius's 1st century AD \"De re coquinaria\", Book III). In the second century AD, the Greek physician Galen, highly respected within Roman society, mentioned asparagus as a beneficial herb, but as dominance of the Roman empire waned, asparagus' medicinal value drew little attention\nuntil 's \"The Perfumed Garden\".\nBy 1469, asparagus was cultivated in French monasteries. Asparagus appears to have been little noticed in England until 1538, and in Germany until 1542.\nAsparagus was brought to North America by European settlers at least as early as 1655. Adriaen van der Donck, a Dutch immigrant to New Netherland, mentions asparagus in his description of Dutch farming practices in the New World. Asparagus was grown by British immigrants as well; in 1685, one of William Penn's advertisements for Pennsylvania included asparagus in a long list of crops that grew well in the American climate.\nThe \"points d'amour\" (\"love tips\") were served as a delicacy to Madame de Pompadour (1721\u20131764).\nEffects on urine.\nThe effect of eating asparagus on urine excreted afterwards has long been observed:\n[Asparagus] cause a powerful and disagreeable smell in the urine, as everybody knows.\n\u2014 \"Treatise of All Sorts of Foods\", Louis L\u00e9mery, 1702\nasparagus... affects the urine with a foetid smell (especially if cut when they are white) and therefore have been suspected by some physicians as not friendly to the kidneys; when they are older, and begin to ramify, they lose this quality; but then they are not so agreeable.\n\u2014 \"An Essay Concerning the Nature of Aliments\", John Arbuthnot, 1735\nA few Stems of Asparagus eaten, shall give our Urine a disagreeable Odour...\n\u2014 \"Letter to the Royal Academy of Brussels\", Benjamin Franklin, c. 1781\nAsparagus \"...transforms my chamber-pot into a flask of perfume.\"\n\u2014 Marcel Proust (1871\u20131922)\nAsparagus contains asparagusic acid. When the vegetable is digested, a group of volatile sulfur-containing compounds is produced.\nCertain compounds in asparagus are metabolized to yield ammonia and various sulfur-containing degradation products, including various thiols and thioesters, which following consumption give urine a characteristic smell. Some of the volatile organic compounds responsible for the smell are:\nSubjectively, the first two are the most pungent, while the last two (sulfur-oxidized) give a sweet aroma. A mixture of these compounds form a \"reconstituted asparagus urine\" odor. This was first investigated in 1891 by Marceli Nencki, who attributed the smell to methanethiol. These compounds originate in the asparagus as asparagusic acid and its derivatives, as these are the only sulfur-containing compounds unique to asparagus. As these are more present in young asparagus, this accords with the observation that the smell is more pronounced after eating young asparagus. The biological mechanism for the production of these compounds is less clear.\nThe onset of the asparagus urine smell is remarkably rapid while the decline is slower. The smell has been reported to be detectable 15 to 30 minutes after ingestion and subsides with a half-life of approximately four hours.\nAsparagus has been eaten and cultivated for at least two millennia but the association between odorous urine and asparagus consumption was not observed until the late 17th century when sulfur-rich fertilisers became common in agriculture. Small-scale studies noted that the \"asparagus urine\" odour was not produced by all individuals and estimates as to the proportion of the population who are excretors (reporting a noticeable asparagus urine odour after eating asparagus) has ranged from about 40% to as high as 79%. When excretors are exposed to urine of people who do not report odour in their urine after asparagus consumption, however, the characteristic asparagus urine odour is usually reported. More recent work has found that a small proportion of individuals do not produce asparagus urine, and amongst those who do, some cannot detect the odour due to a single-nucleotide polymorphism within a cluster of olfactory receptors.\nDebate exists about the universality of producing the sulfurous smell, as well as the ability to detect it. Originally, this was thought to be because some people digested asparagus differently from others, so some excreted odorous urine after eating asparagus, and others did not. In the 1980s, three studies from France, China, and Israel published results showing that producing odorous urine from asparagus was a common human characteristic. The Israeli study found that from their 307 subjects, all of those who could smell \"asparagus urine\" could detect it in the urine of anyone who had eaten asparagus, even if the person who produced it could not detect it. A 2010 study found variations in both production of odorous urine and the ability to detect the odor, but that these were not tightly related. Most people are thought to produce the odorous compounds after eating asparagus, but the differing abilities of various individuals to detect the odor at increasing dilutions suggests a genetically determined specific sensitivity.\nIn 2010, the company 23andMe published a genome-wide association study on whether participants have \"ever noticed a peculiar odor when [they] pee after eating asparagus\". This study pinpointed a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in a cluster of olfactory genes associated with the ability to detect the odor. While this SNP did not explain all of the difference in detection between people, it provides support for the theory that genetic differences occur in olfactory receptors that lead people to be unable to smell these odorous compounds.\nCelebrations.\nThe green crop is significant enough in California's Sacramento\u2013San Joaquin River Delta region that the city of Stockton holds a festival every year to celebrate it. Oceana County, Michigan, the self-proclaimed \"asparagus capital of the world\", hosts an annual festival. The Vale of Evesham in Worcestershire (another \"asparagus capital\") celebrates the annual British Asparagus Festival, with auctions of the best crop, an \"Asparagus Run\" modelled on the Beaujolais Run, and a weekend \"Asparafest\" music festival.\nMany German cities hold an annual \"Spargelfest\" (asparagus festival) celebrating the harvest of white asparagus. Schwetzingen claims to be the \"Asparagus Capital of the World\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46330", "revid": "5042921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46330", "title": "Herring soup", "text": "Herring soup is a fish soup consisting of a thick mix of water, barley-meal and red herring.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46331", "revid": "8299315", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46331", "title": "Flatfish", "text": "Order of fishes\nFlatfish are a group of ray-finned fish belonging to the suborder Pleuronectoidei and historically the order Pleuronectiformes (though this is now disputed). Their collective common name is due to their habit of lying on one side of their laterally-compressed body (flattened side-to-side) upon the seafloor; in this position, both eyes lie on the side of the head facing upwards, while the other side of the head and body (the \"blind side\") lies on the substrate. This loss of symmetry, a unique adaptation in vertebrates, stems from one eye \"migrating\" towards the other during the juvenile's metamorphosis; due to variation, some species tend to face their left side upward, some their right side, and others face either side upward. Pleuronectidae lie on their left side, with eyes on the right. Paralichthyidae lie on their right side, with eyes on the left.\nThey are one of the most speciose groups of demersal fish. Their cryptic coloration and habits, a form of camouflage, conceals them from potential predators.\nCommon names.\nThere are a multitude of common names for flatfish, as they are a widespread group of fish and important food fish across the world. The following are common flatfish names in English:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs these are merely common names, they do not conform with the \"natural\" relationships that are recovered through scientific studies of morphology or genetics. As examples, the three species consistently called \"halibut\" are themselves part of the right-eye flounder family, while the spiny turbots are not at all closely related to \"true\" turbot, but are consistently recovered in a \"primitive\" or basal position at the base of flatfish phylogenetic trees.\nDistribution.\nFlatfishes are found in oceans worldwide, ranging from the Arctic, through the tropics, to Antarctica. Species diversity is centered in the Indo-West Pacific and declines following both latitudinal and longitudinal gradients away from this centre of diversity. Most species are found in depths between 0 and , but a few have been recorded from depths in excess of . None have been confirmed from the abyssal or hadal zones of the deep sea; a reported observation of a flatfish from the Bathyscaphe Trieste's dive into the Mariana Trench (at a depth of almost ) has been questioned by ichthyologists, and recent authorities do not recognize it as valid. Among the deepwater species is \"Symphurus thermophilus\", a tonguefish which congregates around \"ponds\" of sulphur at hydrothermal vents on the seafloor; no other flatfish is known from hydrothermal vent ecosystems.\nConversely, many species will enter brackish or fresh water, and a smaller number of soles (families Achiridae and Soleidae) and tonguefish (Cynoglossidae) are entirely restricted to fresh water.\nDescription.\nThe most obvious characteristic of the flatfish is their asymmetry, with both eyes lying on the same side of the head in the adult fish. In some families, the eyes are usually on the right side of the body (dextral or right-eyed flatfish), and in others, they are usually on the left (sinistral or left-eyed flatfish). The primitive spiny turbots include equal numbers of right- and left-sided individuals, and are generally less asymmetrical than the other families. Other distinguishing features of the order are the presence of protrusible eyes, another adaptation to living on the seabed (benthos), and the extension of the dorsal fin onto the head.\nThe surface of the fish facing away from the sea floor is pigmented, often serving to camouflage the fish, but at times displaying striking patterns. Some flatfishes are also able to change their pigmentation to match the background using their chromatophores, in a manner similar to some cephalopods. The side of the body without the eyes, facing the seabed, is usually colourless or very pale.\nIn general, flatfishes rely on their camouflage for avoiding predators, but some have aposematic traits such as conspicuous eyespots (e.g., \"Microchirus ocellatus\") and several small tropical species (at least \"Aseraggodes\", \"Pardachirus\" and \"Zebrias\") are poisonous. Juveniles of \"Soleichthys maculosus\" mimic toxic flatworms of the genus \"Pseudobiceros\" in both colours and swimming pattern. Conversely, a few octopus species have been reported to mimic flatfishes in colours, shape and swimming mode.\nFlatfishes range in size from the sand flounder \"Tarphops oligolepis\", measuring about in length, and weighing , to the \"Hippoglossus\" halibuts, with the Atlantic halibut measuring up to long, and the Pacific halibut weighing up to .\nMany species such as flounders and spiny turbots eat smaller fish, and have well-developed teeth. These species sometimes hunt in the midwater, away from the bottom, and show fewer \"extreme\" adaptations than other families. The soles, by contrast, are almost exclusively bottom-dwellers (more strictly demersal), and feed on benthic invertebrates. They show a more extreme asymmetry, and may lack teeth on one side of the jaw.\nDevelopment.\nFlatfishes lay eggs that hatch into larvae resembling typical, symmetrical, fish. These are initially elongated, but quickly develop into a more rounded form. The larvae typically have protective spines on the head, over the gills, and in the pelvic and pectoral fins. They also possess a swim bladder, and do not dwell on the bottom, instead dispersing from their hatching grounds as ichthyoplankton. Bilaterally symmetric fish such as goldfish maintain balance using a system within their inner ears which involves the otolith, but larval and metamorphizing flatfish require visible light (such as sunlight) to properly orient themselves.\nThe length of the planktonic stage varies between different types of flatfishes, but through the influence of thyroid hormones, they eventually begin to metamorphose into the adult form. One of the eyes migrates across the top of the head and onto the other side of the body, leaving the fish blind on one side. The larva also loses its swim bladder and spines, and sinks to the bottom, laying its blind side on the underlying surface.\nHybrids.\nHybrids are well known in flatfishes. The Pleuronectidae have the largest number of reported hybrids of marine fishes. Two of the most famous intergeneric hybrids are between the European plaice (\"Pleuronectes platessa\") and European flounder (\"Platichthys flesus\") in the Baltic Sea, and between the English sole (\"Parophrys vetulus\") and starry flounder (\"Platichthys stellatus\") in Puget Sound. The offspring of the latter species pair is popularly known as the hybrid sole and was initially believed to be a valid species in its own right.\nEvolution.\nFlatfishes have been cited as dramatic examples of evolutionary adaptation. In \"The Blind Watchmaker\", Richard Dawkins explains the flatfishes' evolutionary history as such:\n...bony fish as a rule have a marked tendency to be flattened in a vertical direction... It was natural, therefore, that when the ancestors of [flatfish] took to the sea bottom, they should have lain on one \"side\"... But this raised the problem that one eye was always looking down into the sand and was effectively useless. In evolution this problem was solved by the lower eye 'moving' round to the upper side.\nScientists have been proposing since the 1910s that flatfishes evolved from more \"typical\" percoid ancestors. The fossil record indicated that flatfishes might have been present before the Eocene, based on fossil otoliths resembling those of modern pleuronectiforms dating back to the Thanetian and Ypresian stages (57-53 million years ago). Despite this, the origin of the unusual morphology of flatfishes was enigmatic up to the 2000s, with earlier researchers having suggested that it came about as a result of saltation rather than gradual evolution through natural selection, because a partially migrated eye was considered to have been maladaptive. \nThis started to change in 2008 with a study on the two fossil fish genera; \"Amphistium\" and \"Heteronectes\", which dated to about 50 million years ago. These genera retain primitive features not seen in modern types of flatfishes, such as their heads being less asymmetric than modern flatfishes, retaining one eye on each side of their heads, although the eye on one side is closer to the top of the head than on the other. The more recently described fossil genera \"Quasinectes\" and \"Anorevus\" have been proposed to show similar morphologies and have also been classified as \"stem-pleuronectiforms\". Such findings lead palaeontologist Matt Friedman to conclude that the evolution of flatfish morphology \"happened gradually, in a way consistent with evolution via natural selection\u2014not suddenly [saltationally] as researchers once had little choice but to believe.\"\nTo explain the survival advantage of a partially migrated eye, it has been proposed that primitive flatfishes like \"Amphistium\" rested with the head propped up above the seafloor (a behaviour sometimes observed in modern flatfishes), enabling them to use their partially migrated eye to see things closer to the seafloor. While known basal genera like \"Amphistium\" and \"Heteronectes\" support a gradual acquisition of the flatfish morphology, they were probably not direct ancestors to living pleuronectiforms, as fossil evidence indicate that most flatfish lineages living today were present in the Eocene and contemporaneous with them. It has been suggested that the more primitive forms were eventually outcompeted.\nTaxonomy.\nDue to their highly distinctive morphology, flatfishes were previously treated as belonging to their own order, Pleuronectiformes. However, more recent taxonomic studies have found them to group within a diverse group of nektonic marine fishes known as the Carangiformes, which also includes jacks and billfish. Specifically, flatfish have been recovered to be closely related to various groups, such as the threadfins (often recovered as a sister group to flatfish), archerfish, and beachsalmons. Due to this, they are now treated as a suborder of the Carangiformes, as represented in Eschmeyer's Catalog of Fishes.\nClassification.\nThe following classification is based on \"Eschmeyer's Catalog of Fishes\" (2025):\nFossil taxa.\nThe following basal fossil flatfish from the Paleogene are also known:\nPhylogeny.\nThere has been some disagreement whether flatfish as a whole are a monophyletic group. Some palaeontologists think that some percomorph groups unrelated to flatfishes were also \"experimenting\" with head asymmetry during the Eocene, and certain molecular studies conclude that the primitive family of Psettodidae evolved their flat bodies and asymmetrical head independently of other flatfish groups. The following phylogeny is from L\u00fc \"et al.\" 2021; a whole-genome analysis using concatenated sequences of coding sequence (CDS) (codon1\u2009+\u20092\u2009+\u20093, GTRGAMMA model; codon1\u2009+\u20092, GTRGAMMA model) and 4dTV (fourfold degenerate synonymous site, GTRGAMMA model) derived from 1,693 single-copy genes. Notably, Pleuronectiformes is found to be polyphyletic as seen here:\nHowever, threadfins (Polynemidae) aren't universally found to be nested within the group of flatfish, as recovered by a study of ultraconserved elements from the threadfin family in Girard \"et al.\" 2022, or as represented in the World Register of Marine Species, where Pleuronectiformes is retained as a name for the flatfish group. Numerous scientists continue to argue for a monophyletic group of all flatfish, though the debate continues.\nOver 800 described species are placed into 16 families. When they were treated as an order, the flatfishes are divided into two suborders, Psettodoidei and Pleuronectoidei, with &gt; 99% of the species diversity found within the Pleuronectoidei. The largest families are Soleidae, Bothidae and Cynoglossidae with more than 150 species each. There also exist two monotypic families (Paralichthodidae and Oncopteridae). Some families are the results of relatively recent splits. For example, the Achiridae were classified as a subfamily of Soleidae in the past, and the Samaridae were considered a subfamily of the Pleuronectidae. The families Paralichthodidae, Poecilopsettidae, and Rhombosoleidae were also traditionally treated as subfamilies of Pleuronectidae, but are now recognised as families in their own right. The Paralichthyidae has long been indicated to be paraphyletic, with the formal description of Cyclopsettidae in 2019 resulting in the split of this family as well. The following is the maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree from Campbell \"et al.\" 2019, which was obtained by analyzing seven protein-coding genes. This study erected two new families to resolve the previously non-monophyletic status of Paralichthyidae and the Rhombosoleidae:\nThe taxonomy of some groups is in need of a review. The last monograph covering the entire order was John Roxborough Norman's \"Monograph of the Flatfishes\" published in 1934. In particular, \"Tephrinectes sinensis\" may represent a family-level lineage and requires further evaluation e.g. New species are described with some regularity and undescribed species likely remain.\nRelation to humans.\nFishing and aquaculture.\nFlatfish are commonly fished using bottom trawls. Large species such as the halibuts are specifically targeted by fisheries, resulting in heavy fishing pressures and bycatch. Some species are aquacultured, such as the tonguefish \"Cynoglossus semilaevis\".\nAs food.\nFlatfish is considered a whitefish because of the high concentration of oils within its liver. Its lean flesh makes for a unique flavor that differs from species to species. Methods of cooking include grilling, pan-frying, baking and deep-frying.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46332", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46332", "title": "Aa (lava)", "text": ""}
{"id": "46334", "revid": "11104410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46334", "title": "Flat tax", "text": "Type of tax\nA flat tax (short for flat-rate tax) is a tax with a single rate on the taxable amount, after accounting for any deductions or exemptions from the tax base. It is not necessarily a fully proportional tax. Implementations are often progressive due to exemptions, or regressive in case of a maximum taxable amount. There are various tax systems that are labeled \"flat tax\" even though they are significantly different. The defining characteristic is the existence of only one tax rate other than zero, as opposed to multiple non-zero rates that vary depending on the amount subject to taxation.\nA flat tax system is usually discussed in the context of an income tax, where progressivity is common, but it may also apply to taxes on consumption, property or transfers.\nMajor categories.\nFlat tax proposals differ in how the subject of the tax is defined.\nTrue flat-rate income tax.\nA true flat-rate tax is a system of taxation where one tax rate is applied to all personal income with no deductions.\nMarginal flat tax.\nWhere deductions are allowed, a 'flat tax' is a progressive tax with the special characteristic that, above the maximum deduction, the marginal rate on all further income is constant. Such a tax is said to be marginally flat above that point. The difference between a true flat tax and a marginally flat tax can be reconciled by recognizing that the latter simply excludes certain types of income from being defined as taxable income; hence, both kinds of tax are flat on taxable income.\nFlat tax with limited deductions.\nModified flat taxes have been proposed which would allow deductions for a very few items, while still eliminating the vast majority of existing deductions. Charitable deductions and home mortgage interest are the most discussed examples of deductions that would be retained, as these deductions are popular with voters and are often used. Another common theme is a single, large, fixed deduction. This large fixed deduction would compensate for the elimination of various existing deductions and would simplify taxes, having the side-effect that many (mostly low income) households will not have to file tax returns.\nHall\u2013Rabushka flat tax.\nDesigned by economists at the Hoover Institution, Hall\u2013Rabushka is a flat tax on consumption. Principally, Hall\u2013Rabushka accomplishes a consumption tax effect by taxing income and then excluding investment. Robert Hall and Alvin Rabushka have consulted extensively in designing the flat tax systems in Eastern Europe.\nNegative income tax.\nThe negative income tax (NIT), which Milton Friedman proposed in his 1962 book \"Capitalism and Freedom\", is a type of flat tax. The basic idea is the same as a flat tax with personal deductions, except that when deductions exceed income, the taxable income is allowed to become negative rather than being set to zero. The flat tax rate is then applied to the resulting \"negative income,\" resulting in a \"negative income tax\" that the government would owe to the household\u2014unlike the usual \"positive\" income tax, which the household owes the government.\nFor example, let the flat rate be 20%, and let the deductions be $20,000 per adult and $7,000 per dependent. Under such a system, a family of four making $54,000 a year would owe no tax. A family of four making $74,000 a year would owe tax amounting to 0.20 \u00d7 (74,000 \u2212 54,000) = $4,000, as would be the case under a flat tax system with deductions. Families of four earning less than $54,000 per year, however, would experience a \"negative\" amount of tax (that is, the family would receive money from the government instead of paying to the government). For example, if the family earned $34,000 a year, it would receive a check for $4,000. The NIT is intended to replace not just the USA's income tax, but also many benefits low income American households receive, such as food stamps and Medicaid. The NIT is designed to avoid the welfare trap\u2014effective high marginal tax rates arising from the rules reducing benefits as market income rises. An objection to the NIT is that it is welfare without a work requirement. Those who would owe negative tax would be receiving a form of welfare without having to make an effort to obtain employment. Another objection is that the NIT subsidizes industries employing low-cost labor, but this objection can also be made against current systems of benefits for the working poor.\nCapped flat tax.\nA capped flat tax is one in which income is taxed at a flat rate until a specified cap amount is reached. For example, the United States Federal Insurance Contributions Act tax is 6.2% of gross compensation up to a limit (in 2025, up to $176,100 of earnings, for a maximum tax of $10,918.20). This cap has the effect of turning a nominally flat tax into a regressive tax.\nRequirements for a fully defined schema.\nIn devising a flat tax system, several recurring issues must be enumerated, principally with deductions and the identification of when money is earned.\nDefining when income occurs.\nSince a central tenet of the flat tax is to minimize the compartmentalization of incomes into myriad special or sheltered cases, a vexing problem is deciding when income occurs. This is demonstrated by the taxation of interest income and stock dividends. The shareholders own the company and so the company's profits belong to them. If a company is taxed on its profits, then the funds paid out as dividends have already been taxed. It's a debatable question if they should subsequently be treated as income to the shareholders and thus subject to further tax. A similar issue arises in deciding if interest paid on loans should be deductible from the taxable income since that interest is in-turn taxed as income to the loan provider. There is no universally agreed answer to what is fair. For example, in the United States, dividends are not deductible but mortgage interest is deductible. \"Thus a Flat Tax proposal is not fully defined until it differentiates new untaxed income from a pass-through of already taxed income.\"\nPolicy administration.\nTaxes, in addition to providing revenue, can be potent instruments of policy. For example, it is common for governments to encourage social policy such as home insulation or low income housing with tax credits rather than constituting a ministry to implement these policies. In a flat tax system with limited deductions such policy administration, mechanisms are curtailed. In addition to social policy, flat taxes can remove tools for adjusting economic policy as well. For example, in the United States, short-term capital gains are taxed at a higher rate than long-term gains as means to promote long-term investment horizons and damp speculative fluctuation. \"Thus, if one assumes that government should be active in policy decisions such as this, then claims that flat taxes are cheaper/simpler to administer than others are incomplete until they factor in costs for alternative policy administration.\"\nMinimizing deductions.\nIn general, the question of how to eliminate deductions is fundamental to the flat tax design; deductions dramatically affect the effective \"flatness\" in the tax rate. Perhaps the single biggest necessary deduction is for business expenses. If businesses were not allowed to deduct expenses, businesses with a profit margin below the flat tax rate could never earn any money since the tax on revenues would always exceed the earnings. For example, grocery stores typically earn pennies on every dollar of revenue; they could not pay a tax rate of 25% on revenues unless their markup exceeded 25%. Thus, corporations must be able to deduct operating expenses even if individuals cannot. A practical dilemma arises as to identifying what is an expense for a business. For example, if a peanut butter producer purchases a jar manufacturer, is that an expense (since the producer has to purchase jars somehow) or a sheltering of income through investment? Flat tax systems can differ greatly in how they accommodate such gray areas. For example, the \"9-9-9\" flat tax proposal would allow businesses to deduct purchases but not labor costs, which effectively taxes labor-intensive industrial revenue at a higher rate. How deductions are implemented will dramatically change the effective total tax, and thus the flatness of the tax. \"Thus, a flat tax proposal is not fully defined unless the proposal includes a differentiation between deductible and non-deductible expenses.\"\nTax effects.\nDiminishing marginal utility.\nFlat tax benefits higher income brackets progressively due to decline in marginal value. If a flat tax system has a large exemption, it is effectively a progressive tax. As a result, the term \"flat tax\" is actually a shorthand for the more proper marginally flat tax.\nAdministration and enforcement.\nOne type of flat tax would be imposed on all income once: at the source of the income. Hall and Rabushka proposed an amendment to the U.S. Internal Revenue Code that would implement the variant of the flat tax they advocate. This amendment, only a few pages long, would replace hundreds of pages of statutory language (although most statutory language in taxation statutes is \"not\" directed at specifying graduated tax rates).\nAs it now stands, the U.S. Internal Revenue Code is over several million words long, and contains many loopholes, deductions, and exemptions which, advocates of flat taxes claim, render the collection of taxes and the enforcement of tax law complicated and inefficient.\nIt is further argued that current tax law slows economic growth by distorting economic incentives, and by allowing, even encouraging, tax avoidance. With a flat tax, there are fewer incentives than in the current system to create tax shelters, and to engage in other forms of tax avoidance.\nFlat tax critics contend that a flat tax system could be created with many loopholes, or a progressive tax system without loopholes, and that a progressive tax system could be as simple, or simpler, than a flat tax system. A simple progressive tax would also discourage tax avoidance.\nUnder a pure flat tax without deductions, every tax period a company would make a single payment to the government covering the taxes on the employees and the taxes on the company profit. For example, suppose that in a given year, a company called ACME earns a profit of 3 million, spends 2 million in wages, and spends 1 million on other expenses that under the tax law is taxable income to recipients, such as the receipt of stock options, bonuses, and certain executive privileges. Given a flat rate of 15%, ACME would then owe the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) (3M + 2M + 1M) \u00d7 0.15 = 900,000. This payment would, in one fell swoop, settle the tax liabilities of ACME's employees as well as the corporate taxes owed by ACME. Most employees throughout the economy would never need to interact with the IRS, as all tax owed on wages, interest, dividends, royalties, etc. would be withheld at the source. The main exceptions would be employees with incomes from personal ventures. The \"Economist\" claims that such a system would reduce the number of entities required to file returns from about 130 million individuals, households, and businesses, as at present, to a mere 8 million businesses and self-employed.\nHowever, this simplicity depends on the absence of deductions of any kind being allowed (or at least no variability in the deductions of different people). Furthermore, if income of differing types are segregated (e.g., pass-through, long term cap gains, regular income, etc.) then complications ensue. For example, if realized capital gains were subject to the flat tax, the law would require brokers and mutual funds to calculate the realized capital gain on all sales and redemption. If there were a gain, a tax equal to 15% of the amount of the gain would be withheld and sent to the IRS. If there were a loss, the amount would be reported to the IRS. The loss would offset gains, and then the IRS would settle up with taxpayers at the end of the period. Lacking deductions, this scheme cannot be used to implement economic and social policy indirectly by tax credits and thus, as noted above, the simplifications to the government's revenue collection apparatus might be offset by new government ministries required to administer those policies.\nRevenues.\nRussia was considered a prime case of the success of a flat tax; the real revenues from its personal income tax rose by 25.2% in the first year after the country introduced a flat tax in 2001, followed by a 24.6% increase in the second year, and a 15.2% increase in the third year.\nThe Russian example is often used as proof of the validity of this analysis, despite an International Monetary Fund study in 2006 which found that there was no sign \"of Laffer-type behavioral responses generating revenue increases from the tax cut elements of these reforms\" in Russia or in other countries.\nIn 2021, Russia ended its flat tax on personal income as it introduced a second higher tax rate.\nBulgaria's entry into the EU in 2007 was marked by a spur of reforms aimed at reducing the large share of informal economic activity, estimated at 43% in 2006. Parliament approved the introduction of a 10% corporate income tax rate for 2007, to be followed by a 10% personal income tax rate the next year. The IMF was wary of this reform, arguing that the simplified tax system would lower the budget surplus and encourage a larger current account deficit. At the time of these discussions, however, the Bulgarian government did not need external financing and proceeded with its reform plans. The year 2007 brought a huge growth of revenue from corporate income tax (by 39% compared with the previous year) and surpassed the Ministry of Finance's own forecast (27% year on year). The budget surplus rose despite considerable emergency spending at the end of the year. There were several reasons for this beneficial effect: (i) the tax rate limited the incentives for tax evasion, (ii) the optimism at the beginning of the country's EU membership, (iii) and the increase in foreign direct investment, which reached an all-time annual record of \u20ac9 billion (about 11% of GDP).\nOverall structure.\nTaxes other than the income tax (for example, taxes on sales and payrolls) tend to be regressive. Under such a structure, those with lower incomes tend to pay a \"higher\" proportion of their income in total taxes than the affluent do. The fraction of household income that is a return to capital (dividends, interest, royalties, profits of unincorporated businesses) is positively correlated with total household income. Hence a flat tax limited to wages would seem to leave the wealthy better off. Modifying the tax base can change the effects. A flat tax could be targeted at income (rather than wages), which could place the tax burden equally on all earners, including those who earn income primarily from returns on investment. Tax systems could utilize a flat sales tax to target all consumption, which can be modified with rebates or exemptions to remove regressive effects, such as the proposed FairTax in the United States.\nBorder adjustable.\nA flat tax system and income taxes overall are not inherently border-adjustable; meaning the tax component embedded into products via taxes imposed on companies (including corporate taxes and payroll taxes) are not removed when exported to a foreign country \"(see Effect of taxes and subsidies on price)\". Taxation systems such as a sales tax or value added tax can remove the tax component when goods are exported and apply the tax component on imports. The domestic products could be at a disadvantage to foreign products (at home and abroad) that are border-adjustable, which would affect the global competitiveness of a country. However, it's possible that a flat tax system could be combined with tariffs and credits to act as border adjustments (the proposed \"Border Tax Equity Act\" in the United States attempts this). Implementing an income tax with a border adjustment tax credit is a violation of the World Trade Organization agreement. Tax exemptions (allowances) on low income wages, a component of most income tax systems could mitigate this issue for high labour content industries like textiles that compete Globally.\nIn a subsequent section, various proposals for flat tax-like schemes are discussed, these differ mainly on how they approach with the following issues of deductions, defining income, and policy implementation.\nAround the world.\nMost countries tax personal income at the national level using progressive rates, but some use a flat rate. The vast majority of countries that have or had a flat tax on personal income at the national level are former communist countries or islands.\nIn some countries, subdivisions are allowed to tax personal income in addition to the national government. Many of these subdivisions use a flat rate, even if their national government uses progressive rates. Examples are all counties and municipalities of the Nordic countries, all prefectures and municipalities of Japan, and some subdivisions of Italy and of the United States.\nJurisdictions that use flat taxes on personal income.\nNational or single level.\nThe table below lists jurisdictions where personal income is taxed by only one government level, using a flat rate. It includes independent countries and other autonomous jurisdictions. The tax rate listed is the one that applies to income from work, but does not include mandatory contributions to social security. In some jurisdictions, different rates (also flat) apply to other types of income, such as from investments.\nSubnational jurisdictions.\nThe table below lists jurisdictions where personal income is taxed by multiple government levels, and at least one level uses a flat rate. The tax rates listed are those that apply to income from work, except as otherwise noted. Where a range of rates is listed, it means that the flat rate varies by location, not progressive rates.\nJurisdictions without permanent population.\nDespite not having a permanent population, some jurisdictions tax the local income of temporary workers, using a flat rate.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46335", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46335", "title": "Stone Soup", "text": "European folk story\n\"Stone Soup\" is a European folk story in which hungry strangers convince the people of a town to each share a small amount of their food in order to make a meal. In varying traditions, the stone has been replaced with other common inedible objects, and therefore the parable is also known as axe soup, button soup, nail soup, bolt soup, and wood soup.\nStory.\nVarious forms of the story exist; one example is:\nSome travelers come to a village, carrying nothing more than an empty cooking pot. Upon their arrival, the villagers are unwilling to share any of their food stores with the very hungry travelers. Then the travelers go to a stream and fill the pot with water, drop a large stone in it, and place it over a fire. One of the villagers becomes curious and asks what they are doing. The travelers answer that they are making \"stone soup\", which tastes wonderful and which they would be delighted to share with the villager, although it still needs a little bit of garnish, which they are missing, to improve the flavor.\nThe villager, who anticipates enjoying a share of the soup, does not mind parting with a few carrots, so these are added to the soup. Another villager walks by, inquiring about the pot, and the travelers again mention their stone soup which has not yet reached its full potential. More and more villagers walk by, each adding another ingredient, like potatoes, onions, cabbages, peas, celery, tomatoes, sweetcorn, meat (like chicken, pork and beef), milk, butter, salt and pepper. Finally, the stone (being inedible) is removed from the pot, and a delicious and nourishing pot of soup is enjoyed by travelers and villagers alike. Although the travelers have thus tricked the villagers into sharing their food with them, they have successfully transformed it into a tasty meal which they share with the donors.\nCultural and historical references.\nIn the Aarne\u2013Thompson\u2013Uther folktale classification system, this tale and set of variants is type 1548.\nArt, entertainment, and media.\n\"Stone soup\"-like collaborations.\nThere are many examples of projects referencing the \"Stone Soup\" story's theme of making something significant by accumulating many small contributions. Examples include: \nAdaptations.\nFilm.\nThe film \"Fandango\" (1985) contains a wedding sequence towards the end which builds on the Stone Soup theme. The protagonists need to hold a wedding ceremony, but they lack the necessary funds. Therefore, they set up a folding card table by the main street of a sleepy Texas town, dust it off, and invite passersby to come to the wedding. As they concoct stories of delinquent caterers and crashed champagne trucks, the friendly townspeople contribute their time and resources, the result being a magical wedding ceremony.\nLiterature.\nGerald P. Murphy's stage adaptation of \"Stone Soup\" was published by Lazy Bee Scripts in 2008 and has had successful productions in US, UK and France.\nGerald Griffin wrote \"The Collegians\" (1829) which includes a version of limestone soup in chapter 30.\nWilliam Butler Yeats' play \"The Pot of Broth\" (1904) tells a version of the story in which a clever Irish tramp uses his wits to swindle a shrewish medieval housewife out of her dinner.\nThe story is the basis of Marcia Brown's 1947 children's book \"\" (1947), which features soldiers tricking miserly villagers into cooking them a feast. The book was a Caldecott Honor book in 1948 and was read aloud by the Captain (played by Bob Keeshan) on an early episode of \"Captain Kangaroo\" in the 1950s, as well as at least once in the 1960s or early 1970s.\nIn 1965, Gordon R. Dickson published a short story called \"Soupstone\", where a headstrong pilot is sent to solve a problem on a planet under the guise of a highly educated and competent official. He succeeds by pretending to understand everything, but actually merely making the locals apply their already present knowledge and abilities to the task.\n\"Stone Soup\" (1968), written by Ann McGovern and illustrated by Nola Langner, tells the story of a little old lady and a hungry young man at the door asking for food, and how he tricks her into making stone soup. The book was reprinted and reissued in 1986 with Winslow Pinney Pels as the illustrator.\nIn 1975, Walt Disney Productions published a Wonderful World of Reading book titled \"Button Soup\". Daisy Duck tricks Scrooge McDuck to share his food to help flavor her Button Soup.\nCanadian children's author Aubrey Davis adapted the story to a Jewish context in his book \"Bone Button Borscht\" (1996). According to Davis, he wrote the story when he was unable to find a story that he liked for a Hanukkah reading. Barbara Budd's narration of \"Bone Button Borscht\" traditionally airs across Canada on CBC Radio One's \"As It Happens\", on the first day of Hanukkah.\nFrench author and illustrator Anais Vaugelade published a children's picture book, \"Une soupe au caillou\", in which the tramp from the original folktale is replaced by a wandering wolf, and the old woman by a curious hen. All characters in the story are animals, gathering to help making the stone soup, each of them carrying an ingredient for the final dish.\nJon J. Muth's children's book based on the story, also called \"Stone Soup\" (2003), is set in China, as is Ying Chang's \"The Real Story of Stone Soup\" (2007).\nRobert Rankin's book Nostradamus Ate My Hamster features a version of the story introduced as an old Irish tale.\nMusic.\nShel Silverstein's song \"The Wonderful Soup Stone\" tells a version of this story. Bobby Bare included the song on his album \"Lullabys, Legends and Lies\" (1973). and Dr. Hook &amp; the Medicine Show included the song on their album \"Belly Up!\" (1973).\nA version of the tale written by Tom Chapin and John Forster appears on Chapin's album \"Mother Earth\" (1990).\n\"Stone Soup\" \u2013 an album released in November 2001 by the UK artist Moss (a.k.a. Bernard Moss) on Pork Recordings (catalogue ref. PORK 091).\n\"Stone Soup\" - A song featured on the album Mr. Supernatural in 2004 by the artist King Khan and the Shrines on Hazelwood Records\nMilitary tactics.\nUS Army General George S. Patton referred to the \"rock soup method\" of acquiring resources for attacks in the face of official disapproval by his superiors for offensive operations. In the military context, he sent units forward, ostensibly on reconnaissance missions, where he knew resistance was to be met. \"Surprised\" at the enemy resistance, Patton would later request support for his scouts, and these missions eventually turned into small scale probing attacks. Then, once full combat had begun, Patton would request (or make the executive decision) to encircle or push full force against enemy resistance, under the rationale that the reinforcements were either bogged down or unable to retreat. He did this during the Battle of Sicily, in the advance on Palermo, and again in the campaign in northwest Europe, near Metz when his 3rd US Army was officially halted during Operation Market Garden.\nPlaces.\nA large pool located on Karl Johan street in Oslo, funded by the steel company \"Christiania Spigerverk\" (\"Christiania Nail Factory\"), is nicknamed \"Spikersuppa\" literally meaning \"Nail Soup\" in Norwegian.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46336", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46336", "title": "Passerine", "text": "Any bird of the order Passeriformes, sometimes known as perching birds\nA passerine () is any bird of the order Passeriformes (; from Latin \" and '-shaped') which includes more than half of all bird species. Sometimes known as perching birds, passerines generally have an anisodactyl arrangement of their toes (three pointing forward and one back), which facilitates perching.\nWith more than 140 families and some 6,500 identified species, Passeriformes is the largest order of birds and one of the most diverse clades of terrestrial vertebrates, representing 60% of birds. Passerines are divided into three suborders: New Zealand wrens; Suboscines, primarily found in North and South America; and songbirds. Passerines originated in the Southern Hemisphere around 60 million years ago.\nMost passerines are insectivorous or omnivorous, and eat both insects and fruit or seeds.\nEtymology.\nThe terms \"passerine\" and \"Passeriformes\" are derived from the scientific name of the house sparrow, \"Passer domesticus\", whose genus is the Latin word for sparrow. Formerly this meant the songbirds of Europe; now it also includes perching, non-singing birds from the Americas.\nDescription.\nThe order is divided into three suborders, Tyranni (non-singing, Americas), Passeri (songbirds), and the basal New Zealand wrens. Oscines have the best control of their syrinx muscles among birds, producing a wide range of songs and other vocalizations, though some of them, such as the crows, do not sound musical to human beings. Some, such as the lyrebird, are accomplished mimics. The New Zealand wrens are tiny birds restricted to New Zealand, at least in modern times; they were long placed in Passeri.\nMost passerines are smaller than typical members of other avian orders. The heaviest and altogether largest passerines are the thick-billed raven and the larger races of common raven, each exceeding and . The superb lyrebird and some birds-of-paradise, due to very long tails or tail coverts, are longer overall. The smallest passerine is the short-tailed pygmy tyrant, at and .\nAnatomy.\nThe foot of a passerine has three toes directed forward and one toe directed backward, called anisodactyl arrangement. The hind toe (hallux) is long and joins the leg at approximately the same level as the front toes. This arrangement enables passerine birds to easily perch upright on branches. The toes have no webbing or joining, but in some cotingas, the second and third toes are united at their basal third.\nThe leg of passerine birds contains an additional special adaptation for perching. A tendon in the rear of the leg running from the underside of the toes to the muscle behind the tibiotarsus will automatically be pulled and tighten when the leg bends, causing the foot to curl and become stiff when the bird lands on a branch. This enables passerines to sleep while perching without falling off.\nMost passerine birds have 12 tail feathers but the superb lyrebird has 16, and several spinetails in the family Furnariidae have 10, 8, or even 6, as is the case of Des Murs's wiretail. Species adapted to tree trunk climbing such as treecreepers and woodcreeper have stiff tail feathers that are used as props during climbing. Extremely long tails used as sexual ornaments are shown by species in different families. A well-known example is the long-tailed widowbird.\nEggs and nests.\nThe chicks of passerines are altricial: blind, featherless, and helpless when hatched from their eggs. Hence, the chicks require extensive parental care. Most passerines lay colored eggs, in contrast with nonpasserines, most of whose eggs are white except in some ground-nesting groups such as Charadriiformes and nightjars, where camouflage is necessary, and in some parasitic cuckoos, which match the passerine host's egg. The vinous-throated parrotbill has two egg colors, white and blue, to deter the brood parasitic common cuckoo.\nClutches vary considerably in size: some larger passerines of Australia such as lyrebirds and scrub-robins lay only a single egg, most smaller passerines in warmer climates lay between two and five, while in the higher latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, hole-nesting species like tits can lay up to a dozen and other species around five or six.\nThe family Viduidae do not build their own nests, instead, they lay eggs in other birds' nests.\nThe Passeriformes contain several groups of brood parasites such as the viduas, cuckoo-finches, and the cowbirds.\nBird nest construction is complex and cognitively demanding, and has a very high degree of diversification amongst Passeriformes. A study of brain size and nest construction across a large number of different passerine species indicated that building nests with different attachment modes requires different levels of cognitive abilities.\nOrigin and evolution.\nThe evolutionary history of the passerine families and the relationships among them remained rather mysterious until the late 20th century. In many cases, passerine families were grouped together on the basis of morphological similarities that, it is now believed, are the result of convergent evolution, not a close genetic relationship. For example, the wrens of the Americas and Eurasia, those of Australia, and those of New Zealand look superficially similar and behave in similar ways, yet belong to three far-flung branches of the passerine family tree; they are as unrelated as it is possible to be while remaining Passeriformes.\nAdvances in molecular biology and improved paleobiogeographical data gradually are revealing a clearer picture of passerine origins and evolution that reconciles molecular affinities, the constraints of morphology, and the specifics of the fossil record. The first passerines are now thought to have evolved in the Southern Hemisphere in the late Paleocene or early Eocene, around 50\u00a0million years ago.\nThe initial diversification of passerines coincides with the separation of the southern continents in the early Eocene. The New Zealand wrens are the first to become isolated in Zealandia, and the second split involved the origin of the Tyranni in South America and the Passeri in the Australian continent. The Passeri experienced a great radiation of forms in Australia. A major branch of the Passeri, the parvorder Passerida, dispersed into Eurasia and Africa about 40 million years ago, where they experienced further radiation of new lineages. This eventually led to three major Passerida lineages comprising about 4,000 species, which in addition to the Corvida and numerous minor lineages make up songbird diversity today. Extensive biogeographical mixing happens, with northern forms returning to the south, southern forms moving north, and so on.\nFossil record.\nEarliest passerines.\nPerching bird osteology, especially of the limb bones, is rather diagnostic. However, the early fossil record is poor because passerines are relatively small, and their delicate bones do not preserve well. Queensland Museum specimens F20688 (carpometacarpus) and F24685 (tibiotarsus) from Murgon, Queensland, are fossil bone fragments initially assigned to Passeriformes. However, the material is too fragmentary and their affinities have been questioned. Several more recent fossils from the Oligocene of Europe, such as \"Wieslochia\", \"Jamna\", \"Resoviaornis,\" and \"Crosnoornis\", are more complete and definitely represent early passeriforms, and have been found to belong to a variety of modern and extinct lineages.\nFrom the Bathans Formation at the Manuherikia River in Otago, New Zealand, MNZ S42815 (a distal right tarsometatarsus of a tui-sized bird) and several bones of at least one species of saddleback-sized bird have recently been described. These date from the Early to Middle Miocene (https:// to Lillburnian, 19\u201316\u00a0mya).\nEarly European passerines.\nIn Europe, perching birds are not too uncommon in the fossil record from the Oligocene onward, belonging to several lineages:\nThat suboscines expanded much beyond their region of origin is proven by several fossils from Germany such as a presumed broadbill (Eurylaimidae) humerus fragment from the Early Miocene (roughly 20\u00a0mya) of , Germany, the Late Oligocene carpometacarpus from France listed above, and \"Wieslochia\", among others. Extant Passeri super-families were quite distinct by that time and are known since about 12\u201313 mya when modern genera were present in the corvoidean and basal songbirds. The modern diversity of Passerida genera is known mostly from the Late Miocene onward and into the Pliocene (about 10\u20132\u00a0mya). Pleistocene and early Holocene lagerst\u00e4tten (&lt;1.8\u00a0mya) yield numerous extant species, and many yield almost nothing but extant species or their chronospecies and paleosubspecies.\nAmerican fossils.\nIn the Americas, the fossil record is more scant before the Pleistocene, from which several still-existing families are documented. Apart from the indeterminable MACN-SC-1411 (Pinturas Early/Middle Miocene of Santa Cruz Province, Argentina), an extinct lineage of perching birds has been described from the Late Miocene of California, United States: the Palaeoscinidae with the single genus \"Palaeoscinis\". \"\"Palaeostruthus\" eurius\" (Pliocene of Florida) probably belongs to an extant family, most likely passeroidean.\nSystematics and taxonomy.\nThe Passeriformes is currently divided into three suborders: Acanthisitti (New Zealand wrens), Tyranni, (suboscines) and Passeri (oscines or songbirds). The Passeri is now subdivided into two major groups recognized now as Corvides and Passerida respectively containing the large superfamilies Corvoidea and Meliphagoidea, as well as minor lineages, and the superfamilies Sylvioidea, Muscicapoidea, and Passeroidea but this arrangement has been found to be oversimplified. Since the mid-2000s, studies have investigated the phylogeny of the Passeriformes and found that many families from Australasia traditionally included in the Corvoidea actually represent more basal lineages within oscines. Likewise, the traditional three-superfamily arrangement within the Passeri has turned out to be far more complex and will require changes in classification.\nMajor \"wastebin\" families such as the Old World warblers and Old World babblers have turned out to be paraphyletic and are being rearranged. Several taxa turned out to represent highly distinct lineages, so new families had to be established, some of these \u2013 like the stitchbird of New Zealand and the Eurasian bearded reedling \u2013 monotypic with only one living species. In the Passeri alone, a number of minor lineages will eventually be recognized as distinct superfamilies. For example, the kinglets constitute a single genus with less than 10 species today but seem to have been among the first perching bird lineages to diverge as the group spread across Eurasia. No particularly close relatives of theirs have been found among comprehensive studies of the living Passeri, though they might be fairly close to some little-studied tropical Asian groups. Nuthatches, wrens, and their closest relatives are currently grouped in a distinct super-family Certhioidea.\nTaxonomic list of Passeriformes families.\nThis list is in taxonomic order, placing related families next to one another. The families listed are those recognised by the International Ornithologists' Union (IOC). The order and the division into infraorders, parvorders, and superfamilies follows the phylogenetic analysis published by Carl Oliveros and colleagues in 2019. The relationships between the families in the suborder Tyranni (suboscines) were all well determined but some of the nodes in Passeri (oscines or songbirds) were unclear owing to the rapid splitting of the lineages.\n* Acanthisittidae: New Zealand wrens\n* Philepittidae: asities\n* Eurylaimidae: typical broadbills\n* Calyptomenidae: African and green broadbills\n* Sapayoidae: sapayoa\n* Pittidae: pittas\n*Parvorder Furnariida\n* Melanopareiidae: crescentchests\n* Conopophagidae: gnateaters and gnatpittas\n* Thamnophilidae: antbirds\n* Grallariidae: antpittas\n* Rhinocryptidae: typical tapaculos\n* Formicariidae: antthrushes\n* Furnariidae: ovenbirds and woodcreepers\n*Parvorder Tyrannida\n* Pipridae: manakins\n* Cotingidae: cotingas\n* Tityridae: tityras, becards and allies\n* Oxyruncidae: sharpbill\n* Onychorhynchidae: royal flycatchers and allies\n* Tyrannidae: tyrant flycatchers\n* Atrichornithidae: scrub-birds\n* Menuridae: lyrebirds\n* Climacteridae: Australian treecreepers\n* Ptilonorhynchidae: bowerbirds\n* Pomatostomidae: pseudo-babblers\n* Orthonychidae: logrunners\n*Superfamily Meliphagoidea\n* Acanthizidae: scrubwrens, thornbills, and gerygones\n* Meliphagidae: honeyeaters\n* Maluridae: australasian wrens\n* Dasyornithidae: bristlebirds\n* Pardalotidae: pardalotes\n*No superfamily\n* Cinclosomatidae: jewel-babblers, quail-thrushes\n* Campephagidae: cuckooshrikes and trillers\n* Mohouidae: whiteheads\n* Neosittidae: sittellas\n*Superfamily Orioloidea\n* Psophodidae: whipbirds\n* Eulacestomatidae: wattled ploughbill\n* Falcunculidae: shriketits\n* Oreoicidae: Australo-Papuan bellbirds\n* Paramythiidae: painted berrypeckers\n* Vireonidae: vireos, shrike-babblers, and erpornis\n* Pachycephalidae: whistlers\n* Oriolidae: Old World orioles and figbirds\n*Superfamily Malaconotoidea\n* Machaerirhynchidae: boatbills\n* Artamidae: woodswallows, butcherbirds, currawongs, and Australian magpie\n* Rhagologidae: mottled berryhunter\n* Malaconotidae: puffbacks, bushshrikes, tchagras, and boubous\n* Pityriaseidae: Bornean bristlehead\n* Aegithinidae: ioras\n* Platysteiridae: wattle-eyes and batises\n* Vangidae: vangas, helmetshrikes, and woodshrikes\n*Superfamily Corvoidea\n* Rhipiduridae: fantails\n* Dicruridae: drongos\n* Monarchidae: monarch flycatchers\n* Ifritidae: blue-capped ifrit\n* Paradisaeidae: birds-of-paradise\n* Corcoracidae: white-winged chough and apostlebird\n* Melampittidae: melampittas\n* Laniidae: shrikes\n* Platylophidae: crested jayshrike\n* Corvidae: crows, ravens, and jays\n* No parvorder\n* Cnemophilidae: satinbirds\n* Melanocharitidae: berrypeckers and longbills\n* Callaeidae: New Zealand wattlebirds\n* Notiomystidae: stitchbird\n* Petroicidae: Australasian robins\n* Eupetidae: rail-babbler\n* Picathartidae: rockfowl\n* Chaetopidae: rock-jumpers\n* Parvorder Sylviida \u2013 previously known as the superfamily Sylviodea\n* Hyliotidae: hyliotas\n* Stenostiridae: fairy flycatchers\n* Paridae: tits, chickadees and titmice\n* Remizidae: penduline-tits\n* Panuridae: bearded reedling\n* Alaudidae: larks\n* Nicatoridae: nicators\n* Macrosphenidae: crombecs and African warblers\n* Cisticolidae: cisticolas and allies\n*Superfamily Locustelloidea\n* Acrocephalidae: reed warblers, Grauer's warbler and allies\n* Locustellidae: grassbirds and allies\n* Donacobiidae: black-capped donacobius\n* Bernieridae: Malagasy warblers\n* Superfamily Hirundinoidea\n* Pnoepygidae: wren-babblers\n* Hirundinidae: swallows and martins\n*Superfamily Sylvioidea\n* Pycnonotidae: bulbuls\n* Sylviidae: sylviid warblers\n* Paradoxornithidae: parrotbills, fulvettas, wrentit, and myzornis\n* Zosteropidae: white-eyes and yuhinas\n* Timaliidae: tree babblers\n* Leiothrichidae: laughingthrushes and allies\n* Alcippeidae: Alcippe fulvettas\n* Pellorneidae: ground babblers\n*Superfamily Aegithaloidea\n* Phylloscopidae: leaf-warblers and allies\n* Hyliidae: hylias\n* Aegithalidae: long-tailed tits or bushtits\n* Scotocercidae: streaked scrub warbler\n* Cettiidae: Cettia bush warblers and allies\n* Erythrocercidae: yellow flycatchers\n* Parvorder Muscicapida \u2013 previously treated as superfamily Muscicapoidea\n*Superfamily Bombycilloidea\n* Dulidae: palmchat\n* Bombycillidae: waxwings\n* Ptiliogonatidae: silky flycatchers\n* Hylocitreidae: hylocitrea\n* Hypocoliidae: hypocolius\n* \u2020Mohoidae: Hawaiian honeyeaters\n*Superfamily Muscicapoidea\n* Elachuridae: spotted elachura\n* Cinclidae: dippers\n* Muscicapidae: Old World flycatchers and chats\n* Turdidae: thrushes and allies\n* Buphagidae: oxpeckers\n* Sturnidae: starlings, mynas, and rhabdornis\n* Mimidae: mockingbirds and thrashers\n*Superfamily Reguloidea\n* Regulidae: goldcrests and kinglets\n*Superfamily Certhioidea\n* Tichodromidae: wallcreeper\n* Sittidae: nuthatches\n* Certhiidae: treecreepers\n* Salpornithidae: spotted creepers\n* Polioptilidae: gnatcatchers\n* Troglodytidae: wrens\n* Parvorder Passerida \u2013 previously known as the superfamily Passeroidea\n*No superfamily\n* Promeropidae: sugarbirds\n* Modulatricidae: dapple-throat and allies\n* Nectariniidae: sunbirds\n* Dicaeidae: flowerpeckers\n* Chloropseidae: leafbirds\n* Irenidae: fairy-bluebirds\n* Peucedramidae: olive warbler\n* Urocynchramidae: Przewalski's finch\n*Superfamily Ploceoidea\n* Ploceidae: weavers\n* Viduidae: indigobirds and whydahs\n* Estrildidae: waxbills, munias and allies\n*Superfamily Passeroidea\n* Prunellidae: accentors\n* Passeridae: Old World sparrows, snowfinches, and ibon\n* Motacillidae: wagtails and pipits\n*Superfamily Fringilloidea \u2013 previously known as the nine-primaried oscines\n* Fringillidae: finches and euphonias\n* Rhodinocichlidae: rosy thrush-tanager\n* Calcariidae: longspurs and snow buntings\n* Emberizidae: buntings\n* Cardinalidae: cardinals\n* Mitrospingidae: mitrospingid tanagers\n* Thraupidae: tanagers and allies\n* Passerellidae: New World sparrows, bush tanagers\n* Parulidae: New World warblers\n* Icteriidae: yellow-breasted chat\n* Icteridae: grackles, New World blackbirds, and New World orioles\n* Calyptophilidae: chat-tanagers\n* Zeledoniidae: wrenthrush\n* Teretistridae: Cuban warblers\n* Nesospingidae: Puerto Rican tanager\n* Spindalidae: spindalises\n* Phaenicophilidae: Hispaniolan tanagers\nPhylogeny.\nRelationships between living Passeriformes families based on the phylogenetic analysis of Oliveros et al. (2019). Some terminals have been renamed to reflect families recognised by the IOC but not in that study. The IOC families Alcippeidae and Teretistridae were not sampled in this study.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46338", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46338", "title": "Cuculiformes", "text": ""}
{"id": "46341", "revid": "50724202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46341", "title": "Independent city", "text": "Type of city or town\nAn independent city or independent town is a city or town that does not form part of another general-purpose local government entity (such as a province).\nHistorical precursors.\nIn the Holy Roman Empire, and to a degree in its successor states the German Confederation and the German Empire, so-called \"free imperial cities\" (nominative singular \"freie Reichsstadt\", nominative plural \"freie Reichsst\u00e4dte\") held the legal status of imperial immediacy, according to which they were not subinfeudated to any vassal ruler and were instead subject to the authority of the Emperor alone. Examples included Hamburg, Bremen, and L\u00fcbeck, along with others that gained and/or lost the privileges of immediacy over the course of the Empire's history.\nNational capitals.\nA number of countries have made their national capitals into separate entities.\nFederal capitals.\nIn countries with a federal structure, the federal capital is often separate from other jurisdictions in the country, and frequently has a unique system of government.\nAfrica.\nEthiopia.\nAddis Ababa, capital of Ethiopia, has held the designation of chartered city since 1991, when it was separated from the former province of Shewa. It shares this status with one other city, Dire Dawa.\nMali.\nBamako, the capital of Mali, is contained within the Bamako Capital District.\nMozambique.\nMaputo, the capital of Mozambique, is its own district with provincial status surrounded by the Province of Maputo.\nNiger.\nNiger's capital, Niamey, comprises a capital district of Niger. It is surrounded by the Tillab\u00e9ri Department.\nNigeria.\nNigeria's capital Abuja is located in the Federal Capital Territory. The Territory was established in 1976, and the capital was formally moved from Lagos (the historic capital) in 1991.\nAsia.\nTaiwan.\nIn Taiwan under the administrative division system of the Republic of China, some cities are directly administered by the Executive Yuan, some are administered by provinces (the province of Taiwan is nominal), and some are subordinate to counties. The centrally-administered (Taipei City, Kaohsiung City, New Taipei City, Taichung City, Tainan City, and Taoyuan City) and province-administered ones are like independent cities under this definition.\nKorea.\nIn both South Korea and North Korea, special cities are independent from their surrounding provinces and city-states under direct governance from the central government. Examples are Seoul, Busan, Daegu, Incheon, Gwangju, Daejeon and Ulsan in South Korea and Pyongyang and Rason in North Korea. In South Korea, the main criterion for granting secession from the province is a population reaching one million.\nSouth Korea.\nIn addition to its nine provinces, South Korea has seven province-level \"metropolitan cities\". By far the largest among these in terms of population is the capital, Seoul, called a \"teukbyeol-si\" (Korean:\u00a0; Hanja:\u00a0; lit.\u00a0'special city'), which is home to more than 20% of the entire population of the country. The remaining six independent cities are called \"gwangyeok-si\" (; ; lit.\u00a0'large city') whose names are: Busan, Daegu, Daejeon, Incheon, Gwangju, and Ulsan.\nHistorically, these independent cities have been carved from the province that surrounds them. Consequently, they typically share a strong regional and cultural identity with the adjoining province(s). For instance, Gwangju, located at the center of Jeolla region, is heavily associated with the region. Seoul and Incheon are said to make up the Seoul Metropolitan Area with the densely populated Gyeonggi that almost completely encompasses them.\nOne interesting relic of the newer independent cities is that, in some cases, the government administrative buildings (\"docheong\") of the provinces they were once a part of are still located within city boundaries, meaning that these provinces have capitals that are not within their borders.\nOn 1 July 2012, Yeongi-gun, Chungcheongnam-do absorbed parts of Cheonan, Gongju and Cheongju, and became independent from Chungcheongnam-do as Sejong Special Self-governing City under the Special Act on the Installation of Sejong City. Currently, the population of Sejong Special Self-governing City is lower than that of the aforementioned metropolitan cities, but the population is increasing with the construction of a mixed-use administrative city. In 2006, the ruling party floated a proposal to eliminate all current province and independent-city borders. This plan would divide the entire republic into fifty or sixty city- or county-level administrations, similar to the system in Japan. The plan was intended to help reduce regional discrimination and animosity by eliminating provincial identity.\nPhilippines.\nMany major cities in the Philippines are independent cities, classified as either \"highly urbanized\" or \"independent component\" cities. These cities are administratively and legally not subject to a province, and thus do not share their tax revenues with any province. In practise, most cities outside of Metropolitan Manila are often still grouped with provinces that they were partitioned from for the sake of convenience and simplicity. The national government and its agencies serve these cities through sub-offices for each region, to which the cities are indirectly subject. There are 38 such cities, with 16 being located in Metro Manila (including the City of Manila, the national capital); eight in the rest of Luzon and its surrounding islands; seven in the Visayas island group; and seven in Mindanao and its surrounding islands.\nVietnam.\nVietnam has six municipalities that are not part of any of the Vietnam's provinces. This includes Hanoi, the capital of Vietnam; and Ho Chi Minh City (Saigon), the most populous city of Vietnam.\nChina.\nIn China, both Beijing and Tianjin are independent of the surrounding province of Hebei, of which they were formerly a part. Similarly, Shanghai is now independent from Jiangsu and Chongqing from Sichuan. Hong Kong and Macao have the status of special administrative regions, separated from their original province Guangdong.\nThailand.\nIn Thailand, the capital Bangkok operates independently of any province and is considered a special administrative area. It is a primate city in terms of its large population, having nearly 8% of Thailand's total population.\nIndonesia.\nIn Indonesia, the national capital Jakarta is within the \"Daerah Khusus Ibukota Jakarta\" (Jakarta Capital Special Region). Jakarta is considered one of Indonesia's provinces, therefore Jakarta is headed by a governor and not a mayor. However, Jakarta is divided into 5 smaller \"administration-cities\" (\"kota administrasi\") and one \"administration-regency\" (\"kabupaten administrasi\"). The administration-cities are Central, North, East, West, and South Jakarta. The Kepulauan Seribu (Thousand Islands) administration-regency is also included in the formal definition of Jakarta. All of these sub-units have their own degree of autonomy. Mayors of the five administration-cities and the regent of Kepulauan Seribu administration-regency are not elected, but directly appointed by the Governor and members of the Provincial Parliament of Jakarta. Furthermore, these sub-units do not have local parliament as opposed to other cities or regencies in Indonesia.\nIndia.\nNew Delhi and the old city of Delhi together form the National Capital Territory of Delhi.\nIraq.\nThe capital of Iraq, Baghdad, is contained within a special capital district.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, Tokyo, as well as being a city, forms a prefecture, falling into a special category of \"metropolitan prefecture\" having some of the attributes of a city and some of a prefecture. Within Tokyo, there are smaller units, \"wards\", \"cities\", \"towns\", etc., but some of the responsibilities normally assigned to cities and towns in other Japanese prefectures are handled by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government instead.\nPakistan.\nThe capital of Pakistan, Islamabad, is a planned city within the Islamabad Capital Territory, which was created in 1960 out of the Punjab Province. The Territory elects representatives to both houses of the legislature. Before Islamabad was made the capital, Karachi was located in the Federal Capital Territory, which later reverted to the Sindh Province.\nUAE.\nIn United Arab Emirates, the seven emirates are themselves city-states, or were historically, in particular, Dubai Ajman and Sharjah.\nMongolia.\nIn Mongolia, its only independent city is its capital Ulaanbaatar which doesn't belong to any other provinces within the country.\nEurope.\nAustria.\nThe city of Vienna is a federal state within the Republic of Austria. A similar concept is the \"statutory city\".\nBelgium.\nThe Brussels Capital Region, a densely built-up area consisting of 19 communes including the capital city Brussels, became one of Belgium's three regions after the country was turned into a federation in 1970. (In Belgium there are special circumstances due to the country's language communities.)\nBosnia and Herzegovina.\nThe Br\u010dko District is independent of both Entities that constitute Bosnia and Herzegovina (Republika Srpska and Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina). All other cities and municipalities are under the jurisdiction of the Entity (in Republika Srpska) or under the jurisdiction of cantons (Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina). The Dayton Peace Agreement afforded the special designation as a district, while also creating the Office of the High Representative that currently oversees the district of Br\u010dko.\nBulgaria.\nThe capital city of Sofia has the status of oblast (region).\nCroatia.\nThe capital city of Zagreb has the status equal to \u017eupanija (county), whereas all other cities and municipalities are under a county jurisdiction.\nHistorically, Croatian cities became independent by being named a \"royal free city\". Under the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the city of Rijeka (Fiume) was a separate city from the Counties of Hungary, and the Modros-Fiume County that surrounded it.\nFrance.\nThe city of Paris is both a \"d\u00e9partement\" and a \"commune\"; it is the only French city with this status. The Council of Paris (\"Conseil de Paris\") exercises functions similar to those of a departmental council (\"conseil d\u00e9partemental\") and a city council (\"conseil municipal\"). However, Paris and the \"d\u00e9partements\" closest to it are part of the \u00cele-de-France . Lyon is a metropole, a unique territorial collectivity which includes the commune of Lyon itself and its suburbs. The Lyon metropole is an entity which is not part of the nearby Rhone department but it is still part of the Auvergne-Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes region, however it has significant more autonomy than a typical department. All together, the Lyon metropolis makes up the second largest city in France \nGermany.\nIn Germany, most of the federal states are subdivided into administrative districts called Kreise (\"circles\"), each of which normally includes several towns or cities. However, a number of the more important and more populous cities are not part of a \"Kreis\", but are instead themselves each equivalent in status and functions to a \"Kreis\". Such cities are known as \"kreisfreie St\u00e4dte\" (literally, \"district-free cities\") \u2013 or, in the case of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, \"Stadtkreise\" (\"urban districts\").\nThere are currently 110 \"kreisfreie St\u00e4dte\" (or equivalents). Of these, the 22 largest are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Stadtstaaten\" of Germany.\nTwo cities in Germany, namely Berlin and Hamburg, are considered city-states (German: \"Stadtstaaten\"). Additionally, the state of Bremen is officially classified as a city-state although it consists of the two cities of Bremen and Bremerhaven, which are separated by the state of Lower Saxony. Together with thirteen area states (German: \"Fl\u00e4chenl\u00e4nder\") they form the sixteen federal states of Germany. Hamburg and Bremen are \"Free and Hanseatic Cities\".\nGenerally, the city-states have no other rights or duties than the other states. Through the financial redistribution system of Equalization Payments in Germany (German: \"L\u00e4nderfinanzausgleich\"), they do receive more money because of their demographic characteristics. The city-states are most distinctive due to the names of their state organs: their governments are called Senate, the prime ministers 'mayor' (Governing Mayor in Berlin and First Mayor in Hamburg) or President of the Senate (in Bremen) and also the expressions for their state parliaments differ from the other states.\nIn the 18th century, many German cities were free imperial cities (German: \"Reichsst\u00e4dte\"), without a principality between them and the imperial level. After the Napoleonic era, in 1815, four were still city-states: Hamburg, Bremen and L\u00fcbeck in Northern Germany, and Frankfurt where the Federal Convention was located. Frankfurt was incorporated by Prussia in 1866, and L\u00fcbeck became a part of Prussia during the national socialist regime in 1937 (Greater Hamburg Law). After 1945, Berlin was a divided city, and the Western part became a German quasi-state under (Western) Allied supervision. Since 1990/1991, the reunited Berlin is an ordinary German state among others.\nHungary.\nIn Hungary, 23 of the cities are \"cities with county rights\". These cities have equal rights with the 19 counties of Hungary. Budapest, the capital city is also a special district, outside of the country's system of counties. Although Budapest does not belong to Pest County which surrounds it, it is still the county headquarters.\nIreland.\nCork, Dublin, Galway, Limerick and Waterford are governed by independent city councils.\nNorway.\nIn Norway, Oslo is both a municipality (\"kommune\") and a county (\"fylke\") within itself.\nPoland.\nUrban gmina.\nAmong Polish municipalities containing a town or a city, 638 are organized as a mixed urban-rural gmina () consisting of a town and surrounding villages and countryside, governed by a common municipal government. The remaining 302 of them, however, are a standalone urban gmina () which contains solely either an independent town or one of the 107 cities (the latter governed by a city mayor or \"prezydent miasta\").\nCity with powiat rights.\nAmong the 107 cities, 66 of them constitute counties in their own right, formally called cities with powiat rights. They are suitably marked on the list of counties in Poland.\nRomania.\nBucharest, the capital of Romania, is outside the country's system of counties.\nRussian Federation.\nIn the Russian Federation, Moscow and Saint Petersburg are both subjects of the federation and cities themselves. Russia also considers the Crimean city of Sevastopol to be a federal city of Russia, but this is not recognized by the majority of states who see the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea as unlawful.\nSpain.\nIn Spain, there exist two so-called \"autonomous cities\", Ceuta and Melilla, which are located on the North African coast surrounded by Morocco and have been under Spanish jurisdiction since the 15th century. Spain is a highly decentralized state organized in autonomous communities. These two cities hold their special status because they are not large enough to be considered regions on their own. Nonetheless, they function as autonomous communities with a high degree of self-administration and law-making powers.\nSweden.\nHistorically, until 1967, Stockholm did not belong to any county of Sweden. Instead, there was a Governor of Stockholm that had the normal responsibilities of the County Administrative Boards and their managers, the governors. There was no County Council (which is elected by the people and is responsible for example for health care); instead, the City of Stockholm handled such tasks.\nSwitzerland.\nOne of the cantons of Switzerland, Basel-Stadt, is considered to be a city-state, although it contains two smaller municipalities Bettingen and Riehen alongside the city of Basel itself.\nUkraine.\nIn Ukraine, the cities of Kyiv and Sevastopol are part of the country constituent regions along with the autonomous republic of Crimea (ARK), and 24 other oblasts (see Oblasts of Ukraine).\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the UK, having city status gives the city's local government no additional inherent powers; city status depends on a grant from the monarch and merely confers on the place so designated the right to call itself a city. Many cities and large urban areas are unitary authorities, meaning they have their own local government, separate from the surrounding county. (However, a number of large urban areas have a number of unitary authorities, such as Greater Manchester, which mean they do not have a unified, citywide local government.) County borough referred to a borough or a city, independent of county council control in England and Wales from 1889 to 1974 with the term continuing in use in Northern Ireland. Wales re-introduced the term in 1994 for use with certain unitary authorities.\nLondon, the capital of the United Kingdom and its constituent country England, is administratively Greater London, which consists of the City of London and 32 London boroughs. Greater London is not one of the metropolitan or non-metropolitan counties, which the remainder of England is subdivided into. London has its own assembly and directly elected mayor, which exercise local government/devolved powers greater than any other city or place in the UK, apart from the nations/provinces of Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nIn the Canadian province of Ontario, independent cities are referred to as a single-tier municipalities. In addition, there are also separated municipalities.\nIn Quebec, they are often called separated cities, as they are not a part of their surrounding regional county municipality.\nIn Alberta, all municipalities (cities, towns, villages, and summer villages) are separate from their surrounding county.\nIn Saskatchewan and Manitoba, all cities, towns, villages, and resort villages are separate from their surrounding rural municipality; unincorporated communities, including local urban districts, remain part of the rural municipality they lie within.\nIn New Brunswick, all county government was abolished in 1967. Therefore, in theory, all cities, townships, and settlements in New Brunswick could be considered independent cities.\nDominican Republic.\nIn Dominican Republic the Nacional District, containing the city of Santo Domingo de Guzman was created as a special district in 1922.\nMexico.\nPreviously, the Federal District was a separate entity from any of the states of Mexico. However, on 30 January 2016, it became one of the states of the United Mexican States, as well as the capital of the country, calling itself Mexico City.\nUnited States.\nThere are 41 independent cities in the United States. Of these, 38 are in Virginia. They are called 'independent' because they are not in the territory of any county or counties. Independent cities in Virginia may, however, serve as county seats for neighboring counties.\nThe three independent cities outside Virginia are Baltimore, Maryland; St. Louis, Missouri; and Carson City, Nevada.\nNew York City displays many features associated with independent cities but is, in fact, a \"sui generis\" municipality that is coextensive with five counties. Counties invariably are administrative divisions of state government. In the case of New York City, however, they are also administrative divisions of \"city\" government. As city administrative divisions, the five counties are called boroughs, retaining the label 'county' as state administrative divisions. For three out of the five boroughs, the borough and county have different names: the borough of Manhattan is the County of New York; Brooklyn is Kings County; and Staten Island is Richmond County. For the remaining two boroughs, Queens and the Bronx, the county and borough share the same name. Each county elects their own District Attorney to prosecute crimes. Other than that, they have no administrative functions independent of the city government.\nAnother similar entity is a consolidated city-county. An independent city is not even nominally part of any county, whereas for a consolidated city and county, the county at least nominally exists. In some cases, such as Indianapolis, Indiana, the largest city in a county is consolidated with the county government while smaller communities continue to operate within the same county but separately from Indianapolis. In other cases, such as The City and County of Honolulu, Hawaii, and The City and County of San Francisco, California, there is a complete consolidation of municipality and county. San Francisco, for example, has a chief executive called \"Mayor\", a term normally associated with city government, but the legislative body is called \"Board of Supervisors\", which is otherwise associated with county government in California.\nWashington, D.C., meanwhile, effectively functions in varying ways as an independent city, consolidated city-county, and state all in one, although it has special Constitutional status as the \"district constituting the seat of government of the United States,\" and is not part of a county or a state. In 1871, the cities of Washington and Georgetown and the County of Washington were consolidated into a single local government.\nSouth America.\nArgentina.\nThe Buenos Aires city was previously the Federal District of Argentina. In 1996, under the 1994 reform of the Argentine Constitution, the city gained autonomous city status, and changed its formal name to Autonomous City of Buenos Aires, and held its first mayoral elections. Buenos Aires is represented in the Argentine Senate by three senators and in the Argentine Chamber of Deputies by 25 national deputies.\nBrazil.\nBras\u00edlia, the capital of Brazil, is set within the Federal District. The Federal District is a special unit of the federation, as it is not organized the same manner as a municipality, does not possess the same autonomy as a state (but is ranked among them) and is closely related to the central power. The District Governor is elected directly for a 4-year term. Local laws are issued by a legislative chamber also elected by the local population. Judiciary affairs are carried out by the Union, instead of being appointed by the governor as in the other states of Brazil. The Federal District has the status of a federal state in many aspects. It has representatives both in the Chamber of Deputies (lower house of congress) and in the Federal Senate (upper house of congress).\nColombia.\nIn Colombia the Capital District, containing the city of Bogot\u00e1 was created as Special District in 1955 by Gustavo Rojas Pinilla.\nVenezuela.\nThe Capital District has the capital of Venezuela, Caracas.\nOceania.\nPapua New Guinea.\nPort Moresby, the capital of Papua New Guinea, has been contained within the National Capital District of Papua New Guinea since the country achieved independence in 1975.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46343", "revid": "13353642", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46343", "title": "Richard Blaine", "text": ""}
{"id": "46344", "revid": "50715679", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46344", "title": "Roberto Benigni", "text": "Italian actor, comedian, screenwriter, and film director (born 1952)\nRoberto Remigio Benigni ( , ; born 27 October 1952) is an Italian actor, comedian, screenwriter, and film director. He gained international recognition for writing, directing, and starring in the Holocaust comedy drama film \"Life Is Beautiful\" (1997), for which he received the Academy Awards for Best Actor and Best International Feature Film. Benigni was the first actor to win the Best Actor Academy Award for a non-English language performance.\nBenigni made his acting debut in 1977's \"Berlinguer, I Love You\", which he also wrote, and which was directed by Giuseppe Bertolucci. Benigni's directorial debut was the 1983 anthology film \"Tu mi turbi\", which was also the acting debut of his wife, Nicoletta Braschi. He continued directing and also starring in the comedic films \"Nothing Left to Do But Cry\" (1984), \"The Little Devil\" (1988), \"Johnny Stecchino\" (1991), \"The Monster\" (1994), the award-winning film \"Life Is Beautiful\" (1997), \"Pinocchio\" (2002, as the title character), and \"The Tiger and the Snow\" (2005).\nBenigni acted in the Jim Jarmusch films \"Down by Law\" (1986), \"Night on Earth\" (1991), and \"Coffee and Cigarettes\" (2003). He also acted in Federico Fellini\u2019s \" The Voice of the Moon\" (1990), Blake Edwards' \"Son of the Pink Panther\" (1993), Woody Allen's \"To Rome with Love\" (2012), and Matteo Garrone's \"Pinocchio\" (2019, as Geppetto).\nEarly life.\nBenigni was born on 27 October 1952 in Manciano La Misericordia (a \"frazione\" of Castiglion Fiorentino), Tuscany, the son of Isolina Papini (1919\u20132004), a fabric maker, and Luigi Benigni (1919\u20132004), a bricklayer, carpenter, and farmer. He has three sisters: Bruna (born 1945), Albertina (born 1947) and Anna (born 1948). He was raised Catholic and served as an altar boy; later in his life he became an atheist, but then resumed his interest in religious topics, such as the Ten Commandments and the Song of Songs.\nHis first experiences as a theatre actor took place in 1971, in Prato. During that autumn he moved to Rome where he took part in some experimental theatre shows, some of which he also directed. In 1975, Benigni had his first theatrical success with \"Cioni Mario di Gaspare fu Giulia\", written by Giuseppe Bertolucci. Benigni studied clown under Philippe Gaulier at \u00c9cole Philippe Gaulier.\nBenigni became widely known in Italy in the 1970s for a television series called \"Onda Libera\", on Rai 2, produced by Renzo Arbore, in which he interpreted the satirical piece \"The Hymn of the Body Purged\" (\"L'inno del corpo sciolto\", a scatological song about the joys of defecation). A great scandal for the time, the series was suspended due to censorship. His first film was 1977's \"Berlinguer, I Love You\" (\"Berlinguer ti voglio bene\"), also by Bertolucci.\nHis popularity increased with \"L'altra domenica\" (1976\u20131979), another TV show of Arbore's in which Benigni portrayed a lazy film critic who never watches the films he's asked to review. Bernardo Bertolucci then cast him in a small speechless role as a window upholsterer in the film \"La Luna\" which had limited American distribution due to its subject matter.\nCareer.\nEarly roles.\nIn 1980 he met Cesenate actress Nicoletta Braschi, who became his wife on 26 December 1991 and who has starred in most of the films he has directed.\nIn June 1983 he appeared during a public political demonstration by the Italian Communist Party, with which he was a sympathiser, and on this occasion, he lifted and cradled the party's national leader Enrico Berlinguer. It was an unprecedented act, given that until that moment Italian politicians were proverbially serious and formal. Benigni was censored again in the 1980s for calling Pope John Paul II something impolite during an important live TV show (\"Wojtylaccio\", meaning 'Bad Wojtyla' in Italian, but with a somewhat friendly meaning in Tuscan dialect).\nBenigni's first film as director was \"Tu mi turbi\" (\"You Upset Me\") in 1983. This film was also his first collaboration with Braschi.\nIn 1984, he played in \"Non ci resta che piangere\" ('Nothing Left to Do but Cry') with comic actor Massimo Troisi. The story was a fable in which the protagonists are suddenly thrown back in time to the 15th century, just a little before 1492. They start looking for Christopher Columbus in order to stop him from discovering the Americas (for very personal reasons), but are not able to reach him.\nHollywood roles.\nBeginning in 1986, Benigni starred in three films by American director Jim Jarmusch. In \"Down By Law\" (1986) (which in Italy had its title spelt \"Daunbail\u00f2\", in Italian phonetics) he played Bob, an innocent foreigner living in the United States, convicted of manslaughter, whose irrepressible good humour and optimism help him to escape and find love (the film also starred Braschi as his beloved). In \"Night on Earth\" (1991) he played a cabbie in Rome, who causes his passenger, a priest, great discomfort and a heart attack by confessing his bizarre sexual experiences. Later, he also starred in the first of Jarmusch's series of short films, \"Coffee and Cigarettes\" (2003).\nIn 1990, he was a member of the Jury at the 40th Berlin International Film Festival.\nIn 1993, he starred in \"Son of the Pink Panther\", directed by veteran Blake Edwards. Benigni played Peter Sellers' Inspector Clouseau's illegitimate son who is assigned to save the Princess of Lugash. The film bombed in the US, but was a hit in his homeland.\nBenigni had a rare serious role in Federico Fellini's last film, \"La voce della luna\" ('The Voice of the Moon') (1990). In earlier years Benigni had started a long-lasting collaboration with screenwriter Vincenzo Cerami, for a series of films which scored great success in Italy: \"Il piccolo diavolo\" ('The Little Devil') with Walter Matthau, \"Johnny Stecchino\" ('Johnny Toothpick'), and \"Il mostro\" ('The Monster').\n\"Life Is Beautiful\".\nBenigni is widely known outside Italy for his 1997 tragicomedy \"Life Is Beautiful\" (\"La vita \u00e8 bella\"), filmed in Arezzo, also written by Cerami. The film is about an Italian Jewish man who tries to protect his son's innocence during his internment at a Nazi concentration camp, by telling him that the Holocaust is an elaborate game and he must adhere very carefully to the rules to win. Benigni's father had spent three years in a concentration camp in Bergen-Belsen, and \"La vita \u00e8 bella\" is based in part on his father's experiences. Benigni was also inspired by the story of Holocaust survivor Rubino Romeo Salmon\u00ec. Although the story and presentation of the film had been discussed during production with different Jewish groups to limit the offence it might cause, the film was attacked by some critics, who accused it of presenting the Holocaust without much suffering, while others argued that a comedy about such a subject was not appropriate. More favourable critics praised Benigni's artistic daring and skill to create a sensitive comedy involving the Holocaust, a challenge that Charlie Chaplin confessed he would not have taken on with \"The Great Dictator\" had he been aware of the true horrors occurring in ghettos and concentration camps in Europe at the time.\nIn 1998, the film was nominated for seven Academy Awards. At the 1999 ceremony, the film was awarded the Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film (which Benigni accepted as the film's director), Best Original Dramatic Score (the score by Nicola Piovani), and Benigni received the award for Best Actor (the first for a male performer in a non-English-speaking role, and only the third overall acting Oscar for non-English-speaking roles).\nOvercome with giddy delight after \"Life Is Beautiful\" was announced as the Best Foreign Language Film at the Oscars, Benigni climbed over and then stood on the backs of the seats in front of him and applauded the audience before proceeding to the stage. After winning his Best Actor Oscar later in the evening, he said in his acceptance speech, \"This is a terrible mistake because I used up all my English!\" To close his speech, Benigni quoted the closing lines of Dante's \"Divine Comedy\" (\"Divina Commedia\"), referencing \"the love that moves the sun and all the stars\". At the following year's ceremony, when he read the nominees for Best Actress (won by Hilary Swank for \"Boys Don't Cry\"), host Billy Crystal playfully appeared behind him with a large net to restrain Benigni if he got excessive with his antics again. On a 1999 episode of \"Saturday Night Live\", host Ray Romano played him in a sketch parodying his giddy behavior at the ceremony.\nBeyond \"Life Is Beautiful\".\nBenigni played one of the main characters in \"Asterix and Obelix vs. Caesar\" as Detritus, a corrupt Roman provincial governor who wants to kill Julius Caesar, thereby seizing control of the Roman Republic.\nThat same year, he gave a typically energetic and revealing interview to Canadian filmmaker Damian Pettigrew for \"\" (2002), a cinematic portrait of the maestro that was nominated for Best Documentary at the European Film Awards. The film went on to win the prestigious Rockie Award for Best Arts Documentary at the Banff World Television Festival (2002) and the \"Coup de Coeur\" at the International Sunnyside of the Doc Marseille (2002).\nIn 2003, Benigni was honored by the National Italian American Foundation (NIAF), receiving the Foundation's NIAF Special Achievement Award in Entertainment.\nHis film \"La tigre e la neve\" (\"The Tiger and the Snow,\" 2005) is a love story set during the initial stage of the Iraq War.\nOn 15 October 2005, he performed an impromptu striptease on Italy's most watched evening news program, removing his shirt and draping it over the newscaster's shoulders. Prior to removing his shirt, Benigni had already hijacked the opening credits of the news program, jumping behind the newscaster and announcing: \"Berlusconi has resigned!\" (Benigni was an outspoken critic of media tycoon and then former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi.) The previous day, he had led a crowd of thousands in Rome on Friday in protest at the centre-right government's decision to cut state arts funding by 35 per cent.\nOn 2 February 2007, he was awarded the degree of Doctor Honoris Causa by the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium. On 22 April 2008, the degree of Doctor Honoris Causa was conferred on him by the University of Malta, celebrated by a \"Settimana Dantesca\" including Benigni's first stage appearance at a university and the premiere of his performing with Dante scholar Robert Hollander.\nIn 2012, he starred in the Woody Allen film, \"To Rome with Love\".\nIn 2019, he starred as Geppetto in Matteo Garrone's 2019 adaptation of \"Pinocchio\".\n\"TuttoDante\".\nBenigni is an improvisatory poet (\"poesia estemporanea\" is a form of art popularly followed and practised in Tuscany), appreciated for his explanation and recitations of Dante's \"Divine Comedy\" (\"Divina Commedia\") from memory.\nDuring 2006 and 2007, Benigni had a lot of success touring Italy with his 90-minute \"one-man show\" \"TuttoDante\" ('Everything About Dante'). Combining current events and memories of his past narrated with an ironic tone, Benigni then begins a journey of poetry and passion through the world of the \"Divine Comedy\".\n\"TuttoDante\" has been performed in numerous Italian piazzas, arenas, and stadiums for a total of 130 shows, with an estimated audience of about one million spectators. Over 10 million more spectators watched the TV show, \"Il V canto dell'Inferno\" ('The 5th Song of Hell'), broadcast by Rai 1 on 29 November 2007, with re-runs on Rai International.\nBenigni began North American presentations of \"TuttoDante\" with an announcement that he learned English to bring the gift of Dante's work to English speakers. The English performance incorporates dialectic discussion of language and verse and is a celebration of modernity and the concept of human consciousness as created by language.\nBenigni brought \"TuttoDante\" to the United States, Canada and Argentina in the TuttoDante Tour between 2008 and 2009 with performances in San Francisco, Boston and Chicago. Benigni was feted in San Francisco at a special reception held by the National Italian American Foundation in his honour on 24 May 2009. Following his U.S. premiere Benigni performed his last presentation on 16 June 2009, in Buenos Aires, Argentina where he was awarded \"Honorary Citizenship of the City of Buenos Aires\" in a ceremony held at the Legislative Palace in homage to the notable Italian diaspora and culture in Argentina.\nIn other media.\nBenigni is also a singer-songwriter. Among his recorded performances are versions of Paolo Conte's songs.\nIn 2002 was published his compilation-album \"Quanto t'ho amato\".\nHonors.\nIn 1999, a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs, California, Walk of Stars was dedicated to him.\nHonorary degrees.\nIn addition to numerous film awards, Benigni has garnered honorary degrees from universities worldwide:\nInfluence.\nThe Europe List, the largest survey on European culture, established that the top three films in European culture are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46345", "revid": "8931761", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46345", "title": "Arthur Treacher's", "text": "American fast food seafood restaurant chain\nArthur Treacher's Fish &amp; Chips is an American fast food seafood restaurant and restaurant chain that specializes in fish and chips. At the peak of its popularity in the late 1970s, it had 826 stores. As of 2025, there are only three stand-alone Arthur Treacher's locations remaining. The menu typically offers fried seafood or chicken, accompanied by french fries (chips). The fish recipe is authentic having been purchased from Malin's in Bow, the first recorded fish and chip shop in England (est. 1860s).\nFounding.\nThe franchise was established in 1969 in Columbus, Ohio, as National Fast Food Corp. The founders included S. Robert Davis, his friend Dave Thomas (future Wendy's founder), and L. S. Hartzog. They were looking to sell an authentic traditional British fish and chips. The company investigated the roots of the dish in London, where in the 1860s Joseph Malin opened the first recorded combined fish-and-chip shop, located in Bow, East London, called \"Malin's in Bow\". For over one hundred years, the Malin family ran that store until closing in the early 1970s. In 1969, Malin's sold the exclusive rights to their recipe to Arthur Treacher's. The chain kept the same recipe and cooking methods that had originated in 19th century London, thus their slogan \"the original\". At one point in 2021, there was only one Arthur Treacher's restaurant left, in Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio, making it the only place in the world that still served the historic recipe.\nThe chain was also looking for a namesake and they purchased the rights to Arthur Treacher (1894\u20131975), an English character actor typecast as \"the perfect butler\" for his performances as Jeeves, a butler in several Shirley Temple films in addition to the role of Constable Jones in \"Mary Poppins\" from . At the time the chain was founded, Treacher was best known as the announcer and sidekick to Merv Griffin on \"The Merv Griffin Show\". Although Treacher never confirmed whether he had a financial involvement in the restaurants, he was \"a spokesman for the restaurant chain in its early years, underscoring the British character of its food.\" Treacher sometimes visited the restaurants, arriving in a red double-decker bus.\nLater mergers.\nFisher Foods.\nIn 1970, Fisher Foods swapped capital with and licensed franchises from National, with a total of 550 franchises sold (106 to Fisher alone), but only 99 stores were actually in operation. Long John Silver's, Captain D's, Skipper's and Alfie's Fish &amp; Chips likewise employed the fish franchise concept about the same time. Aided by Arthur Treacher's advertisements, these companies introduced British fish and chips to northeastern America.\nOrange Co..\nBy the early 1970s, National Fast Food had become Orange Co. Under this name, Davis conducted an aggressive expansion campaign from 1972 through 1976. Lacking equity, he relied on generous sale-leaseback agreements. Under the terms of the agreements, Orange Co. would sell to investors sites for new restaurants and then sign long leases unconditionally guaranteeing to continue lease payments if the restaurants failed.\nMrs. Paul's Seafood.\nOn November 21, 1979, Orange Co. sold Arthur Treacher's to Mrs. Paul's. However, under the terms of its original sale-leaseback agreements, Orange Co. remained liable for millions of dollars of payments to investors.\nThe \"Cod Wars\" between the UK and Iceland during the 1970s caused cod prices to double. Mrs. Paul's responded by replacing Icelandic cod in Arthur Treacher's recipe with less expensive pollock. The move exacerbated tensions with franchisees\u2014some of whom had already withheld a total of $5 million in royalties for what they perceived to be a steadily declining level of service. Litigation arising from the conflict eventually reached the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit.\nLumara Foods.\nAfter losing the case to the franchisees and having no way to compensate them, Mrs. Paul's sold Arthur Treacher's to a Youngstown, Ohio group of investors called Lumara Foods of America Inc. in March 1982. Lumara Foods filed for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code four months later.\nInvestment group.\nThe company was then bought by a group of investors, and the corporate offices were moved to Youngstown, Ohio. It went into bankruptcy in 1983. Two years later, it was merged into a shell company by Jim Cataland. From 1985 to 1993, Cataland slowly expanded the company again. In 1993, money from a new group of investors headed by Bruce Galloway and Jeffrey Bernstein was used to introduce a more modern seafood concept, to buy additional stores, and to move the company from its base operations in Youngstown to Jacksonville, Florida. \nIn the mid-1980s, franchises in Detroit were converted by their owner to a new chain called Seafood Bay. Arthur Treacher's purchased back six Seafood Bay locations in 1997 but was unsuccessful in reverting them.\nThe company experimented with co-branding, forming an alliance with Arby's (which originated in the Youngstown suburb of Boardman) for co-branded locations. One such location existed in Breezewood, Pennsylvania. However, by the late 1990s, Arby's parent Triarc Cos. Inc. removed the Arthur Treacher's portions of its co-branded Arby's.\nPAT Franchise Systems.\nIn 2002, the company holding the Arthur Treacher's trademark was acquired by PAT Franchise Systems, a wholly owned subsidiary of TruFoods Systems. In 2006, Nathan's Famous bought the exclusive rights to market the Arthur Treacher's trademark and sell their products, co-branded with Nathan's Own concepts, Kenny Rogers Roasters, and Miami Subs (now Miami Grill). However, PAT Franchise Systems retained a license agreement entitling it to sell Arthur Treacher's Fish and Chips franchises in eight states.\nNathan's Famous.\nIn 2021, Nathan's Famous announced plans to offer Arthur Treacher's branded food nationwide as a ghost kitchen concept only available via food delivery services. James Walker, the senior vice president of restaurants, said, \"We think it's a nice combination of historic, storied brand, with new focus on the food.\u201d\nLocations.\nStand-alone.\nThere are three remaining stand-alone restaurants, all in northeast Ohio. The two oldest are in Cuyahoga Falls (est. 1972) and Garfield Heights (est. 1978) - the former has remained in continuous operation since its founding albeit in different buildings. By 2021, it was the last restaurant in the country. Ben Vittoria, the Cuyahoga Falls owner, kept the last store alive and indeed without him the entire franchise would have ceased to operate. In recognition of the restaurant's last stand at Cuyahoga Falls, the town mayor Don Walters designated June 30, 2021, as Arthur Treacher's Day. Customers traveled long distances to relive memories of youth and made the town a food destination. A map on the wall allowed diners to leave a pin where they came from. On April 1, 2025 a third location opened in Cleveland Heights, Ohio.\nEmbedded.\nIn addition to the Ohio stand-alone locations, four Salvatore's Pizzerias in Rochester, New York, have embedded Arthur Treacher's franchises. The Twin Oaks Convenience Store in Pomeroy, Ohio, has an Arthur Treacher's sharing kitchen space with a Hunt Brothers Pizza and a Sub Express. In East Islip, NY, a small strip-mall store has a combination Pudgie's Famous Chicken and Arthur Treacher's.\nInfluences.\nThe playwright August Wilson wrote the Tony Award-winning \"Jitney\" while dining at a Arthur Teacher's in Pittsburgh, PA.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46350", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46350", "title": "March 28, 2002", "text": ""}
{"id": "46356", "revid": "15996738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46356", "title": "Jack McDevitt", "text": "American science fiction author\nJack McDevitt (born April 14, 1935) is an American science fiction author whose novels frequently deal with attempts to make contact with alien races, and with archaeology or xenoarchaeology. Most of his books follow either superluminal pilot Priscilla \"Hutch\" Hutchins or galactic relic hunters Alex Benedict and Chase Kolpath. McDevitt has received numerous nominations for Hugo, Nebula, and John W. Campbell awards. \"Seeker\" won the 2006 Nebula Award for Best Novel.\nMcDevitt's first published story was \"The Emerson Effect\" in \"The Twilight Zone Magazine\" in 1981.\nBiography.\nMcDevitt went to La Salle University, where a short story of his won the annual Freshman Short Story Contest and was published in the school's literary magazine, \"Four Quarters\". As McDevitt explained in an interview:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was on my way. Then I read \"David Copperfield\" and realized I could never write at that level, and therefore I should find something else to do. I joined the Navy, drove a cab, became an English teacher, took a customs inspector's job on the northern border, and didn't write another word for a quarter-century.\nMcDevitt received a master's degree in literature from Wesleyan University in 1971. He returned to writing when his wife, Maureen, encouraged him to try his hand at it in 1980. As of 2007[ [update]], McDevitt lives near Brunswick, Georgia. In 2005, he donated his archive to the department of Rare Books and Special Collections at Northern Illinois University. The novel \"Seeker\" won the 2006 Nebula Award for Best Novel, given by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America. He has been nominated for the Nebula Award sixteen times; \"Seeker\" is his only win.\nThemes.\nWith \"The Engines of God\" (1994), McDevitt introduced the idea of a universe that was once teeming with intelligent life, but contains only their abandoned artifacts by the time humans arrive on the scene. The main character of \"The Engines of God\", pilot Priscilla Hutchins, has since appeared in seven more books, \"Deepsix\" (2001), \"Chindi\" (2002), \"Omega\" (2003), \"Odyssey\" (2006), \"Cauldron\" (2007), \"StarHawk\" (2013), and \"The Long Sunset\" (2018). The mystery surrounding the destructive \"Omega Clouds\" (which are introduced in \"The Engines of God\") is left unexplored until \"Omega\".\nMcDevitt's novels frequently raise questions which he does not attempt to answer. He prefers to leave ambiguities to puzzle and intrigue his readers: \"Some things are best left to the reader's very able imagination.\" The SF Site's Steven H Silver has written about this:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;McDevitt has a (probably unintentional) tendency to give the impression that his novels will go in one direction and then take them in a different direction. Or possibly his background is so well thought out, that throw away lines, or subplots, or minor characters, have enough information behind them to make the reader want to see their story as much as the main plot of the book. While slightly annoying, this is, I've decided, a strength of McDevitt's writing since it shows the depth of his created worlds.\nBibliography.\nNovels.\nAcademy Series - Priscilla \"Hutch\" Hutchins.\nThe short stories \"Melville on Iapetus\" (1983), \"Promises to Keep\" (1984), \"Oculus\" (2002), \"The Big Downtown\" (2005), \"Kaminsky at War\" (2006), \"Maiden Voyage\" (2012), \"Waiting at the Altar\" (2012), and \"The Cat's Pajamas\" (2012) are also set in the Academy universe.\nAlex Benedict.\nThe short stories \"In the Tower\" (1987) and \"A Voice in the Night\" (2013) are also set in the Alex Benedict universe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46357", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46357", "title": "Restaurant chain", "text": ""}
{"id": "46360", "revid": "829949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46360", "title": "Sashimi", "text": "Japanese dish of raw fish\n is a Japanese delicacy consisting of fresh raw fish or meat sliced into thin pieces and often eaten with soy sauce.\nOrigin.\nThe word \"sashimi\" means 'pierced body', i.e., \"\u523a\u8eab\" = \"sashimi\", where \u523a \u3057 = \"sashi\" (pierced, stuck) and \u8eab = \"mi\" (body, meat). This word dates from the Muromachi period (1336\u20131573) and there are multiple theories as to its etymology:\nThe term was possibly coined when the word \"\u5207\u308b\" = \"kiru\" (cut), the culinary step, was considered too inauspicious to be used by anyone other than a samurai. This word may derive from the culinary practice of sticking the fish's tail and fin to the slices for the purpose of identifying the fish being eaten.\nAnother possibility for the name is the traditional method of harvesting. \"\"Sashimi\"-grade\" fish is caught by individual handline. As soon as the fish is landed, its brain is pierced with a sharp spike, and it is placed in slurried ice. This spiking is called the ikejime process, and the instant death means that the fish's flesh contains a minimal amount of lactic acid. This means that the fish will keep fresh on ice for longer without turning white or otherwise degrading.\nMany non-Japanese use the terms \"sashimi\" and \"sushi\" interchangeably, but the two dishes are distinct and separate. Sushi refers to any dish made with vinegared rice. While raw fish is one traditional sushi ingredient, many sushi dishes contain seafood that has been cooked, and others have no seafood at all, including ingredients like seaweed, vegetables, omelets, and fried tofu. \"Sashimi,\" by contrast, is always served on its own. Although Japan has long had the custom of eating fish raw, the idea of serving it as a beautifully arranged dish is thought to have come from China, probably around the Kamakura period (1185\u20131333). An early cookbook in Japanese, written in 1489, directs that the raw flesh should be sliced and mixed with vinegar and seasonings such as salt and herbs.\nAn early western description of sashimi comes from a letter written by the future Admiral of the Fleet, Sir Arthur Wilson of the Royal Navy, who was assigned to the British naval mission to Japan in the late 1860s: \"It is a peculiar sort of fish, which they cut in very thin slices and serve up with some sort of sauce over it. It is considered a great delicacy. I have tried it and did not find it bad, but the idea is not nice.\"\nServing.\n\"Sashimi\" is often served early in a formal Japanese meal but it can also be served in a sashimi set meal, presented with rice and miso soup in separate bowls. Japanese chefs consider \"sashimi\" the finest dish in Japanese formal dining and recommend that it be eaten before other strong flavors affect the palate.\nThe sliced seafood that composes the main ingredient is typically draped over a garnish. The typical garnish is Asian white radish, \"daikon\", shredded into long thin strands, or single leaves of the herb \"shiso\" (perilla). Garnishes for sashimi are generally called \"tsuma\" and may also include slices of other raw vegetables, such as cucumbers and carrots, as well as seaweeds, flowers and leaves and stems of other plants.\n\"Sashimi\" is popularly served with a dipping sauce (soy sauce) and condiments such as wasabi paste, grated fresh ginger, \"gari\" or pickled ginger, grated fresh garlic, or ponzu for meat \"sashimi\", and such garnishes as shiso and shredded daikon radish.\nWasabi paste is sometimes mixed directly into soy sauce as a dipping sauce, which is generally not done when eating sushi (which itself normally includes \"wasabi\"). A reputed motivation for serving wasabi with \"sashimi\" and also \"gari\", besides its flavor, is killing harmful bacteria and parasites that could be present in raw seafood.\nPreparation.\nTo highlight the delicate flavor as well as for texture, the chef cuts fish into different thicknesses by variety of the fish, its age and by the season. The \"hira-zukuri\" cut (literally 'flat slice'), is the standard cut for most \"sashimi\". Typically this style of cut is the size of a domino and thick. Tuna, salmon, and kingfish are most commonly cut in this style. The \"usu-zukuri\" cut (literally 'thin slice'), is an extremely thin, diagonally cut slice that is mostly used to cut firm fish, such as bream, whiting, and flounder. The dimensions of this cut are usually long and wide. The \"kaku-zukuri\" cut (literally 'square slice'), is the style in which \"sashimi\" is cut into small cubes that are on each side. The \"ito-zukuri\" cut (literally 'thread slice'), is the style in which the fish is cut into fine strips, less than in diameter. The fish typically cut with the \"ito-zukuri\" style include garfish and squid; squid dish prepared in \"ito-zukuri\" is also called \"ika s\u014dmen\" and is dipped in dashi or \"men-tsuyu\" like eating \"s\u014dmen\" noodle.\nVarieties.\nPopular main ingredients for sashimi include:\nSome sashimi ingredients, such as octopus, are sometimes served cooked given their chewy nature. Most seafood, such as tuna, salmon, and squid, are served raw. \"Tataki\" (\u305f\u305f\u304d or \u53e9\u304d, 'pounded') is a type of sashimi that is quickly and lightly seared on the outside, leaving it raw inside.\nIngredients other than raw fish meat.\nFood cut into small pieces and eaten with wasabi and soy sauce may be called sashimi in Japan, including the following ingredients. Like bamboo shoots, the food is enjoyed raw to appreciate the freshness, and producers and farmers offer those sashimi at their properties in top season. Some of the vegetables are enjoyed as thin sliced strips and called sashimi while they resemble fish meat, like avocado as salmon and konnyaku as puffer fish.\nLess common, but not unusual, sashimi ingredients are vegetarian items, such as yuba (bean curd skin), and raw red meats, such as beef (known as \"gyuunotataki\") or horse (known as \"basashi\"). Chicken \"sashimi\" (known as \"toriwasa\") is considered by some to be a delicacy; the Nagoya k\u014dchin, French \"poulet de Bresse\" and its American derivative, the blue foot chicken, are favored by many for this purpose, as, besides their taste, they are certified to be free of \"Salmonella\". Chicken sashimi is sometimes slightly braised or seared on the outside.\nBeef, pork, and poultry are bought from licensed butchers and processors and served raw or slightly cooked to avoid high risk of food poisoning and parasite infection. Meat may be treated in boiling water (yubiki) or braised with a gas torch (aburi). Served with ponzu citrus vinegar.\nSafety.\nAs a raw food, consuming sashimi can result in foodborne illness when bacteria or parasites are present; for example, anisakiasis is a disease caused by the accidental ingestion of larval nematodes in the family Anisakidae, primarily \"Anisakis simplex\" but also \"Pseudoterranova decipiens\". In addition, incorrectly prepared fugu fish may contain tetrodotoxin, a potent neurotoxin.\nAnother type of foodborne illness that could occur after consuming tainted sashimi is diphyllobothriasis. This disease is an infection within the intestines that occurs when the tapeworm \"Diphyllobothrium latum\" is consumed. Common fish such as trout, salmon, pike, and sea bass harbor this parasitic larva in their muscles. Since the innovation of the chilled transport system paired with the salmon and trout consumption, an increasing number of cases have been recorded annually in northern Japan due to the spread of this disease.\nTraditionally, fish that spend at least part of their lives in brackish or fresh water were considered unsuitable for sashimi because of the possibility of parasites. For example, salmon, an anadromous fish, is not traditionally eaten straight out of the river. A study in Seattle, Washington, showed that all wild salmon had roundworm larvae capable of infecting people, while farm-raised salmon did not have any roundworm larvae. However, a study commissioned by the Pew Foundation found that total organic contaminants were consistently and significantly more concentrated in the farmed salmon as a group than in wild salmon.\nFreezing is often used to kill parasites. According to a European Union regulation, freezing fish at \u221220\u00a0\u00b0C (\u22124\u00a0\u00b0F) for 24 hours kills parasites. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommends freezing at \u221235\u00a0\u00b0C (\u221231\u00a0\u00b0F) for 15 hours, or at \u221220\u00a0\u00b0C (\u22124\u00a0\u00b0F) for 7 days.\nWhile Canada does not federally regulate freezing fish, British Columbia and Alberta voluntarily adhere to guidelines similar to the FDA's. Ontario attempted to legislate freezing as part of raw food handling requirements, though this was soon withdrawn due to protests by the industry that the subtle flavors and texture of raw fish would be destroyed by freezing. Instead, Ontario has decided to consider regulations on how raw fish must be handled prior to serving.\nSome fish for sashimi are treated with carbon monoxide to keep the flesh red for a longer time in storage. This practice can make spoiled fish appear fresh.\nEating chicken sashimi is a serious food poisoning risk. Despite it being on menus, it is hard to find, and many chefs cook it incorrectly. Chicken sashimi is also often sourced at certain restaurants from the thigh, liver and outer breast.\nEnvironmental concerns.\nWith the constant amount of fishing, bluefin tuna population rates have been steadily declining. A proposed solution has been farming bluefin tuna in fisheries. Historically, this has posed a problem in that the captive fish are not raised from spawn, but rather from small wild fish that are netted and transported to the farms, mostly in the Mediterranean. However, Japanese scientists have found a way to successfully breed and raise the fish entirely in captivity.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46363", "revid": "4052843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46363", "title": "LIE", "text": ""}
{"id": "46365", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46365", "title": "Fubar", "text": ""}
{"id": "46367", "revid": "28040267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46367", "title": "Tarfu", "text": "Tarfu or TARFU may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "46371", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46371", "title": "Phalangeriformes", "text": "Suborder of arboreal marsupials\nPhalangeriformes is a paraphyletic suborder of about 70 species of small to medium-sized arboreal marsupials native to Australia, New Guinea, and Sulawesi. The species are commonly known as possums, gliders, and cuscus. The common name \"(o)possum\" for various Phalangeriformes species derives from the creatures' resemblance to the opossums of the Americas (the term comes from Powhatan language \"aposoum\" \"white animal\", from Proto-Algonquian *\"wa\u00b7p-a\u0294\u026cemwa\" \"white dog\"). However, although opossums are also marsupials, Australasian possums are more closely related to other Australasian marsupials such as kangaroos.\nPhalangeriformes are quadrupedal diprotodont marsupials with long tails. The smallest species, indeed the smallest diprotodont marsupial, is the Tasmanian pygmy possum, with an adult head-body length of and a weight of . The largest are the two species of bear cuscus, which may exceed . Phalangeriformes species are typically nocturnal and at least partially arboreal. They inhabit most vegetated habitats, and several species have adjusted well to urban settings. Diets range from generalist herbivores or omnivores (the common brushtail possum) to specialist browsers of eucalyptus (greater glider), insectivores (mountain pygmy possum) and nectar-feeders (honey possum).\nClassification.\nAbout two-thirds of Australian marsupials belong to the order Diprotodontia, which is split into three suborders, namely the Vombatiformes (wombats and the koala, four species in total); the large and diverse Phalangeriformes (the possums and gliders) and Macropodiformes (kangaroos, potoroos, wallabies and the musky rat-kangaroo). Note: this classification is based on Ruedas &amp; Morales 2005. However, Phalangeriformes has been recovered as paraphyletic with respect to Macropodiformes, rendering the latter a subset of the former if Phalangeriformes are to be considered a natural group.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46373", "revid": "48579385", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46373", "title": "Edward I of England", "text": "King of England from 1272 to 1307\nEdward I (17/18 June 1239\u00a0\u2013\u00a07\u00a0July\u00a01307), also known as Edward Longshanks and the Hammer of the Scots (), was King of England from 1272 to 1307. Concurrently, he was Lord of Ireland, and from 1254 to 1306 ruled Gascony as Duke of Aquitaine in his capacity as a vassal of the French king. Before his accession to the throne, he was commonly referred to as the Lord Edward. \nThe eldest son of Henry\u00a0III, Edward was involved from an early age in the political intrigues of his father's reign. In 1259, he briefly sided with a baronial reform movement, supporting the Provisions of Oxford. After reconciling with his father, he remained loyal throughout the subsequent armed conflict, known as the Second Barons' War. After the Battle of Lewes, Edward was held hostage by the rebellious barons, but escaped after a few months and defeated the baronial leader Simon de Montfort at the Battle of Evesham in 1265. Within two years, the rebellion was extinguished and, with England pacified, Edward left to join the Ninth Crusade to the Holy Land in 1270. He was on his way home in 1272 when he was informed of his father's death. Making a slow return, he reached England in 1274 and was crowned at Westminster Abbey.\nEdward spent much of his reign reforming royal administration and common law. Through an extensive legal inquiry, he investigated the tenure of several feudal liberties. The law was reformed through a series of statutes regulating criminal and property law, but the King's attention was increasingly drawn towards military affairs. After suppressing a minor conflict in Wales in 1276\u201377, Edward responded to a second one in 1282\u201383 by conquering Wales. He then established English rule, built castles and towns in the countryside and settled them with English people. After the death of the heir to the Scottish throne, Edward was invited to arbitrate a succession dispute. He claimed feudal suzerainty over Scotland and invaded the country, and the ensuing First Scottish War of Independence continued after his death. Simultaneously, Edward found himself at war with France (a Scottish ally) after King PhilipIV confiscated the Duchy of Gascony. The duchy was eventually recovered but the conflict relieved English military pressure against Scotland. By the mid-1290s, extensive military campaigns required high levels of taxation and this met with both lay and ecclesiastical opposition in England. In Ireland, he had extracted soldiers, supplies and money, leaving decay, lawlessness and a revival of the fortunes of his enemies in Gaelic territories. When the King died in 1307, he left to his son EdwardII a war with Scotland and other financial and political burdens.\nEdward's temperamental nature and height () made him an intimidating figure. He often instilled fear in his contemporaries, although he held the respect of his subjects for the way he embodied the medieval ideal of kingship as a soldier, an administrator, and a man of faith. Modern historians are divided in their assessment of Edward; some have praised him for his contribution to the law and administration, but others have criticised his uncompromising attitude towards his nobility. Edward is credited with many accomplishments, including restoring royal authority after the reign of Henry\u00a0III and establishing Parliament as a permanent institution, which allowed for a functional system for raising taxes and reforming the law through statutes. At the same time, he is often condemned for vindictiveness, opportunism and untrustworthiness in his dealings with Wales and Scotland, coupled with a colonialist approach to their governance and to Ireland, and for antisemitic policies leading to the 1290 Edict of Expulsion, which expelled all Jews from England.\nEarly years, 1239\u20131263.\nChildhood and marriage.\nEdward was born at the Palace of Westminster on the night of 17\u201318 June 1239, to King Henry\u00a0III and Eleanor of Provence. Edward, an Anglo-Saxon name, was not commonly given among the aristocracy of England after the Norman Conquest, but Henry was devoted to the veneration of Edward the Confessor and decided to name his firstborn son after the saint. Edward's birth was widely celebrated at the royal court and throughout England, and he was baptised three days later at Westminster Abbey. He was commonly referred to as the Lord Edward until his accession to the throne in 1272. Among his childhood friends was his cousin Henry of Almain, son of King Henry's brother Richard of Cornwall. Henry of Almain remained a close companion of the prince for the rest of his life. Edward was placed in the care of Hugh Giffard\u00a0\u2013 father of the future Chancellor Godfrey Giffard\u00a0\u2013 until Bartholomew Pecche took over at Giffard's death in 1246. The details of Edward's upbringing are unknown, but he received an education typical of an aristocratic boy his age, including in military studies.\nThere were concerns about Edward's health as a child, and he fell ill in 1246, 1247, and 1251. Nonetheless, he grew up to become a strong, athletic, and imposing man. At he towered over most of his contemporaries, hence his epithet \"Longshanks\", meaning \"long legs\" or \"long shins\". The historian Michael Prestwich states that his \"long arms gave him an advantage as a swordsman, long thighs one as a horseman. In youth, his curly hair was blond; in maturity it darkened, and in old age it turned white. The regularity of his features was marred by a drooping left eyelid ... His speech, despite a lisp, was said to be persuasive.\"\nIn 1254, English fears of a Castilian invasion of the English-held province of Gascony induced King Henry to arrange a politically expedient marriage between fifteen-year-old Edward and thirteen-year-old Eleanor, the half-sister of King Alfonso X of Castile. They were married on 1\u00a0November 1254 in the Abbey of Santa Mar\u00eda la Real de Las Huelgas in Castile. As part of the marriage agreement, Alfonso X gave up his claims to Gascony, and Edward received grants of land worth 15,000\u00a0marks a year. The marriage eventually led to the English acquisition of Ponthieu in 1279 upon Eleanor's inheritance of the county. Henry made sizeable endowments to Edward in 1254, including Gascony; most of Ireland, which was granted to Edward, while making the claim for the first time that dominion of Ireland would never be separated from the English crown; and much land in Wales and England, including the Earldom of Chester. They offered Edward little independence, for Henry retained much control over the land, particularly in Ireland, and benefited from most of the income from those lands. Split control caused problems. Between 1254 and 1272, eleven different Justiciars were appointed to head the Irish government, encouraging further conflict and instability; corruption rose to very high levels. In Gascony, Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester, had been appointed as royal lieutenant in 1253 and drew its income, so Edward derived neither authority nor revenue from this province. Around the end of November 1254, Edward and Eleanor left Castile and entered Gascony, where they were warmly received by the populace. Here, Edward styled himself as \"ruling Gascony as prince and lord\", a move that the historian J. S. Hamilton states was a show of his blooming political independence.\nFrom 1254 to 1257, Edward was under the influence of his mother's relatives, known as the Savoyards, the most notable of whom was Peter II of Savoy, the Queen's uncle. After 1257, Edward became increasingly close to the Lusignan faction\u00a0\u2013 the half-brothers of his father Henry\u00a0III\u00a0\u2013 led by such men as William de Valence. The two groups of privileged foreigners were resented by the established English aristocracy, who would be at the centre of the ensuing years' baronial reform movement. Edward's ties to his Lusignan kinsmen were viewed unfavourably by contemporaries, including the chronicler Matthew Paris, who circulated tales of unruly and violent conduct by Edward's inner circle, raising questions about his personal qualities.\nEarly ambitions.\nEdward showed independence in political matters as early as 1255, when he sided with the Soler family in Gascony in their conflict with the Colomb family. This ran contrary to his father's policy of mediation between the local factions. In May 1258, a group of magnates drew up a document for reform of the King's government\u00a0\u2013 the so-called Provisions of Oxford\u00a0\u2013 largely directed against the Lusignans. Edward stood by his political allies and strongly opposed the Provisions. The reform movement succeeded in limiting the Lusignan influence, and Edward's attitude gradually changed. In March 1259, he entered into a formal alliance with one of the main reformers, Richard de Clare, 6th Earl of Gloucester, and on 15\u00a0October announced that he supported the barons' goals and their leader, the Earl of Leicester.\nThe motive behind Edward's change of heart could have been purely pragmatic: the Earl of Leicester was in a good position to support his cause in Gascony. When the King left for France in November, Edward's behaviour turned into pure insubordination. He made several appointments to advance the cause of the reformers, and his father believed that Edward was considering a coup d'\u00e9tat. When Henry returned from France, he initially refused to see his son, but through the mediation of Richard of Cornwall and Boniface, Archbishop of Canterbury, the two were eventually reconciled. Edward was sent abroad to France, and in November 1260 he again united with the Lusignans, who had been exiled there.\nBack in England, early in 1262, Edward fell out with some of his former Lusignan allies over financial matters. The next year, King Henry sent him on a campaign in Wales against the Welsh prince Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, but Edward's forces were besieged in northern Wales and achieved only limited results. Around the same time, Leicester, who had been out of the country since 1261, returned to England and reignited the baronial reform movement. As the King seemed ready to give in to the barons' demands, Edward began to take control of the situation. From his previously unpredictable and equivocating attitude, he changed to one of firm devotion to protection of his father's royal rights. He reunited with some of the men he had alienated the year before\u00a0\u2013 including Henry of Almain and John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey\u00a0\u2013 and retook Windsor Castle from the rebels. Through the arbitration of King Louis\u00a0IX of France an agreement was made between the two parties. This Mise of Amiens was largely favourable to the royalist side and would cause further conflict.\nCivil war and crusades, 1264\u20131273.\nSecond Barons' War.\nFrom 1264 to 1267 the Second Barons' War was fought between baronial forces led by the Earl of Leicester and those who remained loyal to the King. Edward initiated the fighting by capturing the rebel-held city of Gloucester. When Robert de Ferrers, 6th Earl of Derby, came to the assistance of the baronial forces, Edward negotiated a truce with the Earl. Edward later broke the terms of the agreement. He then captured Northampton from Simon de Montfort the Younger before embarking on a retaliatory campaign against Derby's lands. The baronial and royalist forces met at the Battle of Lewes, on 14\u00a0May 1264. Edward, commanding the right wing, performed well, and soon defeated the London contingent of the Earl of Leicester's forces. Unwisely, he pursued the scattered enemy, and on his return found the rest of the royal army defeated. By the Mise of Lewes, Edward and his cousin Henry of Almain were given up as hostages to Leicester.\nEdward remained in captivity until March 1265, and after his release was kept under strict surveillance. In Hereford, he escaped on 28\u00a0May while out riding and joined up with Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Gloucester, who had recently defected to the King's side. The Earl of Leicester's support was now dwindling, and Edward retook Worcester and Gloucester with little effort. Meanwhile, Leicester had made an alliance with Llywelyn and started moving east to join forces with his son Simon. Edward made a surprise attack at Kenilworth Castle, where the younger Montfort was quartered, before moving on to cut off the Earl of Leicester. The two forces then met at the Battle of Evesham, on 4\u00a0August 1265. The Earl of Leicester stood little chance against the superior royal forces, and after his defeat he was killed and his corpse mutilated on the field.\nThrough such episodes as the deception of Derby at Gloucester, Edward acquired a reputation as untrustworthy. During the summer campaign he began to learn from his mistakes and gained the respect and admiration of contemporaries through actions such as showing clemency towards his enemies. The war did not end with the Earl of Leicester's death, and Edward participated in the continued campaigning. At Christmas, he came to terms with Simon the Younger and his associates at the Isle of Axholme in Lincolnshire, and in March 1266 he led a successful assault on the Cinque Ports. A contingent of rebels held out in the virtually impregnable Kenilworth Castle and did not surrender until the drafting of the conciliatory Dictum of Kenilworth in October 1266. In April it seemed as if the Earl of Gloucester would take up the cause of the reform movement, and civil war would resume, but after a renegotiation of the terms of the Dictum of Kenilworth, the parties came to an agreement. Around this time, Edward was made steward of England and began to exercise influence in the government. He was also appointed Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports in 1265. Despite this, he was little involved in the settlement negotiations following the wars as he was planning his forthcoming crusade.\nCrusade and accession.\nEdward pledged himself to undertake a crusade in an elaborate ceremony on 24\u00a0June 1268, with his brother Edmund Crouchback and cousin Henry of Almain. Some of Edward's former adversaries, such as John de Vescy and the 7th Earl of Gloucester, similarly committed themselves, although some, like Gloucester, did not ultimately participate. With the country pacified, the greatest impediment to the project was funding. King Louis\u00a0IX of France, who was the leader of the crusade, provided a loan of about \u00a317,500. This was not enough, and the rest had to be raised through a direct tax on the laity, which had not been levied since 1237. In May 1270, Parliament granted a tax of one-twentieth of all movable property; in exchange the King agreed to reconfirm Magna Carta, and to impose restrictions on Jewish money lending. On 20\u00a0August Edward sailed from Dover for France. Historians have not determined the size of his accompanying force with any certainty, but it was probably fewer than 1000\u00a0men, including around 225\u00a0knights.\nOriginally, the Crusaders intended to relieve the beleaguered Christian stronghold of Acre in Palestine, but King Louis and his brother Charles of Anjou, the king of Sicily, decided to attack the emirate of Tunis to establish a stronghold in North Africa. The plan failed when the French forces were struck by an epidemic which, on 25\u00a0August, killed Louis. By the time Edward arrived at Tunis, Charles had already signed the Treaty of Tunis with the Emir, and there was little to do but return to Sicily. Further military action was postponed until the following spring, but a devastating storm off the coast of Sicily dissuaded both Charles and Philip III, Louis's successor, from any further campaigning. Edward decided to continue alone, and on 9\u00a0May 1271\u00a0he landed at Acre.\nThe Christian situation in the Holy Land was precarious. Jerusalem had been reconquered by the Muslims in 1244, and Acre was now the centre of the Kingdom of Jerusalem. The Muslim states were on the offensive under the Mamluk leadership of Baibars, and were threatening Acre. Edward's men were an important addition to the garrison, but they stood little chance against Baibars's superior forces, and an initial raid at nearby St Georges-de-Lebeyne in June was largely futile. An embassy to Abaqa, the Ilkhan of the Mongols, helped bring about an attack on Aleppo in the north, which distracted Baibars's forces. The Mongol invasion ultimately failed. In November, Edward led a raid on Qaqun, which could have served as a bridgehead to Jerusalem, but this was unsuccessful. The situation in Acre grew desperate, and in May 1272\u00a0Hugh III of Cyprus, the nominal king of Jerusalem, signed a ten-year truce with Baibars. Edward was initially defiant, but in June 1272 he was the victim of an assassination attempt by a member of the Syrian Order of Assassins, supposedly ordered by Baibars. He managed to kill the assassin, but was struck in the arm by a dagger feared to be poisoned, and was severely weakened over the following months. This persuaded Edward to abandon the campaign.\nOn 24\u00a0September 1272 Edward left Acre. Shortly after arriving in Sicily, he was met with the news that his father had died on 16\u00a0November. Edward was deeply saddened by this news, but rather than hurrying home, he made a leisurely journey northwards. This was due partly to his still-poor health, but also to a lack of urgency. The political situation in England was stable after the mid-century upheavals, and Edward was proclaimed king after his father's death, rather than at his own coronation, as had until then been customary. In Edward's absence, the country was governed by a royal council, led by Robert Burnell. Edward passed through Italy and France, visiting Pope Gregory X and paying homage to Philip III in Paris for his French domains. Edward travelled by way of Savoy to receive homage from his great-uncle Count Philip I for castles in the Alps held by a treaty of 1246.\nEdward then journeyed to Gascony to put down a revolt headed by Gaston de B\u00e9arn. While there, he launched an investigation into his feudal possessions, which, as Hamilton puts it, reflects \"Edward's keen interest in administrative efficiency ... [and] reinforced Edward's position as lord in Aquitaine and strengthened the bonds of loyalty between the king-duke and his subjects\". Around the same time, the King organised political alliances with the kingdoms in Iberia. His four-year-old daughter Eleanor was promised in marriage to Alfonso, the heir to the Crown of Aragon, and Edward's heir Henry was betrothed to Joan, heiress to the Kingdom of Navarre. Neither union would come to fruition. On 2 August 1274 Edward returned to England, landing at Dover. The thirty-five-year-old king held his coronation on 19 August at Westminster Abbey, alongside Queen Eleanor. Immediately after being anointed and crowned by Robert Kilwardby, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Edward removed his crown, saying that he did not intend to wear it again until he had recovered all the crown lands that his father had surrendered during his reign.\nEarly reign, 1274\u20131296.\nConquest of Wales.\nLlywelyn ap Gruffudd enjoyed a temporary advantage after the Barons' War. The 1267 Treaty of Montgomery recognised his ownership of land he had conquered in the Four Cantrefs of Perfeddwlad and his title of Prince of Wales. However, his administration was heavy-handed and unpopular, especially among Welshmen on the Marches, where Llywelyn resorted to hostage-taking and intimidation to retain his domination. He also entered into a damaging conflict with the Welsh church, further undermining his authority. Armed conflicts continued on the March. In 1272 Llywelyn suffered a major defeat to the Earl of Gloucester, Gilbert de Clare, and was forced to evacuate south-east Wales. This setback triggered a failed attempt to assassinate the prince, exposing divisions in his principality. The chief suspects, his younger brother Dafydd and Gruffudd ap Gwenwynwyn of Powys, fled to take refuge at the English court. Citing ongoing hostilities and Edward's harbouring of his enemies, Llywelyn refused to do homage to the King. For Edward, a further provocation came from Llywelyn's planned marriage to Eleanor, daughter of Simon de Montfort the Elder. Llywelyn was also suspected of planting a Montfortian spy, Nicholas Waltham, at Edward\u2019s court, and intriguing with Eleanor\u2019s brothers, Simon the Younger and Guy.\nIn November 1276, Edward declared war. Initial operations were under the captaincy of Mortimer, Edward's brother Edmund, Earl of Lancaster, and William de Beauchamp, 9th Earl of Warwick. Support for Llywelyn was weak among his countrymen. In July 1277 Edward invaded with a force of 15,500, of whom 9,000 were Welsh. The campaign never came to a major battle, and Llywelyn realised he had no choice but to surrender. By the Treaty of Aberconwy in November 1277, he was left only with the land of Gwynedd, though he was allowed to retain the title of Prince of Wales.\nWar broke out again in 1282. The Welsh saw the war as being over national identity and the right to traditional Welsh law. This enjoyed wide support, provoked by attempts to abuse the English legal system to dispossess prominent Welsh landowners, many of whom were Edward's former opponents. For Edward, it became a war of conquest aimed to \"put an end finally to \u2026 the malice of the Welsh\". The war started with a rebellion by Dafydd, who was discontented with the reward he had received in 1277. Llywelyn and other Welsh leaders soon joined in, and initially the Welsh attack was successful. In June, Gloucester was defeated at the Battle of Llandeilo Fawr. On 6\u00a0November, while John Peckham, Archbishop of Canterbury, was conducting peace negotiations, Edward's commander of Anglesey, Luke de Tany, carried out a surprise attack. A pontoon bridge had been built to the mainland, but shortly after Tany and his men crossed over, they were ambushed by the Welsh and suffered heavy losses at the Battle of Moel-y-don. The Welsh advances ended on 11\u00a0December, when Llywelyn was lured into a trap and killed at the Battle of Orewin Bridge. The conquest of Gwynedd was complete with the capture in June 1283 of Dafydd, who was taken to Shrewsbury and executed as a traitor the following year; Edward ordered Dafydd's head to be publicly exhibited on London Bridge. \nBy the 1284 Statute of Rhuddlan, the principality of Wales was incorporated into England and was given an administrative system like the English, with counties policed by sheriffs. English law was introduced in criminal cases; the Welsh were allowed to maintain their own customary laws in some cases of property disputes. After 1277, and increasingly after 1283, Edward embarked on a project of English settlement of Wales, creating new towns like Flint, Aberystwyth and Rhuddlan. Their new residents were English migrants, the local Welsh being banned from living there, and many were protected by extensive walls. \nAn extensive project of castle building was also initiated, under the direction of James of Saint George, a prestigious architect Edward had met in Savoy on his return from the crusade. These included Beaumaris, Caernarfon, Conwy and Harlech castles, intended to act as fortresses, royal palaces and as the new centres of civilian and judicial administration. His programme of castle building in Wales heralded the widespread introduction of arrowslits in castle walls across Europe, drawing on Eastern architectural influences. Also a product of the Crusades was the introduction of the concentric castle, and four of the eight castles Edward founded in Wales followed this design. The castles drew on imagery associated with the Byzantine Empire and King Arthur in an attempt to build legitimacy for his new rule, and they made a clear statement about Edward's intention to rule Wales permanently. The Welsh aristocracy were nearly wholly dispossessed of their lands. Edward was the greatest beneficiary of this process. Localised rebellions occurred in 1287\u201388, partly caused by Edward failing to reward former Welsh allies. A more serious revolt came in 1294, under the leadership of Madog ap Llywelyn, a distant relative of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. The causes of the 1294 revolt included resentment at the occupation, poor, colonial-style governance, and very heavy taxation. This last conflict demanded the King's attention, but in both cases the rebellions were put down. The revolt was followed by immediate punitive measures including taking 200 hostages. Measures to stop the Welsh from bearing arms or living in the new boroughs probably date from this time, and the Welsh administration continued to be nearly wholly imported. \nIn 1284, King Edward had his son Edward (later Edward\u00a0II) born at Caernarfon Castle, probably to make a statement about the new political order in Wales. In 1301 at Lincoln, the young Edward became the first English prince to be invested as Prince of Wales, when the King granted him the Earldom of Chester and lands across North Wales, hoping to give his son more financial independence. Edward began a more conciliatory policy to rebuild systems of patronage and service, particularly through his son as Prince of Wales, but Wales remained politically volatile, and a deep distrust remained between the English settlers and the Welsh.\nDiplomacy and war on the Continent.\nEdward never again went on crusade after his return to England in 1274, but he maintained an intention to do so, and in 1287 took a vow to go on another crusade. This intention guided much of his foreign policy, until at least 1291. To stage a European-wide crusade, it was essential to prevent conflict between the sovereigns on Continental Europe. A major obstacle to this was the conflict between the French Capetian House of Anjou ruling southern Italy and the Crown of Aragon in Spain. In 1282, the citizens of Palermo rose up against Charles of Anjou and turned for help to Peter III of Aragon, in what has become known as the Sicilian Vespers. In the war that followed, Charles of Anjou's son, Charles of Salerno, was taken prisoner by the Aragonese. The French began planning an attack on Aragon, raising the prospect of a large-scale European war. To Edward, it was imperative that such a war be avoided, and in Paris in 1286 he brokered a truce between France and Aragon that helped secure Charles's release. As far as the crusades were concerned, Edward's efforts proved ineffective. A devastating blow to his plans came in 1291, when the Mamluks captured Acre, the last Christian stronghold in the Holy Land.\nEdward had long been deeply involved in the affairs of his own Duchy of Gascony. In 1278 he assigned an investigating commission to his trusted associates Otto de Grandson and the chancellor Robert Burnell, which caused the replacement of the seneschal Luke de Tany. In 1286, Edward visited the region and stayed for almost three years. On Easter Sunday 1287, Edward was standing in a tower when the floor collapsed. He fell 80 feet, broke his collarbone, and was confined to bed for several months. Several others died. Soon after he regained his health, he ordered the local Jews expelled from Gascony, seemingly as a \"thank-offering\" for his recovery.\nThe perennial problem was the status of Gascony within the Kingdom of France, and Edward's role as the French king's vassal. On his diplomatic mission in 1286, Edward had paid homage to the new king, PhilipIV. Following an outbreak of piracy and informal war between English, Gascon, Norman, and French sailors in 1293, his brother Edmund Crouchback allowed Philip IV to occupy Gascony's chief fortresses as a show of good faith that Edward had not intended the seizure of several French ships or the sacking of the French port of La Rochelle. Philip refused to release the fortresses, and declared Gascony forfeit when Edward refused to appear before him again in Paris.\nCorrespondence between Edward and the Mongol court of the east continued during this time. Diplomatic channels between the two had begun during Edward's time on crusade, regarding a possible alliance to retake the Holy Land for Europe. Edward received Mongol envoys at his court in Gascony while there in 1287, and one of their leaders, Rabban Bar Sauma, recorded an extant account of the interaction. Other embassies arrived in Europe in 1289 and 1290, the former relaying Ilkhan Abaqa's offer to join forces with the crusaders and supply them with horses. Edward responded favourably, declaring his intent to travel to the east once he obtained papal approval. This did not materialise, but the King's decision to send Geoffrey of Langley as his ambassador to the Mongols showed that he was seriously considering the prospective Mongol alliance.\nEleanor of Castile died on 28\u00a0November 1290. The couple loved each other, and like his father, Edward was very devoted to his wife and was faithful to her throughout their marriage. He was deeply affected by her death, and displayed his grief by ordering the construction of twelve so-called Eleanor crosses, one at each place where her funeral cort\u00e8ge stopped for the night. \nIn 1294 a war at sea flared up between English and Norman privateers. Philip the Fair exploited the conflict to confiscate Gascony, provoking Edward to renounce his homage and declare war. After the initial fighting in Gascony, both kings sought to widen the conflict by forging expensive alliances. Edward joined forces with Adolf of Nassau (the King of Germany), the Count of Flanders and the barons of Franche-Comt\u00e9 in eastern Burgundy. Other members of the alliance included two of his sons-in-law, the Duke of Brabant and the Count of Bar-le-Duc. Edward's strategy was to attack the French on all fronts and stretch their forces to their breaking point. Most of his allies did indeed go into action and caused considerable damage in Champagne, Burgundy, Gascony and the Toulousaine. However, the King of Germany failed to join Edward in Flanders, obliging the allies to seek a truce in October 1297. Edward renewed his military contract with the Burgundians in March 1298, prolonging the war in Franche-Comt\u00e9. This may have been an effort to distract Philip and prevent him from aiding the Scots. The war was effectively frozen by the Treaties of Montreuil in 1299, whereby Edward agreed to marry Philip's sister Margaret. As part of her dowry Philip returned the county of Ponthieu, which had been seized along with Gascony in 1294. This restored Edward's position as a vassal of the French king, although Gascony was not formally returned until the 1303 Treaty of Paris.\nGreat Cause.\nThe relationship between England and Scotland by the 1280s was one of relatively harmonious coexistence. The issue of homage did not reach the same level of controversy as it did in Wales; in 1278 King Alexander\u00a0III of Scotland paid homage to Edward, who was his brother-in-law, but apparently only for the lands he held in England. Problems arose only with the Scottish succession crisis of the early 1290s. When Alexander died in 1286, he left as heir to the Scottish throne Margaret, his three-year-old granddaughter and sole surviving descendant. By the Treaty of Birgham, it was agreed that Margaret should marry King Edward's six-year-old son Edward of Caernarfon, though Scotland would remain free of English overlordship. Margaret, by now seven, sailed from Norway for Scotland in late 1290, but fell ill on the way and died in Orkney. This left the country without an obvious heir, and led to the succession dispute known as the Great Cause.\nFourteen claimants put forward their claims to the title, of whom the foremost competitors were John Balliol and Robert de Brus, 5th Lord of Annandale. The Scottish magnates made a request to Edward to conduct the proceedings and administer the outcome, but not to arbitrate in the dispute. The actual decision would be made by 104 auditors\u00a0\u2013 40 appointed by Balliol, 40 by Brus and the remaining 24 selected by Edward from senior members of the Scottish political community. At Birgham, with the prospect of a personal union between the two realms, the question of suzerainty had not been of great importance to Edward. Now he insisted that, if he were to settle the contest, he had to be fully recognised as Scotland's feudal overlord. The Scots were reluctant to make such a concession, and replied that since the country had no king, no one had the authority to make this decision. This problem was circumvented when the competitors agreed that the realm would be handed over to Edward until a rightful heir had been found. After a lengthy hearing, a decision was made in favour of John Balliol on 17\u00a0November 1292.\nEven after Balliol's accession, Edward still asserted his authority over Scotland. Against the objections of the Scots, he agreed to hear appeals on cases ruled on by the court of guardians that had governed Scotland during the interregnum. A further provocation came in a case brought by Macduff, son of Malcolm II, Earl of Fife, in which Edward demanded that Balliol appear in person before the English Parliament to answer the charges. This the Scottish King did, but the final straw was Edward's demand that the Scottish magnates provide military service in the war against France. This was unacceptable; the Scots instead formed an alliance with France and launched an unsuccessful attack on Carlisle. Edward responded by invading Scotland in 1296 and taking the town of Berwick-upon-Tweed which included the massacre of civilians. At the Battle of Dunbar, Scottish resistance was effectively crushed. Edward took the Stone of Destiny\u00a0\u2013 the Scottish coronation stone\u00a0\u2013 and brought it to Westminster, placing it in what became known as King Edward's Chair; he deposed Balliol and placed him in the Tower of London, and installed Englishmen to govern the country. The campaign had been very successful, but the English triumph would be only temporary.\nGovernment and law.\nCharacter as king.\nEdward had a reputation for a fierce and sometimes unpredictable temper, and he could be intimidating; one story tells how the Dean of St Paul's, wishing to confront Edward over high taxation in 1295, fell down and died once he was in the King's presence, and one 14th-century chronicler attributed the death of Archbishop Thomas of York to the King's harsh conduct towards him. When Edward of Caernarfon demanded an earldom for his favourite Piers Gaveston, the King erupted in anger and supposedly tore out handfuls of his son's hair. Some of his contemporaries considered Edward frightening, particularly in his early days. The \"Song of Lewes\" in 1264 described him as a leopard, an animal regarded as particularly powerful and unpredictable. At times, Edward exhibited a gentler disposition, and was known to be devoted to his large family. He was close to his daughters, and gave them expensive gifts when they visited court.\nDespite his harsh disposition, Edward's English contemporaries considered him an able, even an ideal, king. Though not loved by his subjects, he was feared and respected, as reflected in the lack of armed rebellions in England during his reign. Edward is often noted as exhibiting vindictiveness towards his defeated enemies, and triumphalism in his actions. Historian R.\u00a0R.\u00a0Davies considered Edward's repeated and \"gratuitous belittling of his opponents\", to have been \"one of the most consistent and unattractive features of his character as king\". Examples include the seizure of fragments of the Holy Cross from Wales after its defeat in 1283, and subsequently the Stone of Scone and regalia from Scotland after defeats in 1296. Some historians question Edward's good faith and trustworthiness in relation to his dealing with Wales and Scotland, believing him to have been capable of behaving duplicitously.\nHistorian Michael Prestwich believes Edward met contemporary expectations of kingship in his role as an able, determined soldier and in his embodiment of shared chivalric ideals. In religious observance he fulfilled the expectations of his age: he attended chapel regularly, gave alms generously and showed a fervent devotion to the Virgin Mary and Saint Thomas Becket. Like his father, Edward was a keen participant in the tradition of the royal touch, which was believed to cure those who were touched from scrofula. Contemporary records suggest that the King touched upwards of a thousand people each year. Despite his personal piety, Edward was frequently in conflict with the Archbishops of Canterbury who served during his reign. Relations with the Papacy were at times no better, Edward coming into conflict with Rome over the issue of ecclesiastical taxation. Edward's use of the church extended to war mobilisation including disseminating justifications for war, usually through the issue of writs to England's archbishops, who distributed his requests for services and prayers. Edward's architectural programme similarly had an element of propaganda, sometimes combining this with religious messages of piety, as with the Eleanor Crosses.\nEdward took a keen interest in the stories of King Arthur, which were popular in Europe during his reign. In 1278 he visited Glastonbury Abbey to open what was then believed to be the tomb of Arthur and Guinevere, and gained \"Arthur's crown\" from Llywelyn after the conquest of North Wales; his castle-building campaign in Wales drew upon the Arthurian myths in their design and location. He held \"Round Table\" events in 1284 and 1302, involving tournaments and feasting, and chroniclers compared him and the events at his court to Arthur. In some cases Edward appears to have used the Arthurian myths to serve his own political interests, including legitimising his rule in Wales and discrediting the Welsh belief that Arthur might return as their political saviour.\nAdministration and the law.\nSoon after assuming the throne, Edward set about restoring order and re-establishing royal authority after the troubled reign of his father. To accomplish this, he immediately ordered an extensive change of administrative personnel. The most important of these was the designation of Robert Burnell as chancellor in 1274, a man who would remain in the post until 1292 as one of the King's closest associates. The same year as Burnell's appointment, Edward replaced most local officials, such as the escheators and sheriffs. This last measure was taken in preparation for an extensive inquest covering all of England, that would hear complaints about abuse of power by royal officers. The second purpose of the inquest was to establish what land and rights the Crown had lost during the reign of Henry\u00a0III.\nThe inquest produced a set of census documents called the Hundred Rolls. These have been likened to the 11th-century Domesday Book, and they formed the basis for the later legal inquiries called the \"Quo warranto\" proceedings. The purpose of these inquiries was to establish by what warrant () liberties were held. If the defendant could not produce a royal licence to prove the grant of the liberty, then it was the Crown's opinion\u00a0\u2013 based on the writings of the influential 13th-century legal scholar Henry de Bracton\u00a0\u2013 that the liberty should revert to the King. Both the Statute of Westminster 1275 and Statute of Westminster 1285 codified the existing law in England. By enacting the Statute of Gloucester in 1278 the King challenged baronial rights through a revival of the system of general eyres (royal justices to go on tour throughout the land) and through a significant increase in the number of pleas of quo warranto to be heard by such eyres.\nThis caused great consternation among the aristocracy, who insisted that long use in itself constituted licence. A compromise was eventually reached in 1290, whereby a liberty was considered legitimate as long as it could be shown to have been exercised since the coronation of Richard the Lionheart in 1189. Royal gains from the \"Quo warranto\" proceedings were insignificant as few liberties were returned to the King, but he had nevertheless won a significant victory by establishing the principle that all liberties emanated from the Crown.\nThe 1290 statute of \"Quo warranto\" was only one part of a wider legislative reform, which was one of the most important contributions of Edward's reign. This era of legislative action had started already at the time of the baronial reform movement; the Statute of Marlborough (1267) contained elements both of the Provisions of Oxford and the Dictum of Kenilworth. The compilation of the Hundred Rolls was followed shortly after by the issue of Westminster\u00a0I (1275), which asserted the royal prerogative and outlined restrictions on liberties. The Statutes of Mortmain (1279) addressed the issue of land grants to the Church. The first clause of Westminster\u00a0II (1285), known as \"De donis conditionalibus\", dealt with family settlement of land, and entails. The Statute of Merchants (1285) established firm rules for the recovery of debts, and the Statute of Winchester (1285) dealt with security and peacekeeping on a local level by bolstering the existing police system. \"Quia emptores\" (1290)\u00a0\u2013 issued along with \"Quo warranto\"\u00a0\u2013 set out to remedy land ownership disputes resulting from alienation of land by subinfeudation. The age of the great statutes largely ended with the death of Robert Burnell in 1292.\nFinances and Parliament.\nEdward's reign saw an overhaul of the coinage system, which was in a poor state by 1279. Compared to the coinage already circulating at the time of Edward's accession, the new coins issued proved to be of superior quality. In addition to minting pennies, halfpences and farthings, a new denomination called the groat (which proved to be unsuccessful) was introduced. The coinmaking process itself was also improved. The moneyer William Turnemire introduced a novel method of minting coins that involved cutting blank coins from a silver rod, in contrast with the old practice of stamping them out from sheets; this technique proved to be efficient. The practice of minting coins with the moneyer's name on them became obsolete under Edward's rule because England's mint administration became far more centralised under the Crown's authority. During this time, English coins were frequently counterfeited on the Continent, especially the Low Countries, and despite a ban in 1283, English coinage was secretly exported to the European continent. In August 1280, Edward forbade the usage of the old long cross coinage, which forced the populace to switch to the newly minted versions. Records indicate that the coinage overhaul successfully provided England with a stable currency.\nEdward's frequent military campaigns put a great financial strain on the nation. There were several ways through which the King could raise money for war, including customs duties, loans and lay subsidies, which were taxes collected at a certain fraction of the moveable property of all laymen who held such assets. In 1275, Edward negotiated an agreement with the domestic merchant community that secured a permanent duty on wool, England's primary export. In 1303, a similar agreement was reached with foreign merchants, in return for certain rights and privileges. The revenues from the customs duty were handled by the Riccardi, a group of bankers from Lucca in Italy. This was in return for their service as moneylenders to the crown, which helped finance the Welsh Wars. When the war with France broke out, the French king confiscated the Riccardi's assets, and the bank went bankrupt. After this, the Frescobaldi of Florence took over the role as moneylenders to the English crown. Edward also sought to reduce pressure on his finances by helping his wife Eleanor to build an independent income.\nEdward held Parliament on a regular basis throughout his reign. In 1295, a significant change occurred. For this Parliament, as well as the secular and ecclesiastical lords, two knights from each county and two representatives from each borough were summoned. The representation of commons in Parliament was nothing new; what was new was the authority under which these representatives were summoned. Whereas previously the commons had been expected to assent to decisions made by the magnates, it was now proclaimed that they should meet with the full authority (\"plena potestas\") of their communities, to give assent to decisions made in Parliament. The King now had full backing for collecting lay subsidies from the entire population. Whereas Henry III had only collected four of these in his reign, Edward collected nine. This format eventually became the standard for later Parliaments, and historians have named the assembly the \"Model Parliament\", a term first introduced by the English historian William Stubbs.\nParliament and the expulsion of the Jews.\n Edward's policy towards the English Jews dominated his financial relations with Parliament until 1290. Jews, unlike Christians, were allowed to charge interest on loans, known as usury. Edward faced pressure from the church, who were increasingly intolerant of Judaism and usury. The Jews were the King's personal property, and he was free to tax them at will. Over-taxation of the Jews forced them to sell their debt bonds at cut prices, which was exploited by the crown to transfer vast land wealth from indebted landholders to courtiers and his wife, Eleanor of Provence, causing widespread resentment. In 1275, facing discontent in Parliament, Edward issued the Statute of the Jewry, which outlawed loans with interest and encouraged the Jews to take up other professions. In 1279, using a crack-down on coin-clippers as a pretext, he organised the arrest of all the heads of Jewish households in England. Approximately a tenth of the Jewish population, around 300 people, were executed. Others were allowed to pay fines. At least \u00a316,000 was raised through fines and the seizure of property from the dead. In 1280, he ordered all Jews to attend special sermons, preached by Dominican friars, with the hope of persuading them to convert, but these exhortations were not followed. By 1280, the Jews had been exploited to a level at which they were no longer of much financial use to the crown, but they could still be used in political bargaining.\nWith the Edict of Expulsion in 1290, Edward formally expelled all Jews from England. As they crossed the Channel to France, some became victims to piracy, and many more were dispossessed or died in the October storms. The Crown disposed of their property through sales and 85 grants made to courtiers and family. The Edict appears to have been issued as part of a deal to secure a lay subsidy of \u00a3110,000 from Parliament, the largest granted in the medieval period. Although expulsions had taken place on a local, temporary basis, the English expulsion was unprecedented because it was permanent. It was eventually reversed in the 1650s. Edward claimed the Expulsion was done \"in honour of the Crucified\" and blamed the Jews for their treachery and criminality. He helped pay for the renovation of the tomb of Little Saint Hugh, a child falsely claimed to have been ritually crucified by Jews, in the same style as the Eleanor crosses, to take political credit for his actions. As historian Richard Stacey notes, \"a more explicit identification of the crown with the ritual crucifixion charge can hardly be imagined.\"\nAdministration in Ireland.\n Edward's primary interest in Ireland was as a source of resources, soldiers and funds for his wars, in Gascony, Wales, Scotland and Flanders. Royal interventions aimed to maximise economic extraction. Corruption among Edward's officials was at a high level, and despite Edward's efforts after 1272 to reform the Irish administration, record keeping was poor. \nDisturbances in Ireland increased during the period. The weakness and lack of direction given to the Lordship's rule allowed factional fighting to grow, reinforced by the introduction of indentured military service by Irish magnates from around 1290. The funnelling of revenue to Edward's wars left Irish castles, bridges and roads in disrepair, and alongside the withdrawal of troops to be used against Wales and Scotland and elsewhere, helped induce lawless behaviour. Resistance to 'purveyances', or forced purchase of supplies such as grain, added to lawlessness, and caused speculation and inflation in the price of basic goods. Pardons were granted to lawbreakers for service for the King in England. Revenues and removal of troops for Edward's wars left the country unable to address its basic needs, while the administration was wholly focused on providing for Edward's war demands; troops looted and fought with townspeople when on the move. Gaelic Ireland enjoyed a revival, due to the absence of English magnates and the weakness of the Lordship, assimilating some of the settlers. Edward's government was hostile to the use of Gaelic law, which it condemned in 1277 as \"displeasing to God and to reason\". Conflict was firmly entrenched by the time of the 1297 Irish Parliament, which attempted to create measures to counter disorder and the spread of Gaelic customs and law, while the results of the distress included many abandoned lands and villages.\nLater reign, 1297\u20131307.\nConstitutional crisis.\nThe incessant warfare of the 1290s put a great financial demand on Edward's subjects. Whereas the King had levied only three lay subsidies until 1294, four such taxes were granted in the years 1294\u20131297, raising over \u00a3200,000. Along with this came the burden of prises, seizure of wool and hides, and the unpopular additional duty on wool, dubbed the \"maltolt\" (\"unjustly taken\"). The fiscal demands on the King's subjects caused resentment, which eventually led to serious political opposition. The initial resistance was caused not by the lay taxes, but by clerical subsidies. In 1294, Edward made a demand of a grant of one-half of all clerical revenues. There was some resistance, but the King responded by threatening opponents with outlawry, and the grant was eventually made. At the time, Robert Winchelsey, the designated Archbishop of Canterbury, was in Italy to receive consecration. Winchelsey returned in January 1295 and had to consent to another grant that November. In 1296, his position changed when he received the papal bull \"Clericis laicos\". This prohibited the clergy from paying taxes to lay authorities without explicit consent from the Pope. When the clergy, with reference to the bull, refused to pay, Edward responded with outlawry. Winchelsey was presented with a dilemma between loyalty to the King and upholding the papal bull, and he responded by leaving it to every individual clergyman to pay as he saw fit. By the end of the year, a solution was offered by the new papal bull \"Etsi de statu\", which allowed clerical taxation in cases of pressing urgency. This allowed Edward to collect considerable sums by taxing the English clergy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEdwardBy God, Sir Earl, either go or hangRoger BigodBy that same oath, O king, I shall neither go nor hang\nChronicle of Walter of Guisborough\nOpposition from the laity took longer to surface. This resistance focused on the King's right to demand military service and his right to levy taxes. At the Salisbury Parliament of February 1297, the Earl Marshal Roger Bigod, 5th Earl of Norfolk, objected to a royal summons of military service. Bigod argued that the military obligation only extended to service alongside the King; if the King intended to sail to Flanders, he could not send his subjects to Gascony. In July, Bigod and Humphrey de Bohun, 3rd Earl of Hereford and Constable of England, drew up a series of complaints known as the Remonstrances, in which objections to the high level of taxation were voiced. Undeterred, Edward requested another lay subsidy. This one was particularly provocative, because the King had sought consent from only a small group of magnates, rather than from representatives of the communities in Parliament. While Edward was in Winchelsea, preparing for the campaign in Flanders, Bigod and de Bohun arrived at the Exchequer to prevent the collection of the tax. As the King left the country with a greatly reduced force, the kingdom seemed to be on the verge of civil war. The English defeat by the Scots at the Battle of Stirling Bridge resolved the situation. The renewed threat to the homeland gave king and magnates common cause. Edward signed the \"Confirmatio cartarum\"\u00a0\u2013 a confirmation of Magna Carta and its accompanying Charter of the Forest\u00a0\u2013 and the nobility agreed to serve with the King on a campaign in Scotland.\nEdward's problems with the opposition did not end with the Scottish campaign. Over the following years he would be held to the promises he had made, in particular that of upholding the Charter of the Forest. In the Parliament of 1301, the King was forced to order an assessment of the royal forests, but in 1305 he obtained a papal bull that freed him from this concession. Ultimately, it was a change in personnel that spelt the end of the opposition against Edward. De Bohun died late in 1298, after returning from the Scottish campaign. In 1302 Bigod arrived at an agreement with the King that was beneficial for both: Bigod, who had no children, made Edward his heir, in return for a generous annual grant. Edward got his revenge on Winchelsey, who had been opposed to the King's policy of clerical taxation, in 1305, when Clement V was elected pope. Clement was a Gascon sympathetic to the King, and on Edward's instigation had Winchelsey suspended from office.\nReturn to Scotland.\nEdward believed that he had completed the conquest of Scotland when he left the country in 1296, but resistance soon emerged under the leadership of Andrew de Moray in the north and William Wallace in the south. On 11\u00a0September 1297, a large English force under the leadership of John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey, and Hugh de Cressingham was routed by a much smaller Scottish army led by Wallace and Moray at the Battle of Stirling Bridge. The defeat sent shockwaves into England, and preparations for a retaliatory campaign started immediately. Soon after Edward returned from Flanders, he headed north. On 22\u00a0July 1298, in the only major battle he had fought since Evesham in 1265, Edward defeated Wallace's forces at the Battle of Falkirk. Edward was not able to take advantage of the momentum and the next year the Scots recaptured Stirling Castle. Even though Edward campaigned in Scotland in 1300, when he successfully besieged Caerlaverock Castle and in 1301, the Scots refused to engage in open battle again, preferring instead to raid the English countryside in smaller groups.\nThe Scots appealed to Pope Boniface VIII to assert a papal claim of overlordship to Scotland in place of the English. His papal bull addressed to King Edward in these terms was firmly rejected on Edward's behalf by the Barons' Letter of 1301. The English managed to subdue the country by other means: in 1303, a peace agreement was reached between England and France, effectively breaking up the Franco-Scottish alliance. Robert the Bruce, the grandson of the claimant to the crown in 1291, had sided with the English in the winter of 1301\u201302. In 1304, most of the other nobles of the country had also pledged their allegiance to Edward, and the English also managed to re-take Stirling Castle. A great propaganda victory was achieved in 1305 when Wallace was betrayed by Sir John de Menteith and turned over to the English, who had him taken to London and publicly executed. With Scotland largely under English control, Edward installed Englishmen and collaborating Scots to govern the country.\nThe situation changed again on 10\u00a0February 1306, when Robert the Bruce murdered his rival John Comyn, and a few weeks later, on 25\u00a0March, was crowned King of Scotland. Bruce now embarked on a campaign to restore Scottish independence, and this took the English by surprise. Edward was suffering ill health by this time, and instead of leading an expedition himself, he gave different military commands to Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke, and Henry Percy, 1st Baron Percy, while the main royal army was led by the Prince of Wales. The English initially met with success; on 19\u00a0June, Aymer de Valence routed Bruce at the Battle of Methven. Bruce was forced into hiding, and the English forces recaptured their lost territory and castles.\nEdward acted with unusual brutality against Bruce's family, allies, and supporters. His sister, Mary, was imprisoned in a cage at Roxburgh Castle for four years. Isabella MacDuff, Countess of Buchan, who had crowned Bruce, was held in a cage at Berwick Castle. His younger brother Neil was executed by being hanged, drawn, and quartered; he had been captured after he and his garrison held off Edward's forces who had been seeking his wife, daughter and sisters. Edward now regarded the struggle not as a war between two nations, but as the suppression of a rebellion of disloyal subjects. This brutality, rather than helping to subdue the Scots, had the opposite effect, and rallied growing support for Bruce.\nDeath and burial.\nIn February 1307, Bruce resumed his efforts and started gathering men, and in May he defeated Valence at the Battle of Loudoun Hill. Edward, who had rallied somewhat, now moved north himself. He developed dysentery on the way, and his condition deteriorated. On 6\u00a0July he encamped at Burgh by Sands, just south of the Scottish border. When his servants came the next morning to lift him up so that he could eat, the King died in their arms.\nSeveral stories emerged about Edward's deathbed wishes; according to one tradition, he requested that his heart be carried to the Holy Land, along with an army to fight the infidels. A more dubious story tells of how he wished for his bones to be carried along on future expeditions against the Scots. Another account of his deathbed scene is more credible; according to one chronicle, Edward gathered around him Henry de Lacy, 3rd Earl of Lincoln; Guy de Beauchamp, 10th Earl of Warwick; Aymer de Valence; and Robert de Clifford, 1st Baron de Clifford, and charged them with looking after his son Edward. In particular they should make sure that Piers Gaveston, whom he had banished earlier that year, was not allowed to return to the country. The new king, Edward\u00a0II, ignored his father's wish, and had his favourite recalled from exile almost immediately. Edward\u00a0II remained in the north until August, but then abandoned the campaign and headed south, partially due to financial limitations. He was crowned king on 25\u00a0February 1308.\nEdward\u00a0I's body was brought south, lying in state at Waltham Abbey, before being buried in Westminster Abbey on 27\u00a0October. There are few records of the funeral, which cost \u00a3473.\nEdward's tomb was an unusually plain sarcophagus of Purbeck marble, without the customary royal effigy, possibly the result of the shortage of royal funds. The Society of Antiquaries of London opened the tomb in 1774, finding that the body had been well preserved over the preceding 467 years, and took the opportunity to determine the King's original height. Traces of the Latin inscription \"Edwardus Primus Scottorum Malleus hic est, 1308. Pactum Serva\" (\"Here is Edward\u00a0I, Hammer of the Scots, 1308. Keep the Troth\") can still be seen painted on the side of the tomb, referring to his vow to avenge the rebellion of Robert the Bruce. This resulted in Edward being given the epithet the \"Hammer of the Scots\" by historians, but is not contemporary in origin, having been added by the Abbot John Feckenham in the 16th century.\nLegacy.\nThe first histories of Edward in the 16th and 17th centuries drew primarily on the works of the chroniclers, and made little use of the official records of the period. They limited themselves to general comments on Edward's significance as a monarch, and echoed the chroniclers' praise for his accomplishments. In the 17th century, the lawyer Edward Coke wrote extensively about Edward's legislation, terming the King the \"English Justinian\" after the Byzantine lawmaker Justinian\u00a0I. Later in the century, historians used the available record as evidence to elucidate the roles of Parliament and kingship under Edward, drawing comparisons between his reign and the political strife of their own century. In the 18th century, historians depicted Edward as an able, if ruthless, monarch, conditioned by the circumstances of his time.\nThe influential Victorian historian William Stubbs suggested that Edward had actively shaped national history, forming English laws and institutions, and helping England to develop a parliamentary and constitutional monarchy. His strengths and weaknesses as a ruler were considered to be emblematic of the English people as a whole. Stubbs's student, Thomas Tout, initially adopted the same perspective, but after extensive research into Edward's royal household, and backed by the research of his contemporaries into the early Parliaments of the period, he changed his mind. Tout came to view Edward as a self-interested, conservative leader, using the parliamentary system as \"the shrewd device of an autocrat, anxious to use the mass of the people as a check upon his hereditary foes among the greater baronage.\"\nHistorians in the 20th and 21st centuries have conducted extensive research on Edward and his reign. Most have concluded this was a highly significant period in English medieval history, some describing Edward as one of the great medieval kings, although most agree that his final years were less successful than his early decades in power. G. Templeman argued in his 1950 historiographical essay that \"it is generally recognized that Edward I deserves a high place in the history of medieval England\". Three major academic narratives of Edward have been produced during this period. F. M. Powicke's volumes, published in 1947 and 1953, forming the standard works on Edward for several decades, were largely positive in praising the achievements of his reign, and his focus on justice and the law. In 1988, Michael Prestwich produced an authoritative biography of the King, focusing on his political career, still portraying him in sympathetic terms, but highlighting some of the consequences of his failed policies. Marc Morris's biography followed in 2008, drawing out more of the detail of Edward's personality, and generally taking a harsher view of his weaknesses and less pleasant characteristics, pointing out that modern analysts of Edward's reign denounce the King for his policies against the Jewish community in England. Considerable academic debate has taken place around the character of Edward's kingship, his political skills, and his management of his earls, and whether this was collaborative or repressive in nature.\nHistorians have debated how Edward I's reign should be assessed: Michael Prestwich in 1988 attempted to judge him by the standards of his time. Fred Cazel agrees with this approach, particularly regarding his lack of political \"sensitivity\" and uncompromising attitudes, arguing that anger was his political weapon. Prestwich concludes that \"Edward was a formidable king; his reign, with both its successes and its disappointments, a great one,\" and he was \"without doubt one of the greatest rulers of his time\". G. W. S. Barrow counters that Edward's contemporaries knew the \"meaning of compassion, magnanimity, justice and generosity\", that he rarely rose above minimum moral standards of his time, but rather showed a highly vindictive streak, and is among the \"boldest opportunists of English political history\". John Gillingham argues that Edward was an \"effective bully\", but \"no king of England had a greater impact on the peoples of Britain than Edward I\" and that \"modern historians of the English state \u2026 have always recognized Edward I's reign as pivotal.\" In 2014, Andrew Spencer and Caroline Burt reassessed Edward's reign from an English constitutional perspective, asserting that he had a personal role in reform and a moral purpose in his leadership. Spencer concludes that Edward's reign \"was indeed \u2026 a great one\", and Burt claims that Edward was \"innovative, \u2026 creative, focused and successful\". She adds that he \"played the part of a good king well \u2026 [and] with aplomb\". Colin Veach asks whether \"the Welsh, Scots, Irish and Jews would have agreed\".\nThere is a great difference between English and Scottish historiography on King Edward. G.W.S.Barrow saw Edward as ruthlessly exploiting the leaderless state of Scotland to obtain feudal superiority over the kingdom and reduce it to an English possession. In his view, Edward's insistence on war and misapprehension of Scottish capacity for resistance created a \"bitter antagonism \u2026 which endured for centuries\". Michael Brown warns that Scottish independence should not be viewed as inevitable; Edward could have achieved his goals. Welsh historians see Edward's reign and conquest as a disaster for Welsh confidence and culture. R.\u00a0R.\u00a0Davies views his methods in Wales as essentially colonialist, creating deep resentment and an \"apartheid-like\" social structure. John Davies noted the \"anti-Welsh fanaticism\" of the English colonists introduced by Edward's conquest. They acknowledge Edward's attempts to rebuild some kind of co-operation with native Welsh society, but state that this was insufficient to heal the trauma of conquest. Irish historian James Lydon regarded the 13th century and Edward's reign as a turning point for Ireland, as the Lordship extracted Irish resources for his wars, failed to maintain peace, and allowed a resurgence in the fortunes of Gaelic Ireland, leading to prolonged conflict. Simon Schama, Norman Davies, and historians from Scotland, Wales and Ireland, have tried to assess Edward's reign in the context of the development of Britain and Ireland. They emphasise the growing power of the law, centralised state and crown across Europe, and see Edward as asserting his rights within England and the other nations of Britain and Ireland. Brown adds that Edward suffered from this as a subject of the French king in Gascony. Centralisation tended to imply uniformity and increasing discrimination against peripheral identities and hostility to Irish and Welsh law. While this group of historians do not see Edward as having conducted a planned policy of expansionism, they often see the tactics and results of his policies as often having caused unnecessary division and conflict. \nBarrie Dobson said that Edward I's actions towards the Jewish minority often appear to be the most relevant part of his reign for a modern audience, while in 1992 Colin Richmond expressed dismay that Edward had not received a wider re-evaluation. Paul Hyams sees his \"sincere religious bigotry\" as central to his actions against Jews, Richmond sees him as a \"pioneering antisemite\", and Robert Stacey regards him as the first English monarch to operate a state policy of antisemitism. Robert Moore emphasises that antisemitism was developed by church leaders and acted on by figures including Edward, rather than being a facet of popular prejudice. Studies of medieval antisemitism identify Henry III and Edward's reigns, along with the Expulsion, as developing a persistent English antisemitism, based on the idea of the English superseding the Jews as God's chosen people, and on England's uniqueness as a country free of Jews.\nFamily.\nFirst marriage.\nBy his first wife Eleanor of Castile, Edward had at least fourteen children, perhaps as many as sixteen. Of these, five daughters survived into adulthood, but only one son outlived his father, becoming King Edward II (r.\u20091307\u00a0\u2013\u00a01327). Edward's children with Eleanor were:\nSecond marriage.\nBy Margaret of France, Edward had two sons, both of whom lived to adulthood, and a daughter who died as a child:\nA genealogy in the Hailes Abbey chronicle indicates that John Botetourt may have been Edward's illegitimate son, but the claim is unsubstantiated.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46374", "revid": "1750837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46374", "title": "Diatom", "text": "Single-celled alga with a silica cell wall\nA diatom (Neo-Latin \"diatoma\") is any member of a large group comprising several genera of algae, specifically microalgae, found in the oceans, waterways and soils of the world. Living diatoms make up a significant portion of Earth's biomass. They generate about 20 to 50 percent of the oxygen produced on the planet each year, take in over 6.7 billion tonnes of silicon each year from the waters in which they live, and constitute nearly half of the organic material found in the oceans. The shells of dead diatoms are a significant component of marine sediment, and the entire Amazon basin is fertilized annually by 27 million tons of diatom shell dust transported by transatlantic winds from the African Sahara, much of it from the Bod\u00e9l\u00e9 Depression, which was once made up of a system of fresh-water lakes.\nDiatoms are unicellular organisms: they occur either as solitary cells or in colonies, which can take the shape of ribbons, fans, zigzags, or stars. Individual cells range in size from 2 to 2000 micrometers. In the presence of adequate nutrients and sunlight, an assemblage of living diatoms doubles approximately every 24 hours by asexual multiple fission; the maximum life span of individual cells is about six days. Diatoms have two distinct shapes: a few (\"centric diatoms\") are \"radially\" symmetric, while most (\"pennate diatoms\") are broadly \"bilaterally\" symmetric.\nAbout 12,000 species of diatoms have been documented, but it is thought many more have not been documented. The unique feature of diatoms is that they are surrounded by a cell wall made of silica (hydrated silicon dioxide), called a frustule. These frustules produce structural coloration, prompting them to be described as \"jewels of the sea\" and \"living opals\".\nMovement in diatoms primarily occurs passively as a result of both ocean currents and wind-induced water turbulence; however, male gametes of centric diatoms have flagella, permitting active movement to seek female gametes. Similar to plants, diatoms convert light energy to chemical energy by photosynthesis, but their chloroplasts were acquired in different ways.\nUnusually for autotrophic organisms, diatoms possess a urea cycle, a feature that they share with animals, although this cycle is used to different metabolic ends in diatoms. The family Rhopalodiaceae also possess a cyanobacterial endosymbiont called a spheroid body. This endosymbiont has lost its photosynthetic properties, but has kept its ability to perform nitrogen fixation, allowing the diatom to fix atmospheric nitrogen. Other diatoms in symbiosis with nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria are among the genera \"Hemiaulus\", \"Rhizosolenia\" and \"Chaetoceros\".\nDinotoms are diatoms that have become endosymbionts inside dinoflagellates. Research on the dinoflagellates \"Durinskia baltica\" and \"Glenodinium foliaceum\" has shown that the endosymbiont event happened so recently, evolutionarily speaking, that their organelles and genome are still intact with minimal to no gene loss. The main difference between these and free living diatoms is that they have lost their cell wall of silica, making them the only known shell-less diatoms.\nThe study of diatoms is a branch of phycology. Diatoms are classified as eukaryotes, organisms with a nuclear envelope-bound cell nucleus, that separates them from the prokaryotes archaea and bacteria. Diatoms are a type of plankton called phytoplankton, the most common of the plankton types. Diatoms also grow attached to benthic substrates, floating debris, and on macrophytes. They comprise an integral component of the periphyton community. Another classification divides plankton into eight types based on size: in this scheme, diatoms are classed as microalgae. Several systems for classifying the individual diatom species exist.\nFossil evidence suggests that diatoms originated during or before the early Jurassic period, which was about 150 to 200 million years ago. The oldest fossil evidence for diatoms is a specimen of extant genus \"Hemiaulus\" in Late Jurassic aged amber from Thailand.\nDiatoms are used to monitor past and present environmental conditions, and are commonly used in studies of water quality. Diatomaceous earth (diatomite) is a collection of diatom shells found in the Earth's crust. They are soft, silica-containing sedimentary rocks which are easily crumbled into a fine powder and typically have a particle size of 10 to 200 \u03bcm. Diatomaceous earth is used for a variety of purposes including for water filtration, as a mild abrasive, in cat litter, and as a dynamite stabilizer.\nOverview.\nDiatoms are protists that form massive annual spring and fall blooms in aquatic environments and are estimated to be responsible for about half of photosynthesis in the global oceans. This predictable annual bloom dynamic fuels higher trophic levels and initiates delivery of carbon into the deep ocean biome. Diatoms have complex life history strategies that are presumed to have contributed to their rapid genetic diversification into ~200,000 species\u200a that are distributed between the two major diatom groups: centrics and pennates.\nMorphology.\nDiatoms are generally 20 to 200 micrometers in size, with a few larger species. Their yellowish-brown chloroplasts, the site of photosynthesis, are typical of heterokonts, having four cell membranes and containing pigments such as the carotenoid fucoxanthin. Individuals usually lack flagella, but they are present in male gametes of the centric diatoms and have the usual heterokont structure, including the hairs (mastigonemes) characteristic in other groups.\nDiatoms are often referred as \"jewels of the sea\" or \"living opals\" due to their optical properties. The biological function of this structural coloration is not clear, but it is speculated that it may be related to communication, camouflage, thermal exchange and/or UV protection.\nDiatoms build intricate hard but porous cell walls called frustules composed primarily of silica. This siliceous wall can be highly patterned with a variety of pores, ribs, minute spines, marginal ridges and elevations; all of which can be used to delineate genera and species.\nThe cell itself consists of two halves, each containing an essentially flat plate, or valve, and marginal connecting, or girdle band. One half, the \"hypotheca\", is slightly smaller than the other half, the \"epitheca\". Diatom morphology varies. Although the shape of the cell is typically circular, some cells may be triangular, square, or elliptical. Their distinguishing feature is a hard mineral shell or frustule composed of opal (hydrated, polymerized silicic acid).\nDiatoms are divided into two groups that are distinguished by the shape of the frustule: the \"centric diatoms\" and the \"pennate diatoms\".\nPennate diatoms are bilaterally symmetric. Each one of their valves have openings that are slits along the raphes and their shells are typically elongated parallel to these raphes. They generate cell movement through cytoplasm that streams along the raphes, always moving along solid surfaces.\nCentric diatoms are radially symmetric. They are composed of upper and lower valves \u2013 \"epitheca\" and \"hypotheca\" \u2013 each consisting of a valve and a girdle band that can easily slide underneath each other and expand to increase cell content over the diatoms progression. The cytoplasm of the centric diatom is located along the inner surface of the shell and provides a hollow lining around the large vacuole located in the center of the cell. This large, central vacuole is filled by a fluid known as \"cell sap\" which is similar to seawater but varies with specific ion content. The cytoplasmic layer is home to several organelles, like the chloroplasts and mitochondria. Before the centric diatom begins to expand, its nucleus is at the center of one of the valves and begins to move towards the center of the cytoplasmic layer before division is complete. Centric diatoms have a variety of shapes and sizes, depending on from which axis the shell extends, and if spines are present.\nSilicification.\nDiatom cells are contained within a unique silica cell wall known as a frustule made up of two valves called thecae, that typically overlap one another. The biogenic silica composing the cell wall is synthesised intracellularly by the polymerisation of silicic acid monomers. This material is then extruded to the cell exterior and added to the wall. In most species, when a diatom divides to produce two daughter cells, each cell keeps one of the two-halves and grows a smaller half within it. As a result, after each division cycle, the average size of diatom cells in the population gets smaller. Once such cells reach a certain minimum size, rather than simply divide, they reverse this decline by forming an auxospore, usually through meiosis and sexual reproduction, but exceptions exist. The auxospore expands in size to give rise to a much larger cell, which then returns to size-diminishing divisions.\nThe exact mechanism of transferring silica absorbed by the diatom to the cell wall is unknown. Much of the sequencing of diatom genes comes from the search for the mechanism of silica uptake and deposition in nano-scale patterns in the frustule. The most success in this area has come from two species, \"Thalassiosira pseudonana\", which has become the model species, as the whole genome was sequenced and methods for genetic control were established, and \"Cylindrotheca fusiformis\", in which the important silica deposition proteins silaffins were first discovered. Silaffins, sets of polycationic peptides, were found in \"C. fusiformis\" cell walls and can generate intricate silica structures. These structures demonstrated pores of sizes characteristic to diatom patterns. When \"T. pseudonana\" underwent genome analysis it was found that it encoded a urea cycle, including a higher number of polyamines than most genomes, as well as three distinct silica transport genes. In a phylogenetic study on silica transport genes from 8 diverse groups of diatoms, silica transport was found to generally group with species. This study also found structural differences between the silica transporters of pennate (bilateral symmetry) and centric (radial symmetry) diatoms. The sequences compared in this study were used to create a diverse background in order to identify residues that differentiate function in the silica deposition process. Additionally, the same study found that a number of the regions were conserved within species, likely the base structure of silica transport.\nThese silica transport proteins are unique to diatoms, with no homologs found in other species, such as sponges or rice. The divergence of these silica transport genes is also indicative of the structure of the protein evolving from two repeated units composed of five membrane bound segments, which indicates either gene duplication or dimerization. The silica deposition that takes place from the membrane bound vesicle in diatoms has been hypothesized to be a result of the activity of silaffins and long chain polyamines. This Silica Deposition Vesicle (SDV) has been characterized as an acidic compartment fused with Golgi-derived vesicles. These two protein structures have been shown to create sheets of patterned silica in-vivo with irregular pores on the scale of diatom frustules. One hypothesis as to how these proteins work to create complex structure is that residues are conserved within the SDV's, which is unfortunately difficult to identify or observe due to the limited number of diverse sequences available. Though the exact mechanism of the highly uniform deposition of silica is as yet unknown, the \"Thalassiosira pseudonana\" genes linked to silaffins are being looked to as targets for genetic control of nanoscale silica deposition.\nThe ability of diatoms to make silica-based cell walls has been the subject of fascination for centuries. It started with a microscopic observation by an anonymous English country nobleman in 1703, who observed an object that looked like a chain of regular parallelograms and debated whether it was just crystals of salt, or a plant. The viewer decided that it was a plant because the parallelograms didn't separate upon agitation, nor did they vary in appearance when dried or subjected to warm water (in an attempt to dissolve the \"salt\"). Unknowingly, the viewer's confusion captured the essence of diatoms\u2014mineral utilizing plants. It is not clear when it was determined that diatom cell walls are made of silica, but in 1939 a seminal reference characterized the material as silicic acid in a \"subcolloidal\" state Identification of the main chemical component of the cell wall spurred investigations into how it was made. These investigations have involved, and been propelled by, diverse approaches including, microscopy, chemistry, biochemistry, material characterisation, molecular biology, 'omics, and transgenic approaches. The results from this work have given a better understanding of cell wall formation processes, establishing fundamental knowledge which can be used to create models that contextualise current findings and clarify how the process works.\nThe process of building a mineral-based cell wall inside the cell, then exporting it outside, is a massive event that must involve large numbers of genes and their protein products. The act of building and exocytosing this large structural object in a short time period, synched with cell cycle progression, necessitates substantial physical movements within the cell as well as dedication of a significant proportion of the cell's biosynthetic capacities.\nThe first characterisations of the biochemical processes and components involved in diatom silicification were made in the late 1990s. These were followed by insights into how higher order assembly of silica structures might occur. More recent reports describe the identification of novel components involved in higher order processes, the dynamics documented through real-time imaging, and the genetic manipulation of silica structure. The approaches established in these recent works provide practical avenues to not only identify the components involved in silica cell wall formation but to elucidate their interactions and spatio-temporal dynamics. This type of holistic understanding will be necessary to achieve a more complete understanding of cell wall synthesis.\nBehaviour.\nMost centric and araphid pennate diatoms are nonmotile, and their relatively dense cell walls cause them to readily sink. Planktonic forms in open water usually rely on turbulent mixing of the upper layers of the oceanic waters by the wind to keep them suspended in sunlit surface waters. Many planktonic diatoms have also evolved features that slow their sinking rate, such as spines or the ability to grow in colonial chains. These adaptations increase their surface area to volume ratio and drag, allowing them to stay suspended in the water column longer. Individual cells may regulate buoyancy via an ionic pump.\nSome pennate diatoms are capable of a type of locomotion called \"gliding\", which allows them to move across surfaces via adhesive mucilage secreted through a seamlike structure called the raphe. In order for a diatom cell to glide, it must have a solid substrate for the mucilage to adhere to.\nCells are solitary or united into colonies of various kinds, which may be linked by siliceous structures; mucilage pads, stalks or tubes; amorphous masses of mucilage; or by threads of chitin (polysaccharide), which are secreted through strutted processes of the cell.\nPhytochromes.\nEven though light is a crucial part of how diatoms create oxygen for the planet, the organism faces some difficulties when it comes to detecting its energy source. The intensity of light in water lessens as depth increases. Light penetration also greatly differs between coastal and open waters and during the changing seasons. Such factors result in a less efficient photosynthetic conversion, similar to the process of plant photosynthesis, as the light becomes dimmer, photsynthesis slows down. However, diatoms possess photoreceptors, which are light-activated proteins, that aid them in sensing different light wavelengths, such as red light and far-red light, for detecting light in the ocean.\nIt has been demonstrated that diatoms use photoreceptors called phytochromes to determine the water's depth to respond to light signals. Phytochromes can sense red and far-red light and are widely known to be found in both plants and phytoplankton. These proteins switch between two states called red-light and far red-light so that the organism can detect and respond to any changes in the perceived underwater light intensity and spectrum. Since red and far-red light is known to diminish with increasing water depth, many questioned the importance of the phytochromes' role when it comes to marine life. Analysis of environmental DNA sequences taken from the Tara Oceans expedition, as well as the genome data from cultured diatoms which demonstrated that the phytochrome-encoding genes were mostly found in diatoms living in temperate and polar regions in mid-to-high latitudes but such diatom phytochrome genes were not found in diatoms living in tropical waters.\nLaboratory experiments with the diatom \"Phaeodactylum tricornutum\" demonstrated how the diatom phytochromes react to light. Using a yellow fluorescent protein gene controlled by phytochromes inserted into the diatom enabled its activity in simulations with deep-water conditions to be tracked. This showed that diatoms had developed a reduced sensitivity to far-red light, as well as an increased sensitivity to low-intensity blue and green light, which are more present at greater depths.\nRemoval of the phytochrome gene from the diatom \"Thalassiosira pseudonana\" grown in a similar deep-water simulation demonstrated that the mutant diatom had a lower photosynthetic efficiency, as well as a reduced photoprotection, compared to the wild-type diatoms with the phytochrome gene, and that when both the mutant and wild-type diatoms were exposed to high white light, there was no difference in reactions.\nWith these findings, the authors found that diatom phytochromes respond more to blue and green light in low intensities, unlike the plant phytochromes that respond to red and far-red light. They suggest that the diatom phytochromes went through an evolutionary adaptation to acclimate to the violent waters in the open waters of the temperate and polar regions. Since the function of diatom phytochromes is to sense the water depth, it provides the diatoms information that is very advantageous in regions with differing seasons. These photoreceptors play a critical role in helping phytoplankton adjust to environments with limited light, specifically the deep-water environments.\nLife cycle.\nReproduction and cell size.\nReproduction among these organisms is asexual by binary fission, during which the diatom divides into two parts, producing two \"new\" diatoms with identical genes. Each new organism receives one of the two frustules \u2013 one larger, the other smaller \u2013 possessed by the parent, which is now called the epitheca; and is used to construct a second, smaller frustule, the hypotheca. The diatom that received the larger frustule becomes the same size as its parent, but the diatom that received the smaller frustule remains smaller than its parent. This causes the average cell size of this diatom population to decrease. It has been observed, however, that certain taxa have the ability to divide without causing a reduction in cell size. Nonetheless, in order to restore the cell size of a diatom population for those that do endure size reduction, sexual reproduction and auxospore formation must occur.\nCell division.\nVegetative cells of diatoms are diploid (2N) and so meiosis can take place, producing male and female gametes which then fuse to form the zygote. The zygote sheds its silica theca and grows into a large sphere covered by an organic membrane, the auxospore. A new diatom cell of maximum size, the initial cell, forms within the auxospore thus beginning a new generation. Resting spores may also be formed as a response to unfavourable environmental conditions with germination occurring when conditions improve.\nA defining characteristic of all diatoms is their restrictive and bipartite silica cell wall that causes them to progressively shrink during asexual cell division. At a critically small cell size and under certain conditions, auxosporulation restitutes cell size and prevents death. The entire lifecycles of only a few diatoms have been described and rarely have sexual events been captured in the environment.\nSexual reproduction.\nMost eukaryotes are capable of sexual reproduction involving meiosis. Sexual reproduction appears to be an obligatory phase in the life cycle of diatoms, particularly as cell size decreases with successive vegetative divisions. Sexual reproduction involves production of gametes and the fusion of gametes to form a zygote in which maximal cell size is restored. The signaling that triggers the sexual phase is favored when cells accumulate together, so that the distance between them is reduced and the contacts and/or the perception of chemical cues is facilitated.\nAn exploration of the genomes of five diatoms and one diatom transcriptome led to the identification of 42 genes potentially involved in meiosis. Thus a meiotic toolkit appears to be conserved in these six diatom species, indicating a central role of meiosis in diatoms as in other eukaryotes.\nSperm motility.\nDiatoms are mostly non-motile; however, sperm found in some species can be flagellated, though motility is usually limited to a gliding motion. In centric diatoms, the small male gametes have one flagellum while the female gametes are large and non-motile (oogamous). Conversely, in pennate diatoms both gametes lack flagella (isogamous). Certain araphid species, that is pennate diatoms without a raphe (seam), have been documented as anisogamous and are, therefore, considered to represent a transitional stage between centric and raphid pennate diatoms, diatoms with a raphe.\nDegradation by microbes.\nCertain species of bacteria in oceans and lakes can accelerate the rate of dissolution of silica in dead and living diatoms by using hydrolytic enzymes to break down the organic algal material.\nEcology.\nDistribution.\nDiatoms are a widespread group and can be found in the oceans, in fresh water, in soils, and on damp surfaces. They are one of the dominant components of phytoplankton in nutrient-rich coastal waters and during oceanic spring blooms, since they can divide more rapidly than other groups of phytoplankton. Most live pelagically in open water, although some live as surface films at the water-sediment interface (benthic), or even under damp atmospheric conditions. They are especially important in oceans, where a 2003 study found that they contribute an estimated 45% of the total oceanic primary production of organic material. However, a more recent 2016 study estimates that the number is closer to 20%. Spatial distribution of marine phytoplankton species is restricted both horizontally and vertically.\nGrowth.\nPlanktonic diatoms in freshwater and marine environments typically exhibit a \"boom and bust\" (or \"\"bloom\" and bust\") lifestyle. When conditions in the upper mixed layer (nutrients and light) are favourable (as at the spring), their competitive edge and rapid growth rate enables them to dominate phytoplankton communities (\"boom\" or \"bloom\"). As such they are often classed as opportunistic r-strategists (i.e. those organisms whose ecology is defined by a high growth rate, \"r\").\nImpact.\nThe freshwater diatom \"Didymosphenia geminata\", commonly known as \"Didymo,\" causes severe environmental degradation in water-courses where it blooms, producing large quantities of a brown jelly-like material called \"brown snot\" or \"rock snot\". This diatom is native to Europe and is an invasive species both in the antipodes and in parts of North America. The problem is most frequently recorded from Australia and New Zealand.\nWhen conditions turn unfavourable, usually upon depletion of nutrients, diatom cells typically increase in sinking rate and exit the upper mixed layer (\"bust\"). This sinking is induced by either a loss of buoyancy control, the synthesis of mucilage that sticks diatoms cells together, or the production of heavy \"resting spores\". Sinking out of the upper mixed layer removes diatoms from conditions unfavourable to growth, including grazer populations and higher temperatures (which would otherwise increase cell metabolism). Cells reaching deeper water or the shallow seafloor can then rest until conditions become more favourable again. In the open ocean, many sinking cells are lost to the deep, but refuge populations can persist near the thermocline.\nUltimately, diatom cells in these resting populations re-enter the upper mixed layer when vertical mixing entrains them. In most circumstances, this mixing also replenishes nutrients in the upper mixed layer, setting the scene for the next round of diatom blooms. In the open ocean (away from areas of continuous upwelling), this cycle of bloom, bust, then return to pre-bloom conditions typically occurs over an annual cycle, with diatoms only being prevalent during the spring and early summer. In some locations, however, an autumn bloom may occur, caused by the breakdown of summer stratification and the entrainment of nutrients while light levels are still sufficient for growth. Since vertical mixing is increasing, and light levels are falling as winter approaches, these blooms are smaller and shorter-lived than their spring equivalents.\nIn the open ocean, the diatom (spring) bloom is typically ended by a shortage of silicon. Unlike other minerals, the requirement for silicon is unique to diatoms and it is not regenerated in the plankton ecosystem as efficiently as, for instance, nitrogen or phosphorus nutrients. This can be seen in maps of surface nutrient concentrations \u2013 as nutrients decline along gradients, silicon is usually the first to be exhausted (followed normally by nitrogen then phosphorus).\nBecause of this bloom-and-bust cycle, diatoms are believed to play a disproportionately important role in the export of carbon from oceanic surface waters (see also the biological pump). Significantly, they also play a key role in the regulation of the biogeochemical cycle of silicon in the modern ocean.\nReason for success.\nDiatoms are ecologically successful, and occur in virtually every environment that contains water \u2013 not only oceans, seas, lakes, and streams, but also soil and wetlands. The use of silicon by diatoms is believed by many researchers to be the key to this ecological success. Raven (1983) noted that, relative to organic cell walls, silica frustules require less energy to synthesize (approximately 8% of a comparable organic wall), potentially a significant saving on the overall cell energy budget. In a now classic study, Egge and Aksnes (1992) found that diatom dominance of mesocosm communities was directly related to the availability of silicic acid \u2013 when concentrations were greater than 2 \u03bcmol m\u22123, they found that diatoms typically represented more than 70% of the phytoplankton community. Other researchers have suggested that the biogenic silica in diatom cell walls acts as an effective pH buffering agent, facilitating the conversion of bicarbonate to dissolved CO2 (which is more readily assimilated). More generally, notwithstanding these possible advantages conferred by their use of silicon, diatoms typically have higher growth rates than other algae of the same corresponding size.\nSources for collection.\nDiatoms can be obtained from multiple sources. Marine diatoms can be collected by direct water sampling, and benthic forms can be secured by scraping barnacles, oyster and other shells. Diatoms are frequently present as a brown, slippery coating on submerged stones and sticks, and may be seen to \"stream\" with river current. The surface mud of a pond, ditch, or lagoon will almost always yield some diatoms. Living diatoms are often found clinging in great numbers to filamentous algae, or forming gelatinous masses on various submerged plants. \"Cladophora\" is frequently covered with \"Cocconeis\", an elliptically shaped diatom; \"Vaucheria\" is often covered with small forms. Since diatoms form an important part of the food of molluscs, tunicates, and fishes, the alimentary tracts of these animals often yield forms that are not easily secured in other ways. Diatoms can be made to emerge by filling a jar with water and mud, wrapping it in black paper and letting direct sunlight fall on the surface of the water. Within a day, the diatoms will come to the top in a scum and can be isolated.\nBiogeochemistry.\nSilica cycle.\nThe diagram shows the major fluxes of silicon in the current ocean. Most biogenic silica in the ocean (silica produced by biological activity) comes from diatoms. Diatoms extract dissolved silicic acid from surface waters as they grow, and return it to the water column when they die. Inputs of silicon arrive from above via aeolian dust, from the coasts via rivers, and from below via seafloor sediment recycling, weathering, and hydrothermal activity.\nAlthough diatoms may have existed since the Triassic, the timing of their ascendancy and \"take-over\" of the silicon cycle occurred more recently. Prior to the Phanerozoic (before 544 Ma), it is believed that microbial or inorganic processes weakly regulated the ocean's silicon cycle. Subsequently, the cycle appears dominated (and more strongly regulated) by the radiolarians and siliceous sponges, the former as zooplankton, the latter as sedentary filter-feeders primarily on the continental shelves. Within the last 100 My, it is thought that the silicon cycle has come under even tighter control, and that this derives from the ecological ascendancy of the diatoms.\nHowever, the precise timing of the \"take-over\" remains unclear, and different authors have conflicting interpretations of the fossil record. Some evidence, such as the displacement of siliceous sponges from the shelves, suggests that this takeover began in the Cretaceous (146 Ma to 66 Ma), while evidence from radiolarians suggests \"take-over\" did not begin until the Cenozoic (66 Ma to present).\nCarbon cycle.\nThe diagram depicts some mechanisms by which marine diatoms contribute to the biological carbon pump and influence the ocean carbon cycle. The anthropogenic CO2 emission to the atmosphere (mainly generated by fossil fuel burning and deforestation) is nearly 11 gigatonne carbon (GtC) per year, of which almost 2.5 GtC is taken up by the surface ocean. In surface seawater (pH 8.1\u20138.4), bicarbonate (HCO3-) and carbonate ions (CO32-) constitute nearly 90 and &lt;10% of dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) respectively, while dissolved CO2 (CO2 aqueous) contributes &lt;1%. Despite this low level of CO2 in the ocean and its slow diffusion rate in water, diatoms fix 10\u201320 GtC annually via photosynthesis thanks to their carbon dioxide concentrating mechanisms, allowing them to sustain marine food chains. In addition, 0.1\u20131% of this organic material produced in the euphotic layer sinks down as particles, thus transferring the surface carbon toward the deep ocean and sequestering atmospheric CO2 for thousands of years or longer. The remaining organic matter is remineralized through respiration. Thus, diatoms are one of the main players in this biological carbon pump, which is arguably the most important biological mechanism in the Earth System allowing CO2 to be removed from the carbon cycle for very long period.\nUrea cycle.\nA feature of diatoms is the urea cycle, which links them evolutionarily to animals. In 2011, Allen et al. established that diatoms have a functioning urea cycle. This result was significant, since prior to this, the urea cycle was thought to have originated with the metazoans which appeared several hundreds of millions of years before the diatoms. Their study demonstrated that while diatoms and animals use the urea cycle for different ends, they are seen to be evolutionarily linked in such a way that animals and plants are not.\nWhile often overlooked in photosynthetic organisms, the mitochondria also play critical roles in energy balance. Two nitrogen-related pathways are relevant and they may also change under ammonium (NH4+) nutrition compared with nitrate (NO3\u2212) nutrition. First, in diatoms, and likely some other algae, there is a urea cycle. The long-known function of the urea cycle in animals is to excrete excess nitrogen produced by amino acid Catabolism; like photorespiration, the urea cycle had long been considered a waste pathway. However, in diatoms the urea cycle appears to play a role in exchange of nutrients between the mitochondria and the cytoplasm, and potentially the plastid\u200a and may help to regulate ammonium metabolism. Because of this cycle, marine diatoms, in contrast to chlorophytes, also have acquired a mitochondrial urea transporter and, in fact, based on bioinformatics, a complete mitochondrial GS-GOGAT cycle has been hypothesised.\nOther.\nDiatoms are mainly photosynthetic; however a few are obligate heterotrophs and can live in the absence of light provided an appropriate organic carbon source is available.\nPhotosynthetic diatoms that find themselves in an environment absent of oxygen and/or sunlight can switch to anaerobic respiration known as nitrate respiration (DNRA), and stay dormant for up till months and decades.\nMajor pigments of diatoms are chlorophylls a and c, beta-carotene, fucoxanthin, diatoxanthin and diadinoxanthin.\nTaxonomy.\nDiatoms belong to a large group of protists, many of which contain plastids rich in chlorophylls a and c. The group has been variously referred to as heterokonts, chrysophytes, chromists or stramenopiles. Many are autotrophs such as golden algae and kelp; and heterotrophs such as water moulds, opalinids, and actinophryid heliozoa. The classification of this area of protists is still unsettled. In terms of rank, they have been treated as a division, phylum, kingdom, or something intermediate to those. Consequently, diatoms are ranked anywhere from a class, usually called Diatomophyceae or Bacillariophyceae, to a division (=phylum), usually called Bacillariophyta, with corresponding changes in the ranks of their subgroups.\nGenera and species.\nAn estimated 20,000 extant diatom species are believed to exist, of which around 12,000 have been named to date according to Guiry, 2012 (other sources give a wider range of estimates). Around 1,000\u20131,300 diatom genera have been described, both extant and fossil, of which some 250\u2013300 exist only as fossils.\nClasses and orders.\nFor many years the diatoms\u2014treated either as a class (Bacillariophyceae) or a phylum (Bacillariophyta)\u2014were divided into just 2 orders, corresponding to the centric and the pennate diatoms (Centrales and Pennales). This classification was extensively overhauled by Round, Crawford and Mann in 1990 who treated the diatoms at a higher rank (division, corresponding to phylum in zoological classification), and promoted the major classification units to classes, maintaining the centric diatoms as a single class Coscinodiscophyceae, but splitting the former pennate diatoms into 2 separate classes, Fragilariophyceae and Bacillariophyceae (the latter older name retained but with an emended definition), between them encompassing 45 orders, the majority of them new.\nToday (writing at mid 2020) it is recognised that the 1990 system of Round et al. is in need of revision with the advent of newer molecular work, however the best system to replace it is unclear, and current systems in widespread use such as AlgaeBase, the World Register of Marine Species and its contributing database DiatomBase, and the system for \"all life\" represented in Ruggiero et al., 2015, all retain the Round et al. treatment as their basis, albeit with diatoms as a whole treated as a class rather than division/phylum, and Round et al.'s classes reduced to subclasses, for better agreement with the treatment of phylogenetically adjacent groups and their containing taxa. (For references refer the individual sections below).\nOne proposal, by Linda Medlin and co-workers commencing in 2004, is for some of the centric diatom orders considered more closely related to the pennates to be split off as a new class, Mediophyceae, itself more closely aligned with the pennate diatoms than the remaining centrics. This hypothesis\u2014later designated the Coscinodiscophyceae-Mediophyceae-Bacillariophyceae, or Coscinodiscophyceae+(Mediophyceae+Bacillariophyceae) (CMB) hypothesis\u2014has been accepted by D.G. Mann among others, who uses it as the basis for the classification of diatoms as presented in Adl. et al.'s series of syntheses (2005, 2012, 2019), and also in the Bacillariophyta chapter of the 2017 \"Handbook of the Protists\" edited by Archibald et al., with some modifications reflecting the apparent non-monophyly of Medlin et al. original \"Coscinodiscophyceae\". Meanwhile, a group led by E.C. Theriot favours a different hypothesis of phylogeny, which has been termed the structural gradation hypothesis (SGH) and does not recognise the Mediophyceae as a monophyletic group, while another analysis, that of Parks et al., 2018, finds that the radial centric diatoms (Medlin et al.'s Coscinodiscophyceae) are not monophyletic, but supports the monophyly of Mediophyceae minus \"Attheya\", which is an anomalous genus. Discussion of the relative merits of these conflicting schemes continues by the various parties involved.\nAdl \"et al.\", 2019 treatment.\nIn 2019, Adl \"et al.\" presented the following classification of diatoms, while noting: \"This revision reflects numerous advances in the phylogeny of the diatoms over the last decade. Due to our poor taxon sampling outside of the Mediophyceae and pennate diatoms, and the known and anticipated diversity of all diatoms, many clades appear at a high classification level (and the higher level classification is rather flat).\" This classification accepts the Mediophyceae of Medlin and co-workers and introduces new clades for a number of otherwise isolated genera.\nSee taxonomy of diatoms for more details.\nEvolution and fossil record.\nOrigin.\nHeterokont chloroplasts appear to derive from those of red algae, rather than directly from prokaryotes as occurred in plants. This suggests they had a more recent origin than many other algae. However, fossil evidence is scant, and only with the evolution of the diatoms themselves do the heterokonts make a serious impression on the fossil record.\nEarliest fossils.\nThe earliest known fossil diatoms date from the early Jurassic (~185 Ma ago), although the molecular clock and sedimentary evidence suggests an earlier origin. It has been suggested that their origin may be related to the end-Permian mass extinction (~250 Ma), after which many marine niches were opened. The gap between this event and the time that fossil diatoms first appear may indicate a period when diatoms were unsilicified and their evolution was cryptic. Since the advent of silicification, diatoms have made a significant impression on the fossil record, with major fossil deposits found as far back as the early Cretaceous, and with some rocks such as diatomaceous earth, being composed almost entirely of them.\nRelation to grasslands.\nThe expansion of grassland biomes and the evolutionary radiation of grasses during the Miocene is believed to have increased the flux of soluble silicon to the oceans, and it has been argued that this promoted the diatoms during the Cenozoic era. Recent work suggests that diatom success is decoupled from the evolution of grasses, although both diatom and grassland diversity increased strongly from the middle Miocene.\nRelation to climate.\nDiatom diversity over the Cenozoic has been very sensitive to global temperature, particularly to the equator-pole temperature gradient. Warmer oceans, particularly warmer polar regions, have in the past been shown to have had substantially lower diatom diversity. Future warm oceans with enhanced polar warming, as projected in global-warming scenarios, could thus in theory result in a significant loss of diatom diversity, although from current knowledge it is impossible to say if this would occur rapidly or only over many tens of thousands of years.\nMethod of investigation.\nThe fossil record of diatoms has largely been established through the recovery of their siliceous frustules in marine and non-marine sediments. Although diatoms have both a marine and non-marine stratigraphic record, diatom biostratigraphy, which is based on time-constrained evolutionary originations and extinctions of unique taxa, is only well developed and widely applicable in marine systems. The duration of diatom species ranges have been documented through the study of ocean cores and rock sequences exposed on land. Where diatom biozones are well established and calibrated to the geomagnetic polarity time scale (e.g., Southern Ocean, North Pacific, eastern equatorial Pacific), diatom-based age estimates may be resolved to within &lt;100,000 years, although typical age resolution for Cenozoic diatom assemblages is several hundred thousand years.\nDiatoms preserved in lake sediments are widely used for paleoenvironmental reconstructions of Quaternary climate, especially for closed-basin lakes which experience fluctuations in water depth and salinity.\nIsotope records.\nWhen diatoms die their shells (frustules) can settle on the seafloor and become microfossils. Over time, these microfossils become buried as opal deposits in the marine sediment. Paleoclimatology is the study of past climates. Proxy data is used in order to relate elements collected in modern-day sedimentary samples to climatic and oceanic conditions in the past. Paleoclimate proxies refer to preserved or fossilized physical markers which serve as substitutes for direct meteorological or ocean measurements. An example of proxies is the use of diatom isotope records of \u03b413C, \u03b418O, \u03b430Si (\u03b413Cdiatom, \u03b418Odiatom, and \u03b430Sidiatom). In 2015, Swann and Snelling used these isotope records to document historic changes in the photic zone conditions of the north-west Pacific Ocean, including nutrient supply and the efficiency of the soft-tissue biological pump, from the modern day back to marine isotope stage 5e, which coincides with the last interglacial period. Peaks in opal productivity in the marine isotope stage are associated with the breakdown of the regional halocline stratification and increased nutrient supply to the photic zone.\nThe initial development of the halocline and stratified water column has been attributed to the onset of major Northern Hemisphere glaciation at 2.73 Ma, which increased the flux of freshwater to the region, via increased monsoonal rainfall and/or glacial meltwater, and sea surface temperatures. The decrease of abyssal water upwelling associated with this may have contributed to the establishment of globally cooler conditions and the expansion of glaciers across the Northern Hemisphere from 2.73 Ma. While the halocline appears to have prevailed through the late Pliocene and early Quaternary glacial\u2013interglacial cycles, other studies have shown that the stratification boundary may have broken down in the late Quaternary at glacial terminations and during the early part of interglacials.\nDiversification.\nThe Cretaceous record of diatoms is limited, but recent studies reveal a progressive diversification of diatom types. The Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event, which in the oceans dramatically affected organisms with calcareous skeletons, appears to have had relatively little impact on diatom evolution.\nTurnover.\nAlthough no mass extinctions of marine diatoms have been observed during the Cenozoic, times of relatively rapid evolutionary turnover in marine diatom species assemblages occurred near the Paleocene\u2013Eocene boundary, and at the Eocene\u2013Oligocene boundary. Further turnover of assemblages took place at various times between the middle Miocene and late Pliocene, in response to progressive cooling of polar regions and the development of more endemic diatom assemblages.\nA global trend toward more delicate diatom frustules has been noted from the Oligocene to the Quaternary. This coincides with an increasingly more vigorous circulation of the ocean's surface and deep waters brought about by increasing latitudinal thermal gradients at the onset of major ice sheet expansion on Antarctica and progressive cooling through the Neogene and Quaternary towards a bipolar glaciated world. This caused diatoms to take in less silica for the formation of their frustules. Increased mixing of the oceans renews silica and other nutrients necessary for diatom growth in surface waters, especially in regions of coastal and oceanic upwelling.\nGenetics.\nExpressed sequence tagging.\nIn 2002, the first insights into the properties of the \"Phaeodactylum tricornutum\" gene repertoire were described using 1,000 expressed sequence tags (ESTs). Subsequently, the number of ESTs was extended to 12,000 and the diatom EST database was constructed for functional analyses. These sequences have been used to make a comparative analysis between \"P. tricornutum\" and the putative complete proteomes from the green alga \"Chlamydomonas reinhardtii\", the red alga \"Cyanidioschyzon merolae\", and the diatom \"Thalassiosira pseudonana\". The diatom EST database now consists of over 200,000 ESTs from \"P. tricornutum\" (16 libraries) and \"T. pseudonana\" (7 libraries) cells grown in a range of different conditions, many of which correspond to different abiotic stresses.\nGenome sequencing.\nIn 2004, the entire genome of the centric diatom, \"Thalassiosira pseudonana\" (32.4 Mb) was sequenced, followed in 2008 with the sequencing of the pennate diatom, \"Phaeodactylum tricornutum\" (27.4 Mb). Comparisons of the two reveal that the \"P. tricornutum\" genome includes fewer genes (10,402 opposed to 11,776) than \"T. pseudonana\"; no major synteny (gene order) could be detected between the two genomes. \"T. pseudonana\" genes show an average of ~1.52 introns per gene as opposed to 0.79 in \"P. tricornutum\", suggesting recent widespread intron gain in the centric diatom. Despite relatively recent evolutionary divergence (90 million years), the extent of molecular divergence between centrics and pennates indicates rapid evolutionary rates within the Bacillariophyceae compared to other eukaryotic groups. Comparative genomics also established that a specific class of transposable elements, the Diatom Copia-like retrotransposons (or CoDis), has been significantly amplified in the \"P. tricornutum\" genome with respect to \"T. pseudonana\", constituting 5.8 and 1% of the respective genomes.\nEndosymbiotic gene transfer.\nDiatom genomics brought much information about the extent and dynamics of the endosymbiotic gene transfer (EGT) process. Comparison of the \"T. pseudonana\" proteins with homologs in other organisms suggested that hundreds have their closest homologs in the Plantae lineage. EGT towards diatom genomes can be illustrated by the fact that the \"T. pseudonana\" genome encodes six proteins which are most closely related to genes encoded by the \"Guillardia theta\" (cryptomonad) nucleomorph genome. Four of these genes are also found in red algal plastid genomes, thus demonstrating successive EGT from red algal plastid to red algal nucleus (nucleomorph) to heterokont host nucleus. More recent phylogenomic analyses of diatom proteomes provided evidence for a prasinophyte-like endosymbiont in the common ancestor of chromalveolates as supported by the fact the 70% of diatom genes of Plantae origin are of green lineage provenance and that such genes are also found in the genome of other stramenopiles. Therefore, it was proposed that chromalveolates are the product of serial secondary endosymbiosis first with a green algae, followed by a second one with a red algae that conserved the genomic footprints of the previous but displaced the green plastid. However, phylogenomic analyses of diatom proteomes and chromalveolate evolutionary history will likely take advantage of complementary genomic data from under-sequenced lineages such as red algae.\nHorizontal gene transfer.\nIn addition to EGT, horizontal gene transfer (HGT) can occur independently of an endosymbiotic event. The publication of the \"P. tricornutum\" genome reported that at least 587 \"P. tricornutum\" genes appear to be most closely related to bacterial genes, accounting for more than 5% of the \"P. tricornutum\" proteome. About half of these are also found in the \"T. pseudonana\" genome, attesting their ancient incorporation in the diatom lineage.\nGenetic engineering.\nTo understand the biological mechanisms which underlie the great importance of diatoms in geochemical cycles, scientists have used the \"Phaeodactylum tricornutum\" and \"Thalassiosira spp.\" species as model organisms since the 90's.\nFew molecular biology tools are currently available to generate mutants or transgenic lines : plasmids containing transgenes are inserted into the cells using the biolistic method or transkingdom bacterial conjugation (with 10\u22126 and 10\u22124 yield respectively), and other classical transfection methods such as electroporation or use of PEG have been reported to provide results with lower efficiencies.\nTransfected plasmids can be either randomly integrated into the diatom's chromosomes or maintained as stable circular episomes (thanks to the CEN6-ARSH4-HIS3 yeast centromeric sequence). The phleomycin/zeocin resistance gene Sh Ble is commonly used as a selection marker, and various transgenes have been successfully introduced and expressed in diatoms with stable transmissions through generations, or with the possibility to remove it.\nFurthermore, these systems now allow the use of the CRISPR-Cas genome edition tool, leading to a fast production of functional knock-out mutants and a more accurate comprehension of the diatoms' cellular processes.\nHuman uses.\nPaleontology.\nDecomposition and decay of diatoms leads to organic and inorganic (in the form of silicates) sediment, the inorganic component of which can lead to a method of analyzing past marine environments by corings of ocean floors or bay muds, since the inorganic matter is embedded in deposition of clays and silts and forms a permanent geological record of such marine strata (see siliceous ooze).\nIndustrial.\nDiatoms, and their shells (frustules) as diatomite or diatomaceous earth, are important industrial resources used for fine polishing and liquid filtration. The complex structure of their microscopic shells has been proposed as a material for nanotechnology.\nDiatomite is considered to be a natural nano material and has many uses and applications such as: production of various ceramic products, construction ceramics, refractory ceramics, special oxide ceramics, for production of humidity control materials, used as filtration material, material in the cement production industry, initial material for production of prolonged-release drug carriers, absorption material in an industrial scale, production of porous ceramics, glass industry, used as catalyst support, as a filler in plastics and paints, purification of industrial waters, pesticide holder, as well as for improving the physical and chemical characteristics of certain soils, and other uses.\nDiatoms are also used to help determine the origin of materials containing them, including seawater.\nNanotechnology.\nThe deposition of silica by diatoms may also prove to be of utility to nanotechnology. Diatom cells repeatedly and reliably manufacture valves of various shapes and sizes, potentially allowing diatoms to manufacture micro- or nano-scale structures which may be of use in a range of devices, including: optical systems; semiconductor nanolithography; and even vehicles for drug delivery. With an appropriate artificial selection procedure, diatoms that produce valves of particular shapes and sizes might be evolved for cultivation in chemostat cultures to mass-produce nanoscale components. It has also been proposed that diatoms could be used as a component of solar cells by substituting photosensitive titanium dioxide for the silicon dioxide that diatoms normally use to create their cell walls. Diatom biofuel producing solar panels have also been proposed.\nForensic.\nThe main goal of diatom analysis in forensics is to differentiate a death by submersion from a post-mortem immersion of a body in water. Laboratory tests may reveal the presence of diatoms in the body. Since the silica-based skeletons of diatoms do not readily decay, they can sometimes be detected even in heavily decomposed bodies. As they do not occur naturally in the body, if laboratory tests show diatoms in the corpse that are of the same species found in the water where the body was recovered, then it may be good evidence of drowning as the cause of death. The blend of diatom species found in a corpse may be the same or different from the surrounding water, indicating whether the victim drowned in the same site in which the body was found.\nHistory of discovery.\nThe first illustrations of diatoms are found in an article from 1703 in Transactions of the Royal Society showing unmistakable drawings of \"Tabellaria\". Although the publication was authored by an unnamed English gentleman, there is recent evidence that he was Charles King of Staffordshire. The first formally identified diatom, the colonial \"Bacillaria paxillifera\", was discovered and described in 1783 by Danish naturalist Otto Friedrich M\u00fcller. Like many others after him, he wrongly thought that it was an animal due to its ability to move. Even Charles Darwin saw diatom remains in dust whilst in the Cape Verde Islands, although he was not sure what they were. It was only later that they were identified for him as siliceous polygastrics. The infusoria that Darwin later noted in the face paint of Fueguinos, native inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego in the southern end of South America, were later identified in the same way. During his lifetime, the siliceous polygastrics were clarified as belonging to the \"Diatomaceae\", and Darwin struggled to understand the reasons underpinning their beauty. He exchanged opinions with the noted cryptogamist G. H. K. Thwaites on the topic. In the fourth edition of \"On the Origin of Species\", he wrote, \"Few objects are more beautiful than the minute siliceous cases of the diatomaceae: were these created that they might be examined and admired under the high powers of the microscope?\" and reasoned that their exquisite morphologies must have functional underpinnings rather than having been created purely for humans to admire.\nGallery.\nThree diatom species were sent to the International Space Station, including the huge (6\u00a0mm length) diatoms of Antarctica and the exclusive colonial diatom, \"Bacillaria paradoxa\". The cells of \"Bacillaria\" moved next to each other in partial but opposite synchrony by a microfluidics method.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46375", "revid": "47474982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46375", "title": "Perkin Warbeck", "text": "15th-century pretender to the English throne\nPerkin Warbeck (c.\u20091474 \u2013 23 November 1499) was a pretender to the English throne claiming to be Richard of Shrewsbury, Duke of York, who was the second son of Edward IV and one of the so-called \"Princes in the Tower\". Richard, were he alive, would have been the rightful claimant to the throne, assuming that his elder brother Edward V was dead and that he was legitimate\u2014a point that had been previously contested by his uncle, King Richard III.\nDue to the uncertainty as to whether Richard had died (either of some natural cause or having been murdered in the Tower of London) or whether he had somehow survived, Warbeck's claim gained some support. Followers may have truly believed Warbeck was Richard or may have supported him simply because of their desire to overthrow the reigning king, Henry VII, and reclaim the throne. Given the lack of knowledge regarding Richard's fate, and having received support outside England, Warbeck emerged as a significant threat to the newly established Tudor dynasty; Henry declared Warbeck an impostor.\nWarbeck made several landings in England backed by small armies but met strong resistance from the King's men and surrendered in Hampshire in 1497. After his capture, he retracted his claim, writing a confession in which he said he was actually Flemish and born in Tournai around 1474. He was executed on 23 November 1499. Dealing with Warbeck cost Henry VII over \u00a313,000 (), putting a strain on Henry's weak state finances.\nEarly life.\nPerkin Warbeck's personal history is fraught with many unreliable and varying statements. Warbeck said that he was Richard of Shrewsbury, Duke of York, the younger son of King Edward IV, who had disappeared mysteriously along with his brother Edward V after Richard, Duke of Gloucester, succeeded to the throne as King Richard III following the death of King Edward IV, his eldest brother, in 1483. After Warbeck was captured and interrogated in 1497 under the eye of King Henry VII, another version of his life was published, based on his confession. This confession is considered by many historians to be possibly only partially true as it was procured under duress. \nAccording to the confession, Warbeck was born to a woman called Katherine de Faro, wife of John Osbeck (also known as Jehan de Werbecque). Osbeck was Flemish and held the occupation of comptroller to the city of Tournai, in present-day Belgium. These family ties are backed up by several municipal archives of Tournai which mention most of the people whom Warbeck declared he was related to. Around the age of ten, he was taken to Antwerp by his mother to learn Dutch. From there, he was undertaken by several masters around Antwerp and Middelburg before being employed by a local English merchant named John Strewe for a few months where he traded cloth.\nAfter his time in the Netherlands, Warbeck yearned to visit other countries and was hired by a Breton merchant. This merchant eventually brought Warbeck to Cork, Ireland, in 1491 when he was about 17, and there he learned to speak English. Warbeck then claims that upon seeing him dressed in silk clothes, some of the citizens of Cork who were Yorkists demanded to do \"him the honour as a member of the Royal House of York.\" He said they did this because they were resolved on gaining revenge on the King of England; they decided that he would claim to be the younger son of the late King Edward IV.\nClaim to the English throne.\nWarbeck first claimed the English throne at the court of Burgundy in 1490, where jeton coins were minted for him. Warbeck explained his (i.e. Richard of Shrewsbury's) mysterious disappearance by claiming that his brother Edward V had been murdered, but he had been spared by his brother's (unidentified) murderers because of his age and \"innocence\". However, he had been made to swear an oath not to reveal his true identity for \"a certain number of years\". He claimed that from 1483 to 1490, he had lived on the continent of Europe under the protection of Yorkist loyalists, but when his main guardian, Sir Edward Brampton, returned to England, he was left free. He then declared his true identity.\nIn 1491, Warbeck landed in Ireland in the hope of gaining support for his claim as Lambert Simnel had four years previously. His cause was promoted by John Atwater, a former Mayor of Cork and ardent Yorkist, who may have been instrumental in helping him assume the identity of Richard. However, little support materialized for an active rebellion, and Warbeck was forced to return to mainland Europe. There his fortunes improved. He was first received by Charles VIII of France, but in 1492 he was expelled under the terms of the Treaty of \u00c9taples, by which Charles had agreed not to shelter rebels against Henry VII. After an English expedition laid siege to Boulogne, Charles VIII agreed to withdraw all backing from Warbeck. In the Duchy of Burgundy, however, Warbeck was publicly recognised as Richard of Shrewsbury by Margaret of York, widow of Charles the Bold, sister of Edward IV, and thus the aunt of the Princes in the Tower. Whether Margaret\u2014who left England to marry before either of her nephews were born\u2014truly believed that the pretender was her nephew Richard, or whether she considered him a fraud but supported him anyway, is unknown, but she tutored him in the ways of the Yorkist court.\nHenry complained to Philip of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, about the harbouring of the pretender. When Henry was ignored, he imposed a trade embargo on Burgundy, cutting off important Burgundian trade connections with England. The pretender was also welcomed by various other monarchs and was known in international diplomacy as the Duke of York. At the invitation of Duke Philip's father, Emperor Maximilian I, in 1493, Perkin attended the funeral of Maximilian's father Frederick III and was recognised as King Richard IV of England.\nSupport in England (Perkin Warbeck conspiracy).\nPro-Yorkist sympathy in England involved important figures making it known that they were prepared to back Warbeck's claims. These included Lord Fitzwater, Sir Simon Montfort, Sir Thomas Thwaites (ex-Chancellor of the Exchequer), Sir William Stanley (the Lord Chamberlain) and Sir Robert Clifford. Clifford went over to mainland Europe and wrote back to his friends to confirm Warbeck's real identity as Prince Richard.\nKing Henry ordered the group of supporters to be rounded up and put on trial. All were duly arrested, together with William D'Aubeney, Thomas Cressener, Thomas Astwode, Robert Ratcliff and others. Lord Fitzwater was sent as a prisoner to Calais and later beheaded for trying to bribe his gaolers.\nIn show trials in January 1495, all the conspirators were initially condemned to death, although six, including Thwaites, were then pardoned and their sentences commuted to imprisonment and fines. Within days Sir Simon Montfort, Robert Ratcliff and William D'Aubeney were beheaded at Tower Hill and Cressener and Astwode pardoned at the block. Later the same month Sir William Stanley was also beheaded. Other members of the group were imprisoned and fined. Sir Robert Clifford was pardoned and rewarded for revealing the names of the conspirators.\nFirst landing in England.\nOn 3 July 1495, funded by Margaret of Burgundy, Warbeck landed at Deal in Kent, hoping for a show of popular support. They were confronted by locals loyal to Henry VII in the ensuing Battle of Deal. Warbeck's small army was routed and 150 of the pretender's troops were killed without Warbeck even disembarking. He was forced to retreat almost immediately, this time to Ireland. There he found support from Maurice FitzGerald, 9th Earl of Desmond, and laid siege to Waterford, but, meeting resistance, he fled to Scotland.\nSupport in Scotland (1495\u20131496).\nWarbeck was well received by James IV of Scotland. Warbeck followed the court. He came to Stirling Castle on 20 or 27 November 1495, was a Christmas guest at Linlithgow Palace, and spent time at Falkland Palace. James realised that Warbeck's presence gave him international leverage. As Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain were negotiating an alliance with Henry VII, James IV knew that Spain would help him in his struggles with England in order to prevent the situation escalating into war with France. \nSpanish ambassadors arrived in Edinburgh, and later Pedro de Ayala was established as a resident ambassador during the crisis. Warbeck married Lady Catherine Gordon, a daughter of George Gordon, 2nd Earl of Huntly. The marriage was celebrated in Edinburgh with a tournament, possibly on 13 January, Saint Mungo's day. James gave Warbeck clothes for the wedding and armour covered with purple silk.\nHistorian Katie Stevenson suggests the clothing bought for the tournament shows Warbeck fought in a team with the king and four knights. A copy of a love letter in Latin obtained by Pedro de Ayala is thought to be Warbeck's proposal to Lady Catherine. However, James's biographer Norman Macdougall comments that it is clear that nobody, with the possible exception of Margaret of Burgundy, took seriously his claim to be the prince; his marriage to a junior Scots noblewoman was scarcely what might be expected for a potential king of England.\nIn September 1496, James IV prepared to invade England with Warbeck. A red, gold and silver banner was made for Warbeck as the Duke of York; James's armour was gilded and painted, and the royal artillery was prepared. John Ramsay of Balmain (who called himself Lord Bothwell) described the events for Henry VII. He saw Roderic de Lalaing, a Flemish knight, arrive with two little ships and 60 German soldiers and meet James IV and talk to Warbeck. Guns provided for the raid from Edinburgh Castle included two great French \"curtalds\", 10 falconets or little serpentines, and 30 iron breech-loading \"cart guns\" with 16 close-carts or wagons for the munitions. Bothwell estimated the invasion force would last only four to five days in England before it ran out of provisions. He suggested, from the safety of Berwick-upon-Tweed, that the Scots could be vanquished by a modest English force attacking from north and south in a pincer movement.\nThe Scottish host assembled near Edinburgh; James IV and Warbeck offered prayers at Holyrood Abbey on 14 September and on the next day at St Triduana's Chapel and Our Lady Kirk of Restalrig. On 19 September 1496 the Scottish army was at Ellem and on 21 September they crossed the Tweed at Coldstream. Miners set to work to demolish Heaton Castle on 24 September, but the army quickly retreated when resources were expended and hoped-for support for Perkin Warbeck in Northumberland failed to materialise. According to an English record, the Scots penetrated four miles into England with a royal banner displayed and destroyed three or four little towers (or Bastle houses). They left on 25 September 1496 when an English army commanded by Lord Neville approached from Newcastle. When news of this invasion reached Ludovico Sforza, Duke of Milan, on 21 October 1496, he wrote to his ambassador in Spain to request the Spanish monarchs make peace between England and Scotland. The peace mission was entrusted to the Spanish ambassador in Scotland, Pedro de Ayala, who had been Perkin's companion in Northumberland.\nLater, wishing to be rid of Warbeck, James IV provided a ship called the \"Cuckoo\" and a hired crew under a Breton captain, Guy Foulcart. Horses were hired for 30 of Warbeck's companions to ride to the ship at Ayr on 5 July 1497. Pedro de Ayala accompanied Perkin to Ayr. Perkin pawned a horse for cash in Ayr and sailed to Waterford in shame. James IV made peace with England by signing the Treaty of Ayton at St Dionysius's Church in Ayton in Berwickshire. Once again Perkin attempted to lay siege to Waterford, but this time his effort lasted only eleven days before he was forced to flee Ireland, chased by four English ships. According to some sources, by this time he was left with only 120 men on two ships. Bacon's \"History of the Reign of King Henry VII\" said he had \"in his company four small barks, with some sixscore or sevenscore fighting men\".\nLanding in Cornwall.\nOn 7 September 1497, Warbeck landed at Whitesand Bay, two miles north of Land's End, in Cornwall, hoping to capitalise on the Cornish people's resentment in the aftermath of their uprising only three months earlier. Warbeck proclaimed that he could put a stop to extortionate taxes levied to help fight a war against Scotland and was warmly welcomed. He was declared \"Richard IV\" on Bodmin Moor and his Cornish army some 6,000 strong entered Exeter before advancing on Taunton. Henry VII sent his chief general, Giles Daubeney, 1st Baron Daubeney, to attack the Cornish and when Warbeck heard that the King's scouts were at Glastonbury he panicked and deserted his army.\nWarbeck was captured at Beaulieu Abbey in Hampshire where he surrendered. Henry VII reached Taunton on 4 October 1497, where he received the surrender of the remaining Cornish army. The ringleaders were executed and others fined. Warbeck was imprisoned, first at Taunton, then at the Tower of London, where he was \"paraded through the streets on horseback amid much hooting and derision of the citizens\".\nImprisonment and death.\nWarbeck was initially treated well by Henry. As soon as he confessed to being an impostor, he was released from the Tower of London and was given accommodation at Henry's court. He was even allowed to be present at royal banquets. He was, however, kept under guard and was not allowed to sleep with his wife, who was living under the protection of the queen.\nAfter eight months at court, Warbeck tried to escape; he was quickly recaptured. He was then held in the Tower, initially in solitary confinement, and later alongside the 17th Earl of Warwick; the two tried to escape in 1499. Captured once again, Warbeck was led from the Tower to Tyburn on 23 November 1499, where he read out a confession and was hanged. Warbeck had signed a paper confessing that his name was Piers Osbeck, a boatman's son from Tournai in France. It is unclear from where Henry VII got the name \"Perkin Warbeck\" or why it was maintained by Henry. Warbeck's Irish ally John Atwater was also executed at Tyburn on the same day. The Earl of Warwick was beheaded on Tower Hill on 28 November 1499.\nWarbeck was buried in Austin Friars, London. The presumed site of his unmarked grave is at the Dutch Church, Austin Friars.\nHis story was featured in Francis Bacon's 1622 work \"History of the Reign of King Henry VII\".\nAppearance.\nPerkin reportedly resembled Edward IV in appearance, which has led to speculation that he might have been Edward's illegitimate son or at least had some genuine connection with the York family. Francis Bacon believed he was one of Edward's many illegitimate children. It has also been suggested that he was a son of one of Edward's siblings, either Richard III or Margaret of York, Warbeck's first major sponsor.\nSome authors, for example Horace Walpole, have even gone as far as to claim that Warbeck actually was Richard, Duke of York.\nPortrait.\nIt is often claimed that Perkin's only surviving likeness is a drawing in the \"Recueil d'Arras\" by Jacques le Boucq dating from c. 1570.\nThe text labelling the drawing as Perkin Warbeck is in a different hand to inscriptions on other drawings in the collection. It might have been added later. It is then questionable if it indeed depicts Warbeck.\nSince le Boucq didn't know who the man was, by his time the identity of the man was likely forgotten. \nHowever, Le Boucq's original handwriting describes the materials of the man's outfit as \"drap dor\"(drap d'or=cloth of gold) and \"drap darger\"(probably drap d'argent=cloth of silver). An outfit fit for royalty, but not pointing to Warbeck specifically. \nWithin the Recueil d'Arras, the \"Perkin Warbeck\" drawing is placed among portraits of the Scottish and English royal family (James IV, Margaret Tudor, Henry VII and Elizabeth of York).\nThis group of drawings in the \"Recueil d'Arras\" may be based on the work of Meynnart Wewyck, an artist at the Tudor court who travelled to Scotland in the years after Perkin Warbeck had left. There he was known as \"Mynours the English painter\". \nImportantly, Wewyck is said to have delivered 4 portraits of English royals to Scotland in 1502 but in Receuil only 3 are labelled as them. (Henry VII, Elizabeth of York and Margaret Tudor). The remaining painting depicted a young prince, the future Henry VIII. He might be the male mistakenly labelled as Warbeck.\nAnother painter, Piers, from Antwerp, was his successor at the Scottish court, and he has also been suggested as the source of the Scottish portraits in the \"Recueil\".\nWarbeck in popular culture.\nWarbeck's story subsequently attracted writers, most notably the dramatist John Ford, who dramatized the story in his play \"Perkin Warbeck\", first performed in the 1630s.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46376", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46376", "title": "Monmouth", "text": "Town in Monmouthshire, Wales\nMonmouth ( or ; ) is a market town and community in Monmouthshire, Wales, situated on where the River Monnow joins the River Wye, from the Wales\u2013England border. The population in the 2011 census was 10,508, rising from 8,877 in 2001. Monmouth was the county town of historic Monmouthshire, although Abergavenny is the largest settlement and Monmouthshire County Council has its main offices at Rhadyr, just outside Usk. Monmouth is in the UK Parliament constituency of Monmouthshire and the Senedd constituency of Monmouth.\nThe town was the site of a small Roman fort, Blestium, and became established after the Normans built Monmouth Castle c.\u20091067. The medieval stone gated bridge is the only one of its type remaining in Britain. The castle later came into the possession of the House of Lancaster, and was the birthplace of King Henry V in 1386.\nToponymy.\nThe name Monmouth is an English contraction of 'Monnow-mouth'. The Welsh name for the river, \"Mynwy\", which may originally have meant \"fast-flowing\", was anglicised as Monnow. The town was originally known in Welsh as \"Abermynwy\" (\"mouth of the Monnow\"), replaced by \"Trefynwy\" (\"Monnow town\" \u2013 the initial \"m\" of \"Mynwy\" mutating in Welsh to \"f\", pronounced /v/) by the 1600s.\nHistory.\nExcavations undertaken by the Monmouth Archaeological Society on sites along Monnow Street have uncovered details of the early history of the town. The Council for British Archaeology has designated Monmouth as one of the top ten towns in Britain for archaeology.\nPrehistoric.\nEvidence of a Bronze Age boat building community, including three channels adjoining the site of a now-vanished lake, was discovered in September 2013, during archaeological investigations by the Monmouth Archaeological Society of the Parc Glyndwr housing development site, immediately north-west of the town.\nThe excavations later revealed the remains of a Neolithic dwelling. The dwelling was constructed on stilts on a human-made island away from the lake shore in water up to deep. Oak timbers had been \"skillfully\" cut with stone or flint axes to form stilts, of posts and poles, which \"probably\" rested on three parallel fully-grown tree 'sleeper beams', up to wide, laid horizontally on the lakebed. Timbers from the structure were radiocarbon dated to 4867\u00a0years before present (BP).\nRoman times.\nThe first recorded settlement at Monmouth was the small Roman fort of \"Blestium\", one of a network of military bases established on the frontiers of the Roman occupation. This was connected by road to the larger Roman towns at \"Glevum\" (Gloucester) and \"Isca Augusta\" (Caerleon). Archaeologists have found Roman pottery and coins within the modern town centre. During the later Roman period, between the 2nd and late 4th centuries, it appears to have been a centre for iron working, using the local iron ores and charcoal also worked at nearby \"Gobannium\" (Abergavenny) and \"Ariconium\" (near Ross-on-Wye).\nThe Middle Ages.\nAfter the end of Roman rule in Britain, the area was at the southern edge of the Welsh kingdom of Ergyng. The only evidence of continuing settlement at Monmouth is a record of a 7th-century church, at an unknown location within the town, dedicated to the Welsh saint Cadoc. In 1056, the area was devastated by the Welsh prince Gruffydd ap Llywelyn, on his way with an army of Welsh, Saxons and Danes to defeat Ralph, Earl of Hereford, and sack the Saxon \"burh\" at Hereford, to the north.\nFollowing the Norman conquest of England in 1066, the Earldom of Hereford was given to William FitzOsbern of Breteuil, Normandy, one of King William's closest allies, who was responsible for defending the area against the Welsh. A new castle was built at Monmouth, holding commanding views over the surrounding area from a sound defensive site and exerting control over both river crossings and the area's important resources of farmland, timber and minerals. Initially it would have been a motte and bailey castle, later rebuilt in stone, and refortified and developed over time. A town grew up around it, and a Benedictine priory was established around 1075 by Withenoc, a Breton who became lord of Monmouth after Roger, the son of William fitzOsbern, was disgraced. The priory may have once been the residence of the monk Geoffrey of Monmouth, who was born around 1100 and is best known for writing the chronicle \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" (\"History of the Kings of Britain\").\nThe town was recorded in the Domesday Book as part of Herefordshire, and expanded thereafter. There was early burgage development along Monnow Street, and the suburb of Overmonnow, west of the river and protected by a defensive moat called the Clawdd-du or Black ditch, began to develop by the 12th century. Charters from the period refer to the town's trade in iron, and to forges making use of local ore and charcoal. The cinders produced by the forges formed heaps, and were used in building foundations; the name of Cinderhill Street in Overmonnow dates from this period.\nDuring the period of turmoil between the supporters of King Henry III and the barons who sought to curtail his power, the town was the scene of a major battle in 1233, in which the king's forces were routed by the troops of Richard Marshal, Earl of Pembroke. Later, the castle was extended by Henry's son Edmund Crouchback, after he became Earl of Lancaster in 1267. In about 1300, town walls were built, and the Monnow Bridge was fortified. The bridge, now pedestrianised, remains in place, the only such fortified bridge in Britain and reputedly one of only three similar crossings in Europe.\nKing Edward II was briefly imprisoned at Monmouth Castle in 1326 after being overthrown by his wife Isabella and her lover Roger Mortimer. In the mid 14th century, the castle and town came into the possession of the House of Lancaster through the marriage of John of Gaunt to Blanche of Lancaster. John of Gaunt strengthened the castle, adding the great hall, and the castle became a favourite residence of the House of Lancaster. In 1387, John of Gaunt's grandson was born to Mary de Bohun, in the Queen's Chamber within the gatehouse of Monmouth Castle, while his father Henry Bolingbroke was hunting in the area. The boy was known as Henry of Monmouth before his coronation as Henry V; supported by longbowmen from the area, he won the Battle of Agincourt in 1415. Monmouth's links with Henry are commemorated in the naming of the main town square, Agincourt Square, and in the statue of Henry on the front of the Shire Hall.\nFrom the 14th century onwards, the town became noted for the production of woollen Monmouth caps. However, as a border town, its prosperity suffered after nearby areas, including Usk and Grosmont, were devastated through attacks by supporters of Owain Glynd\u0175r around 1405, though Monmouth itself did not come under attack.\nPost-medieval times.\nIn 1536, Henry VIII imposed the Laws in Wales Acts 1535\u20131542, abolishing the powers of the Marcher Lords and integrating the administration of England and Wales. A new shire was created covering the area west of Gloucestershire and Herefordshire, and Monmouth became its county town. The town gained representation in the English Parliament at the same time, and its priory was dissolved. In 1605, James I granted Monmouth a town charter by letters patent. The granting of the charter included the charge that the town \"at all perpetual future times ... be and remain a town and borough of Peace and Quiet, to the example and terror of the wicked and reward of the good\". The layout of the town as depicted in Speed's map of 1610 would be easily recognisable to present day inhabitants, with the layout of the main axis clearly visible from the castle via the main street, Monnow Street, to the bridge. Monnow Street is a typical market street, in being wide in the middle (for those selling) and narrow at each end, to help prevent livestock escaping.\nMonmouth School was founded by William Jones in 1614. The castle changed hands three times during the English Civil War, and Oliver Cromwell passed through on his way to retaking Chepstow Castle and laying siege to Pembroke Castle in 1648. Monmouth castle was slighted after the wars ended, but the town itself grew in prosperity. Great Castle House, built in 1673, is now the home of the Royal Monmouthshire Royal Engineers (Militia), the oldest regiment in the British Army. The Shire Hall was built in 1724, and was used for the local Assizes, with the area beneath the building serving as the town market.\nBy the end of the 18th century, the town had become a popular centre for visitors undertaking the \"Wye Tour\", an excursion by boat through the scenic Wye Valley taking in the picturesque sights of Ross-on-Wye, Goodrich, Tintern, Chepstow and elsewhere. Poets William Wordsworth, Samuel Coleridge, and Robert Southey, as well as painter J. M. W. Turner, were among those who visited the area.\nThe 19th and 20th centuries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe town was visited in 1802 by Admiral Horatio Nelson, who knew the importance of the area's woodland in providing timber for the British Navy and approved a Naval Temple built in his honour on the nearby Kymin Hill. Wooden ships up to 500 tons were built at a shipyard just south of Monmouth bridge until the new bridge at Chepstow was opened in 1816. Priory Street, the town's first bypass, was built in the 1830s, with the town slaughterhouse beneath. In 1840, at Monmouth's Shire Hall, Chartist protesters John Frost, Zephaniah Williams and William Jones became the last men in Britain to be sentenced to be hanged, drawn and quartered after being found guilty of treason following riots in Newport that led to 20 deaths. The sentences were later commuted to transportation to Van Diemen's Land.\nUntil the establishment of an official police force in 1857, Monmouth had a parish constable assisted by beadles to keep law and order. The appointed constables held office for a year and were often men who had experience in other local government or community roles. William Fuller who held office as Monmouth's constable for over twenty years in the early to mid 19th century, also served as Inspector of Nuisances, Chief of the Fire Brigade, Inspector of Weights and Measures, Clerk of the Market, and Conservator of the Wye.\nFuller is also recorded as having rescued people from drowning, acted as emergency midwife, and rescued a woman from a flooded house. The types of crime that Fuller and subsequent police officers had to deal with in and around Monmouth as the century progressed were recorded in detail in the local newspapers, the \"Merlin\" and the \"Monmouthshire Beacon\". These crimes included theft of livestock, clothing, food, valuables, fuel (wood and coal); assault; vandalism; highway robbery; fraud; passing counterfeit coin; prostitution, and indecent exposure, as well as the more serious crimes of concealing the death of an infant, carnal knowledge without consent, and murder. The constable would have been present in court at Shire Hall when many of these cases came before the Quarter Sessions or Assizes. Once the court had passed sentence there was a wide range of punishments available to the authorities. Capital offences were dealt with at Monmouth County Gaol, as were whippings and sentences of hard labour. Although a police force of four constables and a sergeant was established in Monmouth in 1836, uncertain finances meant that within two years the force was reduced to just two constables.\nFour railways were built to serve Monmouth between 1857 and 1883: the Coleford, Monmouth, Usk and Pontypool Railway, the Ross and Monmouth Railway, the Wye Valley Railway, and the Coleford Railway. All of these closed between 1917 and 1964. In 1896 a hydroelectric power station was built on the River Monnow at Osbaston, providing electrical power to the town until 1953. A new hydroelectric station was built on the same site and has operated since 2009, typically generating 670,000kWh annually.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Monmouth had close links with the Rolls family, who built a mansion at The Hendre just outside the town. In 1904, Charles Rolls established a new car making business with Henry Royce, but in 1910 he was killed in an aeroplane crash at the age of 32; he is commemorated by a statue in Agincourt Square. St Mary's Church contains a memorial to the men of who died in HMS \"Monmouth\", which was sunk with all hands on 1 November 1914, by German cruisers SMS \"Scharnhorst\" and SMS \"Gneisenau\" off the Chilean Coast at the Battle of Coronel during the First World War; the church hosts an annual service in remembrance. Seven Royal Navy ships have been named after the town, including a Type 23 frigate launched in 1991 which is still in operation. The remains of two pillboxes stand on the Wyesham side of the Wye Bridge. They were built in 1940/1 as part of the Western Command Stop Line No. 27, designed to impede a German invasion force.\nMonmouth remained a relatively quiet town for most of the 20th century; its passenger rail services ended in 1959, but its road connections were improved with the new A40 bypassing the town in 1966, although this \"severed the town ruthlessly from the river on which in the past it had depended\", and later connecting the town to the motorway system. These improved communications contributed to the development of the town, with suburbs extending beyond the rivers Wye and Monnow to the south-east, west and north of the old town centre. In July 2015 the town adopted a flag.\nMonmouthpedia.\nMonmouth is the focus of MonmouthpediA, the first Wikipedia GLAM project to cover a whole town, creating Wikipedia articles on interesting and notable features and aspects of the town. It uses QRpedia QR codes to deliver articles to users, in English, Welsh or alternative languages.\nGeography.\nMonmouth is in an area of Devonian age Old Red Sandstone, at the point where the River Wye is joined by its tributary, the River Monnow, and immediately north of the point at which the smaller River Trothy flows into the Wye from the west. Immediately to the south, the Wye enters a valley, incised into sandstone and, in particular, Carboniferous Limestone. The town is surrounded by wooded hills to its north, east and south, including Buckholt Wood (), The Kymin (), and The Graig (), with more gently undulating terrain to the west. The town centre itself is sited on a low-lying spur between the floodplains of the Wye and Monnow, and has frequently suffered from severe flooding. The water-meadows to the north and south of the town centre, known respectively as Vauxhall Fields and Chippenham Mead, have generally remained free of development.\nIn climatic terms, the town is located between those areas around the Severn Estuary which show a maritime influence, and the cooler and drier conditions of the English Midlands further inland. The nearby Ross-on-Wye weather station shows average daily maximum temperatures ranging from in January to in July, with 1504 hours of sunshine per year, and an average annual rainfall of .\nTransport.\nSince 1966, the A40 dual carriageway road runs past Monmouth linking with the M50 motorway at Ross-on-Wye. South of the town, the road passes through a short tunnel beneath Gibraltar Hill. It follows the River Wye valley from the northeast of Monmouth. The A466 road, also known as the Wye Valley Road, crosses the A40, linking Chepstow and Hereford, and provides access to the Severn Bridge on the M48 motorway.\nThe distances of airports from Monmouth are, Bristol Airport , Cardiff Airport and London Heathrow Airport .\nRegular but infrequent bus services run between the town and Hereford, Ross-on-Wye, Coleford, Chepstow, Newport and Abergavenny.\nMonmouth has been without passenger rail services since January 1959; goods trains ran until 1964. Monmouth's main railway station, known as Monmouth Troy, was a coal distribution depot and a base for heavy goods vehicles for many years after its closure as a part of the rail network, but the building has now been dismantled and re-erected at Winchcombe railway station on the Gloucestershire Warwickshire Railway. The other station at Monmouth was Monmouth May Hill on the Ross and Monmouth Railway, built on the opposite bank of the Wye to the town centre. This operated for many years as Monmouth Sawmills and Gas Works after its closure as part of the rail network.\nGovernance.\nMonmouth is administered by Monmouthshire County Council, one of the 22 unitary local authorities in Wales formed in 1996. Its offices were located until 2012 at the former Gwent County Hall at Croesyceiliog, Cwmbran; its main offices are now located at Rhydar, just outside Usk. The town elects five county councillors, for the wards of Dixton with Osbaston, Drybridge, Overmonnow, Town and Wyesham; as of March 2024, three councillors are Welsh Labour, two independent and one Welsh Conservative. The town also has its own town council, comprising 19 councillors elected every five years. The mayor of Monmouth for the year 2025/2026 is councillor Jackie Atkin.\nMonmouth had a mayor and burgesses in medieval times, and the town gained its first charter, from Henry VI, in 1447. It was included within the Hundred of Skenfrith after the county of Monmouthshire was formed. Following the Municipal Corporations Act 1835, the town elected a borough council, comprising a mayor, aldermen and councillors. In 1974 that corporation was abolished, and the town became part of the much larger Monmouth District (becoming Monmouth Borough in 1988), which until 1996 formed one of the five districts of Gwent.\nThe town was first represented in Parliament in 1536, when it was allocated one seat and the shire two further seats. By the late 17th century, the electorate of the three seats comprised the resident freemen of Monmouth, Newport and Usk, and after the Great Reform Act of 1832 the constituency was generally referred to as the Monmouth Boroughs. The Representation of the People Act 1918 led to Newport becoming a parliamentary borough in its own right, and Monmouth was included in the new Monmouth county constituency. The town remained part of the Monmouth constituency in subsequent elections, although the constituency boundary has changed several times, until 2024 when it became part of the Monmouthshire constituency. Notable Members of Parliament (MPs) for the area have included the industrialist Crawshay Bailey from 1852 to 1868; Peter Thorneycroft, Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1957\u201358 and Chairman of the Conservative Party 1975\u201381, who was the town's MP from 1945 to 1966; and John Stradling Thomas, MP from 1970 to 1991. The constituency has returned a Conservative MP at most recent elections; the current member is David Davies, first elected in 2005. In elections for the Senedd, the town is part of the Monmouth constituency; the current MS is Peter Fox (Conservative). Until January 2020, Monmouth was within the Wales constituency for the European Parliament.\nThe Laws in Wales Acts created an anomaly in that, although Monmouthshire was noted as being in the 'Country or Dominion of Wales', it was made directly responsible to the courts of Westminster rather than falling under the Court of Great Sessions in Wales. Ecclesiastically, until 1836 the town of Monmouth fell within the diocese of Hereford, rather than that of Llandaff. These arrangements gave rise to the widespread belief that the area was part of England rather than Wales, although most legislation for Wales was applied to it using the phrase \"Wales and Monmouthshire\". Following the Welsh Church Act 1914, the Church in Wales established the Diocese of Monmouth in 1921, and in 1949, Monmouthshire was included within the remit of the Council for Wales and Monmouthshire, an appointed precursor of the Welsh Office. The issue of whether Monmouth should be considered as part of Wales for administrative purposes was finally clarified in law by the Local Government Act 1972, which incorporated Monmouthshire within Wales.\nEconomy.\nMonmouth developed primarily as a market town, and agricultural centre, rather than as a centre of industry. The wool industry was important in its early growth, and the town was a centre for the production of the very popular knitted and felted Monmouth caps, from the 15th century onwards. Historically, Monmouth also had iron and tinplate works, together with paper and corn mills. The town was also an important river port, with warehouses and wharves along the Wye later removed for the building of the A40 relief road.\nMonmouth is now primarily a centre for service industries and tourism, and its good road communications have encouraged commuting to larger centres in the West Midlands, South Wales, and Bristol. The Monmouth and District Chamber of Trade and Commerce represents businesses in the town and aims to support and encourage their development.\nThe town has a variety of both national and independent shops, most situated along Monnow Street. There are a number of supermarkets, some banks although the numbers have declined in the 21st century, and independent cafes and restaurants. Church Street, a cobbled pedestrianised street, contains craft shops, a book shop, a greengrocer, chemist, coffee shops and restaurants. Monmouth has been a Fairtrade town since 2005. A regular market takes place close to the Monnow Bridge, and occasionally in the traditional market place in Agincourt Square. There are numerous public houses in the town.\nAccording to the 2001 census, Monmouth had relatively high proportions of its population working in the retail and wholesale sectors of the economy (19.5%, compared with 16.3% for Wales as a whole), education (11.8%, compared with 8.1% across Wales), and property services (10.8%, compared with 8.5% across Wales). The proportion working in manufacturing was lower than the average (16.5% compared with 17.3% across Wales), as was the proportion in public administration (4.3% compared with 6.8% across Wales). In terms of occupational groups, the proportion of residents in managerial and professional posts was higher than average (30.1% compared with 22.7% across Wales), and the proportions in administrative and processing work were lower (8.7% in each group, compared with 12.2% and 10.2% respectively across Wales).\nDemography.\nThe usual resident population in the 2001 census was 8,877. Of that total, 1,760 (19.8%) were aged 15 or younger; 1,227 (13.8%) between 16 and 29; 1,687 (21.1%) between 30 and 44; 1,849 (20.8%) between 45 and 59; 1,386 (15.6%) between 60 and 74; and 968 (10.9%) aged 75 or over. The median age of residents was 42, in comparison to a Wales-wide median age of 39. The town's population increased from 5,504 in 1961 to 8,877 in 2001, a growth of 61% over forty years.\nEducation.\nThere are three primary schools in the town: Kymin View, Osbaston, and Overmonnow.\nThe secondary schooling needs of the town are served by Monmouth Comprehensive School which had over 1,600 pupils in 2012. Welsh medium secondary education is provided at Ysgol Gyfun Gwynllyw in Pontypool. Monmouth also has independent schooling including; the Monmouth Schools, a group of four boarding and day schools. Monmouth University of the Third Age (U3A) offers educational and leisure activities for retired and semi-retired people.\nHealth and social care.\nHealth care services are provided by the Aneurin Bevan Health Board, part of the National Health Service. Following the closure of the Cottage Hospital in 2006, health services are provided at the Monnow Vale Integrated Health and Social Care Facility.\nThe \"Bridges Community Centre\" in Drybridge House adjacent to the Health and Social Care Facility provides support services to disadvantaged and vulnerable people.\nReligion.\nIn the 2001 census, 74.2% of the town's resident population gave their religion as Christian, with 16.7% stating \"no religion\". Minority religions included Muslim (0.2%), Sikh (0.2%), and Buddhist (0.2%).\nMonmouth contains churches of several denominations. Within the Church in Wales, the Monmouth Group of Parishes includes the Priory Church of St Mary, which holds regular weekly services. The church was founded as a Benedictine priory around 1075. It fell into ruin after the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1536, but was rebuilt as a parish church in 1737, and then completely rebuilt again in 1882. The church spire is prominent in views of, and within, the town. Other Anglican churches in the local group of parishes are St Thomas' at Overmonnow, and the churches at Mitchel Troy, Wonastow and Buckholt. The Diocese of Monmouth, the cathedral of which is the Cathedral Church of St Woolos in Newport, is one of the six dioceses of the Church in Wales. The churches at Wyesham and Dixton, though within the boundaries of Wales, are administered by the Church of England, and fall within the Diocese of Hereford.\nSt Mary's Roman Catholic Church was the first Catholic church to be built in Wales after the Reformation, and its construction followed the relaxation of laws against Catholics in 1778. The building was extended on several occasions in the 19th century. Monmouth Methodist Church is noted for both its exterior and interior architectural features. The Baptist Church was founded in 1818, though the current church was not constructed until 1907. There is a Christian Fellowship church at Wyesham.\nCulture and regular events.\nThe Savoy Theatre, on Church Street, is the oldest working theatre in Wales. Monmouth is also home to the Blake Theatre, which opened in 2004. Local performance groups include the Off Centre Theatre Company, Monmouth Operatic Society, Monmouth Choral Society, and the Merlin Society, one of the largest music societies in the country. The Monmouthshire Show (formerly the Monmouth Show) has been held each year, traditionally on the last Thursday of August, since 1919, though its history can be traced back to 1857. Prior to that there had been an agricultural society in the town dating back to the 1790s, which held ploughing competitions. The show, now held on the third Saturday in July, is the largest one-day agricultural show in Wales, with over 350 trade stands.\nThe Monmouth Museum, formerly the Nelson Museum, is home to one of the largest collections of Nelson material, bequeathed to the town by Lady Llangattock, mother of Charles Rolls. It also displays the only known example of an original Monmouth cap, dating from the 16th century. The museum is currently closed, prior to its relocation to the Shire Hall. A small Regimental Museum established in 1989 is housed in Great Castle House, a former town house built on the site of part of Monmouth Castle. The Monmouth Festival, a free nine-day music festival, has been running every year since 1982 and is one of the largest free music festivals in Europe. The town also holds the Rockfield Country Music Festival and the Monmouth Women's Festival each year. An annual regatta is held, each May, and a raft race takes place each year for the St David's Foundation. Location scenes for two episodes of the BBC drama series \"Doctor Who\" were filmed in Monmouth: \"The Unquiet Dead\" (2005) and \"The Next Doctor\" (2008). Monmouth was named one of the best places to live in Wales in 2017. In 2020 the international beekeeping charity organisation Bees for Development designated Monmouth a \"Bee Town\", the first such in Britain. An annual Bee Festival is held, which takes place in the Nelson Garden and Chippenham Fields. The county and town councils have special policies in place for pollinators. The Welsh language and culture are promoted by the Monmouth &amp; District Welsh Society \"(Cymdeithas Gymraeg Trefynwy a'r Cylch)\". Monmouth is twinned with the French town of Carbonne, and Waldbronn in Germany.\nSport, leisure and tourism.\nMonmouth is home to Monmouth Town F.C., a football club founded around 1905. It plays in the Ardal League South East (third tier) at the Chippenham Sports Ground. The town has a leisure centre, on the site of the comprehensive school, with a 20m x 10m swimming pool. In 2011 the swimming pool underwent a \u00a3300,000 refurbishment. There is an 18-hole golf course on the edge of the town, as well as the Rolls Golf Club at The Hendre. There are also cricket, bowls and rugby clubs. Monmouth is the current training base for the Welsh Men's National Lacrosse team, which trained at Monmouth Girls School before the 2014 world championships. Monmouth has a rowing tradition on the River Wye, with the Monmouth Rowing Club, founded in 1928, whose boathouse also hosts the rowing clubs of Monmouth Comprehensive School and of Monmouth School for Girls, and Monmouth School for Boys Rowing club, which has its own boathouse on the opposite bank of the Wye.\nMonmouth has been established as a tourist centre for some 200 years. It is in close proximity to the Forest of Dean and Wye Valley. Tourist attractions within the town include the castle, the museum, the Nelson Garden and the Shire Hall where the Tourist Information Centre and visitor centre is located. The area is also attractive to walkers. Both the Offa's Dyke Path, a long-distance footpath beginning in Chepstow and finishing in North Wales, and the Wye Valley Walk passing through the town.\nNotable people.\nPeople associated with Monmouth include Geoffrey of Monmouth, the Oxford-based cleric, born in about 1100 and believed to be originally from the area, who wrote \"Historia Regum Britanniae\", the \"History of British Kings\". Gilbert de Clare, 6th Earl of Hertford and Guardian of England, died at the castle in 1295, and King Edward II was briefly imprisoned there in 1326. The future Henry V, the victor at the battle of Agincourt in 1415, was born in the castle in 1386. Philip Evans, Jesuit priest and martyr, was born in the town in 1645.\nHoratio Nelson visited Monmouth on several occasions and in 1802, after visiting the Kymin Naval Temple, spoke at the Beaufort Arms Hotel. After his death, the garden where he dined with Lady Hamilton after the speech was named the Nelson Garden. William Allen was awarded the Victoria Cross for his actions in the Battle of Rorke's Drift (1879), and is buried in Monmouth Cemetery.\nRockfield Studios, situated just outside the town, have hosted many prominent bands including Queen and Oasis. Notable rock guitarist Brian Godding was born in the town and musician Dave Edmunds lives there. Other former or current residents of the area have included poet and singer-songwriter Jake Thackray, rugby international and commentator Eddie Butler, television presenter Kate Humble, historian and TV presenter Professor Saul David, astrologer Russell Grant, historian Keith Kissack and comedian Miles Jupp. Monmouth is the home of composer, organist and choirmaster Robert Jones.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46377", "revid": "2340490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46377", "title": "Edward III of England", "text": "King of England from 1327 to 1377\nEdward III (13 November 1312 \u2013 21 June 1377), also known as Edward of Windsor before his accession, was King of England from January 1327 until his death in 1377. He is noted for his military success and for restoring royal authority after the disastrous and unorthodox reign of his father, Edward II. Edward III transformed the Kingdom of England into one of the most formidable military powers in Europe. His fifty-year reign is one of the longest in English history, and saw vital developments in legislation and government, in particular the evolution of the English Parliament, as well as the ravages of the Black Death. He outlived his eldest son, Edward the Black Prince, and was succeeded by his grandson, Richard II.\nEdward was crowned at age fourteen after his father was deposed by his mother, Isabella of France, and her lover, Roger Mortimer. At the age of seventeen, he led a successful coup d'\u00e9tat against Mortimer, the \"de facto\" ruler of England, and began his personal reign. After a successful campaign in Scotland, he declared himself rightful heir to the French throne, starting the Hundred Years' War (1337\u20131453). Following some initial setbacks, this first phase of the war went exceptionally well for England and would become known as the Edwardian War. Victories at Cr\u00e9cy and Poitiers led to the highly favourable Treaty of Br\u00e9tigny (1360), in which England made territorial gains, and Edward renounced his claim to the French throne. Edward's later years were marked by foreign policy failure and domestic strife, largely as a result of his decreasing activity and poor health. The second phase of the Hundred Years' War began in 1369, leading to the loss of most of Edward's conquests, save for the Pale of Calais, by 1375.\nEdward was temperamental and thought himself capable of feats such as healing by the royal touch, as some prior English kings did. He was also capable of unusual clemency. He was in many ways a conventional medieval king whose main interest was warfare, but he also had a broad range of non-military interests. Admired in his own time, and for centuries after, he was later denounced as an irresponsible adventurer by Whig historians, but modern historians credit him with significant achievements.\nBackground.\nEdward's father, King Edward II of England had court favourites who were unpopular with his nobility, such as Piers Gaveston and Hugh Despenser the Younger. Gaveston was killed during a noble rebellion against Edward II in 1312, while Despenser was hated by the English nobility. Edward II was also unpopular with the common people due to his repeated demands that they provide unpaid military service in Scotland. None of his campaigns there were successful, and this led to a further decline in his popularity, particularly with the nobility. His image was damaged again in 1322 when he executed his cousin Thomas, Earl of Lancaster, and confiscated the Lancaster estates. Historian Chris Given-Wilson wrote that, by 1325, the nobility believed that \"no landholder could feel safe\" under the regime. This distrust of Edward II was shared by his wife, Isabella of France, who believed Despenser responsible for poisoning the King's mind against her. In September 1324 Queen Isabella was publicly humiliated when the government declared her an enemy alien, and the King repossessed her estates, probably at the urging of Despenser. Edward II also disbanded her retinue. Edward II had already been threatened with deposition on two previous occasions (in 1310 and 1321). Historians agree that hostility towards the king was universal. W. H. Dunham and C. T. Wood ascribed this to Edward II's \"cruelty and personal faults\", suggesting that \"very few, not even his half-brothers or his son, seemed to care about the wretched man\" and that none would fight for him. A contemporary chronicler described Edward II as , or a \"useless king\".\nEarly life (1312\u20131327).\nEdward was born at Windsor Castle on 13 November 1312, and was described in a contemporary prophecy as \"the boar that would come out of Windsor\". The reign of his father, Edward II, was a particularly problematic period of English history. The King had alienated several English nobles and Scottish allies by abandoning his father's war with Scotland soon after his accession, and continued to lose battles against the Scots intermittently. Also controversial was the King's patronage of a small group of royal favourites rather than his nobility generally. This, says the historian Michael Prestwich, \"unbalanced the whole system of royal patronage\". However, the birth of a male heir in 1312 \u2013 the future Edward III \u2013 soon improved Edward II's relations with the French, and a moderate element within the nobility temporarily quelled baronial opposition. The young prince was created Earl of Chester at only twelve days old, and by January the following year had been provided with an entire household. An early influence on Prince Edward was the Bishop of Durham, Richard de Bury, one of the century's major bibliophiles. Originally a tutor, he appears to have become a mentor to the King. Under Bury's tutelage, Edward learned to write and to read French and Latin. He would have had access to famous contemporary works, such as Vegetius's \"De Re Militari\", which had been translated into Anglo-Norman, as well as the \"Mirror for Princes\" and various psalters and religious texts.\nSince the Norman Conquest had united the Duchy of Normandy and its French estates with those of the Crown and the land of England, English kings had held several territories, including Poitou, Aquitaine, Normandy, Anjou and Maine, and these holdings \u2013 at one point covering more of France than that held by the French king \u2013 had frequently led to conflict. In 1325, Edward II was faced with a demand from his brother-in-law Charles IV of France to perform homage for the English Duchy of Aquitaine. The King was reluctant to leave the country, as discontent was once again brewing domestically, particularly over his relationship with the favourite Hugh Despenser the Younger. Instead, he had his son Edward created Duke of Aquitaine in his place and sent him to France to perform the homage. The young Edward was accompanied by his mother Isabella, who was King Charles's sister and was meant to negotiate a peace treaty with the French. While in France, Isabella conspired with the exiled Roger Mortimer to have Edward II deposed. To build up diplomatic and military support for the venture, Isabella had her son engaged to the twelve-year-old Philippa of Hainault. An invasion of England was launched and Edward II's forces deserted him completely. Isabella and Mortimer summoned a parliament, and the King was forced to relinquish the throne to his son, who was proclaimed king in London on 25 January 1327. The new king was crowned as Edward III at Westminster Abbey on 1 February at the age of 14.\nEarly reign (1327\u20131337).\nMortimer's rule and fall.\nOne of Edward's first acts \u2013 \"de facto\" Mortimer's \u2013 was to lead another campaign to Scotland in July 1327. It was not long before the new reign also met with other problems caused by the central position of Mortimer at court, who was now the de facto ruler of England. Mortimer used his position to acquire noble estates and titles, and his unpopularity grew with the humiliating defeat by the Scots at the Battle of Stanhope Park in the county of Durham, and the ensuing Treaty of Edinburgh\u2013Northampton, agreed with the Scots in 1328. The young king also came into conflict with his guardian. Mortimer knew his position in relation to the King was precarious and subjected Edward to disrespect. The King married Philippa of Hainault at York Minster on 24 January 1328, and the birth of their first child, Edward of Woodstock, on 15 June 1330 only increased tension with Mortimer. Eventually, the King decided to take direct action against Mortimer. Although up until now Edward had kept a low profile, it is likely that he increasingly suspected that Mortimer's behaviour could endanger Edward's own life, as the former's position became more unpopular. This was exacerbated by his execution of Edward's uncle Edmund, Earl of Kent. Contemporary chroniclers suspected, too, that Mortimer had designs on the throne, and it is likely that it was these rumours that encouraged Edward to act against him and his mother, who supposedly maintained a close relationship with Mortimer.\nAided by his close companion William Montagu, 3rd Baron Montagu, and a small number of other trusted men, Edward took Mortimer by surprise and captured him at Nottingham Castle on 19 October 1330. Mortimer was executed and Edward's personal reign began. The historian Mark Ormrod argued that at this point Edward had had \"little instruction in the art of kingship\", and although he had received several books on the subject on his betrothal to Philippa, \"it is extremely doubtful that he read or comprehended these works\". His reign, continues Ormrod, was to be guided by his practical, rather than theoretical, experience.\nWar in Scotland.\nEdward III was not content with the peace agreement made in his name, but the renewal of the war with Scotland originated in private, rather than royal initiative. A group of English magnates known as The Disinherited, who had lost land in Scotland by the peace accord, staged an invasion of Scotland and won a great victory at the Battle of Dupplin Moor in 1332. They attempted to install Edward Balliol as king of Scotland in place of the infant David II, but Balliol was soon expelled and was forced to seek the help of Edward III. The English king responded by laying siege to the important border town of Berwick and defeated a large relieving army at the Battle of Halidon Hill, even while under threat from foreign raids. However, Berwick was taken after the besieged Scots set fire to the town, forcing them to treat; at one point Edward's queen was under siege in Bamburgh Castle, but this was too late to save the Scots' campaign. He reinstated Balliol on the throne and received a substantial amount of land in southern Scotland. These victories proved hard to sustain, as forces loyal to David II gradually regained control of the country. A Scottish uprising in 1334 required the raising of another army and a supporting navy. Edward, having repaired Roxburgh Castle, launched a number of ineffective strikes against the Scots. In 1338, Edward agreed a truce with the Scots.\nOne reason for the change of strategy towards Scotland was a growing concern for the relationship between England and France. As long as Scotland and France were in an alliance, the English were faced with the prospect of fighting a war on two fronts. The French carried out raids on English coastal towns, leading to rumours in England of a full-scale French invasion.\nCreating a new nobility.\nWhen Edward took power, he found his family in \"complete disarray\", says Ormrod. His nobility was divided into factions after the troublesome reign of his father and was weakened by line failure among many families. While the lesser baronage was less affected by political misadventure than their seniors, they were also weaker due to their rights being more insubstantive. Edward had to pacify two noble parties: one which had been against his father from the beginning, and another which had opposed Mortimer's and Isabella's minority regime. James Bothwell argues that, while he managed to reconcile the sides bloodlessly and with minimum acrimony, it was insufficient to leave him secure on his own: he lanced the opposition but had not turned them into a loyalist cadre. Only the Earls of Arundel, Oxford and Warwick could be counted on as loyalists.\nTo counter the limited loyalty among the aristocrats, following the March 1337 Parliament Edward created six new earls. He also summoned 61 new men to the lords with lesser titles, usually by writ of summons, over the rest of his reign. These creations \u2013 although expensive \u2013 received very little ill will among the extant aristocracy, including the royal family. The 1337 creations were Hugh de Audley to the Earldom of Gloucester, William de Bohun to that of Northampton, William de Clinton to Huntingdon, Henry of Grosmont to Derby, William de Montagu to Salisbury and Robert de Ufford to Suffolk. Of these, Bohun, Clinton, Montagu and Ufford had played leading roles in Edward's coup against Mortimer; they were likewise the greatest beneficiaries in terms of grants and estates. Another common denominator was that most of them had also been trusted companions of Edward before the coup; Ufford, for example, jousted with him and attended him in his homage before Philip VI of France, while Montagu had been his \"closest supporter\", and had run secret diplomatic missions to the Pope for him before the coup.\nJames Bothwell has noted that, while these men may have been less well off before they were promoted, they were not less experienced, either politically or militarily. These promotions were especially important to Edward because it had been from among the earls that his father had created so many bitter enemies, and therefore that was the demography that Edward wanted to reorganise in his favour. These promotions reinforced his own and the Crown's position and, with war approaching, he created six new recruitment conduits from the regions directly to the royal army. For the earls themselves, the prospect was not so positive: due to the parlous state of the royal finances, most of them did not receive a minimum of 1000 marks a year that was promised to them to uphold their new estate. All except Gloucester had to be satisfied with irregular grants of land to boost their incomes, but these would often not be available until the incumbent died and they escheated to the King.\nMid-reign (1337\u20131360).\nSluys.\nIn 1337, Philip VI of France confiscated the English king's Duchy of Aquitaine and the county of Ponthieu. Instead of seeking a peaceful resolution to the conflict by paying homage to the French king, as his father had done, Edward responded by laying claim to the French crown as the grandson of Philip IV of France. The French rejected this based on the precedents for agnatic succession set in 1316 and 1322 and upheld the rights of Philip IV's nephew Philip VI, leading to tensions that caused the Hundred Years' War. In the early stages of the war, Edward's strategy was to build alliances with other Continental rulers. In 1338, Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor, named Edward Vicar general of the Holy Roman Empire and promised his support. As late as 1373, the Anglo-Portuguese Treaty of 1373 established an Anglo-Portuguese Alliance. These measures produced few results.\nThe only major military victory during this phase of the war was the English naval victory at Sluys on 24 June 1340, which secured control of the English Channel. This victory decimated a superior French fleet and lowered the threat of a French invasion of England, which increased English desires to attack France. This situation lasted less than a year. Edward was unlikely to have been happy with this victory due to his continuing financial problems. The English also captured 166 French merchantmen; they had been raiding the south coast of England for several years and were unpopular amongst English sailors. Up to 16,000 French sailors were killed and French captain, Nicolas B\u00e9huchet \u2013 who could otherwise have expected to be ransomed \u2013 was hanged from his own yardarm. Edward saw God's hand in his victory and a triumphal coin was struck in commemoration \u2013 showing Edward in a ship, probably meant to be B\u00e9huchet's own \u2013 and the King gained a reputation as a naval warrior.\nCost of war.\nMeanwhile, the fiscal pressure on the kingdom caused by Edward's expensive alliances led to discontent at home. The regency council at home was frustrated by the mounting national debt, while the King and his commanders on the Continent were angered by the failure of the government in England to provide sufficient funds. To deal with the situation, Edward himself returned to England, arriving in London unannounced on 30 November 1340. Finding the affairs of the realm in disorder, he purged the royal administration of a great number of ministers and judges. These measures did not bring domestic stability, and a stand-off ensued between the King and John de Stratford, Archbishop of Canterbury, during which Stratford's relatives Robert Stratford, Bishop of Chichester, and Henry de Stratford were temporarily stripped of title and imprisoned respectively. Stratford claimed that Edward had violated the laws of the land by arresting royal officers. A certain level of conciliation was reached at the Parliament of April 1341. Here Edward was forced to accept severe limitations to his financial and administrative freedom, in return for a grant of taxation. Yet in October the same year, Edward repudiated this statute and Archbishop Stratford was politically ostracised. The extraordinary circumstances of the April Parliament had forced the King into submission, but under normal circumstances, the powers of the king in medieval England were virtually unlimited, a fact that Edward was able to exploit.\nHistorian Nicholas Rodger called Edward III's claim to be the \"Sovereign of the Seas\" into question, arguing there was hardly any royal navy before the reign of Henry V (1413\u20131422). Despite Rodger's view, King John had already developed a royal fleet of galleys and had attempted to establish an administration for these ships and others which were arrested (privately owned ships pulled into royal/national service). Henry III, his successor, continued this work. Notwithstanding the fact that he, along with his predecessor, had hoped to develop a strong and efficient naval administration, their endeavours produced one that was informal and mostly ad hoc. A formal naval administration emerged during Edward's reign, comprising lay administrators and led by William de Clewre, Matthew de Torksey and John de Haytfield successively bearing the title of \"Clerk of the King's Ships\". Robert de Crull was the last to fill this position during Edward III's reign and would have the longest tenure in this position. It was during his tenure that Edward's naval administration would become a base for what evolved during the reigns of successors such as Henry VIII's \"Council of Marine\" and \"Navy Board\" and Charles I's \"Board of Admiralty\". Rodger also argues that for much of the fourteenth century, the French had the upper hand, apart from Sluys in 1340 and, perhaps, off Winchelsea in 1350. Yet, the French never invaded England and King John II of France died in captivity in England. There was a need for an English navy to play a role in this and to handle other matters, such as the insurrection of the Anglo-Irish lords and acts of piracy.\nCommand structure.\nEdward's military command structure began with himself at the centre, and then members of the court acted as his generals. This included the King's family, and Edward utilised the martial capabilities of his sons, particularly his eldest son, Edward the Black Prince. This was not only pragmatic, in that they were all good warriors, but had the added propaganda value of demonstrating the hereditary nature of Edward's claim to the French throne. However, command was not always the prerogative of the nobility. Knights Banneret \u2013 knights able to lead other knights \u2013 were also favoured as leaders of armies or divisions, as they were also already close to the king, being part of his household and bodyguard. They bore particular responsibilities during King Edward's \"chevauch\u00e9es\", which often required the main army to split into smaller forces, each requiring its own captain. This sometimes led to dissension. For example, in the 1369 Loire campaign, the Earl of Pembroke shared command with Sir John Chandos; although the latter was appointed seneschal of France by the Black Prince, Pembroke refused to work beneath him on account of his superior social status. Ultimately, though, the task of raising the armies that they would lead fell to both: the aristocracy could raise the largest number of tenants and retainers after the King, but it was the lower men who acted as recruiting sergeants in the regions. Unlike during his father's or great-grandfather's campaigns in Scotland, the feudal levy \u2015 whereby military service was provided for free in exchange for land rights \u2015 by the outbreak of the Hundred Years' War it had become the norm for men of all ranks to be paid for their service from the King. In return, the crown shouldered the responsibility for paying for the bulk of equipment. The military historian Andrew Ayton has described this transition as amounting to a \"military revolution\", and one spearheaded by the King himself.\nCr\u00e9cy and Poitiers.\nBy the early 1340s, it was clear that Edward's policy of alliances was too costly, and yielded too few results. The following years saw more direct involvement by English armies, including in the Breton War of Succession, but these interventions also proved fruitless at first. Edward defaulted on large scale Florentine loans, and partly as a result the lenders declared bankruptcy.\nA change came in July 1346, when Edward staged a major offensive, sailing for Normandy with a force of 15,000 men. His army sacked the city of Caen, and marched across northern France, to meet up with Flemish forces in Flanders. It was not Edward's initial intention to engage the French army, but at Cr\u00e9cy, just north of the Somme, he found favourable terrain and decided to fight a pursuing army led by Philip VI. On 26 August, the English army defeated a far larger French army in the Battle of Cr\u00e9cy. Shortly after this, on 17 October, an English army defeated and captured King David II of Scotland at the Battle of Neville's Cross. With his northern borders secured, Edward felt free to continue his major offensive against France, laying siege to the town of Calais. The operation was the greatest English venture of the Hundred Years' War, involving an army of 32,000 men. The siege started on 4 September 1346, and lasted until the town surrendered on 3 August 1347.\nAfter the fall of Calais, factors outside of Edward's control forced him to wind down the war effort. In 1348, the Black Death struck England with full force, killing a third or more of the country's population. This loss of manpower led to a shortage of farm labour and a corresponding rise in wages. The great landowners struggled with the shortage of manpower and the resulting inflation in labour cost. To curb the rise in wages, the King and Parliament responded with the Ordinance of Labourers in 1349, followed by the Statute of Labourers in 1351. These attempts to regulate wages could not succeed in the long run, but in the short term they were enforced with great vigour. All in all, the plague did not lead to a full-scale breakdown of government and society, and recovery was remarkably swift. This was to a large extent thanks to the competent leadership of royal administrators such as Treasurer William Edington and Chief Justice William de Shareshull.\nIt was not until the mid-1350s that military operations on the Continent were resumed on a large scale. In 1356, Edward's eldest son, Edward, Prince of Wales, won an important victory in the Battle of Poitiers. The greatly outnumbered English forces not only routed the French, but captured the French king John II and his youngest son, Philip. After a succession of victories, the English held great possessions in France, the French king was in English custody, and the French central government had almost totally collapsed. There has been a historical debate as to whether Edward's claim to the French crown originally was genuine, or if it was simply a political ploy meant to put pressure on the French government. Regardless of the original intent, the stated claim now seemed to be within reach. Yet a campaign in 1359, meant to complete the undertaking, was inconclusive. In 1360, therefore, Edward accepted the Treaty of Br\u00e9tigny, whereby he renounced his claims to the French throne, but secured his extended French possessions in full sovereignty. Edward kept his subjects fully informed of political and military developments abroad by a large number of regular reports from himself and his captains to various outlets, including convocation, the City of London and the archbishops, that, while the scholar A. E. Prince acknowledged that taken singularly, these reports may not represent a cohesive public relations within government, they do perhaps indicate, as a whole, the existence of a \"simple propaganda organization\" with which the King boosted domestic morale. These then ended up as part of popular chronicles, either verbatim or in part, whether newsletters or public letters.\nGovernment.\nLegislation.\nThe middle years of Edward's reign were a period of significant legislative activity. Perhaps the best-known piece of legislation passed was the Statute of Labourers of 1351, which addressed the labour shortage problem caused by the Black Death. The statute fixed wages at their pre-plague level and checked peasant mobility by asserting that lords had the first claim on their men's services. In spite of concerted efforts to uphold the statute, it eventually failed due to intense competition among landowners for labour. The law has been described as an attempt \"to legislate against the law of supply and demand\", which doomed it to certain failure. Nevertheless, the labour shortage had created a community of interest between the smaller landowners of the House of Commons and the greater landowners of the House of Lords. The resulting measures angered the peasants, leading to the Peasants' Revolt of 1381.\nThe reign of Edward III coincided with the so-called Babylonian Captivity of the papacy at Avignon. During the wars with France, opposition emerged in England against perceived injustices by a papacy largely controlled by the French crown. Papal taxation of the English Church was suspected to be financing the nation's enemies, while the practice of provisions (the Pope's providing benefices for clerics) caused resentment in the English population. The statutes of Provisors and Praemunire, of 1350 and 1353 respectively, aimed to amend this by banning papal benefices, as well as limiting the power of the papal court over English subjects. The statutes did not sever the ties between the king and the Pope, who were equally dependent upon each other.\nOther legislation of importance includes the Treason Act 1351. It was precisely the harmony of the reign that allowed a consensus on the definition of this controversial crime. Yet, the most significant legal reform was probably that concerning the Justices of the Peace. This institution began before the reign of Edward III but, by 1350, the justices had been given the power not only to investigate crimes and make arrests, but also to try cases, including those of felony. With this, an enduring fixture in the administration of local English justice had been established.\nParliament and taxation.\nParliament as a representative institution was already well established by the time of Edward III, but the reign was nevertheless central to its development. During this period, membership in the English baronage, formerly a somewhat indistinct group, became restricted to those who received a personal summons to Parliament. This happened as Parliament gradually developed into a bicameral institution, composed of a House of Lords and a House of Commons. Yet it was not in the Lords, but in the Commons that the greatest changes took place, with the expanding political role of the Commons. Informative is the Good Parliament, where the Commons for the first time \u2013 albeit with noble support \u2013 were responsible for precipitating a political crisis. In the process, both the procedure of impeachment and the office of the Speaker were created. Even though the political gains were of only temporary duration, this parliament represented a watershed in English political history.\nThe political influence of the Commons originally lay in their right to grant taxes. The financial demands of the Hundred Years' War were enormous, and the King and his ministers tried different methods of covering the expenses. Edward had a steady income from crown lands, and could also take up substantial loans from Italian and domestic financiers. To finance warfare, he had to resort to taxation of his subjects. Taxation took two primary forms: levy and customs. The levy was a grant of a proportion of all moveable property, normally a tenth for towns and a fifteenth for farmland. This could produce large sums of money, but each such levy had to be approved by Parliament, and the king had to prove the necessity. The customs therefore provided a welcome supplement, as a steady and reliable source of income. An \"ancient duty\" on the export of wool had existed since 1275. Edward I had tried to introduce an additional duty on wool, but this unpopular \"maltolt\", or \"unjust exaction\", was soon abandoned. Then, from 1336 onwards, a series of schemes aimed at increasing royal revenues from wool export were introduced. After some initial problems and discontent, it was agreed through the Statute of the Staple of 1353 that the new customs should be approved by Parliament, though in reality, they became permanent.\nThrough the steady taxation of Edward III's reign, Parliament \u2013 and in particular the Commons \u2013 gained political influence. A consensus emerged that in order for a tax to be just, the King had to prove its necessity, it had to be granted by the community of the realm, and it had to be to the benefit of that community. In addition to imposing taxes, Parliament would also present petitions for redress of grievances to the King, most often concerning misgovernment by royal officials. This way the system was beneficial for both parties. Through this process, the Commons, and the community they represented, became increasingly politically aware, and the foundation was laid for the particular English brand of constitutional monarchy. It became the norm for the king's ministers to argue his case before Parliament, the Commons to grant the king the tax he requested, and then the king's concessions to Parliament would be announced at its end.\nThe King occasionally attempted to avoid resorting to Parliament to raise taxes, such as in 1338 when he attempted a forced loan on wool. This soon collapsed \u2013 in the words of E. B. Fryde it was a \"lamentable failure\" \u2013 and once again, Edward had to return to Parliament. Edward also attempted to reinforce what he believed to be his ancient rights, such as the return of all goods and chattels of felons to the Crown, and scutage, as well as new proposals, such as that debts should be repaid to the Crown in one payment rather than incrementally. All these schemes collapsed, however, the latter because the lords claimed that such a method of taxation infringed upon their traditional rights. According to Fryde, \"one of Edward's most onerous and wasteful liabilities\" came in February 1339, when he effectively pawned the Great Crown of England to the Archbishop of Trier, for which the King promised repayment of \u00a316,650. Edward met his creditors in Ghent in 1340, but, unable to immediately satisfy their demands, notes Bertie Wilkinson, \"pretending that he wanted to take a walk, he secretly rode away\".\nChivalry and national identity.\nFurthermore, Edward bolstered the sense of community within this group by the creation of a new order of chivalry. In January 1344 a great feast was held in Windsor Castle to which large numbers were invited; not just the lords but the City of London also sent a contingent. The first night saw a feast at which all the attending ladies, with only two knights among them, dined, while the other men ate in their tents. This was followed by jousting over the next three days, where Edward \u2013 \"not because of his kingly rank but because of his great exertions\", Adam Murimuth claims in his chronicle \u2013 was deemed champion. This was followed by the King's announcement of the founding of the Round Table of King Arthur, to which \"certain lords\" took an oath. The first meeting of the new chapter was arranged for the following Whitsun. Nothing, however, was to come of the project; as Murimuth comments, \"this work was later stopped for various reasons\".\nInstead, around four years later, Edward founded the Order of the Garter, probably in 1348. The new order carried connotations from the legend by the circular shape of the garter. Edward's wartime experiences during the Cr\u00e9cy campaign (1346\u20137) seem to have been a determining factor in his abandonment of the Round Table project. It has been argued that the total warfare tactics employed by the English at Cr\u00e9cy in 1346 were contrary to Arthurian ideals and made Arthur a problematic paradigm for Edward, especially at the time of the institution of the Garter. There are no formal references to King Arthur and the Round Table in the surviving early fifteenth century copies of the Statutes of the Garter, but the Garter Feast of 1358 did involve a round table game. Thus, there was some overlap between the projected Round Table fellowship and the actualized Order of the Garter. Polydore Vergil tells of how the young Joan of Kent \u2013 allegedly the King's favourite at the time \u2013 accidentally dropped her garter at a ball at Calais. Edward responded to the ensuing ridicule of the crowd by tying the garter around his own knee with the words \"honi soit qui mal y pense\" (shame on him who thinks ill of it).\nThis reinforcement of the aristocracy and the emerging sense of an English national identity must be seen in conjunction with the war in France. Just as the war with Scotland had done, the fear of a French invasion helped strengthen a sense of national unity and nationalise the aristocracy that had been largely Anglo-Norman since the Norman Conquest. Since the time of Edward I, popular myth suggested that the French planned to extinguish the English language, and as his grandfather had done, Edward III made the most of this scare. As a result, the English language experienced a strong revival during Edward III's reign; in 1362, a Statute of Pleading ordered English to be used in law courts, and the year after, Parliament was for the first time opened in English. At the same time, the vernacular saw a revival as a literary language, through the works of William Langland, John Gower and especially \"The Canterbury Tales\" by Geoffrey Chaucer. Yet the extent of this Anglicisation must not be exaggerated. The statute of 1362 was in fact written in the French language and had little immediate effect, and Parliament was opened in that language as late as 1377. The Order of the Garter, though a distinctly English institution, included also foreign members such as John IV, Duke of Brittany, and Robert of Namur.\nLater reign (1360\u20131377).\nFurther campaigns in France and governance.\nWhile Edward's early reign had been energetic and successful, his later years were marked by inertia, military failure and political strife. The day-to-day affairs of the state had less appeal to Edward than military campaigning, so during the 1360s Edward increasingly relied on the help of his subordinates, in particular William Wykeham. A relative upstart, Wykeham was made Keeper of the Privy Seal in 1363 and Chancellor in 1367, though due to political difficulties connected with his inexperience, the Parliament forced him to resign the chancellorship in 1371. Compounding Edward's difficulties were the deaths of his most trusted men, some from the 1361\u201362 recurrence of the plague. William Montagu, 1st Earl of Salisbury, Edward's companion in the 1330 coup, died as early as 1344. William de Clinton, 1st Earl of Huntingdon, who had also been with Edward at Nottingham, died in 1354. One of the earls created in 1337, William de Bohun, 1st Earl of Northampton, died in 1360, and the next year Henry of Grosmont, Duke of Lancaster, perhaps the greatest of Edward's captains, succumbed to what was probably plague. Their deaths left the majority of the magnates younger and more naturally aligned to the princes than to the King himself.\nIncreasingly, Edward began to rely on his sons for the leadership of military operations. The king's second son, Lionel of Antwerp, attempted to subdue by force the largely autonomous Anglo-Irish lords in Ireland. The venture failed, and the only lasting mark he left was the suppressive Statutes of Kilkenny in 1366. In France, meanwhile, the decade following the Treaty of Br\u00e9tigny was one of relative tranquillity, but on 8 April 1364, John II died in captivity in England, after unsuccessfully trying to raise his own ransom at home. He was followed by the vigorous Charles V, who enlisted the help of the capable Bertrand du Guesclin, Constable of France In 1369, the French war started anew, and Edward's son John of Gaunt was given the responsibility of a military campaign. The effort failed, and with the Treaty of Bruges in 1375, the great English possessions in France were reduced to only the coastal towns of Calais, Bordeaux, and Bayonne.\nAlice Perrers.\nAlice Perrers was originally one of Philippa's household ladies, having been appointed by 1359. Within five years, by which time she would have been 18, and after the death of her husband, she is speculated to have become the lover of the elderly King. She maintained an active business life outside her career in the royal household, particularly as a moneylender, while also making the most out of her royal connections, accepted gifts from courtiers and those wishing to further their causes with the King. Edward presented her with gifts, including land, manors and jewels, and in 1371 these included those of the now-dead Philippa. Alice, in what may have been an attempt to keep her new estates after the King's death, tied them up in a series of enfeoffments. This meant that legally they ceased to be royal gifts which could be resumed to the Crown, but hers to receive from her feoffees when she chose. These gifts included 50 manors in 25 counties and \u00a320,000 in jewels. The contemporary chronicler Thomas Walsingham saw her as a low-born woman who, through her own ambition, made a fortune from the besotted King; and this was the popular view presented to the Good Parliament of 1376, in which she was also accused of taking 2000 to 3000 pounds in gold and silver per annum from the royal treasury. Another contemporary, the Anonimalle Chronicler, complained that this was all \"without any notable profit and in great damage to our lord the king\", and urged that Alice be removed from the King's circle even though he was still living, albeit known to be dying. Modern historians have credited her with more agency than merely using \"womanly wiles\" to get her own way, noting her head for business and the law. Bothwell also notes that she probably recognised the future precariousness of her position after the King died \u2013 \"which it was obvious to all in the 1370s was imminent\" \u2013 and intended to use much of her wealth to provide for her two daughters, whose lives would be even more precarious in the following reign. She was correct in this expectation. Edward could not prevent her banishment during the Good Parliament, though she had returned to his inner circle later that year and remained there until his death. However, in 1378 (first year of Richard II's reign) she was put on trial before Parliament. She was found guilty and sentenced to exile. Further, her property was forfeited to the Crown.\nDiscontent at home.\nMilitary failure abroad, and the associated fiscal pressure of constant campaigns, led to political discontent in England. Finance was a particular grievance; although it was rarely raised as an issue before 1371, after that time complaints about the royal household's expenditure were frequent. The problems came to a head in the Parliament of 1376, the so-called Good Parliament. The Parliament was called to grant taxation, but the House of Commons took the opportunity to address specific grievances. In particular, criticism was directed at some of the King's closest advisors. Lord Chamberlain William Latimer, 4th Baron Latimer, and Steward of the Household John Neville, 3rd Baron Neville de Raby, were dismissed from their positions. Edward III's mistress, Alice Perrers, who was seen to hold far too much power over the ageing king, was banished from court.\nYet the real adversary of the Commons, supported by powerful men such as Wykeham and Edmund Mortimer, 3rd Earl of March, was John of Gaunt. Both the King and Edward of Woodstock were by this time incapacitated by illness, leaving Gaunt in virtual control of government. Gaunt was forced to give in to the demands of Parliament, but at its next convocation in 1377, most of the achievements of the Good Parliament were reversed and a poll tax was instituted to pay for the war.\nDeath and succession.\nEdward III did not have much to do with any of this; after around 1375 he played a limited role in the government of the realm. Around 29 September 1376, he fell ill with a large abscess. After a brief period of recovery in February 1377, the King died of a stroke at Sheen on 21 June.\nEdward III was succeeded by his ten-year-old grandson, King Richard II, son of Edward of Woodstock, since Woodstock himself had died on 8 June 1376. In 1376, Edward had signed letters patent on the order of succession to the crown, citing in second position his third son John of Gaunt, but ignoring Philippa, daughter of his second son Lionel of Antwerp, Duke of Clarence. Philippa's exclusion contrasted with a decision by Edward I in 1290, which had recognized the right of women to inherit the crown and to pass it on to their descendants. The order of succession determined in 1376 led the House of Lancaster to the throne in 1399 (Gaunt was Duke of Lancaster), whereas the rule decided by Edward I would have favoured Philippa's descendants, among them the House of York, beginning with Richard of York, her great-grandson. The large number of cousins that were created is sometimes argued to have laid the foundations for the Wars of the Roses in the fifteenth century.\nFamily.\nEdward III and his wife Philippa had seven sons and five daughters born over a 25-year period. This was considered a success by contemporaries and a sign of God's favour. Edward understood the importance of a \"strong and united royal family\", argues Ormrod. It allowed him, through their marriages, to make alliances within his own aristocracy and also with continental dynasties. However, the latter policy gradually fell apart with the gradual loss of England's European possessions towards the end of the century. For example, he organised the marriage of his sister Eleanor of Woodstock to the Count of Guelders as part of a pro-Netherlandish, anti-French policy in 1332. Yet when the coalition collapsed in 1340, the fact that he had only lost her in that particular marriage market was a positive. From around this time, says Ormrod, \"the Hundred Years' War became a family enterprise\": Edward the Black Prince commanded a force at Cr\u00e9cy, and ten years later his younger brothers Lionel, John and Edmund had joined the war. However, while his sons were fighting in France, they could not be procreating the royal line; by 1358, only Lionel had married and provided Edward with a grandchild. By the mid-1360s his family had furthered his continental policy, both diplomatically and militarily, sufficiently that he allowed his son Edward and his daughter Isabella to do that rarest of things in the Middle Ages: marry for love. Neither the former's match with Joan of Kent and the latter's to Enguerrand VII de Coucy, were particularly advantageous to the King; the first was a clandestine marriage, while de Courcy was a French hostage. Ormrod concludes that, by 1376:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Edward III's greatest misfortune was that he lived long enough to witness the complete collapse of [his] elaborate dynastic plan. By 1377, the king's family had been depleted, his territories reduced, his diplomacy wrecked, and his own control of affairs nullified.\nA fourth son, Thomas of Windsor, is also sometimes posited as being born in 1347 and dying the following year. However, the historian Kathryn Warner has suggested that, as William of Woodstock was also born and died the same year, and combined with the paucity of material evidence, it is likely that this Thomas is a composite. She argues that \"the entire existence of 'Thomas of Windsor' in some modern books and websites appears to be based on the spurious story by two chroniclers that Philippa was heavily pregnant when she interceded for the Calais burghers in early August 1347\". She also notes that for William, who also died young, there is much evidence for his existence, including \"his funeral or tomb, or for the queen's purification after his birth, or for any kind of celebration held to mark the birth of another royal child\". The medievalist Nicholas Orme has noted that medieval chroniclers were particularly accurate when it came to recording royal births.\nThe geneticist Adam Rutherford has calculated Edward had over 300 great-great-grandchildren and, therefore, over 20,000 descendants by 1600. Thus, by the 21st century, it is \"virtually impossible\" that a person with a predominantly British ancestry is not descended from Edward III, as they would have around 32,000 ancestors from 1600. Conversely, Rutherford has calculated that statistically, the odds on a 20th-century British person not being descended from Edward III is 0.99532,768 = 4.64 \u00d7 10\u221272.\nPersonality.\nMark Ormrod has noted that in this period, politics was often dictated by the personality and character of the king. However, it was also understood that not only should a king rule well and wisely, but that he should be seen to do so. Ormrod argues that, while he did not begin his reign with these skills, unlike many of his fellow Plantagenet kings, he acquired them. His collection of chronicles indicates an interest in history, even to the extent that, on occasion, he consulted their authors. He may have been particularly keen to emulate Henry II and Edward I, whose own martial prowess and success would have resonated with him. His tastes were conventional, Ormrod says, and J. R. Lander also has argued that this is reflected in his hobbies. Unlike his father's passion for manual work, including carpentry, thatching and rowing, Edward III \"shared to the full the conventional tastes and pleasure of the aristocracy\", with his principal interest being architecture. This conservativism is reflected in his religious views, which, expressed as they were through the patronage of friaries and visiting of shrines, demonstrate a conventional religion. This is also reflected in his almsgiving. While ancestors such as Henry III had often been haphazard and exuberant in the amounts they gave and when they did so, Edward III maintained a regular 366 meals a week to be provided for the poor with another \u00a325 to be distributed during the four main feasts. However, alongside his conventionality ran a populist streak, and Ormrod has described him as a \"natural showman\", particularly in his alacrity to heal those suffering from scrofula by his royal touch. In less than two years, between 1338 and 1340, he touched for scrofula in both England and while campaigning in France; another 355 occurred between November 1340 and the same month the following year. He was generous to the point of extravagance. In an alternative view, Norman Cantor has described Edward as an \"avaricious and sadistic thug\".\nFrom what is known of Edward's character, he could be impulsive and temperamental, as was seen by his actions against Stratford and the ministers in 1340/41. Other escapades were not just impulsive but dangerous, such as in 1349, when he sailed to Calais with only a small bodyguard. At the same time, he was well known for his clemency; Mortimer's grandson was not only absolved, he came to play an important part in the French wars and was eventually made a Knight of the Garter. His favourite pursuit was the art of war and, in this, he conformed to the medieval notion of good kingship. As a warrior he was so successful that one modern military historian has described him as the greatest general in English history. He seems to have been unusually devoted to Queen Philippa. Much has been made of Edward's sexual licentiousness, but there is no evidence of any infidelity on his part before Alice Perrers became his lover, and by that time the Queen was already terminally ill. This devotion extended to the rest of the family as well; in contrast to many of his predecessors, Edward never experienced opposition from any of his five adult sons.\nLegacy.\nEdward III, argues the scholar Michael A.R. Graves, left a \"dual legacy\". These were the large brood of children and grandchildren he left, and his claim to the French throne. In the first instance, his endowment of his sons as Dukes of Clarence, Lancaster and York allowed them to create their own dynasties which were both part of the royal family and the aristocracy, which, following Henry Bolingbroke's usurpation of Edward's grandson, Richard II, \"bedevilled\" the Lancastrian dynasty. Secondly, while the resumption of Edward's claims and war in France was initially successful\u2014contemporaries compared Henry V's decisive victory at Agincourt with Edward's at Cr\u00e9cy and Poitiers\u2014when the tide turned against the English in France, the dynasty was also weakened. Indeed, war in France was problematic for the House of York as well as Lancaster. Edward IV was probably consciously following in his namesake's footsteps when he invaded France in 1475, even if the subsequent Treaty of Picquigny was wholly unintended. Edward IV's reign looked back on that of Edward III \u2013 with its martial and administrative progress \u2013 as something to model their own on, argues Morgan. Edward IV's own \"Household Books\", summarise the approach as \"we take to bylde upon a more perfit new house\", and indeed many of their grants and warrants contain a final clause that whatever was under discussion should be as they were in Edward III's final year. Even the final destruction of the Plantagenets at Bosworth in 1485 failed to impinge on Edward III's posthumous image; he was also the most recent king Henry VII could lay claim of descent from.\nHistoriography.\nEdward III enjoyed unprecedented popularity in his own lifetime, and even the troubles of his later reign were never blamed directly on the King himself. His contemporary Jean Froissart wrote in his \"Chronicles\": \"His like had not been seen since the days of King Arthur.\" D. A. L. Morgan has drawn attention to the continuing popularity of Edward into the next century, observing that \"by 1500 Edward III was well into his stride as the greatest King ever to have ruled England\", quoting \"The Great Chronicle of London\" on Henry VII, who if not for his avarice, \"mygth have been pereless of alle princis that regnyd ovyr England syne the tyme of Edwardthe thyrd\". This view persisted for a while but, with time, Edward's image changed. The Whig historians of a later age preferred constitutional reform to foreign conquest and accused Edward of ignoring his responsibilities to his own nation. Bishop Stubbs, in his \"The Constitutional History of England\", states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Edward III was not a statesman, though he possessed some qualifications which might have made him a successful one. He was a warrior; ambitious, unscrupulous, selfish, extravagant and ostentatious. His obligations as a king sat very lightly on him. He felt himself bound by no special duty, either to maintain the theory of royal supremacy or to follow a policy which would benefit his people. Like Richard I, he valued England primarily as a source of supplies.\nThis view has been challenged through most of the 20th century, and Ormrod has observed that \"no modern reader could seriously accept all these compliments at face value\", although also that in their efforts to counter the prevailing hagiography, early 20th-century historians were more critical:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Edward III is now often seen as a rather second-rate ruler, stubborn and selfish in his foreign ambitions, weak and yielding in his domestic policies. He lacked the forcefulness of Henry II, the statesmanship of Edward I, the charisma of Henry V, or the application of Henry VII. He was prepared to accept short-term compromises and to ignore the wider implications Of his actions.\nLater scholarship, suggests Ormrod, \"tended to be rather kinder\". In a 1960 article, May McKisack points out the teleological nature of Stubbs' judgement. A medieval king could not be expected to work towards some future ideal of a parliamentary monarchy as if it were good in itself; rather, his role was a pragmatic one \u2013 to maintain order and solve problems as they arose. At this, Edward excelled. Edward had also been accused of endowing his younger sons too liberally and thereby promoting dynastic strife culminating in the Wars of the Roses. This claim was rejected by K. B. McFarlane, who argued that this was not only the common policy of the age, but also the best. Later biographers of Edward such as Mark Ormrod and Ian Mortimer have followed this historiographical trend. The older negative view has not completely disappeared; Cantor has argued that Edward was a \"destructive and merciless force\". Ormrod argues that in overturning the Stubbsian paradigm, historians may have gone too far in the opposite direction, not taking into account the problems he had to solve and the number of different factions he had to accommodate to get things done. Chris Given-Wilson and Michael Prestwich, in their introduction to the proceedings of the 1999 Centre for Medieval Studies conference at the University of York, summarise modern consensus as being, effectively, that he was, overall, a strong king, a just king and a good warrior and strategist; basically a good king for the time. This, they argue, is the most important point regarding modern scholarship on Edward III: not necessarily to overturn previous consensus, but to look at all aspects of a multi-faceted King and examine how he achieved this success. Modern historians are also more distant than contemporaries in their view of the King's fecundity being a sign of success; more often, it is seen as a liability as each mouth had to be paid for, draining limited resources. Further, it may have led to later partisanship between the Crown and its cadet branches.\nLater events.\nEdward's grandson, the young Richard II, faced political and economic problems, many resulting from the Black Death, including the Peasants' Revolt that broke out across the south of England in 1381. Over the coming decades, Richard and groups of nobles vied for power and control of policy towards France until Henry of Bolingbroke seized the throne with the support of Parliament in 1399. Ruling as Henry IV, he exercised power through a royal council and Parliament, while attempting to enforce political and religious conformity. His son, Henry V, reinvigorated the war with France and came close to achieving strategic success shortly before his death in 1422. Henry VI became king at the age of only nine months and both the English political system and the military situation in France began to unravel.\nA sequence of bloody civil wars \u2013 later termed the Wars of the Roses \u2013 erupted in 1455, spurred on by an economic crisis and a widespread perception of poor government. The idea that Edward III was to blame for the later-15th century Wars of the Roses was prevalent as late as the 19th century, but came to be challenged in the 20th.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
