{"id": "45106", "revid": "32695559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45106", "title": "Lord Voldemort", "text": "Fictional character from Harry Potter\nLord Voldemort ( , in the films) is a fictional character and the main antagonist in the \"Harry Potter\" series of novels by J. K. Rowling. He first appears in \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" (1997) and returns either in person or in flashbacks in each novel in the series except the third, \"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\", in which he is only mentioned.\nVoldemort, an anagrammatic sobriquet for his birth name Tom Marvolo Riddle, is the archenemy of Harry Potter, who according to a prophecy has \"the power to vanquish the Dark Lord\". After killing Harry's parents, Lily and James Potter, he attempts to murder the boy, but instead leaves him with a scar on his forehead in the shape of a lightning bolt. Nearly every witch or wizard dares not utter his name and refers to him instead with such monikers as \"You-Know-Who\", \"He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named\", or \"The Dark Lord\". Voldemort's obsession with blood purity signifies his aim to rid the wizarding world of Muggle (non-magical) heritage and to conquer both worlds, Muggle and wizarding, to achieve pure-blood dominance. Through his mother's family, he is the last descendant of the wizard Salazar Slytherin, one of the four founders of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. He is the leader of the Death Eaters, a group of wizards and witches dedicated to ridding the Wizarding World of Muggles and establishing Voldemort as its supreme ruler.\nCharacter development.\nIn a 1999 interview, Rowling claimed Voldemort was invented as a nemesis for Harry Potter, and she intentionally did not flesh out Voldemort's backstory at first. \"The basic idea [was that Harry] didn't know he was a wizard ... And so then I kind of worked backwards from that position to find out how that could be, that he wouldn't know what he was. ... When he was one year old, the most evil wizard for hundreds and hundreds of years attempted to kill him. He killed Harry's parents, and then he tried to kill Harry\u2014he tried to curse him. ... Harry has to find out, before we find out. And\u2014so\u2014but for some mysterious reason the curse didn't work on Harry. So he's left with this lightning bolt-shaped scar on his forehead and the curse rebounded upon the evil wizard, who has been in hiding ever since.\"\nIn the second book, Rowling establishes that Voldemort hates non-pure-blood wizards, despite being a half-blood himself. In a 2000 interview with the BBC, Rowling described Voldemort as a self-hating bully: \"Well I think it is often the case that the biggest bullies take what they know to be their own defects, as they see it, and they put them right on someone else and then they try and destroy the other and that's what Voldemort does.\" In the same year, Rowling became more precise about Voldemort. She began to link him to real-life tyrants, describing him as \"a raging psychopath, devoid of the normal human responses to other people's suffering\". In 2004, though, Rowling said that she did not base Voldemort on any real person. In 2006, Rowling told an interviewer that Voldemort at his core has a human fear: the fear of death. She said: \"Voldemort's fear is death, ignominious death. I mean, he regards death itself as ignominious. He thinks that it's a shameful human weakness, as you know. His worst fear is death.\"\nThroughout the series, Rowling establishes that Voldemort is so feared in the wizarding world that it is considered dangerous even to speak his name. Most characters in the novels refer to him as \"You-Know-Who\" or \"He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named\" rather than say his name aloud. In \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\", a \"taboo\" spell is placed upon the name, such that Voldemort or his followers may trace anyone who utters it. By this means, his followers eventually find and capture Harry and his friends Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger. In the second book, Rowling reveals that \"I am Lord Voldemort\" is an anagram of the character's birth name, Tom Marvolo Riddle (in translated editions of the book, his middle name or entire birth name is/are often changed in order to allow anagrams to be formed in other languages).\nAccording to the author, Voldemort's name is an invented word. The name \"Voldemort\" is derived from the French \"vol de mort\" which means \"flight of death\" or \"theft of death\".\nAppearances.\n\"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\".\nVoldemort makes his debut in \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\". In this story, Rowling introduces him as the Dark Lord who tried to kill Harry Potter because the boy was prophesied to destroy him. Voldemort murdered Harry's parents, James and Lily, but as a result of his mother's love and willingness to sacrifice herself for him, baby Harry survived when Voldemort tried to murder him with a Killing Curse. Voldemort was disembodied, and Harry was left with a mysterious, lightning bolt-shaped scar on his forehead as a result.\nIn the book, Voldemort unsuccessfully tries to regain his dissolved body by stealing the titular Philosopher's Stone. To achieve his objective, Voldemort uses Professor Quirrell's aid by latching onto the back of the latter's head. However, at the climax of the book, Harry manages to prevent Voldemort from stealing the stone.\n\"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\".\nIn the second installment, \"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\", Rowling introduces Voldemort's true identity, former Hogwarts pupil and Slytherin prefect Tom Marvolo Riddle, who appears as a manifestation of the Dark Lord's teenage self that resides inside a magical diary found by Ginny Weasley. In this book, Ginny is written as a shy girl with a crush on Harry. Feeling anxious and lonely, she begins to write into the diary and shares her deepest fears with the sympathetic Tom. However, at the climax of the story, when the manifestation of Riddle rearranges the letters in his name to write \"I am Lord Voldemort\", it is revealed that Tom and the Dark Lord are just one person and that he is a descendant of one of the school's founders, Salazar Slytherin. Riddle states he has grown strong on Ginny's fears and eventually possesses her, using her as a pawn to unlock the Chamber of Secrets, whence a basilisk is set free and petrifies several Hogwarts students. Harry defeats the manifestation of Riddle from the diary and the basilisk. In \"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\", Albus Dumbledore reveals to Harry that the diary was one of Voldemort's Horcruxes.\n\"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\".\nVoldemort does not appear in the third book, \"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\", either in person or as a magical manifestation. He is, however, heard when Harry passes out from the harsh effects of a Dementor. Towards the end of the story, Sybill Trelawney, the Divination professor, makes a rare genuine prophecy: \"The Dark Lord lies alone and friendless, abandoned by his followers. His servant has been chained these twelve years. Tonight, before midnight, the servant will break free and set out to rejoin his master. The Dark Lord will rise again with his servant's aid, greater and more terrible than ever before.\" The servant is eventually revealed to be Peter Pettigrew, who, for the 12 years since Voldemort's fall, has been disguised as Ron's pet rat, Scabbers.\n\"Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire\".\nIn \"Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire\" (2000), Voldemort reappears at the start and the climax of the book. Rowling lets many seemingly unrelated plot elements fall into order. It is revealed that Voldemort's minion Barty Crouch Jr, disguised as Hogwarts professor Mad-Eye Moody, has manipulated the events of the Triwizard Tournament in Harry's favour. Voldemort's goal is to teleport Harry under Dumbledore's watch as a reluctant participant to the Little Hangleton graveyard, where the Riddle family is buried. Harry is captured and, after Pettigrew uses Harry's blood to fulfil a gruesome magical ritual, Voldemort regains his body and is restored to his full power. For the first time in the series, Rowling describes his appearance: \"tall and skeletally thin\", with a face \"whiter than a skull, with wide, livid scarlet eyes and a nose that was as flat as a snake's with slits for nostrils\". Rowling writes that his \"hands were like large, pale spiders; his long white fingers caressed his own chest, his arms, his face; the red eyes, whose pupils were slits, like a cat's, gleamed still more brightly through the darkness\". It is revealed that with Pettigrew's help, Voldemort had created a small, rudimentary body, corporeal enough to travel and perform magic, and formulated a plan to restore his own body by capturing Harry. A portion of the plan had been overheard by Frank Bryce, a gardener, whom Voldemort then killed. Voldemort then completes his plan and returns to life in his full body as a result of the ritual with Harry's blood. He then summons his Death Eaters to the graveyard to witness the death of Harry as he challenges Harry to a duel. However, when Voldemort duels Harry, their wands become magically locked together due to the twin phoenix feather cores of the wands. Because of a phenomenon later revealed as Priori Incantatem, ghost-like manifestations of Voldemort's most recent victims (including Harry's parents) then appear and distract Voldemort, allowing Harry just enough time to escape via Portkey with the body of fellow-student, Cedric Diggory, who was murdered by Pettigrew on Voldemort's orders.\n\"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\".\nVoldemort returns near the end of \"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\" (2003). He engineers a plot to free Bellatrix Lestrange and other Death Eaters from Azkaban and then embarks on a scheme to retrieve the full record of a prophecy stored in the Department of Mysteries regarding Harry and himself. He sends a group of Death Eaters to retrieve the prophecy, where the Order of the Phoenix meets them. All but Bellatrix are captured, and Voldemort engages in a ferocious duel with Dumbledore. When Dumbledore gets the upper hand, Voldemort attempts to possess Harry but finds that he cannot; Harry is too full of that which Voldemort finds incomprehensible, and which he detests as weakness: love. Sensing that Dumbledore could win, Voldemort disapparates, but not before the Minister for Magic sees him in person, making his return to life public knowledge in the next book.\n\"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\".\nIn \"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\" (2005), Voldemort continues his rise to power. He murders Amelia Bones of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement and begins to target members of the Order of the Phoenix. In a series of flashbacks, it is revealed that Voldemort was the son of the witch Merope Gaunt and a Muggle named Tom Riddle. Riddle abandoned Merope before their child's birth, soon after which Merope died. After living in an orphanage, young Riddle met Dumbledore, who told him he was a wizard and arranged for him to attend Hogwarts. Riddle was outwardly a model student, but inwardly took sadistic pleasure in using his powers to harm and control people. He eventually murdered his father and grandparents as revenge for abandoning him. The book also discusses Riddle's hatred of Muggles, his obsession with Horcruxes, and his desire to split his soul to achieve immortality. Rowling stated that Voldemort's conception under the influence of a love potion symbolises the coercive circumstances under which he was brought into the world.\nIn the main plot of the book, Voldemort's next step is to engineer an assault on Hogwarts, and to kill Dumbledore. This is accomplished by Draco Malfoy, who arranges transportation of Death Eaters into Hogwarts by a pair of Vanishing Cabinets, which bypass the extensive protective enchantments placed around the school. The cabinets allow Voldemort's Death Eaters to enter Hogwarts, where battle commences and Dumbledore is cornered. Hogwarts professor (and re-doubled agent) Severus Snape uses the Killing Curse against Dumbledore when Draco could not force himself to do so.\n\"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\".\nIn \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\" (2007), Voldemort furthers his quest for ultimate power. He disposes of the Minister for Magic and replaces him with Pius Thicknesse, who is under the Imperius Curse. Establishing a totalitarian police state, he has Muggle-borns persecuted and arrested for \"stealing magic\" from the \"pure blood\" wizards. After failing to kill Harry with Draco's father Lucius Malfoy's borrowed wand (to avoid the effect of Priori Incantatem), he goes on a murderous search for the Elder Wand, the most powerful wand ever created, seeing it as the weapon he needs to overcome Harry's wand and make him truly invincible. His journey takes him to Nurmengard, the prison where Gellert Grindelwald is kept, and he kills Grindelwald as well. He finally locates the Elder Wand and steals it from Dumbledore's tomb.\nLater, Voldemort finds out that Harry and his friends are hunting and destroying his Horcruxes when informed of their heist on the Lestranges' vault at Gringotts in search for Hufflepuff's Cup. After offering the occupants of Hogwarts mercy if they give up Harry, he assembles a large army and launches an invasion of the castle, where Harry is searching for Ravenclaw's Diadem. Voldemort orders his pet snake Nagini to execute Snape, believing it would make him the true master of the Elder Wand, since Snape killed Dumbledore. He then calls an hour's armistice, in exchange for Harry. When Harry willingly walks into Voldemort's camp in the Forbidden Forest, Voldemort strikes him down with the Elder Wand. However, the use of Harry's blood to resurrect Voldemort's body proves to be a major setback: while Harry's blood runs in Voldemort's veins, Harry cannot be killed as his mother's protection lives on now in Voldemort too. Instead, Voldemort unknowingly destroys the part of his own soul that resides in Harry's body. \nVoldemort forces Rubeus Hagrid to carry Harry's apparently lifeless body back to the castle as a trophy, sparking another battle during which Nagini, his last Horcrux, is destroyed by Neville Longbottom. The battle then moves into the Great Hall, where Voldemort fights Minerva McGonagall, Kingsley Shacklebolt, and Horace Slughorn simultaneously. Harry then reveals himself and explains to Voldemort that Draco became the true master of the Elder Wand when he disarmed Dumbledore; Harry, in turn, won the wand's allegiance when he took Draco's wand. \nRefusing to believe this, Voldemort casts the Killing Curse with the Elder Wand while Harry uses a Disarming Charm with Draco's, but the Elder Wand refuses to kill its master and the spell rebounds on Voldemort who, with all of his Horcruxes destroyed, finally dies.\nRowling stated that after his death, Voldemort is forced to exist in the stunted infant-like form that Harry sees in the King's Cross-like limbo after his confrontation with Voldemort in the Forbidden Forest. Rowling also mentioned that, despite his extreme fear of death, he cannot become a ghost.\nPortrayal in films.\nVoldemort appears in every \"Harry Potter\" film, with the exception of \"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\". Several actors have portrayed him in his varying incarnations and ages.\nIn \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\", Voldemort's manifestation is as a face on the back of Quirrell's head, an effect achieved by computer generated imagery. Ian Hart, the actor who played Quirrell in the same film, provided the voice and the facial source for this character. Voldemort also appears in a scene in the Forbidden Forest where he is seen drinking the blood of a unicorn. As Voldemort's face was altered enough by CG work, and Hart's voice was affected enough, there was no confusion by Hart's playing of the two roles. In that film, he was also shown in a flashback sequence when he arrived at the home of James and Lily Potter to kill them. In this scene Voldemort is played by Richard Bremmer, though his face is never seen. His next appearance would be in \"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\" as the 16-year-old Tom Marvolo Riddle (portrayed by Christian Coulson).\nIn \"Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire\", Voldemort is initially only heard, possessing the scratchy, weak voice heard in the first film. By the film's climax, however, he appears in his physical form for the first time, played by Ralph Fiennes. As in the book, Voldemort is shown clad in dark black robes, being tall and emaciated, with no hair and yellowish teeth; his wand has a white tone, and the handle appears to be made of bone; his fingernails are long and pale blue while his toenails appear to be infected. Unlike in the book, his pupils are not cat-like, and his eyes are blue, because producer David Heyman felt that his evil would not be able to be seen and would not fill the audience with fear (his eyes do briefly take on a snake-like appearance when he opens them after turning human, but quickly turn normal). As in the book, the film version of Voldemort has snake-like slit nostrils with the flesh of his nose significantly pressed back. Ralph Fiennes' nose was not covered in makeup on the set but was digitally removed in post-production. In this first appearance, Voldemort also has a forked tongue, but this element was removed for the subsequent films.\nFiennes stated that he had two weeks to shoot the climactic showdown scene where he is gloating over a terrified Harry, played by Daniel Radcliffe. Fiennes said with a chuckle: \"I have no doubt children will be afraid of me now if they weren't before.\" In preparation, he read the novel \"Goblet of Fire\", but jokingly conceded: \"I was only interested in my scene, and I had to go through thousands and thousands of other scenes which I did, dutifully, until I got to my scene and I read it many, many, many, many, many times and that was my research.\" Fiennes reprised his role as Voldemort in \"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\" and \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows \u2013 Part 1\" and \"Part 2\".\nFiennes's nephew, Hero Fiennes Tiffin, portrayed Tom Riddle as a child in \"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\". By the time filming arrived Christian Coulson was 29, and not considered suitable to return as the adolescent Riddle. Thomas James Longley was originally scheduled to take over the role, but last minute renegotiations saw Frank Dillane cast instead.\nStage adaption.\nIn the 2016 stage play \"Harry Potter and the Cursed Child\", it is revealed that Bellatrix gave birth to Voldemort's daughter Delphi before the Battle of Hogwarts. Twenty-two years later, Delphi poses as Cedric's cousin and manipulates Harry and Ginny's second son Albus Severus Potter and his friend, Draco and Astoria Greengrass's son Scorpius Malfoy, into stealing a prototype Time Turner with which she hopes to resurrect her father. Using the Time Turner, Scorpius accidentally creates an alternative timeline where Voldemort killed Harry at the battle and now rules the wizarding world. In an attempt to achieve this future, Delphi travels to Godric's Hollow on the night Voldemort killed Harry's parents, hoping to avert the prophecy that led to her father's downfall. After receiving a message from his son, Harry, together with Ron, Hermione and Draco (who by now has become friends with Harry after they join forces to save their respective sons) transfigures himself into Voldemort so that he can distract Delphi, allowing them to overpower her. The real Voldemort kills Harry's parents as prophesied, and Delphi is sent to Azkaban.\nCharacterisation.\nOutward appearance.\nAfter he regains his body in the fourth book, Rowling describes Voldemort as having pale skin, a chalk-white, skull-like face, snake-like slits for nostrils, red eyes and cat-like slits for pupils, a skeletally thin body and long, thin hands with unnaturally long fingers. As mentioned in the first chapter of the seventh book, he also has no hair or lips. Earlier in life, as seen through flashbacks contained in the second and sixth books, Tom Marvolo Riddle was handsome and tall with pale skin, jet black hair, and dark brown eyes. He could charm many people with his looks. The transformation into his monstrous state is believed to have been the result of creating his Horcruxes and becoming less human as he continued to divide his soul. In the films, Voldemort's eyes are blue with round pupils, as the decision was made not to have his portrayer Ralph Fiennes wear colored contact lenses.\nPersonality.\nRowling described Voldemort as \"the most evil wizard for hundreds and hundreds of years\". She elaborated that he is a \"raging psychopath, devoid of the normal human responses to other people's suffering\", and whose only ambition in life is to become all-powerful and immortal. He is also a sadist who hurts and murders people\u2014especially Muggles\u2014for his own amusement. He has no conscience, feels no remorse or empathy, and does not recognise the worth and humanity of anybody except himself.\nHe feels no need for human companionship or friendship and cannot comprehend love or affection for another. He believes he is superior to everyone around him, to the point that he frequently refers to himself in the third person as \"Lord Voldemort\". Rowling also stated that Voldemort is \"incredibly power hungry. Racist, really\", and that if Voldemort were to look into the Mirror of Erised, in which one sees one's greatest desire, he would see \"Himself, all-powerful and eternal. That's what he wants.\"\nRowling also stated that Voldemort's conception by influence of Amortentia\u2014a love potion administered by his mother, a witch named Merope Gaunt, to the Muggle Tom Riddle\u2014is related to his inability to understand love; it is \"a symbolic way of showing that he came from a loveless union\u2014but of course, everything would have changed if Merope had survived and raised him herself and loved him. The enchantment under which Tom Riddle fathered Voldemort is important because it shows coercion, and there can't be many more prejudicial ways to enter the world than as the result of such a union\".\nLike most archetypical villains, Voldemort's arrogance leads to his downfall. He also suffers from a pathological fear of death, which he regards as a shameful and ignominious human weakness. According to Rowling, his Boggart would be his own corpse. Rowling also said that the difference between Harry and Voldemort is that Harry accepts mortality, and thus Harry is, in the end, stronger than his nemesis.\nMagical abilities and skills.\nRowling establishes Voldemort throughout the series as an extremely powerful, intelligent, and ruthless dark wizard, described as the greatest and most powerful Dark Wizard of all time. He is known as one of the greatest Legilimens in the world and a highly accomplished Occlumens; he can read minds and shield his own from penetration. Besides Dumbledore, he is also the only wizard ever known to be able to apparate silently. Voldemort was also said to fear one wizard alone, Dumbledore.\nIn the final book, Voldemort flies unsupported, something that amazes those who see it. Voldemort, like his ancestral family, the Gaunts, is a Parselmouth, meaning he can converse with serpents. This skill was inherited from his ancestor, Salazar Slytherin. The Gaunt family speak Parseltongue among themselves. This highly unusual trait may be preserved through inbreeding, a practice employed by the Gaunt Family to maintain their blood's purity. When Voldemort attempts to kill Harry his ability to speak Parseltongue is passed to Harry through the small bit of the former's soul. After that bit of soul is destroyed, Harry loses this ability. In a flashback in the sixth novel, Voldemort boasts to Dumbledore during a job interview that he has \"pushed the boundaries of magic farther than they had ever before\". Dumbledore states that Voldemort's knowledge of magic is more extensive than any wizard alive and that even Dumbledore's most powerful protective spells and charms would likely be insufficient if Voldemort returned to full power. Dumbledore also said that Voldemort was probably the most brilliant student Hogwarts has ever seen. Although Voldemort remains highly accomplished and prodigious in skill, he is enormously lacking and highly inept in the most powerful magic, love. This inability to love and trust others proves to be Voldemort's greatest weakness in the series. Voldemort initially voices scepticism that his own magic might not be the most powerful, but upon returning to power, he admits to his Death Eaters that he had overlooked the ancient and powerful magic which Lily Potter invoked and that would protect Harry from harm.\nOn her website, Rowling wrote that Voldemort's wand is made of yew, whose sap is poisonous, and which symbolises death. It forms a deliberate contrast to Harry's wand, which is made of holly, which she chose because holly is alleged to repel evil.\nRowling establishes in the books that Voldemort is magically connected to Harry via Harry's forehead scar. He disembodies himself when his Killing Curse targeting Harry rebounds on him, leaving the scar on Harry's forehead. In the books, and to a lesser extent in the films, Harry's scar serves as an indicator of Voldemort's presence: it burns when the Dark Lord is near or when Voldemort is feeling murderous or exultant. According to Rowling, by attacking Harry when he was a baby Voldemort gave him \"tools [that] no other wizard possessed\u2014the scar and the ability it conferred, a magical window into Voldemort's mind\".\nFamily.\nVoldemort was born Tom Marvolo Riddle on 31 December 1926. His mother Merope died in childbirth, leaving the baby to grow up alone in an orphanage. In \"Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire\", it is revealed that Voldemort murdered his father and grandparents, leaving himself the only surviving member of the Riddle family.\nHouse of Gaunt.\nMost of the exposition of the House of Gaunt's background occurs in \"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\", through the medium of Dumbledore's Pensieve. The Gaunts were once a powerful and influential family, and are the last known descendants of Salazar Slytherin. However, a vein of mental instability and violence within the family, reinforced through cousin marriages intended to preserve the pureblood line, had reduced them to poverty and squalor, as shown in the Pensieve's \"memory\" that Harry and Dumbledore witnessed. Like Salazar Slytherin, the Gaunts spoke Parseltongue. At the time of the story, the Gaunts' only material asset is a ramshackle shanty in Little Hangleton, that stood in a thicket in a valley opposite the Riddle House. Like the Riddles, the Gaunts were also unpopular with the local residents, with a reputation for being vulgar and intimidating.\nMarvolo Gaunt was the last family patriarch. He was sentenced to a short term in Azkaban for his and his son's assault upon a Ministry of Magic official; this affected his health and he died soon after returning home. His signet ring passed to his son, Morfin Gaunt, who was convicted of assaulting a Muggle, and later died in Azkaban, convicted this time as a party to the murder of Tom Riddle Sr and Riddle's parents.\nDumbledore discovers the real culprit while visiting Morfin in Azkaban to gather information about Voldemort. After Dumbledore successfully extracts Morfin's memory of his encounter with his nephew, he tries to use the evidence to have Morfin released, but Morfin dies before the decision can be made. The House of Gaunt ended with Morfin's death.\nMerope Gaunt () was the daughter of Marvolo, and sister of Morfin. Harry's first impression of her was that she looked \"like the most defeated person he had ever seen\". She married Tom Riddle Sr and became pregnant within three months of the wedding. It is suggested that she tricked her husband into loving her by using a love potion, but sometime during her pregnancy, chose to stop administering the potion. It is implied that Merope had grown tired of living the lie and thought that her husband might have grown to love her, or that he might have stayed for the sake of their unborn child; however, he left her. Desperate, Merope wandered through the streets of London. The only thing she had left was the heavy gold locket that had once belonged to Salazar Slytherin, one of her family's most treasured items, which she sold for a small amount. When she was due to give birth, she stumbled into a Muggle orphanage, where she gave birth to her only son. She died within the next hour.\nReception.\nSeveral people have drawn a parallel between Voldemort and some politicians. Rowling has said that Voldemort was \"a sort of\" Adolf Hitler, and that there is some parallel with Nazism in her books. Rowling also compared Voldemort to Joseph Stalin. Alfonso Cuar\u00f3n, director of \"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\" compared Voldemort to George W. Bush and Saddam Hussein, who he said \"...have selfish interests and are very much in love with power. Also, a disregard for the environment. A love for manipulating people.\" Andrew Slack and the Harry Potter Alliance compare media consolidation in the US to Voldemort's regime in \"Deathly Hallows\" and its control over the \"Daily Prophet\" and other media saying that \"Once Voldemort took over every form of media in the wizarding world, Dumbledore's Army and the Order of the Phoenix formed an independent media movement called 'Potterwatch'. Now the HP Alliance and Wizard Rock have come together to fight for a Potterwatch movement in the real world to fight back against Big VoldeMedia from further pushing out local and foreign news, minority representation, and the right to a Free Press.\" Julia Turner of \"Slate Magazine\" also noted similarities between the events of \"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\" and the war on terror. She said that Voldemort commits acts of terrorism such as destroying bridges, murdering innocents, and forcing children to kill their elders. Rowling compared Voldemort to Donald Trump during his 2016 presidential campaign.\nVoldemort has also been compared to other fictional characters, such as Sauron from \"The Lord of the Rings\"; they are, during the time when the main plot takes place, seeking to recover their lost power after having been considered dead or at least no longer a threat, and are also so feared that they are sometimes unnamed.\nThe entertainment website \"IGN\" listed Voldemort as the seventh best \"Harry Potter\" character, calling him \"truly frightening\".\nIn popular culture.\nSeveral campaigns have used Voldemort to compare his evil to the influence of politicians, large media and corporations. \"Lord Voldemort\" is a nickname sometimes used for Peter Mandelson. Voldemort is also a recurring theme among wizard rock bands. \"Voldemort Can't Stop the Rock!\" is the second album from Harry and the Potters, and the character is mentioned in songs such as \"The Dark Lord Lament\" and \"Flesh, Blood, and Bone\".\nVoldemort also appears in the \"Potter Puppet Pals\" sketches by Neil Cicierega. One of the episodes including him was the seventeenth most viewed video of all time as of 2008 and the winner for \"Best Comedy\" of the year 2007 at YouTube.\n\"Continuing the Magic\", an article in the 21 May 2007 issue of \"Time\", includes mock book covers designed by author Lon Tweeten, laced with pop culture references. One of them, the \"Dark Lord of the Dance\", shows Voldemort teaming up with Harry on Broadway. In the \"MAD Magazine\" parodies of the films, the character is called Lord Druckermort, a backwards reference to the magazine's longtime caricaturist Mort Drucker. In Alan Moore's ', a young Tom Marvolo Riddle (introduced as \"Tom\", whose middle name is a \"marvel\" and last name is a \"conundrum\") appears, and becomes the new avatar of Oliver Haddo at the story's conclusion. In \"A Very Potter Musical\", Voldemort is played by actor Joe Walker.\nIn 2011, Voldemort was one of eight British magical figures, which included characters from Arthurian legend, \"The Chronicles of Narnia\", and \"Discworld\", commemorated on a series of UK postage stamps issued by the Royal Mail.\nIn a segment celebrating British children's literature at the 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony in London, an inflatable Voldemort appeared alongside other villains, The Queen of Hearts, Captain Hook, and Cruella de Vil, to haunt children's dreams, before the arrival of a group of over thirty Mary Poppins who descended with their umbrellas to defeat them.\nIn 2015, British activist Majid Nawaz used and popularized the term \"Voldemort effect\" to describe the inability to name, shame and isolate Islamist extremism from the moderate Muslim community.\nDuring the 2016 United States elections, Daniel Radcliffe was asked by Sky News journalist Craig Dillon if he would compare Donald Trump to Lord Voldemort; Radcliffe responded, \"Trump is worse\".\nVoldemort appears in \"The Lego Batman Movie\" as one of the prisoners in the Phantom Zone that Joker recruits to take over Gotham City. Though Ralph Fiennes is featured in this movie as the voice of the British butler Alfred Pennyworth, he does not reprise his role as Voldemort. Instead, Voldemort is voiced by Eddie Izzard.\nOutside of the \"Harry Potter\" video games, Voldemort is also a playable character in \"Lego Dimensions\", with archive audio of Fiennes' portrayal in the films used for his voiceovers.\nA 2018 Italian fan film titled \" depicts the story of Tom Riddle's rise to power.\nVoldemort appears in \", in the crowd for the game between the Tune Squad and the Goon Squad.\nAn upcoming French fan-made short-film titled \"The House of Gaunt\" \"- Lord Voldemort Origins\" explores the origin story of Voldemort and The Gaunt family.\nIn the \"Breaking Bad\" spinoff \"Better Call Saul\", Saul Goodman, speaking to Mike Ehrmantraut, nicknames the drug lord Gus Fring 'He Who Shall Not Be Named' in reference to Voldemort.\nIn May 2022, senior Australian Labor Party MP Tanya Plibersek compared former defence minister Peter Dutton from the Liberal Party of Australia to Voldemort. During a discussion about Dutton's prospects of becoming Liberal Party leader on Brisbane radio station 4BC, she said: \"I think there will be a lot of children who have watched a lot of Harry Potter films who will be very frightened of what they are seeing on TV at night, that's for sure... I am saying he looks a bit like Voldemort and we will see whether he can do what he promised he would do when he was last running for leader which is smile more.\" A spokesperson from Plibersek's office said that she had reached out to Dutton soon after the interview to offer an unreserved apology and to say that she should have not made the remark. Labor Party leader, prime minister Anthony Albanese said Pilbersek's comments were \"not acceptable\" and that she had done the right thing in offering an apology. Dutton confirmed Plibersek had apologised. In response, Dutton said that while the comments were unfortunate, they were \"water off a duck's back.\" He said that he realised that he was \"not the prettiest bloke on the block\" and said that he was bald due to being diagnosed with a skin condition.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45107", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45107", "title": "Madeira wine", "text": "Fortified wine made in Madeira, Portugal\nMadeira is a fortified wine made on the Portuguese island of Madeira, in the North Atlantic Ocean. Madeira is produced in a variety of styles ranging from dry wines, which can be consumed on their own, as an ap\u00e9ritif, to sweet wines usually consumed with dessert. Cheaper cooking versions are often flavoured with salt and pepper for use in cooking, but these are not fit for consumption as a beverage.\nThe islands of Madeira have a long winemaking history, dating back to the Age of Exploration (approximately from the end of the 15th century), when Madeira was a standard port of call for ships heading to the New World or East Indies. To prevent the wine from spoiling, the local vintners began adding neutral grape spirits. On the long sea voyages, the wine would be exposed to excessive heat and movement, which benefited its flavour. This was discovered when an unsold shipment of wine was returned to the islands after a round trip.\nToday, Madeira is noted for its unique winemaking process that involves oxidizing the wine through heat and ageing. The younger blends (three and five years old) are produced with the aid of artificial application of heat to accelerate the aging process; the older blends, colheitas and frasqueiras, are produced by the canteiro method. Because of the way these wines are aged, they are very long-lived in the bottle, and those produced by the canteiro method will survive for decades and even centuries, even after being opened. Wines that have been in barrels for many decades are often removed and stored in demijohns where they may remain unharmed indefinitely.\nSome wines produced in small quantities in Crimea, California, and Texas are also referred to as \"Madeira\" or \"Madera\"; however, most countries conform to the EU PDO regulations and limit the use of the term \"Madeira\" or \"Mad\u00e8re\" to wines that come from the Madeira Islands.\nHistory of Madeira.\nDevelopment and success (15th\u201318th centuries).\nThe roots of Madeira's wine industry date back to the Age of Exploration, when Madeira was a regular port of call for ships travelling to the East Indies. By the 16th century, records indicate that a well-established wine industry on the island supplied these ships with wine for the long voyages across the sea. The earliest examples of Madeira were unfortified and tended to spoil before reaching their destination. However, following the example of port, a small amount of distilled alcohol made from cane sugar was added to stabilize the wine by boosting the alcohol content. (The modern process of fortification using brandy did not become widespread until the 18th century.) The Dutch East India Company became a regular customer, picking up large, casks of wine known as \"pipes\" for their voyages to India.\nThe intense heat in the holds of the ships had a transforming effect on the wine, as discovered by Madeira producers when one shipment was returned to the island after a long trip. The customer was found to prefer the taste of this style of wine, and Madeira labeled as \"vinho da roda\" (wines that have made a round trip) became very popular. Madeira producers found that aging the wine on long sea voyages was very costly, so they began to develop methods on the island to produce the same aged and heated style. They began storing the wines on trestles at the winery or in special rooms known as \"estufas\", where the heat of the island sun would age the wine.\nWith the increase of commercial treaties with England such as the Marriage Treaty in 1662, important English merchants settled on the island and, ultimately, controlled the increasingly important island wine trade. The English traders settled in the Funchal as of the seventeenth century, consolidating the markets from North America, the West Indies and England itself. Notable brands include Cossart and Gordon founded in 1745 and Blandy's in 1811.\nThe eighteenth century was the \"golden age\" for Madeira. The wine's popularity extended from the American colonies and Brazil in the New World to Great Britain, Russia, and Northern Africa. The American colonies, in particular, were enthusiastic customers, consuming as much as 95% of all wine produced on the island each year.\nEarly American history (17th\u201318th centuries).\nMadeira was a very important wine in the history of the United States of America. No wine-quality grapes were grown among the thirteen colonies, so imports were needed, with a great focus on Madeira. One of the major events on the road to the American Revolution in which Madeira played a key role was the seizure of John Hancock's sloop by Boston customs officials on 9 May 1768. Hancock's boat was seized after he had unloaded a cargo of 25 pipes () of Madeira, and a dispute arose over import duties. The seizure of \"Liberty\" caused riots to erupt in Boston.\nMadeira was a favorite of Thomas Jefferson, and it was used to toast the Declaration of Independence. George Washington, Alexander Hamilton, Benjamin Franklin and John Adams are also said to have appreciated the qualities of Madeira. The wine was mentioned in Benjamin Franklin's autobiography. On one occasion, Adams wrote to his wife, Abigail, of the great quantities of Madeira he consumed while a Massachusetts delegate to the Continental Congress. A bottle of Madeira was used by visiting Captain James Sever to christen in 1797. Chief Justice John Marshall was also known to appreciate Madeira, as were his cohorts on the early U.S. Supreme Court. Madeira and walnuts were often served together as a last course at dinner parties in Washington in the early decades of the 1800s.\nModern era (19th century \u2013 present).\nThe mid-19th century ushered an end to the industry's prosperity. First came the 1851 discovery of powdery mildew, which severely reduced production over the next three years. Just as the industry was recovering through the use of the copper-based Bordeaux mixture fungicide, the phylloxera epidemic that had plagued France and other European wine regions reached the island. By the end of the 19th century, most of the island's vineyards had been uprooted, and many were converted to sugar cane production. The majority of the vineyards that did replant chose to use American vine varieties, such as \"Vitis labrusca, Vitis riparia and Vitis rupestris\" or hybrid grape varieties rather than replant with the \"Vitis vinifera\" varieties that were previously grown.\nBy the turn of the 20th century, sales started to slowly return to normal, until the industry was rocked again by the Russian Civil War and American Prohibition, which closed off two of Madeira's biggest markets. After the repeal of Prohibition, improved shipping technology meant that ships no longer needed to stop off in Madeira, the island that was directly in the trade winds between Europe and America. The wine became known as The Forgotten Island Wine. The rest of the 20th century saw a downturn for Madeira, both in sales and reputation, as low-quality \"cooking wine\" became primarily associated with the island\u2014much as it had for Marsala.\nIn 1988, the Symington family of Portugal invested in the Madeira Wine Company that owned many of the Madeira brand names. They asked Bartholomew Broadbent to re-launch Madeira and create a market for it again in America, which he did in 1989, establishing a firm rebirth of Madeira.\nTowards the end of the 20th century, some producers started a renewed focus on quality\u2014ripping out the hybrid and American vines and replanting with the \"noble grape\" varieties of Sercial, Verdelho, Terrantez, Bual and Malvasia. The \"workhorse\" varieties of Tinta Negra Mole now known officially as just Tinta Negra, and Complexa are still present and in high use, but hybrid grapes were officially banned from wine production in 1979. Today, Madeira's primary markets are in the Benelux countries, France (where it is only used for cooking, salt and pepper having been added prior to bottling), and Germany; emerging markets are growing in Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States.\nViticulture.\nClimate and geography.\nThe island of Madeira has an oceanic climate with some tropical influences. With high rainfall and average mean temperature of 66\u00a0\u00b0F (19\u00a0\u00b0C), the threats of fungal grape diseases and botrytis rot are constant viticultural hazards. To combat these threats, Madeira vineyards are often planted on low trellises, known as \"latada\", that raise the canopy of the vine off the ground similar to a style used in the Vinho Verde region of Portugal. The terrain of the mountainous volcanic island is difficult to cultivate, so vineyards are planted on man-made terraces of red and brown basaltic bedrock. These terraces, known as \"poios\", are very similar to the terraces of the Douro that make Port wine production possible. The use of mechanical harvesting and vineyard equipment is near impossible, making wine grape growing a costly endeavor on the island. Many vineyards have in the past been ripped up for commercial tourist developments or replanted with such products as bananas for commercial concerns. Some replanting is taking place on the island; however, the tourist trade is generally seen as a more lucrative business than wine-making. Most of the grapes, grown by around 2100 grape growers are from vines planted on small plots of land from which the grape growers survive by making an income from a variety of different inter-grown crops.\nGrape varieties.\nApproximately 85% of Madeira is produced with the red grape, Negra Mole. The four major white grape varieties used for Madeira production are (from sweetest to driest) Malvasia, Bual, Verdelho, and Sercial. These varieties also lend their names to Madeira labelling, as discussed below. Occasionally one sees Terrantez, Bastardo and Moscatel varieties, although these are now rare on the island because of oidium and phylloxera. Since 2016, to encourage more growers to plant Terrantez, Madeira's fifth noble grape variety, the government Wine, Embroidery and Handicraft Institute of Madeira (IVBAM) has offered growers free viticultural advice and a \u20ac1.30 subsidy per kilogram of Terrantez fruit harvested. As of 2016, Terrantez production stood at . After the phylloxera epidemic, many wines were \"mislabelled\" as containing one of these noble grape varieties, which were reinterpreted as \"wine styles\" rather than true varietal names. Regulations enacted in 1986 by the European Union introduced the rule that 85% of the grapes in the wine must be of the variety on the label; in 2015, Tinta Negra was elevated to a Recommended varietal and may now also be listed on the label, often alongside a style description such as \"Medium-Rich\". Thus, wines from before the late 19th century (pre-phylloxera) and after the late 20th century conform to this rule, whereas many \"varietally labelled\" Madeiras from most of the 20th century do not. Modern Madeiras which do not carry a varietal label are generally made from Tinta Negra, a varietal that, along with the less highly regarded Complexa, is the workhorse variety on the island since phylloxera and is found in various concentrations in many blends and vintage wines. Bastardo, Complexa, and Tinta Negra are red grape varieties.\nGrown exclusively on the neighboring island of Porto Santo, which is also permitted under the appellation law to provide grapes for Madeira wine, are the varieties Listr\u00e3o (Palomino Fino) and Caracol. Listr\u00e3o Madeira was formerly made by a few companies such as Blandy's and Artur de Barros e Sousa, the latter being the last old producer to utilize the variety when they closed their doors in 2013, but Madeira Vintners founded in that year subsequently restarted production of, and released in 2020, a 5-year-old Listr\u00e3o Reserve Madeira. Caracol, an obscure grape believed to be unique to Porto Santo and only used for the local production of dry table wine in the past, was turned into fortified Madeira for the first time by Madeira Vintners, becoming the first new grape in over a century to be used for high-quality single-varietal Madeira wine. The company's stocks are still aging as of 2025 and no wine is on the market yet.\nOther varieties planted on the island, though not legally permitted for Madeira production, include Arnsburger, Cabernet Sauvignon, and the American hybrids Cunningham and Jacquet. The latter two grapes, formerly used for Madeira production in the post-phylloxera years, were supposed to have been grubbed up altogether under EU law, although in practice some farmers have kept a few vines to make table wine for their own consumption.\nWinemaking.\nThe initial winemaking steps of Madeira start out like most other wines: grapes are harvested, crushed, pressed, and then fermented in either stainless steel or oak casks. The grape varieties destined for sweeter wines\u00a0\u2013 Bual and Malvasia\u00a0\u2013 are often fermented on their skins to leach more phenols from the grapes to balance the sweetness of the wine. Drier wines\u00a0\u2013 made from Sercial, Verdelho, and Negra Mole\u00a0\u2013 are separated from their skins prior to fermentation. Depending on the level of sweetness desired, fermentation of the wine is halted at some point by the addition of neutral grape spirits.\nYounger wines (typically 3 and 5 years old) undergo the \"estufagem\" aging process to produce Madeira's distinctive flavor by artificial heating, whereas the wines destined for long aging are barrel-aged using only the naturally high temperatures of the barrel storage rooms (see \"canteiro process\").\nColourings such as caramel colouring have been used in the past to give some consistency (see also \"Whiskey\"), although this practice is decreasing.\nAging process.\n What makes Madeira wine production unique is how the wines are aged in relatively high temperatures, meant to duplicate the effect of a long sea voyage on the aging barrels through tropical climates. Three main methods are used to heat the wine during aging. Two of the three methods belong to the \"estufagem\" process (\"estufa\" means hothouse or stove in Portuguese), in which artificial heat is used to accelerate the aging process of the wines, whereas the \"canteiro\" process is used for the older and more expensive wines and employs only the natural heat of the barrel warehouses.\n\"Estufagem\" processes:\nBarrel-aging process:\nMuch of the characteristic flavour of Madeira is due to this practice, which hastens the mellowing of the wine and also tends to check secondary fermentation in as much as it is, in effect, a mild kind of pasteurization. Furthermore, the wine is deliberately exposed to air, causing it to oxidize. The resulting wine has a colour similar to a tawny port wine. Wine tasters sometimes describe a wine that has been exposed to excessive heat during its storage as being cooked or \"maderized\".\nStyles.\nNoble varieties.\nThe four major styles of Madeira are synonymous with the names of the four best-known white grapes used to produce the wine. Ranging from the sweetest style to the driest style, the Madeira types are:\nA fifth noble grape, \"Terrantez\", almost became extinct on the island but has been making a comeback. Its style ranges in sweetness from that of Verdelho to that of Bual, never being quite as dry as Sercial nor quite as sweet as Malvasia.\nOther labelling.\nWines made from at least 85% of the noble varieties of Sercial, Verdelho, Bual, and Malvasia are usually labelled based on the amount of time they were aged:\nThe terms pale, dark, full, and rich can also be included to describe the wine's colour.\nMadeira produced from Negra Mole grapes used to be legally restricted to use generic terms on the label to indicate the level of sweetness as \"seco\" (dry), \"meio seco\" (medium dry), \"meio doce\" (medium sweet) and \"doce\" (sweet). However, in 2015 the Madeira Wine Institute announced that producers may officially recognise Tinta Negra on their front labels and that all \"expressions\" must state their bottling date.\nWines listed with \"Solera\" were made in a style similar to sherry, with a fractional blending of wines from different vintages in a solera system. The Solera method of blending is most widely practiced in the sherry production of Spain. Initially, the rules for Madeira soleras were different, with a maximum of ten percent of the wine in the solera being permitted to be drawn off and replaced each year, and the process repeated a maximum of ten times before the solera had to be completely emptied; as such a significant proportion of wine in any bottle would be from the listed year. However, at some unknown time, laws were loosened to allow soleras to be used indefinitely as they are in Sherry production, resulting in some later and less expensive Solera wines containing microscopic quantities of the listed old vintage. Another interesting peculiarity of old solera Madeiras is that they were initially developed as a result of trying to extend the stocks of vintages when the vines had stopped being productive due to Phylloxera. Therefore, as there was no younger wine to add to the vintage, it was usually older wines that were added. In recent years, vintage Madeiras have been commanding higher prices than soleras, but, from 1966 (when Michael Broadbent started wine auctions at Christie's), until about the end of the 20th century, solera Madeiras always fetched a premium at auction over the vintage ones.\nRainwater.\nA style called \"Rainwater\" is one of the largest-selling styles of Madeira in the United States, most commonly drunk as an ap\u00e9ritif. Nowadays it is almost always an inexpensive medium-dry style of wine made entirely from Tinta Negra grapes, and aged for around three years including a period in an estufa, but Barbeito continues to produce a more expensive Rainwater in the old pre-phylloxera style by blending Sercial and Verdelho grapes.\nAccounts conflict as to how this style was developed and named. The most common one derives from the vineyards on the steep hillsides, where irrigation was difficult, and the vines were dependent on the local rainwater for survival. Another involves a shipment destined for the American colonies that was accidentally diluted by rainwater while it sat on the docks in Savannah, Georgia, or Funchal. Rather than dump the wines, the merchants tried to pass it off as a \"new style\" of Madeira and were surprised at its popularity among the Americans. Another story relates that a gentleman in Savannah, Georgia tasted such a Madeira and declared, \"This is as fine as Rainwater.\"\nOther styles.\n\"Quinado-Madeira\", a tonic wine dosed with quinine consumed to ward off malaria in tropical regions, and \"White Madeira\", a lighter style of wine heavily chill-filtered to remove colouring and flavor compounds, were both discontinued at some time in the 20th century.\nCharacteristics.\nExposure to extreme temperature and oxygen accounts for Madeira's stability; an opened bottle will survive unharmed indefinitely. As long as a cork is put into the top of the bottle to prevent the effects of evaporation, fruit flies, and dust, a vintage Madeira, once opened, can last for decades. Properly sealed in bottles, it is one of the longest-lasting wines; Madeiras have been known to survive over 200 years in excellent condition. It is not uncommon to see 150-year-old Madeiras for sale at stores that specialize in rare wine. Vintages dating back to 1780 are known to exist. The oldest bottle that has come onto the market is a 1715 Terrantez.\nBefore the advent of artificial refrigeration, Madeira wine was particularly prized in areas where it was impractical to construct wine cellars (as in parts of the southern United States) because, unlike many other fine wines, it could survive being stored over hot summers without significant damage. In the Americas, Madeira was traditionally stored in the warm attics of houses. \nUses.\nPopular uses include ap\u00e9ritifs (pre-meal) and digestifs (post-meal). In Britain it has traditionally been associated with Madeira cake.\nMadeira is also used as a flavouring agent in cooking. Lower-quality Madeira wines may be flavored with salt and pepper to prevent their sale as Madeira wine, and then exported for cooking purposes. Madeira wine is commonly used in tournedos Rossini and \"sauce mad\u00e8re\" (Madeira sauce). Unflavored Madeira may also be used in cooking, such as the dessert dish \"Plum in madeira\".\nIntangible Cultural Heritage.\nThe 11 September 2024, the University of Madeira announced the intention to lead the drafting of an application of the Madeira wine traditions to the Representative List of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity https://.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45109", "revid": "44658859", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45109", "title": "Marie Antoinette", "text": "Queen of France from 1774 to 1792\nMarie Antoinette (; ; Maria Antonia Josefa Johanna; 2 November 1755 \u2013 16 October 1793) was the last queen of France before the fall of the monarchy during the French Revolution. She was the wife of King Louis XVI. \nBorn an archduchess of Austria, she was the penultimate child and youngest daughter of Empress Maria Theresa and Emperor Francis I of the Holy Roman Empire. She married Louis Auguste, Dauphin of France, in May 1770 at age 14, becoming the Dauphine of France. On 10 May 1774, her husband ascended the throne as king, and she became queen.\nAs queen, Marie Antoinette became increasingly a target of criticism by opponents of the domestic and foreign policies of Louis XVI and those opposed to the monarchy in general. The French accused her of being profligate, promiscuous, having illegitimate children, and harboring sympathies for France's perceived enemies, including her native Austria. She was falsely accused of defrauding the Crown's jewelers in the Affair of the Diamond Necklace, but the accusations still damaged her reputation. During the French Revolution, she became known as because the country's financial crisis was blamed on her lavish spending and her opposition to social and financial reforms proposed by and Jacques Necker.\nSeveral events were linked to Marie Antoinette during the Revolution after the government placed the royal family under house arrest in the Tuileries Palace in October 1789. The June 1791 attempted flight to Varennes and her role in the War of the First Coalition were immensely damaging to her image among French citizens. On 10 August 1792, the attack on the Tuileries forced the royal family to take refuge at the Legislative Assembly, and they were imprisoned in the Temple Prison on 13 August 1792. On 21 September 1792, France was declared a republic and the monarchy was abolished. Louis XVI was executed by guillotine on 21 January 1793. Marie Antoinette's trial began on 14 October 1793; two days later, she was convicted by the Revolutionary Tribunal of high treason and executed by guillotine on 16 October 1793 at the .\nEarly life (1755\u20131770).\nMaria Antonia Josepha Johanna was born on 2 November 1755 at the Hofburg Palace in Vienna, Archduchy of Austria. She was the youngest daughter and 15th child of Empress Maria Theresa, ruler of the Habsburg monarchy, and her husband Francis I, Holy Roman Emperor. Maria Theresa gave birth to all of her previous children without any problems. During the birth of her last daughter serious complications arose, and doctors feared for the life of the mother. Her godparents were Joseph I and Mariana Victoria, king and queen of Portugal; Archduke Joseph and Archduchess Maria Anna acted as proxies for their newborn sister.\nMaria Antonia was born on All Souls' Day, a Catholic day of mourning, and during her childhood her birthday was instead celebrated the day before, on All Saints' Day, due to the connotations of the date. Shortly after her birth she was placed under the care of the governess of the imperial children, Countess von Brandeis. Maria Antonia was raised together with her sister, Maria Carolina of Austria, who was three years older and with whom she had a lifelong close relationship. Maria Antonia had a difficult but ultimately loving relationship with her mother, who referred to her as \"the little Madame Antoine\".\nMaria Antonia spent her formative years between the Hofburg Palace and Sch\u00f6nbrunn, the imperial summer residence in Vienna, where on 13 October 1762, when she was seven, she met Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, two months her junior and a child prodigy. Despite the private tutoring she received, the results of her schooling were less than satisfactory. At age 10 she could not write correctly in German or in any language commonly used at court, such as French or Italian, and conversations with her were stilted. Under the teaching of Christoph Willibald Gluck, Maria Antonia developed into a good musician. She learned to play the harp, the harpsichord and the flute. She sang during the family's evening gatherings, as she was known to have had a beautiful voice. She also excelled at dancing, had \"exquisite\" poise, and loved dolls.\nThe death of her older sister Maria Josepha from smallpox during the epidemic in Vienna in October 1767 made an everlasting impression on the young Maria Antonia. In her later life she recalled the ailing Maria Josepha taking her in her arms. She told her that she would not be traveling to Naples to marry King Ferdinand IV of Naples, to whom she was betrothed, but for the family vault.\nIn 1768, Mathieu-Jacques de Vermond was dispatched by Louis XV to tutor Maria Antonia. De Vermond found her to be unsatisfactorily educated and lacking in important writing skills. Nonetheless, he also complimented her, stating \"her character, her heart, are excellent\". He found her \"more intelligent than has been generally supposed,\" but since \"she is rather lazy and extremely frivolous, she is hard to teach\".\nUnder the recommendation of \u00c9tienne Fran\u00e7ois de Choiseul, Duke of Choiseul, a strong supporter of her prospective marriage, she received a makeover to bring her more in line with the fashion of French royalty. This included the straightening of her teeth by a French dentist, the diversification of her wardrobe, and hairstyles reminiscent of Madame de Pompadour. She was also instructed by Jean-Georges Noverre who taught her to walk in the gliding fashion characteristic of the court of Versailles.\nDauphine of France (1770\u20131774).\nFollowing the Seven Years' War and the Diplomatic Revolution of 1756, Maria Theresa decided to end hostilities with her longtime enemy, King Louis XV of France. Their common desire to destroy the ambitions of Prussia and Great Britain, and to secure a definitive peace between their respective countries led them to seal their alliance with a marriage: on 7 February 1770, Louis XV formally requested the hand of Maria Antonia for his eldest surviving grandson and heir, Louis Auguste, Duke of Berry and Dauphin of France.\nMaria Antonia formally renounced her rights to Habsburg domains, and on 19 April 1770 she was married by proxy with Louis Auguste at the Augustinian Church, Vienna, with her brother Archduke Ferdinand standing in for the dauphin. On 14 May 1770 she met her husband at the edge of the forest of Compi\u00e8gne. Upon her arrival in France, she adopted the French version of her name: Marie Antoinette. A ceremonial wedding took place on 16 May 1770 in the Palace of Versailles, and after the festivities the day ended with the ritual bedding. The couple's longtime failure to consummate the marriage plagued the reputations of the royal couple for the next seven years.\nThe initial reaction to the marriage was mixed. On the one hand, the dauphine was beautiful, personable and well-liked by the common people. Her first official appearance in Paris on 8 June 1773 was a resounding success. On the other hand, those opposed to the alliance with Austria had a difficult relationship with Marie Antoinette, as did others who disliked her for more personal or petty reasons.\nMadame du Barry proved a troublesome foe to the new dauphine. She was Louis XV's mistress and had considerable political influence over him. In 1770 she was instrumental in ousting Choiseul, who had helped orchestrate the Franco-Austrian Alliance and Marie Antoinette's marriage, and in exiling his sister, the Duchess of Gramont, one of Marie Antoinette's ladies-in-waiting. Marie Antoinette was persuaded by her husband's aunts to refuse to acknowledge du Barry, which some saw as a political blunder that jeopardized Austria's interests at the French court. Maria Theresa and the Austrian ambassador to France, Comte de Mercy-Argenteau (who sent the empress secret reports on Marie Antoinette's behaviour) pressured Marie Antoinette to speak to du Barry, which she grudgingly agreed to do on New Year's Day 1772. She merely commented to her, \"There are a lot of people at Versailles today\", but it was enough for du Barry, who was satisfied with this recognition, and the crisis passed.\nTwo days after the death of Louis XV in 1774, Louis XVI exiled du Barry to the Abbaye du Pont-aux-Dames in Meaux, pleasing both Marie Antoinette and his aunts. Two and a half years later, at the end of October 1776, du Barry's exile ended and she was allowed to return to her beloved ch\u00e2teau at Louveciennes, but she was never permitted to return to Versailles.\nQueen of France and Navarre (1774\u20131792).\nEarly years (1774\u20131778).\nOn 10 May 1774, upon the death of Louis XV, the dauphin ascended the throne as King Louis XVI of France and Navarre with Marie Antoinette as his queen consort. At the outset, the new queen had limited political influence with her husband, who, with the support of his two most important ministers, Chief Minister Maurepas and Foreign Minister Vergennes, blocked several of her candidates from assuming important positions, including Choiseul. The queen did play a decisive role in the disgrace and exile of the most powerful of Louis XV's ministers, the Duc d'Aiguillon.\nOn 24 May 1774, two weeks after the death of Louis XV, the king gave his wife the Petit Trianon, a small ch\u00e2teau on the grounds of Versailles that Louis XV had built for Madame de Pompadour. Louis XVI allowed Marie Antoinette to renovate it to suit her own tastes; soon rumours circulated that she had plastered the walls with gold and diamonds.\nThe queen spent heavily on fashion, luxuries, and gambling, even as the country faced a grave financial crisis and the population suffered. Rose Bertin created dresses for her, hairstyles such as \"poufs\", up to three feet (90\u00a0cm) high, and the \"panache\u2014\"a spray of feather plumes. She and her court also adopted the English fashion of dresses made of indienne (a material banned in France from 1686 until 1759 to protect local French woolen and silk industries), percale, and muslin. As a result of all these fashion activities, Marie Antoinette presided over one of the most important and fashionable courts in history, and she was dominant over all of the other ladies of the court. As for her bearing and appearance, the queen was very majestic and charismatic despite gaining much weight over the years with her many pregnancies.\nThe Flour War of 1775\u2014a series of riots caused by the high prices of flour and bread\u2014damaged her reputation among the general public. Eventually, Marie Antoinette's reputation was no better than that of previous kings. Many French people were beginning to blame her for the degrading economic situation, suggesting the country's inability to pay off its debt was the result of her wasting the crown's money. In her correspondence, Maria Theresa expressed concern over her daughter's spending habits, citing the civil unrest it was beginning to cause.\nAs early as 1774, Marie Antoinette had begun to befriend some of her male admirers, such as the Baron de Besenval, the Duc de Coigny, and Count Valentin Esterh\u00e1zy, and also formed deep friendships with various ladies at court. Most noted was Marie-Louise, Princesse de Lamballe, related to the royal family through her marriage into the Penthi\u00e8vre family. On 19 September 1774, she appointed her superintendent of her household, an appointment she soon transferred to her new favourite, the Duchess of Polignac. In 1774, she took under her the patronage of her former music teacher, the German opera composer Christoph Willibald Gluck, who remained in France until 1779.\nMotherhood, changes at court and intervention in politics (1778\u20131781).\nAmidst the atmosphere of a wave of \"libelles\", the Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II came to France incognito, using the name Comte de Falkenstein, for a six-week visit during which he toured Paris extensively and was a guest at Versailles. He visited the king and queen (his sister) on 18 April 1777 at the Ch\u00e2teau de la Muette and spoke frankly to Louis, curious as to why the royal marriage had not been consummated, concluding that no obstacle to the couple's conjugal relations existed save the queen's lack of interest and the king's unwillingness to exert himself.In a letter to his brother Leopold, Grand Duke of Tuscany, Joseph II described them as \"a couple of complete blunderers.\" He disclosed to Leopold that the inexperienced Louis had confided in him the course of action he had been undertaking in their marital bed; saying Louis \"introduces the member,\" but then \"stays there without moving for about two minutes,\" withdraws without having completed the act and \"bids goodnight.\" Suggestions that Louis suffered from phimosis, which was relieved by circumcision, have been discredited. Nevertheless, following Joseph's intervention, the marriage was finally consummated in August 1777. Eight months later, in April 1778, it was suspected that the queen was pregnant, which was officially announced on 16 May. Marie Antoinette's daughter, Marie-Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Charlotte, \"Madame Royale\", was born at Versailles on 19 December 1778. The child's paternity was contested in the \"libelles\", as were all her children's.\nIn the middle of the queen's pregnancy, two events occurred which had a profound effect on her later life: the return of her friend, the Swedish diplomat Count Axel von Fersen the Younger to Versailles for two years, and her brother's claim to the throne of Bavaria, contested by Saxony and Prussia. Marie Antoinette pleaded with her husband for the French to intercede on behalf of Austria. The Peace of Teschen, signed on 13 May 1779, ended the brief conflict, with the queen imposing French mediation at her mother's insistence and Austria gaining the Innviertel territory of at least 100,000 inhabitants\u2014a strong retreat from the early French position which was hostile towards Austria. This gave the impression, partially justified, that the queen had sided with Austria against France.\nMeanwhile, the queen began to institute changes in court customs. Some of them were met with the disapproval of the older generation, such as the abandonment of heavy makeup and the popular wide-hooped panniers. The new fashion called for a simpler feminine look, typified first by the rustic \"robe \u00e0 la polonaise\" style and later by the \"gaulle\", a layered muslin dress Marie Antoinette wore in a 1783 Vig\u00e9e-Le Brun portrait. In 1780 she began to participate in amateur plays and musicals in the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Reine built for her by Richard Mique.\nRepayment of the French debt remained a difficult problem, further exacerbated by Vergennes and also by Marie Antoinette prodding Louis to involve France in the American Revolutionary War. The primary motive for the queen's involvement in political affairs in this period may arguably have had more to do with court factionalism than any true interest on her part in politics, but she played an important role in aiding the American Revolution by securing Austrian and Russian support for France, which resulted in the establishment of the First League of Armed Neutrality that stopped Britain's attack, and by weighing in decisively for the nomination of Philippe Henri, Marquis de S\u00e9gur, as Minister of War and Charles Eug\u00e8ne Gabriel de La Croix as Secretary of the Navy in 1780, who helped George Washington defeat the British in the American Revolutionary War, which ended in 1783.\nMarie Antoinette's second pregnancy ended in a miscarriage early in July 1779, as confirmed by letters between the queen and her mother. However, some historians believed that she may have experienced bleeding related to an irregular menstrual cycle, which she mistook for a lost pregnancy. Her third pregnancy was affirmed in March 1781, and on 22 October she gave birth to Louis Joseph Xavier Fran\u00e7ois, Dauphin of France.\nEmpress Maria Theresa died on 29 November 1780 in Vienna. Marie Antoinette feared that the death of her mother would jeopardise the Franco-Austrian alliance, and ultimately herself. Still, Joseph II wrote to her that he had no intention of breaking the alliance. A second visit from Joseph II, which took place in July 1781 to reaffirm the Franco-Austrian alliance and also to see his sister, was tainted by false rumours that Marie Antoinette was sending money to him from the French treasury.\nDeclining popularity (1782\u20131785).\nDespite the general celebration over the birth of an heir, Marie Antoinette's political influence was perceived to greatly benefit Austria. During the Kettle War in which Joseph II attempted to open the Scheldt river for naval passage, Marie Antoinette succeeded in obliging Vergennes to pay huge financial compensation to Austria. The queen was able to obtain her brother's support against Great Britain in the American Revolution, and she neutralized French hostility to his alliance with Russia.\nIn 1782, after the governess of the royal children, the Princesse de Gu\u00e9m\u00e9n\u00e9, went bankrupt and resigned, Marie Antoinette appointed her favourite, the Duchess of Polignac, to the position. This decision met with disapproval from the court as the duchess was considered to be of too modest origins to occupy such an exalted position. In contrast, both the king and the queen trusted Madame de Polignac completely, gave her a 13-room apartment in Versailles and paid her well. The entire Polignac family benefited greatly from royal favour in titles and positions, but its sudden wealth and lavish lifestyle outraged most aristocratic families, who resented the Polignacs' dominance at court and also fueled the increasing popular disapproval of Marie Antoinette, mostly in Paris. Mercy-Argenteau wrote to the empress: \"It is almost unexampled that in so short a time, the royal favour should have brought such overwhelming advantages to a family\".\nIn June 1783, Marie Antoinette's pregnancy was announced, but on the night of 1\u20132 November, her 28th birthday, she suffered a miscarriage. In 1783 the queen played a decisive role in the nomination of Charles Alexandre de Calonne, a close friend of the Polignacs, as Controller-General of Finances, and of the Baron de Breteuil as the Minister of the Royal Household, making him perhaps the strongest and most conservative minister of the reign. The result of these two nominations was that Marie Antoinette's influence became paramount in government, and the new ministers rejected any major change to the structure of the old regime. More than that, the decree by de S\u00e9gur, the minister of war, requiring four quarters of nobility as a condition for the appointment of officers, mainly served the interest of older noble families including poorer provincial ones, who were widely seen as a reactionary interest group by ambitious members of the middle and professional classes, by some more recent nobility, and even by the Parisian populace and press. The measure also blocked the access of 'commoners', mainly sons of members of the professional classes, and of more recently elevated nobility to important positions in the armed forces. As such, the decree became an important grievance for social classes that had been habitually supportive of the monarchy and established order, and which went on to supply the bulk of the early leadership of the French Revolution.\nCount Axel von Fersen, after his return from America in June 1783, was accepted into the queen's private society. There were claims that the two were romantically involved, but since most of their correspondence has been lost, destroyed, or redacted, for many years there was no conclusive evidence. Starting in 2016, scientists at the Centre for Research and Restoration of Museums of France uncovered some of the redacted text of the queen's letters to Fersen. The revealed texts do not mention a physical relationship but do confirm a very strong emotional relationship.\nAround this time, pamphlets describing farcical sexual deviance including the queen and her friends in the court were growing in popularity around the country. The \"Portefeuille d'un talon rouge\" was one of the earliest, including the queen and a variety of other nobles in a political statement decrying the immoral practices of the court. As time went on, these came to focus more on the queen. They described amorous encounters with a wide range of figures, from the Duchess of Polignac to Louis XV. As these attacks increased, they were connected with the public's dislike of her association with the rival nation of Austria. It was publicly suggested that her supposed behaviour was learned at the Austrian court, particularly lesbianism, which was known as the \"German vice\".\nIn 1783, the queen was busy with the creation of her \"hamlet\", a rustic retreat built by her favoured architect Richard Mique, according to the designs of the painter Hubert Robert. Its creation caused another uproar when its cost became widely known. However, the hamlet was not an eccentricity of Marie Antoinette's. It was en vogue at the time for nobles to have recreations of small villages on their properties. In fact, the design was copied from that of Louis Joseph, Prince of Cond\u00e9. It was also significantly smaller and less intricate than many other nobles'. Around this time she accumulated a library of 5,000 books. Those on music, often dedicated to her, were the most read, though she also liked to read history. She sponsored the arts, in particular music. Marie Antoinette preferred to hold her musicales in the salon of her \"Petit appartement de la reine\" in the Palace of Versailles or in the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Reine. She limited the audience to her intimate circle and a few musicians, among them the Chevalier de Saint-Georges. \"Admitted to perform music with the Queen,\" Saint-Georges probably played his violin sonatas for two instruments, with Her Majesty playing the fortepiano. She also supported some scientific endeavours, encouraging and witnessing the first launch of a \"Montgolfi\u00e8re\" hot air balloon; this extraordinary feat which represented a turning point in human civilization was done by Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Pil\u00e2tre de Rozier.\nOn 27 April 1784, Pierre Beaumarchais's play \"The Marriage of Figaro\" premiered in Paris. Initially banned by the king because of its negative portrayal of the nobility, the play was finally allowed to be publicly performed because of the queen's support and its overwhelming popularity at court, where secret readings of it had been given by Marie Antoinette. The play was a disaster for the image of the monarchy and aristocracy. It inspired Mozart's \"The Marriage of Figaro\", which premiered in Vienna on 1 May 1786.\nOn 24 October 1784, putting the Baron de Breteuil in charge of its acquisition, Louis XVI bought the Ch\u00e2teau de Saint-Cloud from Louis Philippe I, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans in the name of his wife, which she wanted because of their expanding family. She wanted to be able to own her own property, one that was actually hers, to then have the authority to bequeath it to \"whichever of my children I wish,\" choosing the child she thought could use it rather than it going through patriarchal inheritance laws or whims. It was proposed that the cost could be covered by other sales, such as that of the \"ch\u00e2teau Trompette\" in Bordeaux. This was unpopular, particularly with those factions of the nobility who disliked the queen but also with a growing percentage of the population who disapproved of a queen of France independently owning a private residence. The purchase of Saint-Cloud thus damaged the public's image of the queen even further. The ch\u00e2teau's high price, almost 6 million livres, plus the substantial extra cost of redecorating, ensured that much less money was going towards repaying France's substantial debt.\nOn 27 March 1785, Marie Antoinette gave birth to a second son, Louis Charles, who bore the title of Duke of Normandy. The fact that the birth occurred exactly nine months after Fersen's return did not escape the attention of many, leading to doubt as to the parentage of the child and to a noticeable decline of the queen's reputation in public opinion. The majority of Marie Antoinette's and Louis Charles' biographers believe that he was the biological son of Louis XVI, including Stefan Zweig and Antonia Fraser. Fraser has noted that the birthdate matches up with a known conjugal visit from the king. Courtiers at Versailles noted in their diaries that the date of conception corresponded with a period when the king and queen had spent much time together, but these details were ignored amid attacks on the queen's character. These suspicions of illegitimacy further turned popular opinion sharply against the queen, and the image of a licentious, spendthrift, empty-headed foreign queen was quickly taking root in the French psyche.\nA second daughter, her last child, Marie Sophie H\u00e9l\u00e8ne B\u00e9atrix, \"Madame Sophie\", was born on 9 July 1786 and lived only eleven months until 19 June 1787. She was named after the king's aunt, Princess Sophie of France.\nPrelude to the Revolution: scandals and the failure of reforms (1786\u20131789).\nAffair of the Diamond Necklace.\nMarie Antoinette began to abandon her more carefree activities to become increasingly involved in politics in her role as queen of France. By publicly showing her attention to the education and care of her children, the queen sought to improve the dissolute image that had begun to shadow her reputation in 1785 from the \"Affair of the Diamond Necklace\", which involved members of her court defrauding jewelers of the price of an expensive diamond necklace they had originally created for Madame du Barry.\nThe main actors in the scandal were Cardinal de Rohan, Prince de Rohan-Gu\u00e9m\u00e9n\u00e9, and Jeanne de Valois-Saint-R\u00e9my, Comtesse de la Motte. Marie Antoinette had profoundly disliked Rohan since the time he had been the French ambassador to Vienna when she was a child. Despite his high clerical position at the Court, she never addressed a word to him. Others involved were Nicole Lequay, alias \"Baronne d'Oliva\", a prostitute who happened to look like Marie Antoinette; R\u00e9taux de Villette, a forger; Alessandro Cagliostro, an Italian adventurer; and the Count de La Motte, Jeanne de Valois' husband. Madame de La Motte tricked Rohan into buying the necklace as a gift to Marie Antoinette, for him to gain the queen's favour.\nWhen the affair was discovered, those involved were arrested, tried, convicted, and either imprisoned or exiled\u2014except Count de La Motte and R\u00e9taux de Villette, who both managed to flee. Madame de La Motte was sentenced for life to confinement in the Piti\u00e9-Salp\u00eatri\u00e8re Hospital, which also served as a prison for women. Judged by the Parlement of Paris, Rohan was found not guilty and allowed to leave the Bastille. Although later commentators claimed that the affair was extremely damaging to the queen's reputation, even going so far as to say that the affair bolstered support for the French Revolution, neither the court records nor contemporary pamphlets implicated Marie Antoinette. Only later, in 1789 after the Revolution had already begun, did pamphlets and caricatures use the affair of the diamond necklace to criticize the queen for avarice and lasciviousness.\nFailure of political and financial reforms.\nSuffering from an acute case of depression, the king began to seek the advice of his wife. In her new role and with increasing political power, the queen tried to improve the awkward situation brewing between the Parlement and the king. This change of the queen's position signaled the end of the Polignacs' influence and their impact on the finances of the Crown.\nContinuing deterioration of the financial situation despite cutbacks to the royal retinue and court expenses ultimately forced the king, the queen and the Controller-General of Finances Charles Alexandre de Calonne\u2014at the urging of Vergennes\u2014to call a session of the Assembly of Notables after a hiatus of 160 years. The Assembly was held for the purpose of initiating necessary financial reforms, but the Assembly refused to cooperate. The first meeting took place on 22 February 1787, nine days after the death of Vergennes on 13 February. Marie Antoinette did not attend the meeting, and her absence resulted in accusations that the queen was trying to undermine its purpose. The Assembly was a failure; it did not pass any reforms and instead fell into a pattern of defying the king. On the urging of the queen, Louis dismissed Calonne on 8 April.\nOn 1 May \u00c9tienne Charles de Lom\u00e9nie de Brienne, Archbishop of Toulouse and one of the queen's political allies, was appointed by the king at her urging to replace Calonne, first as controller-general of finances and then as chief minister. He began to institute more cutbacks at court while trying to restore the royal absolute power weakened by the Parlement. Brienne was unable to improve the financial situation, and since he was the queen's ally, this failure adversely affected her political position. The continued poor financial climate of the country resulted in the 25 May dissolution of the Assembly of Notables because of its inability to function, and the lack of solutions was blamed on the queen.\nFrance's financial problems were the result of a combination of factors: several expensive wars; a large royal family whose expenditures were paid for by the state; and an unwillingness on the part of most members of the privileged classes, aristocracy, and clergy, to help defray the costs of the government out of their own pockets by relinquishing some of their financial privileges. As a result of the public perception that she had single-handedly ruined the national finances, Marie Antoinette was given the nickname of \"Madame D\u00e9ficit\" in the summer of 1787. While the sole fault for the financial crisis did not lie with her, Marie Antoinette was the biggest obstacle to any major reform effort. She had played a decisive role in the disgrace of the reformer ministers of finance, Anne-Robert-Jacques Turgot (in 1776), and Jacques Necker (first dismissal in 1781). If the secret expenses of the queen were taken into account, court expenses were much higher than the official estimate of 7% of the state budget.\nThe queen attempted to fight back with propaganda portraying her as a caring mother, most notably in the painting by \u00c9lisabeth Vig\u00e9e Le Brun exhibited at the \"Royal Acad\u00e9mie Salon de Paris\" in August 1787, showing her with her children. Around the same time, Jeanne de Valois-Saint-R\u00e9my escaped from prison and fled to London where she published damaging slander concerning her supposed amorous affair with the queen.\nThe political situation in 1787 worsened when, at Marie Antoinette's urging, the \"Parlement of Paris\" was exiled to Troyes on 15 August. It further deteriorated when Louis tried to use a \"lit de justice\" on 11 November to impose legislation. The new Duke of Orl\u00e9ans publicly protested the king's actions and was subsequently exiled to his Ch\u00e2teau de Villers-Cotter\u00eats. The May Edicts issued on 8 May 1788 were also opposed by the public and parlement. On 8 August Louis announced his intention to bring back the Estates General, the traditional elected legislature of the country, which had not been convened since 1614.\nWhile from late 1787 up to his death in June 1789, Marie Antoinette's primary concern was the continued deterioration of the health of Louis Joseph, who suffered from tuberculosis, she was directly involved in the exile of the \"Parlement\", the May Edicts, and the announcement regarding the Estates General. She participated in the King Council, the first queen to do so in over 175 years (since Marie de' Medici had been named \"Chef du Conseil du Roi\", between 1614 and 1617), and she was making the major decisions behind the scene and in the Royal Council.\nMarie Antoinette was instrumental in the reinstatement of Necker as finance minister on 26 August 1788, a popular move, even though she herself was worried that it would go against her if Necker proved unsuccessful in reforming the country's finances. She accepted Necker's proposition to double the representation of the Third Estate (\"tiers \u00e9tat\") in an attempt to check the power of the aristocracy.\nOn the eve of the opening of the Estates General the queen attended the mass celebrating its return. As soon as it opened on 5 May 1789, the fracture between the democratic Third Estate (consisting of bourgeois and radical aristocrats) and the conservative nobility of the Second Estate widened, and Marie Antoinette knew that her rival, the Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, who had given money and bread to the people during the winter, would be acclaimed by the crowd, much to her detriment.\nThe death of Louis Joseph on 4 June, which deeply affected his parents, was virtually ignored by the French people who were instead preparing for the next meeting of the Estates General and hoping for a resolution to the bread crisis. As the Third Estate declared itself a National Assembly, and as people either spread or believed rumours that the queen wished to bathe in their blood, Marie Antoinette went into mourning for her eldest son. Her role was decisive in urging the king to remain firm and not concede to popular demands for reforms. In addition, she showed her determination to use force to crush the forthcoming revolution.\nFrench Revolution before Varennes (1789\u20131791).\nThe situation escalated on 20 June as the Third Estate, which had been joined by several members of the clergy and radical nobility, found the door to its appointed meeting place closed by order of the king. It thus met at the tennis court in Versailles and took the Tennis Court Oath not to separate before it had given a constitution to the nation. On 11 July at Marie Antoinette's urging, Necker was dismissed and replaced by Breteuil, the queen's choice to crush the revolution with mercenary Swiss troops under the command of one of her favourites, Pierre Victor, Baron de Besenval de Br\u00fcnstatt. At the news, Paris was besieged by riots that culminated in the storming of the Bastille on 14 July. On 15 July Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette was named commander-in-chief of the newly formed National Guard.\nIn the days following the storming of the Bastille, for fear of assassination and ordered by the king, the emigration of members of the high aristocracy began on 17 July with the departure of the Count of Artois, the Cond\u00e9s, cousins of the King, and the unpopular Polignacs. Marie Antoinette, whose life was as much in danger, remained with the king, whose power was gradually being taken away by the National Constituent Assembly.\nThe abolition of feudal privileges by the National Constituent Assembly on 4 August 1789 and the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (\"La D\u00e9claration des Droits de l'Homme et du Citoyen\"), drafted by Lafayette with the help of Thomas Jefferson and adopted on 26 August, paved the way to a Constitutional Monarchy (4 September 1791 \u2013 21 September 1792). Despite these dramatic changes, life at the court continued, while the situation in Paris was becoming critical because of bread shortages in September. On 5 October a crowd from Paris descended upon Versailles and forced the royal family to move to the Tuileries Palace in Paris, where they lived under a form of house arrest under the watch of Lafayette's National Guard, while the Count of Provence and his wife were allowed to reside in the Petit Luxembourg, where they remained until they went into exile on 20 June 1791.\nMarie Antoinette continued to perform charitable functions and attend religious ceremonies, but she dedicated most of her time to her children. She also played an important political, albeit not public, role between 1789 and 1791 when she had a complex set of relationships with several key actors of the early period of the French Revolution. One of the most important was Prime Minister of Finances Necker. She blamed him for his support of the revolution and did not regret his resignation in 1790.\nLafayette served as the warden of the royal family. Despite his dislike of the queen\u2014he detested her as much as she detested him and at one time had even threatened to send her to a convent\u2014he was persuaded by Mayor of Paris Jean Sylvain Bailly to work and collaborate with her, and allowed her to see Fersen a number of times. He even went as far as exiling the Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, who was accused by the queen of fomenting trouble. His relationship with the king was more cordial. As a liberal aristocrat, he did not want the fall of the monarchy but rather the establishment of a liberal one, similar to that of Great Britain, based on cooperation between the king and the people, as was to be defined in the Constitution of 1791. Despite her attempts to remain out of the public eye, Marie Antoinette was falsely accused in the \"libelles\" of having an affair with Lafayette. Publication of such calumnies continued to the end, climaxing at her trial with an accusation of incest with her son. There is no evidence to support the accusations.\nMirabeau.\nA significant achievement of Marie Antoinette in that period was the establishment of an alliance with Honor\u00e9 Gabriel Riqueti, Comte de Mirabeau, the most important lawmaker in the assembly. Like Lafayette, Mirabeau was a liberal aristocrat. He had joined the Third Estate and was not against the monarchy but wanted to reconcile it with the revolution. He also wanted to be a minister and was not immune to corruption. On the advice of Mercy, Marie Antoinette opened secret negotiations with him and both agreed to meet privately at the Ch\u00e2teau de Saint-Cloud on 3 July 1790, where the royal family was allowed to spend the summer, free of the radical elements who watched their every move in Paris. At the meeting, Mirabeau was much impressed by the queen and remarked in a letter to Auguste Marie Raymond d'Arenberg, Comte de la Marck, that she was the only person the king had by him: \"La Reine est le seul homme que le Roi ait aupr\u00e8s de Lui.\" An agreement was reached turning Mirabeau into one of her political allies: Marie Antoinette promised to pay him 6000 livres per month and one million livres if he succeeded in his mission to restore the king's authority.\nThe only time the royal couple returned to Paris in that period was on 14 July to attend the \"F\u00eate de la F\u00e9d\u00e9ration\", an official ceremony held at the Champ de Mars in commemoration of the fall of the Bastille one year earlier. At least 300,000 persons participated from all over France, including 18,000 National Guards, with Talleyrand, bishop of Autun, celebrating a mass at the \"autel de la Patrie\" (\"altar of the fatherland\"). The king was greeted at the event with loud cheers of \"Long live the King!\", especially when he took the oath to protect the nation and to enforce the laws voted by the Constitutional Assembly. There were even cheers for the queen, particularly when she presented Louis Joseph to the public.\nMirabeau sincerely wanted to reconcile the queen with the people, and she was happy to see him restoring much of the king's powers, such as his authority over foreign policy and the right to declare war. Over the objections of Lafayette and his allies, the king was given a suspensive veto allowing him to veto any laws for a period of four years. With time, Mirabeau would support the queen, even more, going as far as to suggest that Louis XVI \"adjourn\" to Rouen or Compi\u00e8gne. This leverage with the Assembly ended with the death of Mirabeau in April 1791, despite the attempt of several moderate leaders of the revolution to contact the queen to establish some basis of cooperation with her.\nCivil Constitution of the Clergy.\nIn March 1791 Pope Pius VI had condemned the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, reluctantly signed by Louis XVI, which reduced the number of bishops from 132 to 93, imposed the election of bishops and all members of the clergy by departmental or district assemblies of electors, and reduced the pope's authority over the Church. Religion played important roles in the lives of Marie Antoinette and Louis XVI, both raised in the Roman Catholic faith. The queen's political ideas and her belief in the absolute power of monarchs were based on France's long-established tradition of the divine right of kings.\nOn 18 April, as the royal family prepared to leave for Saint-Cloud to attend Easter mass celebrated by a refractory priest, a crowd, soon joined by the National Guard (disobeying Lafayette's orders), prevented their departure from Paris, prompting Marie Antoinette to declare to Lafayette that she and her family were no longer free. This incident fortified her in her determination to leave Paris for personal and political reasons, not alone, but with her family. Even the king, who had been hesitant, accepted his wife's decision to flee with the help of foreign powers and counter-revolutionary forces. Fersen and Breteuil, who represented her in the courts of Europe, were put in charge of the escape plan while Marie Antoinette continued her negotiations with some of the moderate leaders of the French Revolution.\nFlight, arrest at Varennes and return to Paris (21\u201325 June 1791).\nThere had been several plots designed to help the royal family escape, which the queen had rejected because she would not leave without the king, or which had ceased to be viable because of the king's indecision. Once Louis finally did commit to a plan, its poor execution was the cause of its failure. In an elaborate attempt known as the Flight to Varennes to reach the royalist stronghold of Montm\u00e9dy, some members of the royal family were to pose as the servants of an imaginary \"Madame de Korff\", a wealthy Russian baroness, a role played by Louise-\u00c9lisabeth de Cro\u00ff de Tourzel, governess of the royal children.\nAfter many delays, the escape was ultimately attempted on 21 June 1791, but the entire family was arrested less than 24 hours later at Varennes and taken back to Paris within a week. The escape attempt destroyed much of the remaining support of the population for the king. Upon learning of the capture of the royal family, the National Constituent Assembly sent three representatives\u2014Antoine Barnave, J\u00e9r\u00f4me P\u00e9tion de Villeneuve and Charles C\u00e9sar de Fay de La Tour-Maubourg\u2014to Varennes to escort Marie Antoinette and her family back to Paris. On the way to the capital they were jeered and insulted by the people. During the trip Barnave, the representative of the moderate party in the Assembly, protected Marie Antoinette from the crowds, and even P\u00e9tion took pity on the royal family. Brought safely back to Paris, they were met with silence by the crowd. Thanks to Barnave, the royal couple was not brought to trial and was publicly exonerated of any crime in relation with the attempted escape.\nMarie Antoinette's first Lady of the Bedchamber, Jeanne-Louise-Henriette Campan, wrote about what happened to the queen's hair on the night of 21\u201322 June, \"...in a single night, it had turned white as that of a seventy-year-old woman.\" (\"En une seule nuit ils \u00e9taient devenus blancs comme ceux d'une femme de soixante-dix ans.\")\nRadicalization of the Revolution after Varennes (1791\u20131792).\nAfter their return from Varennes the queen, her family and entourage were held under tight surveillance by the National Guard in the Tuileries, where the royal couple was guarded night and day. Four guards accompanied the queen wherever she went, and her bedroom door had to be left open at night. Her health also began to deteriorate, thus further reducing her physical activities.\nOn 17 July 1791, with the support of Barnave and his friends, Lafayette's \"Garde Nationale\" opened fire on the crowd that had assembled on the Champ de Mars to sign a petition demanding the deposition of the king. The estimated number of those killed varies between 12 and 50. Lafayette's reputation never recovered from the event and, on 8 October he resigned as commander of the National Guard. Their enmity continuing, Marie Antoinette played a decisive role in defeating him in his aims to become the mayor of Paris in November 1791.\nAs her correspondence shows, while Barnave was taking great political risks in the belief that the queen was his political ally and had managed, despite her unpopularity, to secure a moderate majority ready to work with her, Marie Antoinette was not considered sincere in her cooperation with the moderate leaders of the French Revolution, which ultimately ended any chance to establish a moderate government. Moreover, the view that the unpopular queen was controlling the king further degraded the royal couple's standing with the people, which the Jacobins successfully exploited after their return from Varennes to advance their radical agenda to abolish the monarchy. This situation lasted until the spring of 1792.\nBarnave advised the queen to call back Mercy-Argenteau, who had played such an important role in her life before the revolution, but Mercy-Argenteau had been appointed governor-general of the Austrian Netherlands and could not return to France. At the end of 1791, ignoring the danger she faced, the \"Princesse de Lamballe\", who was in London, returned to the Tuileries. As for Fersen, despite the strong restrictions imposed on the queen, he was able to see her a final time in February 1792.\nMarie Antoinette continued to hope that the military coalition of European kingdoms would succeed in crushing the revolution. She counted most on the support of her Austrian family. After the death of Joseph II in 1790, she hoped that his successor and younger brother Leopold II would be willing to support her, and Leopold did issue the largely symbolic Declaration of Pillnitz alongside Prussia, in support of Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette and against the French Revolution. It was Marie Antoinette's hope that the threat of Austria's advancing military would deter further escalation of revolutionary violence. In a letter to her brother, penned in September 1791, Marie Antoinette expressed how she expected the revolution to react: \"...it will be effected by the approach of the war and not by the war itself. The King, his powers restored, will be entrusted with negotiations with the foreign powers, and the princes will return, in the general tranquillity, to reassume their ranks at his court and in the nation.\" In the same letter, she wrote that the fall of France's monarchy and the subsequent rise of revolutionary principles would be \"destructive to all governments.\" Upon Leopold's death in March 1792, his son Francis, a conservative ruler, continued the Austrian policy of positioning troops near the French border and threatening to intervene militarily, yet went no further despite pressure from French \u00e9migr\u00e9s.\nEvents leading to the abolition of the monarchy on 10 August 1792.\nThe Declaration of Pillnitz and Leopold's and Francis II's positioning of troops led to France's declaration of war on Austria on 20 April 1792. This resulted in the queen being viewed as an enemy, although she was personally against Austrian claims to French territories on European soil. That summer, the situation was compounded by multiple defeats of the French Revolutionary Army by the Austrians, in part because Marie Antoinette passed on military secrets to them. In addition, at the insistence of Marie Antoinette, Louis vetoed several measures that would have further restricted his power, earning the royal couple the nicknames \"Monsieur Veto\" and \"Madame Veto\", nicknames then prominently featured in different contexts, including La Carmagnole.\nBarnave remained the most important advisor and supporter of the queen, who was willing to work with him as long as he met her demands, which he did to a large extent. Barnave and the moderates comprised about 260 lawmakers in the new Legislative Assembly; the radicals numbered around 136, and the rest around 350. Initially, the majority was with Barnave, but the queen's policies led to the radicalization of the Assembly, and the moderates lost control of the legislative process. The moderate government collapsed in April 1792 to be replaced by a radical majority headed by the \"Girondins\". The Assembly then passed a series of laws concerning the Church, the aristocracy and the formation of new National Guard units; all were vetoed by Louis XVI. While Barnave's faction had dropped to 120 members, the new \"Girondin\" majority controlled the legislative assembly with 330 members. The two strongest members of that government were Jean Marie Roland, who was minister of interior, and General Charles Fran\u00e7ois Dumouriez, the minister of foreign affairs.\nOn 18 April 1792, a crowd of Blocked from leaving Paris: On April 18, 1792, a crowd of revolutionaries and the National Guard prevented the royal family from leaving Paris for Saint-Cloud to attend mass. The incident deeply angered Marie Antoinette and reinforced her belief that they were not free. Two days later, on 20 April 1792, king came to the Assembly to propose a declaration of war against Austria. At this point, sentiment was particularly inflamed against Marie Antoinette, who was accused (not without reason) of colluding with Austria. In May, the Assembly dissolved the King's Constitutional Guard and placed the royal family under the protection of the recently established National Guard of Paris. In June, King Louis XVI dismissed several Brissotin (Girondin) ministers, precipitating the final collapse of the monarchy and eruption of revolutionary violence.\nOn 20 June 1792, \"a mob of terrifying aspect\" broke into the Tuileries, made the king wear the \"bonnet rouge\" (red Phrygian cap) to show his loyalty to the revolution, insulted Marie Antoinette, accusing her of betraying France, and threatened her life. In consequence, the queen asked Fersen to urge the foreign powers to carry out their plans to invade France and to issue a manifesto in which they threatened to destroy Paris if anything happened to the royal family. The Brunswick Manifesto, issued on 25 July 1792, triggered the Insurrection of 10 August when the approach of an armed mob on its way to the Tuileries Palace forced the royal family to seek refuge at the Legislative Assembly. Ninety minutes later, the palace was invaded by the mob, who massacred the Swiss Guards. On 13 August the royal family was imprisoned in the tower of the Temple in the Marais under conditions considerably harsher than those of their previous confinement in the Tuileries.\nA week later, several of the royal family's attendants, among them the \"Princesse de Lamballe\", were taken for interrogation by the Paris Commune. Transferred to La Force Prison, after a rapid judgment, de Lamballe was savagely killed on 3 September. Her head was affixed on a pike and paraded through the city to the Temple for the queen to see. Marie Antoinette was prevented from seeing it but fainted upon learning of it.\nOn 21 September 1792, France was declared a republic, the monarchy was abolished and the National Convention became the governing body of the French First Republic. The royal family name was downgraded to the non-royal \"Capets\". Preparations began for the trial of the former king in a court of law.\nLouis XVI's trial and execution.\nCharged with treason against the French Republic, Louis XVI was separated from his family and tried in December. He was found guilty by the Convention, led by the Jacobins who rejected the idea of keeping him as a hostage. On 15 January 1793, by a majority of six votes, he was condemned to death by guillotine and executed on 21 January 1793.\nImprisonment.\nThe former queen, now called \"Widow Capet\", plunged into deep mourning. She still hoped her son Louis-Charles, whom the exiled Count of Provence, Louis XVI's brother, had recognized as Louis XVI's successor, would one day rule France. The royalists and the refractory clergy, including those preparing the insurrection in Vend\u00e9e, supported Marie Antoinette and the return to the monarchy. Throughout her imprisonment and up to her execution, Marie Antoinette could count on the sympathy of conservative factions and social-religious groups which had turned against the revolution, and also on wealthy individuals ready to bribe republican officials to facilitate her escape. These plots all failed. While imprisoned in the Tower of the Temple, Marie Antoinette, her children and \u00c9lisabeth were insulted, some of the guards going as far as blowing smoke in her face. Strict security measures were taken to assure that she was not able to communicate with the outside world. Despite these measures, several of her guards were open to bribery, and a line of communication was kept with the outside world.\nAfter Louis's execution, Marie Antoinette's fate became a central question of the National Convention. While some advocated her death, others proposed exchanging her for French prisoners of war or for a ransom from the Holy Roman Emperor. Thomas Paine advocated exile to America. In April 1793, during the Reign of Terror, a Committee of Public Safety, dominated by Maximilien Robespierre, was formed, and men such as Jacques H\u00e9bert began to call for Marie Antoinette's trial. By the end of May, the \"Girondins\" had been chased from power. Calls were also made to \"retrain\" the eight-year-old Louis XVII, to make him pliant to revolutionary ideas. To carry this out, Louis Charles was separated from his mother on 3 July after a struggle during which his mother fought in vain to retain her son, who was handed over to Antoine Simon, a cobbler and representative of the Paris Commune. Until her removal from the Temple, she spent hours trying to catch a glimpse of her son, who within weeks had been made to turn against her, accusing his mother of wrongdoing.\nConciergerie.\nAt 1 a.m. on 1 August, she was transferred from the Temple to an isolated cell in the Conciergerie as 'Prisoner n\u00ba 280'. Leaving the Tower she bumped her head against the lintel of a door, which prompted one of her guards to ask her if she was hurt, to which she answered, \"No! Nothing now can hurt me.\" This was the most difficult period of her captivity. She was under constant surveillance with no privacy. The \"Carnation Plot\" (), an attempt to help her escape at the end of August, was foiled due to the inability to corrupt all the guards. She was attended by Rosalie Lamorli\u00e8re, who took care of her as much as she could. At least once she received a visit by a Catholic priest.\nTrial and execution (14\u201316 October 1793).\nMarie Antoinette was tried by the Revolutionary Tribunal on 14 October 1793. Some historians believe the outcome of the trial had been decided in advance by the Committee of Public Safety around the time the Carnation Plot was uncovered. She and her lawyers were given less than one day to prepare her defense. Among the accusations, many previously published in the \"libelles\", were: orchestrating orgies in Versailles, sending millions of livres of treasury money to Austria, planning the massacre of the National Guards in 1792, declaring her son to be the new king of France, and incest\u2014a charge made by her son Louis-Charles, pressured into doing so by the radical Jacques H\u00e9bert who controlled him.\nThis last accusation drew an emotional response from Marie Antoinette, who refused to respond to this charge, instead appealing to all mothers present in the room. Their reaction comforted her since these women were not otherwise sympathetic to her. Upon being pressed further by a juror to address the accusations of incest, the queen replied, \"If I did not respond, it was because it would be against nature for a mother to reply to such an accusation. On this I appeal to all mothers who may be here.\" When a juror, Joachim Vilate, told Robespierre of this over dinner, Robespierre broke his plate in anger, declaring \"That imbecile H\u00e9bert!\"\nEarly on 16 October, Marie Antoinette was declared guilty of the three main charges against her: depletion of the national treasury, conspiracy against the internal and external security of the state, and high treason because of her intelligence activities in the interest of the enemy; the latter charge alone was enough to condemn her to death. At worst, she and her lawyers had expected life imprisonment. In the hours left to her, she composed a letter to her sister-in-law Madame \u00c9lisabeth, affirming her clear conscience, her Catholic faith, and her love and concern for her children. The letter did not reach \u00c9lisabeth. Her will was part of the collection of papers of Robespierre found under his bed and was published by Edme-Bonaventure Courtois.\nPreparing for her execution, she had to change clothes in front of her guards. She wanted to wear a black dress but was forced to wear a plain white dress, white being the colour worn by widowed queens of France. Her hair was shorn, her hands bound painfully behind her back and she was put on a rope leash. Unlike her husband, who had been taken to his execution in a carriage (\"carrosse\"), she had to sit in an open cart (\"charrette\") for the hour it took to convey her from the Conciergerie via the rue Saint-Honor\u00e9 thoroughfare to reach the guillotine erected in the Place de la R\u00e9volution, the present-day Place de la Concorde. She maintained her composure, despite the insults of the jeering crowd. A constitutional priest was assigned to hear her final confession. He sat by her in the cart, but she ignored him all the way to the scaffold as he had pledged his allegiance to the republic.\nMarie Antoinette was executed by beheading by guillotine at 12:15 pm on 16 October. Her last words are recorded as, \"Pardonnez-moi, monsieur. Je ne l'ai pas fait expr\u00e8s\" or \"Pardon me, sir, I did not do it on purpose\", after accidentally stepping on her executioner's shoe. Marie Tussaud was employed to make a death mask of her head. Her body was thrown into an unmarked grave in the Madeleine cemetery, located close by in rue d'Anjou. Because its capacity was exhausted, the cemetery was closed the following year, on 25 March 1794.\nForeign response.\nAfter her execution, Marie Antoinette became a symbol abroad and a controversial figure of the French Revolution. Some used her as a scapegoat to blame for the events of the revolution. Thomas Jefferson, writing in 1821, claimed that \"Her inordinate gambling and dissipations, with those of the Count d'Artois, and others of her clique, had been a sensible item in the exhaustion of the treasury, which called into action the reforming hand of the nation; and her opposition to it, her inflexible perverseness, and dauntless spirit, led herself to the Guillotine,\" adding \"I have ever believed that, had there been no Queen, there would have been no revolution.\"\nIn Edmund Burke's 1790 treatise \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\", which was written during Marie Antoinette's imprisonment in Paris but prior to her execution, he laments \"the age of chivalry is gone. That of sophisters, economists, and calculators has succeeded, and the glory of Europe is extinguished forever\" and \"Never, never more, shall we behold that generous loyalty to rank and sex.\" After receiving the news, Maria Carolina, Queen of Naples and close sister to Marie Antoinette, spiraled into a state of mourning and an anger against the revolutionaries. She quickly suspended protections of reformers and intellectuals in Naples, allowed Neapolitan bishops wide latitude to halt the secularization of the country, and offered succor to the overflowing number of \"\u00e9migr\u00e9s\" fleeing from revolutionary France, many of whom were granted pensions.\nBourbon Restoration.\nBoth Marie Antoinette's and Louis XVI's bodies were exhumed on 18 January 1815, during the Bourbon Restoration, when the Count of Provence ascended the newly reestablished throne as Louis XVIII, King of France and of Navarre. Christian burial of the royal remains took place three days later, on 21 January, in the necropolis of French kings at the Basilica of Saint-Denis.\nLegacy.\nFor many revolutionary figures, Marie Antoinette was the symbol of what was wrong with the old regime in France. The onus of having caused the financial difficulties of the nation was placed on her shoulders by the revolutionary tribunal, and under the new republican ideas of what it meant to be a member of a nation, her Austrian descent and continued correspondence with the competing nation made her a traitor. The people of France saw her death as a necessary step toward completing the revolution. Furthermore, her execution was seen as a sign that the revolution had done its work.\nMarie Antoinette is known for her taste for fine things, and her commissions from famous craftsmen such as Jean Henri Riesener suggest more about her enduring legacy as a woman of taste and patronage. For instance, a writing table attributed to Riesener, now located at Waddesdon Manor, bears witness to Marie Antoinette's desire to escape the oppressive formality of court life, when she decided to move the table from the queen's boudoir, de la Meridienne, at Versailles to her humble interior, the Petit Trianon. Her favourite objects filled her small, private chateau and reveal aspects of Marie Antoinette's character that have been obscured by satirical political prints, such as those in \"Les Tableaux de la R\u00e9volution\". She owned several instruments; in 1788 she bought a piano made by S\u00e9bastien \u00c9rard.\nA catalog of Marie Antoinette's personal library of 736 volumes was published by Paul Lacroix in 1863, using his pseudonym P. L. Jacob. The listed books were from her library at the Petit Trianon, including many found in her boudoir, and mostly consist of novels and plays. A random selection of her books includes \"Histoire de Mademoiselle de Terville\" by Madeleine d'Arsant de Puisieux, \"Le Philosophe parvenu ou Lettres et pi\u00e8ces originales contenant les aventures d'Eug\u00e8ne Sans-Pair\" by Robert-Martin Lesuire, and \"Oeuvres m\u00eal\u00e9es... contenant des trag\u00e9dies et diff\u00e9rents ouvrages en vers et en prose\" by Madeleine-Ang\u00e9lique de Gomez. A larger and more official library belonging to Marie Antoinette was kept at the Tuileries Palace in Paris.\nLong after her death, Marie Antoinette remains a major historical figure linked with conservatism, the Catholic Church, wealth and fashion. She has been the subject of many books, films, and other media. Politically engaged authors have deemed her the quintessential representative of class conflict, western aristocracy and absolutism. Some of her contemporaries, such as Jefferson, attributed to her as a cause of the French Revolution.\nFrom September 20, 2025, to March 22, 2026, the Victoria and Albert Museum, London hosted an exhibition \u201c\"Marie Antoinette: Style\".\u201d The exhibition examined her interest in fashion and the decorative arts, as well as her influence on designers such as Dior, Chanel, and Vivienne Westwood.\u00a0It was accompanied by an exhibition catalog edited by Sarah Grant.\nIn popular culture.\nThe phrase \"let them eat cake\" is often conventionally attributed to Marie Antoinette, but there is no evidence that she uttered it, and it is now generally regarded as a journalistic clich\u00e9. This phrase originally appeared in Book VI of the first part of Jean-Jacques Rousseau's autobiographical work \"Les Confessions\", finished in 1767 and published in 1782: \"Enfin Je me rappelai le pis-aller d'une grande Princesse \u00e0 qui l'on disait que les paysans n'avaient pas de pain, et qui r\u00e9pondit: Qu'ils mangent de la brioche\". (\"Finally I recalled the stopgap solution of a great princess who was told that the peasants had no bread, and who responded: 'Let them eat brioche'.\") Rousseau ascribes these words to a \"great princess\", but the purported writing date precedes Marie Antoinette's arrival in France. Some think that he invented it altogether.\nIn the United States, expressions of gratitude to France for its help in the American Revolution included naming a city Marietta, Ohio, in 1788. Her life has been the subject of many films, such as \"Marie Antoinette\" (1938) and \"Marie Antoinette\" (2006). Antonia Fraser wrote a biography of Marie Antoinette called \"\". In 2022, her story was dramatised by a Canal+ and BBC English-language television series.\nChildren.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Children of Marie Antoinette\nIn addition to her biological children, Marie Antoinette adopted four children: \"Armand\" Francois-Michel Gagn\u00e9, a poor orphan adopted in 1776; Jean Amilcar, a Senegalese slave boy given to the queen as a present by Chevalier de Boufflers in 1787, but whom she instead freed, baptized, adopted and placed in a pension; Ernestine Lambriquet, daughter of two servants at the palace, who was raised as the playmate of her daughter Marie-Th\u00e9r\u00e8se and whom she adopted after the death of her mother in 1788; and \"Zoe\" Jeanne Louise Victoire, who was adopted in 1790 along with her two older sisters when her parents, an usher and his wife in service of the king, had died. Of these, only Armand, Ernestine, and Zoe actually lived with the royal family: Jean Amilcar, along with the elder siblings of Zoe and Armand who were also formally foster children of the royal couple, simply lived at the queen's expense until her imprisonment, which proved fatal for at least Amilcar, as he was evicted from the boarding school when the fee was no longer paid and reportedly starved to death on the street but in actuality was taken in by one of his teachers and passed a few years later of illness. Armand and Zoe had a position which was more similar to that of Ernestine; Armand lived at court with the king and queen until he left them at the outbreak of the revolution because of his republican sympathies, and Zoe was chosen to be the playmate of the dauphin, just as Ernestine had once been selected as the playmate of Marie-Th\u00e9r\u00e8se, and later sent away to her sisters in a convent boarding school before the Flight to Varennes in 1791.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45110", "revid": "213995", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45110", "title": "Marie-Antoinette", "text": ""}
{"id": "45111", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45111", "title": "1606 BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "45112", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45112", "title": "1607 BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "45113", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45113", "title": "IQ", "text": ""}
{"id": "45114", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45114", "title": "Lunokhod programme", "text": "Soviet Moon rover program\nLunokhod (Russian: , , \"Moonwalker\") was a series of Soviet robotic lunar rovers designed to land on the Moon between 1969 and 1977. Lunokhod 1 was the first roving remote-controlled robot to land on an extraterrestrial body.\nThe 1969 Lunokhod 1A (Lunokhod 0, Lunokhod No.\u00a0201) was destroyed during launch, the 1970 \"Lunokhod 1\" and the 1973 \"Lunokhod 2\" landed on the Moon, and \"Lunokhod 3\" (Lunokhod No.\u00a0205, planned for 1977) was never launched. The successful missions were in operation concurrently with the Zond and Luna series of Moon flyby, orbiter and landing missions.\nThe Lunokhods were primarily designed to support the Soviet human Moon missions during the Moon race. Instead, they were used as remote-controlled robots for exploration of the lunar surface and returning pictures, after the Apollo human lunar landings and cancellation of the Soviet human Moon programme.\nThe Lunokhods were transported to the lunar surface by Luna spacecraft, which were launched by Proton-K rockets.\nDevelopment.\nLunokhod's original primary mission was to be the back-up for L3 crewed Moon expeditions and for the later Zvezda lunar base. For mission safety, weeks before the human mission on a LK lander, an LK-R uncrewed lander from the L3 lunar expedition complex and two Lunokhod automated rovers would be sent to the Moon for a preliminary study of the surface around LK-R and LK sites, to act as radio beacons for precision landings of LK-R and LK, and for a visual evaluation of the status of the site.\nIn mid-1968, at the facility KIP-10 or NIP-10 (\u041a\u0418\u041f-10 or \u041d\u0418\u041f-10, located at ) in the closed town Shkolnoye (Simferopol-28), near Simferopol, Crimea, a lunodrom (\u043b\u0443\u043d\u043e\u0434\u0440\u043e\u043c - Moondrome, located at ) was built. It covered an area of one hectare (120 meters by 70 meters) and was very similar to some parts of the lunar surface. It was constructed using more than 3,000 cubic meters of soil, and included 54 craters up to 16 m in diameter and around about 160 rocks of various sizes. The whole area was surrounded with bricks, painted in gray and black. It was used to analyze problems with the Lunokhod chassis and cosmonaut's skill to control one. \nClosed town Simferopol-28 contained the most significant tracking facility in the Soviet Union, having the largest number of antennas, the largest area, and the most personnel of any of the Soviet tracking facilities. The facility was one of a network of ten facilities which contain earth satellite vehicle tracking equipment and provide command/control for Soviet near-space civil and military events. Additionally, this facility supported all lunar programmes of the Soviet Union, in association with the Evpatoria Deep Space Tracking Facility.\nAt least four complete vehicles were constructed, with the serial numbers 201, 203, 204 and 205.\nRover design.\nThe Lunokhod rovers were lunar vehicles formed of a tub-like compartment with a large convex lid on eight independently-powered wheels. They were equipped with a cone-shaped antenna, a highly directional helical antenna, television cameras, and special extendable devices to impact the lunar soil for density measurements and mechanical property tests, plus a scientific payload which varied with the mission.\nThe Lunokhods were designed under the leadership of Georgy Babakin at Lavochkin design bureau. The metal chassis themselves were designed by Alexander Kemurdzhian.\nThe vehicles were powered by batteries. The rover ran during the lunar day, stopping occasionally to recharge its batteries using its solar panels. The power was supplied during the lunar day by a GaAs solar array on the inside of a round hinged lid which covered the instrument bay, which would charge the batteries when opened. During the lunar nights, the lid was closed and a polonium-210 radioisotope heater unit kept the internal components at operating temperature.\nTo be able to work in a vacuum a special fluoride-based lubricant was used for the rover's mechanical parts, and the electric motors, one in each wheel hub, were enclosed in pressurised containers.\nThe rovers stood high and had a mass of . It was about long and wide and had eight wheels each with an independent suspension, motor and brake. The rover had two speeds, approximately .\nThe Lunokhods were transported to the lunar surface by Luna spacecraft, which were launched by Proton-K rockets. The Moon lander part of the Luna spacecraft for Lunokhods was similar to the one for sample-return missions.\nLunokhod Rovers.\nLunokhod 201.\nAfter years of secret engineering development and training, the first Lunokhod (vehicle 8\u0415\u041b\u2116201) was launched on February 19, 1969. Within a few seconds the rocket disintegrated and the first Lunokhod was lost. The rest of the world did not learn of the rocket's valuable payload until years later. The failure resulted in the radioactive heat source, polonium 210, being spread over a large region of Russia.\n\"Lunokhod 1\".\nAfter the destruction of the original Lunokhod, Soviet engineers began work immediately on another lunar vehicle. \"Lunokhod 1\" (vehicle 8\u0415\u041b\u2116203) was the first of two uncrewed lunar rovers successfully landed on the Moon by the Soviet Union as part of its Lunokhod programme. The spacecraft which carried \"Lunokhod 1\" was named \"Luna 17\". \"Lunokhod 1\" was the first roving remote-controlled robot to land on another world.\n\"Luna 17\" was launched on November 10, 1970 at 14:44:01 UTC. After reaching Earth parking orbit, the final stage of \"Luna 17\"'s launching rocket fired to place it into a trajectory towards the Moon (November 10, 1970 at 14:54 UTC). After two course correction manoeuvres (on November 12 and 14) it entered lunar orbit on November 15, 1970 at 22:00 UTC.\nThe spacecraft soft-landed on the Moon in the Sea of Rains on November 17, 1970 at 03:47 UTC. The lander had dual ramps from which the payload, \"Lunokhod 1\", could descend to the surface. At 06:28 UT the rover moved down the ramps and onto the Moon.\nThe rover's payload included cameras (two television and four panoramic telephotometers), a RIFMA X-ray fluorescence spectrometer, an RT-1 X-ray telescope, a PrOP odometer/penetrometer, a RV-2N radiation detector, and a TL laser retroreflector.\nAn urban legend was spread among the Soviet Union that the Lunokhod rover was driven by a \u201cKGB Dwarf\u201d, however it was never explained how supplies were stored to keep them alive for an 11-month mission.\n\"Lunokhod 2\".\n\"Lunokhod 2\" (vehicle 8\u0415\u041b\u2116204) was the second and more advanced of the two Lunokhod rovers. The launcher put the spacecraft into Earth parking orbit on January 8, 1973, followed by a translunar injection. On January 12, 1973, \"Luna 21\" was braked into a lunar orbit.\nThe \"Luna 21\" spacecraft landed on the Moon to deploy the second Soviet lunar rover, \"Lunokhod 2\". The primary objectives of the mission were to collect images of the lunar surface, examine ambient light levels to determine the feasibility of astronomical observations from the Moon, perform laser ranging experiments from Earth, observe solar X-rays, measure local magnetic fields, and study mechanical properties of the lunar surface material.\nThe landing occurred on January 15, 1973 at 23:35 UT in Le Monnier crater (25.85 degrees N, 30.45 degrees E).\nAfter landing the \"Lunokhod 2\" took television images of the surrounding area, then rolled down a ramp to the surface at 01:14 UT on 1973-01-16. It then took pictures of the \"Luna 21\" lander and landing site.\nThe rover was equipped with three slow-scan television cameras, one mounted high on the rover for navigation, which could return high resolution images at different rates\u20143.2, 5.7, 10.9 or 21.1 seconds per frame (not frames per second). These images were used by the five-man team of controllers on Earth who sent driving commands to the rover in real time. There were four panoramic cameras mounted on the rover.\nScientific instruments included a soil mechanics tester, solar X-ray experiment, an astrophotometer to measure visible and ultraviolet light levels, a magnetometer deployed in front of the rover on the end of a 2.5 m (8\u00a0ft 2 in) boom, a radiometer, a photodetector (Rubin-1) for laser detection experiments, and a French-supplied laser corner reflector.\n\"Lunokhod 3\".\nLunokhod 3 (vehicle 8\u0415\u041b\u2116205) was built for a Moon landing in 1977 as \"Luna 25\", but never flew to the Moon due to lack of launchers and funding. It remains at the NPO Lavochkin museum.\nResults.\nDuring its 322 Earth days of operations, \"Lunokhod 1\" travelled and returned more than 20,000 television images and 206 high-resolution panoramas. In addition, it performed twenty-five soil analyses with its RIFMA x-ray fluorescence spectrometer and used its penetrometer at 500 different locations.\n\"Lunokhod 2\" operated for about four months, covered of terrain, including driving into hilly upland areas and rilles. \"Lunokhod 2\" held the record for the longest distance of surface travel of any extraterrestrial vehicle until 2014. It sent back 86 panoramic images and over 80,000 television pictures. Many mechanical tests of the Moon's surface, laser ranging measurements, and other experiments were completed during this time.\nIn 2010, nearly forty years after the 1971 loss of signal from \"Lunokhod 1\", the NASA Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter photographed its tracks and final location, and researchers, using a telescopic pulsed-laser rangefinder, detected the robot's retroreflector.\nNot until Mars Pathfinder's deployment of the \"Sojourner\" Rover in 1997 was another remote-controlled vehicle put on an extraterrestrial body. For comparison, the similarly sized NASA Mars Exploration Rovers, \"Spirit\" and \"Opportunity\" had, by their fifth anniversary in January 2009, traveled a total of and transmitted over 125,000 images.\nLegacy.\nAccording to a French documentary television film \"Tank on the Moon\" by Jean Afanassieff, the Lunokhod design returned to the limelight 15 years later due to the Chernobyl nuclear power plant disaster on April 26, 1986. The East German-built remote controlled bulldozers available to Soviet civil defense troops weighed dozens of tons\u00a0\u2013 too heavy to operate on the remaining parts of the partially collapsed reactor building roof. Human labourers could not be employed to shovel debris since work shifts were limited to 90-second intervals due to intense ionizing radiation.\nLunokhod designers were called back from retirement, and in two weeks rovers were made which used nuclear decay heat sources for internal rack climate control, their electronic systems were already hardened to partly resist radiation. This benefit allowed the 1986 designers to quickly devise a derived vehicle type for nuclear disaster recovery work. On July 15, two rovers, called STR-1, were delivered to the Chernobyl accident zone and proved useful for clearing debris, earning awards for the designers. Due to extremely high radiation levels, both STR-1 rovers eventually failed, and human workers (later named liquidators) were called in once again.\nLocations and ownership.\nUntil 2010, the final location of \"Lunokhod 1\" was uncertain by a few kilometers. Lunar laser ranging experiments had failed to detect a return signal from its retroreflector since the 1970s. On March 17, 2010, Albert Abdrakhimov found both the lander and the rover in Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter image M114185541RC. On April 22, Tom Murphy (UCSD) and Russet McMillan at the Apache Point Observatory detected the robot's retroreflector using the Apache Point telescopic pulsed-laser rangefinder.\n\"Lunokhod 2\" continues to be detected by lunar laser ranging experiments and its position is known to sub-metre accuracy. Ownership of \"Lunokhod 2\" and the \"Luna 21\" lander was sold by the Lavochkin Association for US$ in December 1993 at a Sotheby's auction in New York (although the catalogue incorrectly lists lot 68A as \"Luna 17/Lunokhod 1\"). The buyer was computer gaming entrepreneur and astronaut's son Richard Garriott, who is also known by the name of his gaming character Lord British. Garriott stated in a 2001 interview: \"I purchased \"Lunakod 21\" [\"sic\"] from the Russians. I am now the world's only private owner of an object on a foreign celestial body. Though there are international treaties that say no government shall lay claim to geography off planet earth, I am not a government. Summarily, I claim the Moon in the name of Lord British!\" In 2007, Garriott said he is still the owner of \"Lunokhod 2\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45115", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45115", "title": "1609 BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "45116", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45116", "title": "Lunokhod 1", "text": "Soviet lunar rover; first rover to operate on the Moon\nLunokhod 1 (Russian: \u041b\u0443\u043d\u043e\u0445\u043e\u0434-1, 'Moonwalker 1'), also known as Device 8EL No. 203 (, \"Apparat 8EL No. 203\") was the first robotic rover on the Moon and the first to freely move across the surface of an astronomical object beyond the Earth. Sent by the Soviet Union it was part of the robotic rovers Lunokhod program. The \"Luna 17\" spacecraft carried \"Lunokhod 1\" to the Moon in 1970. Lunokhod 0 (No.201), the previous and first attempt to land a rover, launched in February 1969 but failed to reach Earth orbit.\nAlthough only designed for a lifetime of three lunar days (approximately three Earth months), \"Lunokhod 1\" operated on the lunar surface for eleven lunar days (321 Earth days) and traversed a total distance of 10.54\u00a0km.\nRover description.\n\"Lunokhod 1\" was a lunar vehicle formed of a tub-like compartment with a large convex lid on eight independently powered wheels. The rover stood high and had a mass of . It was about long and wide.\n\"Lunokhod 1\" was equipped with a cone-shaped antenna, a highly directional helical antenna, four television cameras, and special extendable devices to test the lunar soil for soil density and mechanical properties. \nAn X-ray spectrometer, an X-ray telescope, cosmic ray detectors, and a laser retro-reflector (supplied by France) were also included. \nThe vehicle was powered by batteries which were recharged during the lunar day by a solar cell array mounted on the underside of the lid. To be able to work in a vacuum, special fluoride-based lubricant was used for the mechanical parts, and the electric motors (one in each wheel hub) were enclosed in pressurized containers. \nDuring the lunar nights, the lid was closed, and a polonium-210 radioisotope heater unit kept the internal components at operating temperature. \n\"Lunokhod 1\" was intended to operate through three lunar days (approximately three Earth months), but actually operated for eleven lunar days.\nLaunch and lunar orbit.\n\"Luna 17\" was launched on November 10, 1970, at 14:44:01 UTC. After reaching earth parking orbit, the final stage of \"Luna 17\"'s launching rocket fired to place it into a trajectory towards the Moon (1970-11-10 at 14:54 UTC). After two course correction maneuvers (on November 12 and 14), it entered lunar orbit on November 15, 1970, at 22:00 UTC.\nLanding and surface operations.\nThe spacecraft soft-landed on the Moon in the Mare Imbrium (\"Sea of Rains\") on November 17 at 03:47 UTC. It landed in western Mare Imbrium, about 60\u00a0km south of the Promontorium Heraclides. The lander had dual ramps from which the payload, \"Lunokhod 1\", could descend to the lunar surface. \nAt 06:28 UTC the rover moved onto the Moon's surface. The rover would run during the lunar day, stopping occasionally to recharge its batteries via the solar panels. At night the rover hibernated until the next sunrise, heated by the radioactive source.\nSmall craters along its traverse were named unofficially during the mission. The names were officially approved by the IAU in 2012. They are called Albert, Leonid, Kolya, Valera, Borya, Gena, Vitya, Kostya, Igor, Slava, Nikolya, and Vasya.\nOperations during 1970:\nOperations during 1971:\nLocation.\nThe final location of \"Lunokhod 1\" was uncertain until 2010, as lunar laser ranging experiments had failed to detect a return signal from it since 1971. On March 17, 2010, Albert Abdrakhimov found both the lander and the rover in Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter image M114185541RC (Line 21977, Sample 3189). In April 2010, the Apache Point Observatory Lunar Laser-ranging Operation (APOLLO) team from the University of California at San Diego used the LRO images to locate the rover closely enough for laser range (distance) measurements. On April 22, 2010, and days following, the team successfully measured the distance several times. The intersection of the spheres described by the measured distances then pinpoint the current location of Lunokhod 1 to within 1 meter. APOLLO is now using \"Lunokhod 1\"'s reflector for experiments, as they discovered, to their surprise, that it was returning much more light than other reflectors on the Moon. According to a NASA press release, APOLLO researcher Tom Murphy said, \"We got about 2,000 photons from Lunokhod 1 on our first try. After almost 40 years of silence, this rover still has a lot to say.\"\nBy November 2010, the location of the rover had been determined to within about a centimeter. The location near the limb of the Moon, combined with the ability to range the rover even when it is in sunlight, promises to be particularly useful for determining aspects of the Earth\u2013Moon system.\nIn a report released in May 2013, French scientists at the C\u00f4te d'Azur Observatory led by Jean-Marie Torre reported replicating the 2010 laser ranging experiments by American scientists after research using images from the NASA Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter. In both cases, laser pulses were returned from the \"Lunokhod 1\" retroreflector.\nEnd of mission and results.\nControllers finished the last communications session with \"Lunokhod 1\" at 13:05 UT on September 14, 1971. Attempts to re-establish contact were finally discontinued and the operations of \"Lunokhod 1\" officially ceased on October 4, 1971, the anniversary of Sputnik 1. During its 322 Earth days of operations, \"Lunokhod 1\" travelled 10,540 metres (6.55 miles) and returned more than 20,000 TV images and 206 high-resolution panoramas. In addition, it performed 25 lunar soil analyses with its RIFMA x-ray fluorescence spectrometer and used its penetrometer at 500 different locations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45119", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45119", "title": "Lunokhod 2", "text": "Second robotic Moon rover (1973)\nLunokhod 2 ( (\"Moonwalker 2\"), also known as \u0410\u043f\u043f\u0430\u0440\u0430\u0442 8\u0415\u041b \u2116 204 (\"Device 8EL No. 204\")) was the second of two uncrewed lunar rovers that landed on the Moon by the Soviet Union as part of the Lunokhod programme.\nThe \"Luna 21\" spacecraft landed on the Moon and deployed the second Soviet lunar rover, \"Lunokhod 2\", in January 1973. The lander and rover together massed 1814\u00a0kg. \nThe primary objectives of the mission were to collect images of the lunar surface, examine ambient light levels to determine the feasibility of astronomical observations from the Moon, perform laser ranging experiments from Earth, observe solar X-rays, measure local magnetic fields, and study the soil mechanics of the lunar surface material.\n\"Lunokhod 2\" rover and subsystems.\nThe rover stood high and had a mass of . It was about long and wide and had eight wheels each with an independent suspension, electric motor and brake. The rover had two speeds, about . \n\"Lunokhod 2\" was equipped with three television cameras, one mounted high on the rover for navigation, which could return high resolution images at different frame rates\u20143.2, 5.7, 10.9 or 21.1 seconds per frame. These images were used by a five-man team of controllers on Earth who sent driving commands to the rover in real time. \nPower was supplied by a solar panel on the inside of a round hinged lid which covered the instrument bay, which would charge the batteries when opened. A polonium-210 radioisotope heater unit was used to keep the rover warm during the long lunar nights. \nThere were four panoramic cameras mounted on the rover. Scientific instruments included a soil mechanics tester, solar X-ray experiment, an astrophotometer to measure visible and ultraviolet light levels, a magnetometer deployed in front of the rover on the end of a 2.5 m (8\u00a0ft 2 in) boom, a radiometer, a photodetector (Rubin-1) for laser detection experiments, and a French-supplied laser corner reflector. \nThe lander carried a bas relief of Vladimir Lenin and the State Emblem of the Soviet Union.\nMission.\nThe Proton-K/D launcher put the spacecraft into Earth parking orbit followed by translunar injection. On January 12, 1973, \"Luna 21\" was braked into a lunar orbit. On January 13 and 14, the perilune was lowered to altitude.\nLanding and surface operations.\nOn January 15, 1973, after 40 orbits, the descent of the craft was commenced as the braking rocket was fired at altitude, and the craft began to de-orbit. At an altitude of the main thrusters began firing, slowing the fall until a height of was reached. At this point the main thrusters shut down and the secondary thrusters ignited, slowing the fall until the lander was above the surface, where the engine was switched off. Landing occurred at 23:35 UT in Le Monnier crater at 25.85 degrees N, 30.45 degrees E.\nAfter landing, the \"Lunokhod 2\" took TV images of the surrounding area, then rolled down a ramp to the surface at 01:14 UT on January 16 and took pictures of the \"Luna 21\" lander and landing site, driving for 30 metres. After a period of charging up its batteries, it took more pictures of the site and the lander, and then set off to explore the Moon.\nThe rover would run during the lunar day, stopping occasionally to recharge its batteries with the solar panels. At night the rover hibernated until the next sunrise, heated by the radioactive source.\nEnd of mission.\nOn June 4, 1973, it was announced that the program was completed, leading to speculation that the vehicle probably failed in mid-May or could not be revived after the lunar night of May\u2013June.\nMore recently, Alexander Basilevsky related an account in which on May 9, the rover's open lid touched a crater wall and became covered with dust. When the lid was closed, this dust (a very good insulator) was dumped on to the radiators. The following day, May 10, controllers saw the internal temperature of \"Lunokhod 2\" climb as it was unable to cool itself, eventually rendering the rover inoperable. On May 11, signal from the rover was lost.\nResults.\n\"Lunokhod 2\" operated for about four months, and the original estimate was that it covered of terrain, including hilly upland areas and rilles, and sent back 86 panoramic images and over 80,000 TV pictures. Many mechanical tests of the surface, laser ranging measurements, and other experiments were completed during this time. \"Lunokhod 2\" was thought to have covered based on wheel rotations but Russian scientists at the Moscow State University of Geodesy and Cartography (MIIGAiK) revised that to an estimated distance of about based on Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) images of the lunar surface. Subsequent discussions with their American counterparts ended with an agreed-upon final distance of ; an international team has confirmed that the methods used to calculate the two rovers' odometry is consistent and comparable from the Moon to Mars.\n\"Lunokhod 2\" held the record for off-Earth roving distance until July 27, 2014, when NASA's Mars \"Opportunity\" rover exceeded it after having traveled over .\nCurrent status.\n\"Lunokhod 2\" continues to be detected by lunar laser ranging experiments and its position is known to sub-meter accuracy. On March 17, 2010, Phil Stooke at the University of Western Ontario announced that he had located \"Lunokhod 2\" in NASA Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) images, but later images showed the initial identification was incorrect (the identified point was a mark in the rover tracks near the end of the route, made as \"Lunokhod 2\" turned around), and the LRO LROC team identified the correct location of the rover in March 2012. Excellent \"Lunokhod 2\" images from LROC were published by Mark Robinson on SESE site of ASU.\nPresent ownership.\nOwnership of \"Lunokhod 2\" and the \"Luna 21\" lander was sold by the Lavochkin Association for $68,500 in December 1993 at a Sotheby's auction in New York. (The catalog incorrectly lists lot 68A as \"Luna 17\"/\"Lunokhod 1\").\nThe buyer was computer game entrepreneur and space tourist Richard Garriott (son of the astronaut Owen K. Garriott), who stated in a 2001 interview with \"Computer Games Magazine\"'s Cindy Yans that:\nI purchased Lunakod 21 [\"sic\"] from the Russians. I am now the world's only private owner of an object on a foreign celestial body. Though there are international treaties that say, no government shall lay claim to geography off planet earth, I am not a government. Summarily, I claim the moon in the name of Lord British!\nGarriott later confirmed that he is the owner of \"Lunokhod 2\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45121", "revid": "48905895", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45121", "title": "Alans", "text": "Ancient Iranic people of the North Caucasus\nThe Alans () were an ancient and medieval Iranic nomadic pastoral people who migrated to what is today North Caucasus; some continued on to Europe and later North Africa. They are generally regarded as part of the Sarmatians, and possibly related to the Massagetae. Modern historians have connected the Alans with the Central Asian Yancai of Chinese sources and with the Aorsi of Roman sources. Having migrated westwards and becoming dominant among the Sarmatians on the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe, the Alans are mentioned by Roman sources in the \u00a0CE. At that time they had settled the region north of the Black Sea and frequently raided the Parthian Empire and the South Caucasus provinces of the Roman Empire. From \u00a0CE the Goths broke their power on the Pontic Steppe, thereby assimilating a sizeable portion of the associated Alans.\nUpon the Hunnic defeat of the Goths on the Pontic Steppe around \u00a0CE, many of the Alans migrated westwards along with various Germanic tribes. They crossed the Rhine in 406 along with the Vandals and Suebi, settling in Orl\u00e9ans and Valence. Around 409 they joined the Vandals and Suebi in crossing the Pyrenees into the Iberian Peninsula, settling in Lusitania and Hispania Carthaginensis. The Iberian Alans, soundly defeated by the Visigoths in 418, subsequently surrendered their authority to the Hasdingi Vandals. In 428CE, the Vandals and Alans crossed the Strait of Gibraltar into North Africa, where they founded a kingdom which lasted until its conquest by forces of the Byzantine Emperor Justinian I in 534.\nEventually in the 9th century those Alans who remained under Hunnic rule established the regionally powerful kingdom of Alania in the Northern Caucasus. It survived until the Mongol invasions of the 13th century. Various scholars regard these Alans as the ancestors of the modern Ossetians.\nThe Alans spoke an Eastern Iranian language which derived from Scytho-Sarmatian; in turn, the language evolved into the modern Ossetian language. The name \"Alan\" represents an Eastern Iranian dialectal form of Old Iranian term \"Aryan\", and so is cognate with the name of the country \"\u012ar\u0101n\" (from the gen. plur. \"*ary\u0101n\u0101m\").\nName.\nThe Alans were documented by foreign observers from the 1st century onward under similar names: ; '; ' (Pinyin; \"Alan\" + \"Liu\") in the 2nd century, ' in the 3rd century, later \"Alanguo\" (); Parthian and Middle Persian \"Al\u0101n\u0101n\" (plural); Arabic \"Al\u0101n\" (singular); Syriac \"Al\u0101nay\u0113\"; Classical Armenian \"Alank; Georgian \"Alaneti\" ('country of the Alans'); Hebrew \"Alan\" (pl. \"Alanim\"). Rarer Latin spellings include \"Alauni\" or \"Halani\". The name was also preserved in the modern Ossetian language as \"Allon\".\nThe ethnonym \"Al\u0101n\" is a dialectal variant of the Old Iranian *\"Ary\u0101na\", itself derived from the root \"arya\"-, meaning 'Aryan', the common self-designation of Indo-Iranian peoples. It probably came in use in the early history of the Alans for the purpose of uniting a heterogeneous group of tribes through the invocation of a common, ancestral 'Aryan' origin. Like the name of Iran (*\"Ary\u0101n\u0101m\"), the adjective *\"ary\u0101na\" is related to \"Airyan\u0259m Wa\u0113\u01f0\u014d\" ('stretch of the Aryas'), the mythical homeland of the early Iranians mentioned in the \"Avesta\".\nSome other ethnonyms also bear the name of the Alans: the \"Rhoxol\u0101ni\" ('Bright Alans'), an offshoot of the Alans whose name may be linked to religious practices, and the \"Alanorsoi\" ('White Alans'), perhaps a conglomerate of Alans and Aorsi. The personal names \"Alan\" and \"Alain\" (from Latin \"Alanus\") may have been introduced by Alan settlers to Western Europe during the first millennium.\nThe Alans were also known over the course of their history by another group of related names including the variations \"Asi\", \"As\", and \"Os\" (Romanian ', Bulgarian ', Hungarian ', Russian ', Georgian \"\"). It is this name at the root of the modern \"Ossetian\".\nThe Alans and Warfare.\nThe Alans were famed for their elite and highly mobile cavalry, a fighting style they inherited from their Sarmatian relatives. The Alans' influence on mounted warfare was widespread, with their tactics and equipment impacting the Roman and Germanic armies, among others.\nAlani boys learned to ride at a young age, and Roman writer Ammianus Marcellinus remarked that walking was considered offensive for an Alanic man. A hallmark Alanic tactic, the feigned retreat was designed to draw enemy infantry into a vulnerable position. Alani horsemen would pretend to flee before suddenly wheeling around to attack the enemy's exposed flank.\nAs mercenaries for the Romans and other powers, the Alans demonstrated a sophisticated understanding of combined-arms tactics. Their missile-equipped cavalry would harry the enemy, pinning them in place before the shock cavalry delivered a devastating charge.\nAlani cavalry was highly mobile and was used for rapid skirmishing and opportunistic attacks against enemy flanks. The mobility of their cavalry and the psychological terror they inspired in less disciplined infantry were major advantages.\nThe Alans were recruited into the Mongol forces and known as the Asud, with one unit called \"Right Alan Guard\" that was combined with \"recently surrendered\" soldiers.\nHistory.\nOrigin.\nThe Alans were formed out of the merger of the Massagetae, a Central Asian Iranian nomadic people, with some old tribal groups. Related to the Asii who previously invaded Bactria in the 2nd century BC, the Alans were pushed west by the Kangju people (known to Graeco-Roman authors as the in Greek, and the in Latin), the latter of whom were living in the Syr Darya basin, from where they expanded their rule from Fergana to the Aral Sea region.\nEarly Alans.\nThe first mentions of names that historians link with the \"Alani\" appear at almost the same time in texts from the Mediterranean, Middle East and China.\nIn the 1st century, the Alans migrated westwards from Central Asia, achieving a dominant position among the Sarmatians living between the Don River and the Caspian Sea. The Alans are mentioned in the Vologases inscription which reads that Vologases I, the Parthian king between around45 and 78, in the 11th year of his reign (62), battled Kuluk, king of the Alani. The 1st century Jewish historian Josephus supplements this inscription. Josephus reports in the \"Jewish Wars\" (book7, ch.7.4) how Alans (whom he calls a \"Scythian\" tribe) living near the Sea of Azov crossed the Iron Gates for plunder (72CE) and defeated the armies of Pacorus, king of Media, and Tiridates, King of Armenia, two brothers of Vologeses I (for whom the above-mentioned inscription was made):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now there was a nation of the Alans, which we have formerly mentioned somewhere as being Scythians, and living around Tanais and Lake Maeotis. This nation about this time laid a design of falling upon Media, and the parts beyond it, in order to plunder them; with which intention they treated with the king of Hyrcania; for he was master of that passage which king Alexander shut up with iron gates. This king gave them leave to come through them; so they came in great multitudes, and fell upon the Medes unexpectedly, and plundered their country, which they found full of people, and replenished with abundance of cattle, while nobody dared make any resistance against them; for Pacorus, the king of the country, had fled away for fear into places where they could not easily come at him, and had yielded up everything he had to them, and had only saved his wife and his concubines from them, and that with difficulty also, after they had been made captives, by giving a hundred talents for their ransom. These Alans therefore plundered the country without opposition, and with great ease, and proceeded as far as Armenia, laying waste all before them. Now, Tiridates was king of that country, who met them and fought them but was lucky not to have been taken alive in the battle; for a certain man threw a noose over him and would soon have drawn him in, had he not immediately cut the cord with his sword and escaped. So the Alans, being still more provoked by this sight, laid waste the country, and drove a great multitude of the men, and a great quantity of the other booty from both kingdoms, along with them, and then retreated back to their own country.\nThe fact that the Alans invaded Parthia through Hyrcania shows that at the time many Alans were still based north-east of the Caspian Sea. By the early 2nd century the Alans were in firm control of the Lower Volga and Kuban. These lands had earlier been occupied by the Aorsi and the Siraces, whom the Alans apparently absorbed, dispersed and/or destroyed, since they were no longer mentioned in contemporaneous accounts. It is likely that the Alans' influence stretched further westwards, encompassing most of the Sarmatian world, which by then possessed a relatively homogenous culture.\nIn \u00a0CE, the Alans made a huge raid into Asia Minor via the Caucasus, ravaging Media and Armenia. They were eventually driven back by Arrian, the governor of Cappadocia, who wrote a detailed report (\"Ektaxis kata Alanoon\" or 'War Against the Alans') that is a major source for studying Roman military tactics.\nFrom 215 to 250, the Germanic Goths expanded south-eastwards and broke the Alan dominance on the Pontic Steppe. The Alans however seem to have had a significant influence on the culture of the Goths, who became excellent horsemen and adopted the Alanic animal style art. (The Roman Empire, during the chaos of the 3rd century civil wars, suffered damaging raids by the Gothic armies with their heavy cavalry before the Illyrian Emperors adapted to the Gothic tactics, reorganized and expanded the Roman heavy cavalry, and defeated the Goths under Gallienus, Claudius II and Aurelian.)\nAfter the Gothic entry to the steppe, many of the Alans seem to have retreated eastwards towards the Don, where they seem to have established contacts with the Huns. Ammianus writes that the Alans were \"somewhat like the Huns, but in their manner of life and their habits they are less savage.\" Jordanes contrasted them with the Huns, noting that the Alans \"were their equals in battle, but unlike them in their civilisation, manners and appearance\". In the late 4th century, Vegetius conflates Alans and Huns in his military treatise\u00a0\u2013\u00a0 \"Hunnorum Alannorumque natio\", the \"nation of Huns and Alans\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0and collocates Goths, Huns and Alans, \"exemplo Gothorum et Alannorum Hunnorumque\".\nThe 4th century Roman historian Ammianus Marcellinus noted that the Alans were \"formerly called Massagetae,\" while Dio Cassius wrote that \"they are Massagetae.\" It is likely that the Alans were an amalgamation of various Iranian peoples, including Sarmatians, Massagetae and Sakas. Scholars have connected the Alans to the nomadic state of Yancai mentioned in Chinese sources. The Yancai are first mentioned in connection with late 2nd century BC diplomat Zhang Qian's travels in Chapter 123 of \"Shiji\" (whose author, Sima Qian, died c. 90 BC). The Yancai of Chinese records has again been equated with the Aorsi, a powerful Sarmatian tribe living between the Don River and the Aral Sea, mentioned in Roman records, in particular Strabo.\nLink to \"Yancai\" (\u5944\u8521) / \"Hesu\" (\u95d4\u8607) / \"Alan\" (\u963f\u862d).\nThe Later Han dynasty Chinese chronicle, the \"Hou Hanshu\", 88 (covering the period 25\u2013220 and completed in the 5th century), mentioned a report that the \"Yancai\" nation (\u5944\u8521 lit \"Vast Steppes\" or \"Extensive Grasslands\" &lt; LHC *\"\u0294\u0268amB\"-\"s\u0251C\"; a.k.a. \"Hesu\" (\u95d4\u8607), compare Latin \"Abzoae\", identified with the Aorsi (Ancient Greek \"\u0391\u03bf\u03c1\u03c3\u03b9\u03bf\u03b9\")) had become a vassal state of the Kangju and was now known as \"Alan\" (&lt; LHC: *\"\u0294\u0251-l\u0251n\" \u963f\u862d)\nY. A. Zadneprovskiy suggests that the Kangju subjugation of Yancai occurred in the 1st century BC, and that this subjugation caused various Sarmatian tribes, including the Aorsi, to migrate westwards, which played a major role in starting the Migration Period. The 3rd century Weil\u00fce also notes that Yancai was then known to be Alans, although they were no longer vassals of the Kangju.\nDutch Sinologist A. F. P. Hulsew\u00e9 noted that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Chavannes (1905), p. 558, note 5, approves of the identification of Yen-ts\u2019ai with the \u2018\u0391\u03bf\u03c1\u03c3\u03bf\u03b9 mentioned by Strabo, as proposed by Hirth (1885), p. 139, note 1 ; he believes this identification to be strengthened by the later name Alan, which explains Ptolemy's \"Alanorsi\". Marquart (1905), pp. 240\u2013241, did not accept this identification, but Pulleyblank (1963), pp. 99 and 220, does, referring for additional support to HSPC 70.6b where the name Ho-su \u95d4\u8607, reconstructed in \u2018Old Chinese\u2019 as \u0125a\u0331p-sa\u0331\u0125, can be compared with Abzoae found in Pliny VI, 38 (see also Pulleyblank (1968), p. 252). Also Humbach (1969), pp. 39\u201340, accepts the identification, though with some reserve.\nMigration to Gaul.\nAround 370, according to Ammianus, the peaceful relations between the Alans and Huns were broken, after the Huns attacked the Don Alans, killing many of them and establishing an alliance with the survivors. These Alans successfully invaded the Goths in 375 together with the Huns. They subsequently accompanied the Huns in their westward expansion.\nFollowing the Hunnic invasion in 370, other Alans, along with other Sarmatians, migrated westward. One of these Alan groups fought together with the Goths in the decisive Battle of Adrianople in 378CE, in which emperor Valens was killed. As the Roman Empire continued to decline, the Alans split into various groups; some fought for the Romans while others joined the Huns, Visigoths or Ostrogoths. A portion of the western Alans joined the Vandals and the Suebi in their invasion of Roman Gaul. Gregory of Tours mentions in his \"Liber historiae Francorum\" (\"Book of Frankish History\") that the Alan king Respendial saved the day for the Vandals in an armed encounter with the Franks at the crossing of the Rhine on 31 December 406). According to Gregory, another group of Alans, led by Goar, crossed the Rhine at the same time, but immediately joined the Romans and settled in Gaul.\nUnder Beorgor (), they moved throughout Gaul, till the reign of Petronius Maximus, when they crossed the Alps in the winter of 464, into Liguria, but were there defeated, and Beorgor slain, by Ricimer, commander of the Emperor's forces.\nIn 442, after it became clear to Aetius that he could no longer rely upon the Huns for support, he turned to Goar and persuaded him to move some of his people to settlements in the Orleanais in order to control the bacaudae of Armorica and to keep the Visigoths from expanding their territories northward across the Loire. Goar settled a substantial number of his followers in the Orleanais and the area to the north and personally moved his own capital to the city of Orleans.\nUnder Goar, they allied with the Burgundians led by Gundaharius, with whom they installed the Emperor Jovinus as usurper. Under Goar's successor Sangiban, the Alans of Orl\u00e9ans played a critical role in repelling the invasion of Attila the Hun at the Battle of Ch\u00e2lons. In 463 the Alans defeated the Goths at the battle of Orl\u00e9ans, and they later defeated the Franks led by Childeric in 466. Around 502\u2013503 Clovis attacked Armorica but was defeated by the Alans. However, the Alans, who were Chalcedonian Christians like Clovis, desired cordial relations with him to counterbalance the hostile Arian Visigoths who coveted the land north of the Loire. Therefore, an accord was arranged by which Clovis came to rule the various peoples of Armorica and the military strength of the area was integrated into the Merovingian military.\nHispania and Africa.\nFollowing the fortunes of the Vandals and Suebi into the Iberian Peninsula (Hispania, comprising modern Portugal and Spain) in 409, the Alans led by Respendial settled in the provinces of Lusitania and Carthaginensis. The Kingdom of the Alans was among the first Barbarian kingdoms to be founded. The Siling Vandals settled in Baetica, the Suebi in coastal Gallaecia, and the Asding Vandals in the rest of Gallaecia. Although the newcomers controlled Hispania they were still a tiny minority among a larger Hispano-Roman population, approximately 200,000 out of 6,000,000.\nIn 418 (or 426 according to some authors), the Alan king, Attaces, was killed in battle against the Visigoths, and this branch of the Alans subsequently appealed to the Asding Vandal king Gunderic to accept the Alan crown. The separate ethnic identity of Respendial's Alans dissolved. Although some of these Alans are thought to have remained in Iberia, most went to North Africa with the Vandals in 429. Later the rulers of the Vandal Kingdom in North Africa styled themselves \"Rex Wandalorum et Alanorum\" (\"King of the Vandals and Alans\").\nThere are some vestiges of the Alans in Portugal, namely in Alenquer (whose name may be Germanic for the \"Temple of the Alans\", from \"Alan Kerk\", and whose castle may have been established by them; the Alaunt is still represented in that city's coat of arms), in the construction of the castles of Torres Vedras and Almourol, and in the city walls of Lisbon, where vestiges of their presence may be found under the foundations of the Church of \"Santa Luzia\".\nIn the Iberian peninsula the Alans settled in Lusitania (Alentejo) and the Cartaginense provinces. They became known in retrospect for their massive hunting and fighting running mastiff-type dogs, the Alaunt, which they apparently introduced to Europe. The breed is extinct, but its name is carried by a Spanish breed of dog still called \"Alano\", traditionally used in boar hunting and cattle herding. The Alano name, however, has historically been used for a number of dog breeds in a few European countries thought to descend from the original dog of the Alans, such as the German mastiff (Great Dane) and the French Dogue de Bordeaux, among others.\nY-DNA consistent with the Alans can still be found in these regions, mainly around the District of Portalegre.\nMedieval Alania.\nThe Alans who remained in their original area of settlement north of the Caucasus (and for a time east of the Caspian Sea as well), came into contact and conflict with the Bulgars, the G\u00f6kturks, and the Khazars, who drove most of them from the plains and into the mountains.\nThe Alans converted to Byzantine Orthodoxy in the first quarter of the 10th century, during the patriarchate of Nicholas I Mystikos. Al-Mas\u2018udi reports that they apostasized in 932, but this seems to have been short-lived. The Alans are collectively mentioned as Byzantine-rite Christians in the 13th century. The Caucasian Alans were the ancestors of the modern Ossetians, whose ethnonym derives from the name \"\u0100s\" (very probably the ancient \"Aorsi\"; al-Ma'sudi mentions \"al-Arsiyya\" as guards among the Khazars, and the Rus' called the Alans \"Yasi\"), a sister tribe of the Alans. The \"Armenian Geography\" uses the name \"Ashtigor\" for the most westerly located Alans, a name which survives as \"Digor\" and still refers to the western division of the Ossetians. Furthermore, in Ossetian, \"Asi\" refers to the region around Mount Elbrus, where they probably formerly lived. In the territory from Urukh to Mount Elbrus, a sufficient number of Ossetian toponyms have been preserved up until the 20th century.\nSome of the other Alans remained under the rule of the Huns. Those of the eastern division, though dispersed about the steppes until late medieval times, were forced by the Mongols into the Caucasus, where they remain as the Ossetians. Between the 9th and 12th centuries, they formed a network of tribal alliances that gradually evolved into the Christian kingdom of Alania. Most Alans submitted to the Mongol Empire in 1239\u20131277. They participated in Mongol invasions of Europe and the Song dynasty in Southern China, and the Battle of Kulikovo under Mamai of the Golden Horde.\nIn 1253, the Franciscan friar William of Rubruck reported numerous Europeans in Central Asia. It is also known that 30,000 Alans formed the royal guard (Asud) of the Yuan court in Dadu (Beijing). Marco Polo later reported their role in the Yuan dynasty in his book \"Il Milione\". It is said that those Alans contributed to a modern Mongol clan, Asud. John of Montecorvino, archbishop of Dadu (Khanbaliq), reportedly converted many Alans to Roman Catholic Christianity in addition to Armenians in China. In Poland and Lithuania, Alans were also part of the powerful Clan of Ostoja.\nAccording to the missionary Giovanni da Pian del Carpine, a part of the Alans had successfully resisted a Mongol siege on a mountain for 12 years:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When they (the Mongols) begin to besiege a fortress, they besiege it for many years, as it happens today with one mountain in the land of the Alans. We believe they have been besieging it for twelve years and they (the Alans) put up courageous resistance and killed many Tatars, including many noble ones.\u2014\u200a\nThis twelve-year-long siege is not found in any other report, however the Russian historian A. I. Krasnov connected this battle with two Chechen folktales he recorded in 1967 that spoke of an old hunter named Idig who with his companions defended the Dakuoh mountain for 12 years against Tatar-Mongols. He also reported to have found several arrowheads and spears from the 13th century near the very mountain the battle took place at:\nAgainst the Alans and the Cumans (Kipchaks), the Mongols used divide-and-conquer tactics by first telling the Cumans to stop allying with the Alans and, after the Cumans followed their suggestion, the Mongols then attacked the Cumans after defeating the Alans. Alans were recruited into the Mongol forces with one unit called \"Right Alan Guard\" which was combined with \"recently surrendered\" soldiers, Mongols, and Chinese soldiers stationed in the area of the former Kingdom of Qocho and in Besh Balikh the Mongols established a Chinese military colony led by Chinese general Qi Kongzhi (Ch'i Kung-chih). Alan and Kipchak guards were used by Kublai Khan. In 1368 at the end of the Yuan dynasty in China Toghan Tem\u00fcr was accompanied by his faithful Alan guards. Mangu enlisted in his bodyguard half the troops of the Alan prince, Arslan, whose younger son Nicholas took a part in the expedition of the Mongols against Karajang (Yunnan). This Alan imperial guard was still in existence in 1272, 1286 and 1309, and it was divided into two corps with headquarters in the Ling pei province (Karakor\u00fam). The French-Flemish friar and traveler William of Rubruck mentions Alans numerous times in the account of his 1253\u20131255 journey through Eurasia to the Great Khan, e.g. Alans living as Mongol subjects in Crimea, Old Astrakhan, the Khan's capital Karakorum, and also still as freemen in their Caucasian homeland (\"the Alans or Aas, who are Christians and still fight the Tartars\"). The reason why the earlier Persian word tersa was gradually abandoned by the Mongols in favour of the Syro-Greek word arkon, when speaking of Christians, manifestly is that no specifically Greek Church was ever heard of in China until the Russians had been conquered; besides, there were large bodies of Russian and Alan guards at Peking throughout the last half of the thirteenth and first half of the 14th century, and the Catholics there would not be likely to encourage the use of a Persian word which was most probably applicable in the first instance to the Nestorians they found so degenerated. The Alan guards converted to Catholicism as reported by Odorico. They were a \"Russian guard\".\nIn 1277 Mengu-Timur sent an expedition against the rebellious Alans in the city of Dedyakov. As a result of the campaign, the city was burned.According to many researchers, Dedyakov was located on the territory of the capital of North Ossetia - Vladikavkaz.\nIt is believed that some Alans resettled to the North (Barsils), merging with Volga Bulgars and Burtas, eventually transforming to Volga Tatars. It is supposed that the Iasians, a group of Alans founded a market in the northeast of Romania (about 1200\u20131300), near the Prut river, later called Ia\u0219i town. The latter became the capital of Moldavia in the Middle Ages.\nClassical Alania finally ceased to exist at the end of the 14th century, when Tamerlane invaded. After defeating the Golden Horde in the Battle of the Terek River in 1395, he subsequently attacked several Alanians leaders, leading to months of slaughter and enslavement, which are still remembered in a popular Ossetian folk song called \"mother of Zadaleska\". Tamerlane's invasion led to the Alans fleeing into the depths of the Caucasus Mountains and the end of the Alans' presence in the steppes north of the Caucasus, which is preserved in the Digorian legends.\nAlan mercenaries were involved in the affair with the Catalan Company.\nGenetics.\nIn a study conducted in 2014 by V. V.Ilyinskyon on bone fragments from 10 Alanic burials on the Don River, DNA could be abstracted from a total of seven. Four of them turned out to belong to yDNA Haplogroup G2 and six of them had mtDNAI. The fact that many of the samples share the same y- and mtDNA raises the possibility that the tested individuals belonged to the same tribe or even were close relatives. Nevertheless this supports the argument for a direct Alan ancestry of Ossetians, competing with the hypothesis that Ossetians are alanized Caucasic-speakers, as the main haplogroup among Ossetians is also G2.\nIn 2015, the Institute of Archaeology in Moscow conducted research on various Sarmato-Alan and Saltovo-Mayaki culture Kurgan burials. In this analysis, the two Alan samples from the 4th to 6th century had yDNAs G2a-P15 and R1a-z94, while from the three Sarmatian samples from 2nd to 3rd century two had yDNA J1-M267 and one possessed R1a. Also, the three Saltovo-Mayaki samples from 8th to 9th century turned out to have yDNAs G, J2a-M410 and R1a-z94 respectively.\nA genetic study published in \"Nature\" in May 2018 examined the remains of six Alans buried in the Caucasus from c. 100 to 1400. The sample of Y-DNA extracted belonged to haplogroup R1 and haplogroup Q-M242. One of the Q-M242 samples found in Beslan, North Ossetia from 200 found 4 relatives among Chechens from the Shoanoy Teip. The samples of mtDNA extracted belonged to HV2a1, U4d3, X2f, H13a2c, H5, and W1.\nArchaeology.\nArchaeological finds support the written sources. P. D. Rau (1927) first identified late Sarmatian sites with the historical Alans. Based on the archaeological material, they were one of the Iranian-speaking nomadic tribes that began to enter the Sarmatian area between the middle of the 1st and the 2nd centuries.\nReligion.\nPrior to their Christianisation, the Alans were Indo-Iranian polytheists, subscribing either to the poorly understood Scythian pantheon or to a polytheistic form of Zoroastrianism. Some traditions were directly inherited from the Scythians, like embodying their dominant god in elaborate rituals.\nIn the 4th\u20135th centuries the Alans were at least partially Christianized by Byzantine Arian missionaries. of the church. The Alans converted to Byzantine Orthodoxy in the first quarter of the 10th century, during the patriarchate of Nicholas I Mystikos. Al-Mas\u2018udi reports that they apostasized in 932, but this seems to have been short-lived. By the 13th century, most of the urban population of Ossetia gradually became Eastern Orthodox Christian as a result of Georgian missionary work. In the 13th century, invading Mongol hordes pushed the eastern Alans further south into the Caucasus, where they mixed with native Caucasian groups and successively formed three territorial entities each with different developments. Around 1395, Timur's army invaded the Northern Caucasus and massacred much of the Alanian population.\nAs time went by, Digor in the west came under Kabard and Islamic influence. It was through the Kabardians (an East Circassian tribe) that Islam was introduced into the region in the 17th century. After 1767, all of Alania came under Russian rule, which strengthened Orthodox Christianity in that region considerably. A substantial minority of today's Ossetians are followers of the traditional Ossetian religion, revived in the 1980s as Assianism (Ossetian: \"Uatsdin\" \u2013 'True Faith').\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45122", "revid": "46423769", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45122", "title": "Alani (disambiguation)", "text": "Alani may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45123", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45123", "title": "Rudolf I of Habsburg", "text": "Rudolf I of Habsburg may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "45125", "revid": "2081072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45125", "title": "Thematic role", "text": "Thematic role is a linguistic notion, which may refer to:\nHowever, it should not be confused with the use of \"thematic\" with reference to the stem (\"the theme\") of an inflected word, as in thematic vowel.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45126", "revid": "45093283", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45126", "title": "Anne of the Thousand Days", "text": "1969 British film by Charles Jarrott\nAnne of the Thousand Days is a 1969 British historical drama film based on the life of Anne Boleyn, directed by Charles Jarrott and produced by Hal B. Wallis. The screenplay by Bridget Boland and John Hale is an adaptation of the 1948 play of the same name by Maxwell Anderson.\nThe film stars Richard Burton as King Henry VIII and Genevi\u00e8ve Bujold as Anne Boleyn. Irene Papas plays Catherine of Aragon, Anthony Quayle plays Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, and John Colicos plays Thomas Cromwell. Others in the cast include Michael Hordern, Katharine Blake, Peter Jeffrey, Joseph O'Conor, William Squire, Vernon Dobtcheff, Denis Quilley, Esmond Knight, and T. P. McKenna, who later played Henry VIII in \"Monarch\". Burton's wife Elizabeth Taylor makes a brief, uncredited appearance.\nDespite receiving some negative reviews and mixed reviews from \"The New York Times\" and Pauline Kael, the film was nominated for 10 Academy Awards and won the award for best costumes. Genevi\u00e8ve Bujold's portrayal of Anne, her first role in an English language film, was very highly praised, even by \"Time\" magazine, which otherwise skewered the movie. According to the Academy Awards expos\u00e9 \"Inside Oscar\", an expensive advertising campaign was mounted by Universal Studios that included serving champagne and filet mignon to members of the academy following each screening.\nPlot.\nIn London, 1536, Henry VIII considers whether or not he should sign the warrant for the execution of his second wife, Anne Boleyn.\nNine years earlier, in 1527, Henry has a problem: he reveals his dissatisfaction with his wife, Catherine of Aragon. He is enjoying a discreet affair with Mary Boleyn, a daughter of one of his courtiers, Sir Thomas Boleyn, but the king is bored with her too. At a court ball, he notices Mary's eighteen-year-old sister, Anne, who has returned from her education in France. She is engaged to the son of the Earl of Northumberland, and they have received their parents' permission to marry. The king, however, is enraptured with Anne's beauty and orders Cardinal Wolsey, his Lord Chancellor, to break the engagement.\nWhen news of this decision is carried to Anne, she reacts furiously. She blames the cardinal and the king for ruining her happiness. When Henry makes a rather clumsy attempt to seduce her, Anne bluntly informs him how she finds him.\nHenry brings her back to court with him, and she continues to resist his advances out of a mixture of repulsion for Henry and her lingering anger over her broken engagement. However, she becomes intoxicated with the power that the king's love gives her. Using this power, she continually undermines Cardinal Wolsey, who initially sees Anne as a passing love interest for the king.\nWhen Henry again presses Anne to become his mistress, she repeats that she never will give birth to an illegitimate child. Desperate to have a son, Henry suddenly comes up with the idea of marrying Anne in Catherine's place. Anne is stunned, but she agrees. Wolsey begs the king to abandon the idea because of the political consequences of divorcing Catherine. Henry refuses to listen.\nWhen Wolsey fails to persuade the pope to give Henry his divorce, Anne points out this failing to an enraged Henry. Wolsey is dismissed from office, and his magnificent palace in London is given as a present to Anne, who realizes she has finally fallen in love with Henry. They sleep together, and after discovering that she is pregnant, they are secretly married. Anne is given a splendid coronation, but the people jeer at her in disgust.\nMonths later, Anne gives birth to a daughter, Princess Elizabeth. Henry is displeased because he wanted a son, and their marital relationship begins to cool. His attentions are soon diverted to Lady Jane Seymour, one of Anne's maids. Once she discovers this liaison, Anne banishes Jane from court.\nDuring a row over Sir Thomas More's opposition to Anne's queenship, Anne refuses to sleep with her husband again unless More is put to death. More is executed, but Anne's subsequent pregnancy ends with a stillborn boy.\nHenry demands that his new minister Thomas Cromwell find a way to get rid of Anne. Cromwell tortures a servant in her household into confessing to adultery with the queen; he then arrests four other courtiers who are also accused of being Anne's lovers. Anne is taken to the Tower and placed under arrest. When she is told that she has been accused of adultery, Anne laughs until she sees her brother being brought into the Tower and learns he faces the same accusation.\nAt Anne's trial, she manages to cross-question Mark Smeaton, the tortured servant who finally admits that the charges against Anne were lies. Henry makes an appearance, then visits Anne in her chambers that night. He offers her freedom if she will agree to annul their marriage and make their daughter illegitimate. Anne refuses, saying that she would rather die than betray their daughter, whom she claims will rule after Henry. He slaps her and tells her that her disobedience will mean her death.\nIn the present, Henry decides to execute Anne. A few days later, she is taken to the scaffold and beheaded by a French swordsman. Henry rides off to marry Jane Seymour. Meanwhile, Elizabeth toddles alone in the garden as she hears cannons firing, announcing her mother's death.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Richard Burton as King Henry VIII\nElizabeth Taylor has an uncredited cameo appearance as a masked courtesan who interrupts Queen Catherine's prayers. Kate Burton makes her acting debut as a maid.\nBackground and production.\nThe play \"Anne of the Thousand Days\", the film's basis, was first enacted on Broadway in the Shubert Theatre on 8 December 1948; staged by H. C. Potter, with Rex Harrison and Joyce Redman as Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn respectively, running 288 performances; Harrison won a Tony Award for his performance.\nCinematically, \"Anne of the Thousand Days\" took 20 years to reach the screen because its themes \u2013 adultery, illegitimacy, incest \u2013 were then unacceptable to the U.S. motion picture production code. The film was made on such locations as Penshurst Place and Hever Castle, and at Pinewood and Shepperton Studios.\nHever Castle was one of the main settings for the film; it was also the childhood home of Anne Boleyn.\nBritish actress Olivia Hussey was the first choice for the role of Anne Boleyn. When producer Hal B. Wallis first met Hussey in New York in November 1967 at a party for her then upcoming film \"Romeo and Juliet\" (1968), he offered her the title role. In addition, he also offered her to star with John Wayne in \"True Grit\" (1969). In her 2019 memoir, Hussey stated that she had \"mumbled something about being interested in \"Anne of the Thousand Days\"\u201d but added that she \"couldn\u2019t see herself with Wayne\". She claims that this \"adolescent and opinionated\" remark inevitably ended her professional relationship with Wallis, and he immediately withdrew his offer from her. \"It had taken me less than a minute to talk my way out of it\" Hussey stated.\nMaxwell Anderson employed blank verse for parts of his play, but most examples of this were removed from the screenplay. One blank verse episode that was retained was Anne's soliloquy in the Tower of London. The opening of the play was changed, with Thomas Cromwell's telling Henry VIII the outcome of the trial and Henry's recalling his marriage to Anne rather than Anne's speaking first and then Henry's remembering in flashback.\nReception.\nThe film received mixed reviews from critics, as most commonly they considered the plot dull and plodding. Beyond the story itself, the performances of Genevi\u00e8ve Bujold, Richard Burton, and Irene Papas were met with universal acclaim, especially that of Bujold. Bujold remains the only actress to have been nominated for an Oscar for playing Anne Boleyn.\nThe film was one of the more popular movies of 1970 at the British box office.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45127", "revid": "35681511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45127", "title": "Moors", "text": "Historical term used for various Muslim peoples\nThe term Moor is an exonym used in European languages to designate primarily the Muslim populations of North Africa (the Maghreb) and the Iberian Peninsula (particularly al-Andalus) during the Middle Ages. \nMoors are not a single, distinct or self-defined people. Europeans of the Middle Ages and the early modern period variously applied the name to Arabs, Berbers, Muslim Europeans, and black peoples. The term has been used in a broad sense to refer to Muslims in general, especially those of Arab or Berber descent, whether living in al-Andalus or North Africa. Related terms such as English \"Blackamoor\" were also used to refer to black Africans generally in the early modern period. The 1911 \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" observed that the term \"Moors\" had \"no real ethnological value.\" The word has racial connotations and it has fallen out of fashion among scholars since the mid-20th century.\nThe word is also used when denoting various other specific ethnic groups in western Africa and some parts of Asia. During the colonial era, the Portuguese introduced the names \"Ceylon Moors\" and \"Indian Moors\" in South Asia and Sri Lanka, now official ethnic designations on the island nation, and the Bengali Muslims were also called Moors. In the Philippines, the longstanding Muslim community, which predates the arrival of the Spanish, now self-identifies as the \"Moro people\", an exonym introduced by Spanish colonizers due to their Muslim faith. In modern-day Mauritania, the terms \"Black moors\" and \"white Moors\" are used to refer to the Haratin and Beidane peoples, respectively.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of the word \"Moor\" is uncertain, although it can be traced back to the Phoenician term \"Mahurin\", meaning \"Westerners\". From \"Mahurin\", the ancient Greeks derive \"Mauro\", from which Latin derives \"Mauri\". The word \"Moor\" is presumably of Phoenician origin. Some sources attribute a Hebrew origin to the word.\nHistorical usage.\nAntiquity.\nDuring the classical period, the Romans interacted with, and later conquered, parts of Mauretania, a state that covered modern northern Morocco, western Algeria, and the Spanish cities Ceuta and Melilla. The Berber tribes of the region were noted in the Classics as \"Mauri\", which was subsequently rendered as \"Moors\" in English and in related variations in other European languages. \"Mauri\" (Ancient Greek: \u039c\u03b1\u1fe6\u03c1\u03bf\u03b9) is recorded as the native name by Strabo in the early 1st century. This appellation was also adopted into Latin, whereas the Greek name for the tribe was \"Maurusii\" (). The Moors were also mentioned by Tacitus as having revolted against the Roman Empire in 24 AD.\nMedieval and early modern Europe.\nDuring the Latin Middle Ages, \"Mauri\" was used to refer to Berbers and Arabs in the coastal regions of Northwest Africa. The 16th century scholar Leo Africanus (c. 1494\u20131554) identified the Moors (\"Mauri\") as the native Berber inhabitants of the former Roman Africa Province (Roman Africans).\nAs it was Muslim Berbers and Arabs who conquered the Iberian Peninsula from North Africa in 711, the word has been applied to the inhabitants of the peninsula under Muslim rule (known in this context as al-Andalus). The term could also be applied to the Muslims of Sicily, who began to arrive there during the Aghlabid conquest of the 9th century. The word passed into Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian as \"Moros\" or other cognates. The Emirate of Granada, the last Muslim state on the Iberian Peninsula, was conquered by the Spanish in 1492, resulting in all remaining Muslims in this area to pass under Christian rule. These Muslims and their descendants were thereafter known as \"Moriscos\" ('Moorish' or 'Moor-like') up until their final expulsion from Spain in 1609.\nThe word was more commonly also a racial term for dark-skinned or black people, which is the meaning with which it also passed into English as early as the 14th century. In medieval European literature, the term often denotes Muslim foes of Christian Europe in a derogatory manner. During the Renaissance and the early modern period, it became associated with more romanticized depictions, even when Muslims were otherwise depicted negatively. In works of this period, the \"Moor\" may appear as a courageous warrior, a sexually overt personality, or other stereotypes. Examples of such characters are found in the Spanish \"Poem of the Cid\" and in Shakespeare's \"Othello.\"\nSince the early modern period, \"Moors\" or \"Moorish\" has also been used by western historians and scholars to refer to the history and heterogeneous people of Islamic North Africa and al-Andalus. Since the mid-20th century, however, this usage has declined, though it sometimes persists to denote related topics, such as \"Moorish\" architecture. The word otherwise retains some racial connotations.\n\"White Moors\" and \"Black Moors\".\nThe existence of both \"white Moors\" and \"black Moors\" is attested in historical literature from the late Middle Ages onwards. Late medieval Portuguese sources often referred to \"Arabian\" and \"Turkish\" Moors as \"mouros brancos\" ('white moors'), to North African Berbers as \"mouras da terra\" ('moors of the land'), and to sub-Saharan Africans as \"mouros negros\" ('black moors').40 During the early modern period, the term \"Blackamoor\" was used in English to describe black Africans, alongside other racial terms.\nIn the 1453 chronicle \"The Discovery and Conquest of Guinea\" the Portuguese chronicler Gomes Eannes de Azurara writes: \"Dinis Diaz, leaving Portugal with his company, never lowered sail till he had passed the land of the Moors and arrived in the land of the blacks, that is called Guinea.\" The 'land of the blacks' here refers to the regions south of the Sahara known as \"bil\u0101d as-s\u016bd\u0101n\" in Medieval Arabic texts. De Azurara also notes the existence of 'blacks' among the Moors, stating that \"these blacks were Moors like the others, though their slaves, in accordance with ancient custom\". In \"The First Book of the Introduction of Knowledge\" (1542) the English author Andrew Borde writes that \"Barbary is a great country, and plentiful of fruit, wine and corn. The inhabitants be called the Moors; there be white Moors and black Moors; they be infidels and unchristened.\" Borde includes a poem about \"a black Moor born in Barbary\" who will be \"a good diligent slave\". In his \"Description of Africa\" (1550) The Andalusi author Leo Africanus - described as a Moor by the English translator John Pory (1600) - refers to the Berber populations of Barbary and Numidia (e.g. North Africa) as \"white Africans\", translated by Pory as \"white or tawny Moors\".\nThe terms \"white Moor\" and \"Black moor\" are still used in modern-day Mauritania, where the Moorish population is divided into the socially dominant 'white Moors' of Berber and Arab origin (also known as \"Beidanes\"), and 'black Moors' (also known as \"Haratines\") who are former slaves\".\" \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Haratines are almost exclusively of black origin, but are closely associated with the Moorish population in terms of language and culture. In the words of Samuel Cotton: \u201c[they] have lost virtually every aspect of their African origins except their skin color.\u201d Their Moorish culture and their language are the result of generations of enslavement by the Moors. They are also referred to as \u201cblack Moors\u201d to differentiate them from the \u201cwhite Moors\u201d who enslaved them, and from black Mauritanians who have not been enslaved by the Moors.\nModern meanings.\nApart from its historic associations and context, \"Moor\" and \"Moorish\" designate a specific ethnic group speaking Hassaniya Arabic. They inhabit Mauritania and parts of Algeria, Western Sahara, Tunisia, Morocco, Niger, and Mali. In Niger and Mali, these peoples are also known as the Azawagh Arabs, after the Azawagh region of the Sahara.\nThe authoritative dictionary of the Spanish language does not list any derogatory meaning for the word \"moro\", a term generally referring to people of Maghrebian origin in particular or Muslims in general. Some authors have pointed out that in modern colloquial Spanish use of the term \"moro\" is derogatory for Moroccans in particular.\nIn the Philippines, a former Spanish colony, many modern Filipinos call the large, local Muslim minority concentrated in Mindanao and other southern islands \"Moros\". The word is a catch-all term, as \"Moro\" may come from several distinct ethno-linguistic groups such as the Maranao people. The term was introduced by Spanish colonisers, and has since been appropriated by Filipino Muslims as an endonym, with many self-identifying as members of the \"Bangsamoro\" \"Moro Nation\".\n\"Moreno\" can mean \"dark-skinned\" in Spain, Portugal, Brazil, and the Philippines. Among Spanish speakers, \"moro\" came to have a broader meaning, applied to both Filipino Moros from Mindanao, and the moriscos of Granada. \"Moro\" refers to all things dark, as in \"Moor\", \"moreno\", etc. It was also used as a nickname; for instance, the Milanese Duke Ludovico Sforza was called \"Il Moro\" because of his dark complexion.\nIn Portugal, \"mouro\" (feminine,\" moura\") may refer to supernatural beings known as enchanted \"moura\", where \"Moor\" implies \"alien\" and \"non-Christian\". These beings were siren-like fairies with golden or reddish hair and a fair face. They were believed to have magical properties. From this root, the name moor is applied to unbaptized children, meaning not Christian. In Basque, \"mairu\" means moor and also refers to a mythical people.\nMuslims located in South Asia were distinguished by the Portuguese historians into two groups: Mouros da Terra (\"Moors of the Land\") and the Mouros da Arabia/Mouros de Meca (\"Moors from Arabia/Mecca\" or \"Paradesi Muslims\"). The Mouros da Terra were either descendants of any native convert (mostly from any of the former lower or untouchable castes) to Islam or descendants of a marriage alliance between a Middle Eastern individual and an Indian woman.\nWithin the context of Portuguese colonization, in Sri Lanka (Portuguese Ceylon), Muslims of Arab origin are called \"Ceylon Moors\", not to be confused with \"Indian Moors\" of Sri Lanka (see Sri Lankan Moors). Sri Lankan Moors (a combination of \"Ceylon Moors\" and \"Indian Moors\") make up 12% of the population. The Ceylon Moors (unlike the Indian Moors) are descendants of Arab traders who settled there in the mid-6th century. When the Portuguese arrived in the early 16th century, they labelled all the Muslims in the island as Moors as they saw some of them resembling the Moors in North Africa. The Sri Lankan government continues to identify the Muslims in Sri Lanka as \"Sri Lankan Moors\", sub-categorised into \"Ceylon Moors\" and \"Indian Moors\".\nThe Goan Muslims\u2014a minority community who follow Islam in the western Indian coastal state of Goa\u2014are commonly referred as \"Moir\" () by Goan Catholics and Hindus.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[a] \"Moir\" is derived from the Portuguese word \"mouro\" (\"Moor\").\nIn heraldry.\nMoors\u2014or more frequently their heads, often crowned\u2014appear with some frequency in medieval European heraldry, though less so since the Middle Ages. The term ascribed to them in Anglo-Norman \"blazon\" (the language of English heraldry) is \"maure\", though they are also sometimes called \"moore\", \"blackmoor\", \"blackamoor\" or \"negro\". Maures appear in European heraldry from at least as early as the 13th century, and some have been attested as early as the 11th century in Italy, where they have persisted in the local heraldry and vexillology well into modern times in Corsica and Sardinia.\nArmigers bearing moors or moors' heads may have adopted them for any of several reasons, to include symbolizing military victories in the Crusades, as a pun on the bearer's name in the canting arms of Morese, Negri, Saraceni, etc., or in the case of Frederick II, possibly to demonstrate the reach of his empire. The arms of Pope Benedict XVI feature a moor's head, crowned and collared red, in reference to the arms of Freising, Germany. In the case of Corsica and Sardinia, the blindfolded moors' heads in the four quarters have long been said to represent the four Moorish emirs who were defeated by Peter I of Aragon and Pamplona in the 11th century, the four moors' heads around a cross having been adopted to the arms of Aragon around 1281\u20131387, and Corsica and Sardinia having come under the dominion of the king of Aragon in 1297. In Corsica, the blindfolds were lifted to the brow in the 18th century as a way of expressing the island's newfound independence.\nThe use of Moors (and particularly their heads) as a heraldic symbol has been deprecated in modern North America. For example, the College of Arms of the Society for Creative Anachronism urges applicants to use them delicately to avoid causing offence.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45128", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45128", "title": "1602 BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "45129", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45129", "title": "1601 BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "45130", "revid": "10808929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45130", "title": "Headless Horseman (disambiguation)", "text": "The Headless Horseman is a fictional character that appears in many venues.\nHeadless Horseman may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45131", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45131", "title": "1510s BC", "text": "Decade\nThe 1510s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1519 BC to December 31, 1510 BC.\nSignificant people.\n 1512\nInstalled the Aaronic priesthood at the foot of Mt Sinai..*[Lev 9:1-5,23,24]*"}
{"id": "45132", "revid": "33628975", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45132", "title": "Truth condition", "text": "Condition required for a semantic statement to be true\nIn semantics and pragmatics, a truth condition is the condition under which a sentence is true. For example, \"It is snowing in Nebraska\" is true precisely when it is snowing in Nebraska. Truth conditions of a sentence do not necessarily reflect current reality. They are merely the conditions under which the statement would be true.\nMore formally, a truth condition makes a sentence true for a given inductive definition of truth. Understood this way, truth conditions are theoretical entities. To illustrate with an example: suppose that, in a particular truth theory which is a theory of truth where truth is somehow made acceptable despite semantic terms as close as possible, the word \"Nixon\" refers to Richard M. Nixon, and \"is alive\" is associated with the set of currently living things. Then one way of representing the truth condition of \"Nixon is alive\" is as the ordered pair &lt;Nixon, {x: x is alive}&gt;. And we say that \"Nixon is alive\" is true if and only if the referent (or referent of) \"Nixon\" belongs to the set associated with \"is alive\", that is, if and only if Nixon is alive.\nIn semantics, the truth condition of a sentence is almost universally considered distinct from its meaning. The meaning of a sentence is conveyed if the truth conditions for the sentence are understood. Additionally, there are many sentences that are understood although their truth condition is uncertain. One popular argument for this view is that some sentences are necessarily true\u2014that is, they are true whatever happens to obtain. All such sentences have the same truth conditions, but arguably do not thereby have the same meaning. Likewise, the sets {x: x is alive} and {x: x is alive and x is not a rock} are identical\u2014they have precisely the same members\u2014but presumably the sentences \"Nixon is alive\" and \"Nixon is alive and is not a rock\" have different meanings."}
{"id": "45133", "revid": "18660750", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45133", "title": "The Wind in the Willows", "text": "1908 children's novel by Kenneth Grahame\nThe Wind in the Willows is a children's novel by the British novelist Kenneth Grahame, first published in 1908. It tells the story of Mole, Ratty and Badger as they try to help Mr. Toad after he becomes obsessed with motorcars and gets into trouble. It also contains short stories about them that are disconnected from the main narrative. The novel was based on bedtime stories that Grahame told his son Alastair. It has been adapted numerous times for both stage and screen.\n\"The Wind in the Willows\" received negative reviews upon its initial publication, but it has since become a classic of British literature. It was listed at No. 16 in the BBC's survey The Big Read and has been adapted multiple times in different media.\nBackground.\nIn 1899, Kenneth Grahame (age 40) married Elspeth Thomson, the daughter of Robert William Thomson. The next year, their only child, a son Alastair was born premature. Nicknamed \"Mouse\", he was blind in one eye and had health problems throughout his life. When Alastair was about four years old, his father told him bedtime stories, some of which were about a toad, and on his frequent boating holidays without his family, Grahame wrote further tales of Toad, Mole, Ratty and Badger in letters to Alastair.\nIn 1908 Grahame retired early from his position as Secretary of the Bank of England. The family moved to an old farmhouse in Blewbury, Berkshire. There Grahame used the bedtime stories he had told Alastair as a basis for the manuscript of \"The Wind in the Willows\".\nPlot summary.\nThe novel's characters are anthropomorphized animals. With the arrival of spring and fine weather outside, the good-natured Mole loses patience with spring cleaning, exclaiming, \"Hang spring cleaning!\" He leaves his underground home and comes up at the bank of the river, which he has never seen before. Here he meets Water Rat, a water vole, who takes Mole for a ride in his row boat. They get along well and spend many more days boating. \"Ratty\" teaches Mole the ways of the river, and the two friends live together in Ratty's riverside home.\nOne summer day, Rat and Mole disembark near the grand Toad Hall and pay a visit to Toad. Toad is wealthy, jovial, friendly and kindhearted, but sometimes arrogant and rash; he regularly becomes obsessed with fads, only to abandon them abruptly. His current craze is his horse-drawn caravan. When a passing automobile scares his horse and causes the caravan to overturn into a ditch, Toad's craze for caravan travel is immediately replaced by an obsession with motorcars.\nMole goes to the Wild Wood on a snowy winter's day, hoping to meet the elusive but wise and virtuous Badger. Mole becomes lost in the woods, succumbs to fright and hides among the sheltering roots of a tree. Rat finds him as snow begins to fall in earnest. As they attempt to find their way home, Mole barks his shin on the bootscraper on Badger's doorstep. Badger welcomes Rat and Mole into his large, cosy underground home, providing them with hot food, dry clothes and reassuring conversation. Badger learns from his visitors that Toad has crashed seven cars, has been in hospital three times, and has been issued numerous fines resulting in great expense.\nWith the arrival of spring, the three of them place Toad under house arrest with themselves as guards. However, Toad pretends to be sick. Tricking Ratty into leaving, Toad escapes. \nBadger and Mole continue residing at Toad Hall in the hope that Toad may return. Toad orders lunch at The Red Lion Inn and then sees a motorcar pull into the courtyard. He takes the car, drives it recklessly, and is caught by the police. He is sent to prison for 20 years, most of which is for \"gross impertinence\" to his captors.\nIn prison, Toad gains the sympathy of the gaoler's daughter. With her help, he escapes, disguised as a washerwoman. After a long series of misadventures he returns to the hole of the Water Rat. Rat hauls Toad inside and informs him that Toad Hall has been taken over by weasels, stoats and ferrets from the Wild Wood, who have driven out Mole and Badger. Armed to the teeth, Badger, Rat, Mole and Toad enter through the tunnel and pounce upon the unsuspecting Wild-Wooders, who are holding a celebratory party. Having driven away the intruders, Toad holds a banquet to mark his return, during which he behaves both quietly and humbly. He makes up for his earlier excesses by seeking out and compensating those he has wronged, and the four friends live happily ever after.\nIn addition to the main narrative, the book contains several independent short stories featuring Rat and Mole, such as an encounter with the wild god Pan while they are searching for Otter's son Portly, and Ratty's meeting with a Sea Rat. These appear for the most part between the chapters chronicling Toad's adventures, and they are often omitted from adaptations of the story as well as from some abridged versions.\nEditions.\nThe original publication of the book was plain text, with a frontispiece illustrated by Graham Robertson, but many illustrated, comic and annotated versions have been published over the years. Notable illustrators include Paul Bransom (1913), Nancy Barnhart (1922), Wyndham Payne (1927), Ernest H. Shepard (1931), Arthur Rackham (1940), Richard Cuffari (1966), Tasha Tudor (1966), Michael Hague (1980), Scott McKowen (2005), and Robert Ingpen (2007).\nReception.\nA number of publishers rejected the manuscript. It was published in the UK by Methuen and Co., and later in the US by Scribner. The critics, who were hoping for a third volume in the style of Grahame's earlier works \"The Golden Age\" and \"Dream Days\", generally gave negative reviews. The public loved it, however, and within a few years it sold in such numbers that many reprints were required, with 100 editions reached in Britain alone by 1951. In 1909, then US President Theodore Roosevelt wrote to Grahame to tell that he had \"read it and reread it, and have come to accept the characters as old friends\".\nIn \"The Enchanted Places\" Christopher Robin Milne wrote of \"The Wind in the Willows\":&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A book that we all greatly loved and admired and read aloud or alone, over and over and over: \"The Wind in the Willows\". This book is, in a way, two separate books put into one. There are, on the one hand, those chapters concerned with the adventures of Toad; and on the other hand there are those chapters that explore human emotions\u00a0\u2013 the emotions of fear, nostalgia, awe, wanderlust. My mother was drawn to the second group, of which \"The Piper at the Gates of Dawn\" was her favourite, read to me again and again with always, towards the end, the catch in the voice and the long pause to find her handkerchief and blow her nose. My father, on his side, was so captivated by the first group that he turned these chapters into the children's play, \"Toad of Toad Hall\". In this play one emotion only is allowed to creep in: nostalgia.\nAdaptations.\nRadio.\nThe BBC has broadcast a number of radio productions of the story. Dramatisations include:\nAbridged readings:\nOther presentation formats:\nInspiration.\nMapledurham House in Oxfordshire was an inspiration for Toad Hall, although Hardwick House and Fawley Court also make this claim.\nThe village of Lerryn in Cornwall claims to be the setting for the book.\nSimon Winchester suggested that the character of Ratty was based on Frederick Furnivall, a keen oarsman and acquaintance of Grahame. The writer Sir\u00a0Arthur Quiller-Couch, a friend of Grahame who enjoyed boating, has also been suggested as the inspiration for Ratty.\n\"The Scotsman\" and \"Oban Times\" suggested was inspired by the Crinan Canal, because Grahame spent some of his childhood in Ardrishaig.\nThere is a proposal that the idea for the story arose when its author saw a water vole beside the River Pang in Berkshire, southern England. A 29\u00a0hectare extension to the nature reserve at Moor Copse, near Tidmarsh Berkshire, was acquired in January\u00a02007 by the Berkshire, Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire Wildlife Trust.\nPeter Ackroyd, in his book \"Thames: Sacred River\", asserts that \"Quarry Wood, bordering on the river [Thames] at Cookham Dean, is the original of [the] 'Wild Wood'...\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45134", "revid": "1320084266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45134", "title": "Discourse", "text": "Field of theory which examines elements of conversation\nDiscourse is a generalization of the notion of a conversation to any form of communication. Discourse is a major topic in social theory, with work spanning fields such as sociology, anthropology, continental philosophy, and discourse analysis. Following work by Michel Foucault, these fields view discourse as a system of thought, knowledge, or communication that constructs our world experience. Since control of discourse amounts to control of how the world is perceived, social theory often studies discourse as a window into power. Within theoretical linguistics, discourse is understood more narrowly as linguistic information exchange and was one of the major motivations for the framework of dynamic semantics. In these expressions, denotations are equated with their ability to update a discourse context.\nSocial theory.\nIn the humanities and social sciences, discourse describes a formal way of thinking that can be expressed through language. Discourse is a social boundary that defines what statements can be said about a topic. Many definitions of discourse are primarily derived from the work of French philosopher Michel Foucault. In sociology, \"discourse\" is defined as \"any practice (found in a wide range of forms) by which individuals imbue reality with meaning\".\nPolitical science sees discourse as closely linked to politics and policy making. Likewise, different theories among various disciplines understand discourse as linked to power and state, insofar as the control of \"discourses\" is understood as a hold on reality itself (e.g. if a state controls the media, they control the \"truth\"). In essence, \"discourse\" is inescapable, since any use of language will have an effect on individual perspectives. In other words, the chosen discourse provides the vocabulary, expressions, or style needed to communicate. For example, two notably distinct discourses can be used about various guerrilla movements, describing them either as \"freedom fighters\" or \"terrorists\".\nIn psychology, discourses are embedded in different rhetorical genres and meta-genres that constrain and enable them\u2014language talking about language. This is exemplified in the APA's \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\", which tells of the terms that have to be used in speaking about mental health, thereby mediating meanings and dictating practices of professionals in psychology and psychiatry.\nModernism.\nModernist theorists focused on achieving progress and believed in natural and social laws that could be used universally to develop knowledge and, thus, a better understanding of society. Such theorists would be preoccupied with obtaining the \"truth\" and \"reality\", seeking to develop theories which contained certainty and predictability. Modernist theorists therefore understood discourse to be functional. Discourse and language transformations are ascribed to progress or the need to develop new or more \"accurate\" words to describe discoveries, understandings, or areas of interest. In modernist theory, language and discourse are dissociated from power and ideology and instead conceptualized as \"natural\" products of common sense usage or progress. Modernism further gave rise to the liberal discourses of rights, equality, freedom, and justice; however, this rhetoric masked substantive inequality and failed to account for differences, according to Regnier.\nStructuralism (Saussure and Lacan).\nStructuralist theorists, such as Ferdinand de Saussure and Jacques Lacan, argue that all human actions and social formations are related to language and can be understood as systems of related elements. This means that the \"individual elements of a system only have significance when considered about the structure as a whole, and that structures are to be understood as self-contained, self-regulated, and self-transforming entities\". In other words, it is the structure itself that determines the significance, meaning, and function of the individual elements of a system. Structuralism has contributed to our understanding of language and social systems. Saussure's theory of language highlights the decisive role of meaning and signification in structuring human life more generally.\nPoststructuralism (Foucault).\nFollowing the perceived limitations of the modern era, emerged postmodern theory. Postmodern theorists rejected modernist claims that there was one theoretical approach that explained all aspects of society. Rather, postmodernist theorists were interested in examining the variety of experiences of individuals and groups and emphasized differences over similarities and shared experiences.\nIn contrast to modernist theory, postmodern theory is pessimistic regarding universal truths and realities. Hence, it has attempted to be fluid, allowing for individual differences as it rejects the notion of social laws. Postmodern theorists shifted away from truth-seeking and sought answers to how truths are produced and sustained. Postmodernists contended that truth and knowledge are plural, contextual, and historically produced through discourses. Postmodern researchers, therefore, embarked on analyzing discourses such as texts, language, policies, and practices.\nFoucault.\nIn the works of the philosopher Michel Foucault, a \"discourse\" is \"an entity of sequences, of signs, in that they are enouncements (\"\u00e9nonc\u00e9s\").\" The enouncement (\"l\u2019\u00e9nonc\u00e9\", \"the statement\") is a linguistic construct that allows the writer and the speaker to assign meaning to words and to communicate repeatable semantic relations to, between, and among the statements, objects, or subjects of the discourse. Internal ties exist between the signs (semiotic sequences). The term discursive formation identifies and describes written and spoken statements with semantic relations that produce discourses. As a researcher, Foucault applied the discursive formation to analyses of large bodies of knowledge, e.g. political economy and natural history.\nIn \"The Archaeology of Knowledge\" (1969), a treatise about the methodology and historiography of systems of thought (\"epistemes\") and knowledge (\"discursive formations\"), Michel Foucault developed the concepts of discourse. The sociologist Iara Lessa summarizes Foucault's definition of discourse as \"systems of thoughts composed of ideas, attitudes, courses of action, beliefs, and practices that systematically construct the subjects and the worlds of which they speak.\" Foucault traces the role of discourse in the legitimation of society's power to construct contemporary truths, to maintain said truths, and to determine what relations of power exist among the constructed truths; therefore discourse is a communications medium through which power relations produce men and women who can speak.\nThe interrelation between power and knowledge renders every human relationship into a power negotiation, because power is always present and so produces and constrains the truth. Power is exercised through rules of exclusion (discourses) that determine what subjects people can discuss; when, where, and how a person may speak; and determines which persons are allowed to speak. That knowledge is both the \"creator\" of power and the \"creation\" of power, Foucault coined \"power/knowledge\" to show that it is \"an abstract force which determines what will be known, rather than assuming that individual thinkers develop ideas and knowledge.\"\nInterdiscourse studies the external semantic relations among discourses, as discourses exists in relation to other discourses.\nDiscourse analysis.\nThere is more than one type of discourse analysis, and the definition of \"discourse\" shifts slightly between types. Generally speaking, discourse analyses can be divided into those concerned with \"little d\" discourse and \"big D\" Discourse. The former (\"little d\") refers to language-in-use, such as spoken communication; the latter (\"big D\") refers to sociopolitical discourses (language plus social and cultural contexts).\nCommon forms of discourse analysis include:\nFormal semantics and pragmatics.\nIn formal semantics and pragmatics, discourse is often viewed as the process of refining the information in a common ground. In some theories of semantics, such as discourse representation theory, sentences' denotations themselves are equated with functions that update a common ground.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45137", "revid": "10370269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45137", "title": "Laurussia", "text": ""}
{"id": "45138", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45138", "title": "Georg Major", "text": "German Lutheran theologian (1502\u20131574)\nGeorg Major (April 25, 1502 \u2013 November 28, 1574) was a Lutheran theologian of the Protestant Reformation. \nLife.\nMajor was born in Nuremberg in 1502. At the age of nine he was sent to Wittenberg, and in 1521 he entered the university there. He was a student of Martin Luther and Philip Melanchthon, the latter being a particular influence. When Cruciger returned to Wittenberg in 1529, Major was appointed rector of the Johannisschule in Magdeburg, but in 1537 he became court preacher at Wittenberg and was ordained by Martin Luther. He began to lecture on theology in 1541.\nIn 1545 he joined the theological faculty, and his authority increased to such an extent that in the following year the elector sent him to the Conference of Regensburg, where he was soon captivated by the personality of Butzer. Like Philipp Melanchthon, he fled before the disastrous close of the Schmalkald war, and found refuge in Magdeburg. In the summer of 1547, he returned to Wittenberg, and in the same year became cathedral superintendent at Merseburg, although he resumed his activity at the university in the following year.\nIn the negotiations of the Augsburg Interim, he took the part of Melanchthon in first opposing it and then making concessions. This attitude incurred the enmity of the opponents of the Interim, especially after he cancelled a number of passages in the second edition of his \"Psalterium\" in which he had violently attacked the position of Maurice, Elector of Saxony, whom he now requested to prohibit all polemical treatises proceeding from Magdeburg, while he condemned the preachers of Torgau who were imprisoned in Wittenberg on account of their opposition to the Interim. He was even accused of accepting bribes from Maurice.\nIn 1552, Count Hans Georg, who favored the Interim, appointed him superintendent of Eisleben, on the recommendation of Melchior Kling. The orthodox clergy of the County of Mansfeld, however, immediately suspected him of being an interimist and adiaphorist, and he tried to defend his position in public, but his apology resulted in a dispute called the Majoristic Controversy.\nAt Christmas, 1552, Count Albrecht expelled him without trial and he fled to Wittenberg, where he resumed his activity as professor and member of the Wittenberg Consistory. Thence forth he was an important and active member in the circle of the Wittenberg Philippists.\nFrom 1558 to 1574 he was dean of the theological faculty and repeatedly held the rectorate of the university. He lived long enough to experience the first overthrow of Crypto-Calvinism in the Electorate of Saxony, and Paul Crell, his son-in-law, signed for him at Torgau in May 1574 the articles which repudiated Calvinism and acknowledged the unity of Luther and Melanchthon.\nHe died at Wittenberg in 1574.\nWorks.\nHis significant writings include:\nHe also wrote commentaries on the Pauline epistles and homilies on the pericopes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n "}
{"id": "45139", "revid": "16795899", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45139", "title": "Chennai", "text": "Capital of Tamil Nadu, India\nChennai, also known as Madras (its official name until 1996), is the capital and largest city of Tamil Nadu, the southernmost state of India. It is located on the Coromandel Coast of the Bay of Bengal. According to the 2011 Indian census, Chennai is the sixth-most-populous city in India and forms the fourth-most-populous urban agglomeration. Incorporated in 1688, the Greater Chennai Corporation is the oldest municipal corporation in India and the second oldest in the world after London.\nHistorically, the region was part of the Chola, Pandya, Pallava and Vijayanagara kingdoms during various eras. The coastal land which then contained the fishing village Madrasapattinam, was purchased by the British East India Company from the Nayak ruler Chennapa Nayaka in the 17th century. The British garrison established the Madras city and port and built Fort St. George, the first British fortress in India. The city was made the winter capital of the Madras Presidency, a colonial province of the British Raj in the Indian subcontinent. After India gained independence in 1947, Madras continued as the capital city of the Madras State and present-day Tamil Nadu. The city was officially renamed as Chennai in 1996.\nThe city is coterminous with Chennai district, which together with the adjoining suburbs constitutes the Chennai Metropolitan Area, the 35th-largest urban area in the world by population and one of the largest metropolitan economies of India. Chennai has the fifth-largest urban economy and the third-largest expatriate population in India. Known as the gateway to South India, Chennai is amongst the most-visited Indian cities by international tourists and was ranked 36th among the most-visited cities in the world in 2019 by Euromonitor. Ranked as a beta-level city in the Global Cities Index, it was ranked as the second-safest city in India by National Crime Records Bureau in 2023.\nChennai is a major centre for medical tourism and is termed \"India's health capital\". Chennai houses a major portion of India's automobile industry, hence the name \"Detroit of India\". It was the only South Asian city to be ranked among National Geographic's \"Top 10 food cities\" in 2015 and ranked ninth on Lonely Planet's best cosmopolitan cities in the world. In October 2017, Chennai was added to the UNESCO Creative Cities Network (UCCN) list. It is a major film production centre and home to the Tamil-language film industry.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Chennai\" was derived from the name of Chennappa Nayaka, a Nayak ruler who served as a general under Venkata Raya of the Vijayanagara Empire from whom the British East India Company took the town in lease in 1639. The first official use of the name was in August 1639 in a sale deed to Francis Day of the East India Company. A land grant was given to the Chennakesava Perumal Temple in Chennapatanam later in 1646, which some scholars argue to be the first use of the name.\nThe name \"Madras\" is of native origin, and has been shown to have been in use before the British established a presence in India. A Vijayanagara-era inscription found in 2015 was dated to the year 1367 and mentions the port of M\u0101darasanpattanam, along with other small ports on the east coast, and it was theorized that the aforementioned port is the fishing port of Royapuram. \"Madras\" might have been derived from Madraspattinam, a fishing village north of Fort St. George.\nIn July 1996, the Government of Tamil Nadu officially changed the name from Madras to Chennai. The name \"Madras\" continues to be used occasionally for the city as well as for places or things named after the city in the past.\nHistory.\nStone Age implements have been found near Pallavaram in Chennai; according to the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), Pallavaram was a megalithic cultural establishment, and pre-historic communities resided in the settlement. The region around Chennai was an important administrative, military, and economic centre for many centuries. During the 1st century CE, a Tamil poet named Thiruvalluvar lived in the town of Mylapore, a neighbourhood of present-day Chennai. The region was part of Tondaimandalam which was ruled by the Early Cholas in the 2nd century CE by subduing Kurumbas, the original inhabitants of the region. Pallavas of Kanchi became independent rulers of the region from 3rd to 9th century CE, and the areas of Mahabalipuram and Pallavaram were built during the reign of Mahendravarman I. In 879, Pallavas were defeated by the Later Cholas led by Aditya I, and Jatavarman Sundara Pandyan later brought the region under the Pandya rule in 1264. The region came under the influence of Vijayanagara Empire in the 15th century CE.\nThe Portuguese arrived in 1522 and built a port named S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 after the Christian apostle St. Thomas, who is believed to have preached in the area between 52 and 70\u00a0CE. In 1612, the Dutch established themselves near Pulicat, north of Chennai. On 20 August 1639, Francis Day of the British East India Company, along with the Nayak of Kalahasti Chennappa Nayaka, met with the Vijayanager Emperor Peda Venkata Raya at Chandragiri and obtained a grant for land on the Coromandel coast on which the company could build a factory and warehouse for their trading activities. On 22 August, he secured the grant for a strip of land about long and inland in return for a yearly sum of five hundred lakh pagodas. The region was then formerly a fishing village known as \"Madraspatnam\". A year later, the company built Fort St. George, the first major English settlement in India, which became the nucleus of the growing colonial city and urban Chennai.\nIn 1746, Fort St. George and the town were captured by the French under General La Bourdonnais, the Governor of Mauritius, who plundered the town and its outlying villages. The British regained control in 1749 through the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle and strengthened the town's fortress wall to withstand further attacks from the French and Hyder Ali, the king of Mysore. They resisted a French siege attempt in 1759. In 1769, the city was threatened by Hyder Ali during the First Anglo-Mysore War with the Treaty of Madras ending the conflict. By the 18th century, the British had conquered most of the region and established the Madras Presidency with Madras as the capital.\nThe city became a major naval base and became the central administrative centre for the British in South India. The city was the baseline for the Great Trigonometrical Survey of India, which was\u00a0started on 10 April 1802. With the advent of railways in India in the 19th century, the city was connected to other major cities such as Bombay and Calcutta, promoting increased communication and trade with the hinterland.\nAfter India gained its independence in 1947, the city became the capital of Madras State, the predecessor of the current state of Tamil Nadu. The city was the location of the hunger strike and death of Potti Sreeramulu, which resulted in the formation of Andhra State in 1953 and eventually the re-organization of Indian states based on linguistic boundaries in 1956.\nIn 1965, agitations against the imposition of Hindi and in support of continuing English as a medium of communication arose which marked a major shift in the political dynamics of the city and eventually led to English being retained as an official language of India alongside Hindi. On 17 July 1996, the city was officially renamed from Madras to Chennai, in line with then a nationwide trend to using less Anglicised names. On 26 December 2004, a tsunami lashed the shores of Chennai, killing 206 people in Chennai and permanently altering the coastline. The 2015 Chennai Floods submerged major portions of the city, killing 269 people and resulting in damages of ().\nEnvironment.\nGeography.\nChennai is located on the southeastern coast of India in the northeastern part of Tamil Nadu on a flat coastal plain known as the Eastern Coastal Plains with an average elevation of and highest point at . Chennai's soil is mostly clay, shale and sandstone. Clay underlies most of the city with sandy areas found along the river banks and coasts where rainwater runoff percolates quickly through the soil. Certain areas in South Chennai have a hard rock surface. As of 2018, the city had a green cover of 14.9 per cent, with a per capita green cover of 8.5 square metres against the World Health Organization recommendation of nine square metres.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], water bodies cover an estimated area of the city. Two major rivers flow through Chennai, the Cooum River (or \"Koovam\") through the centre and the Adyar River to the south. A section of the Buckingham Canal built in 1877\u201378, runs parallel to the Bay of Bengal coast, linking the two rivers. Kosasthalaiyar River traverses through the northern fringes of the city before draining into the Bay of Bengal, at Ennore Creek. The Otteri Nullah, an east\u2013west stream, runs through north Chennai and meets the Buckingham Canal at Basin Bridge. The groundwater table in Chennai is at below ground level on average and is replenished mainly by rainwater. Of the coastline of the city, experiences erosion, with sand accretion along the shoreline at the Marina beach and the area between the Ennore Port and Kosasthalaiyar river.\nGeology.\nChennai is situated in Seismic Zone III, indicating a moderate risk of damage from earthquakes. Owing to the tectonic zone the city falls in, the city is considered a potential geothermal energy site. The crust has old granite rocks dating back nearly a billion years indicating volcanic activities in the past with expected temperatures of at depth.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Chennai has the dry-summer version of a tropical savanna climate (\"As\"), closely bordering the dry-winter version (\"Aw\") due to a February average rainfall of . The city lies on the thermal equator and as it is also located on the coast, there is no extreme variation in seasonal temperature. The hottest time of the year is from April to June with an average temperature of . The highest recorded temperature was on 31 May 2003. The coldest time of the year is in December\u2013January, with average temperature of and the lowest recorded temperature of on 11 December 1895 and 29 January 1905.\nChennai receives most of its rainfall from the northeast monsoon between October and December while smaller amounts of rain also come from the southwest monsoon between June and September. The dry season is between January and May, with March having the least average rainfall at . The average annual rainfall is about . The highest annual rainfall recorded was in 2005. Prevailing winds in Chennai are usually southwesterly between April and October and northeasterly during the rest of the year. The city relies on the annual monsoon rains to replenish water reservoirs. Cyclones and depressions are common features during the season. Water inundation and flooding happen in low-lying areas during the season with significant flooding in 2015 and 2023.\nFlora and fauna.\nA protected estuary on the Adyar River forms a natural habitat for several species of birds and animals. Chennai is also a popular city for birding with more than 130 recorded species of birds have been recorded in the city. Marshy wetlands such as Pallikaranai and inland lakes also host a number of migratory birds during the monsoon and winter. The southern stretch of Chennai's coast from Tiruvanmiyur to Neelangarai are favoured by the endangered olive ridley sea turtles to lay eggs every winter. Guindy National Park is a protected area within the city limits and wildlife conservation and research activities take place at Arignar Anna Zoological Park. Madras Crocodile Bank Trust is a herpetology research station, located south of Chennai. The city's tree cover is estimated to be around with 121 recorded species belonging to 94 genera and 42 families. Major species include Copper pod, Indian beech, Gulmohar, Raintree, Neem, and Tropical Almond. The city's marine and inland water bodies house a number of fresh water and salt water fishes, and marine organisms.\nEnvironmental issues.\nChennai had many lakes spread across the city, but urbanization has led to the shrinkage of water bodies and wetlands. The water bodies have shrunk from an estimated in 1893 to in 2017. The number of wetlands in the city has decreased from 650 in 1970 to 27 in 2015. Nearly half of the native plant species in the city's wetlands have disappeared with only 25 per cent of the erstwhile area covered with aquatic plants still viable. The major water bodies including the Adyar, Cooum and Kosathaliyar rivers, and the Buckingham canal are heavily polluted with effluents and waste from domestic and commercial sources. The encroachment of urban development on wetlands has hampered the sustainability of water bodies and was a major contributor to the floods in 2015 and 2023 and water scarcity crisis in 2019.\nThe Chennai River Restoration Trust set up by the government of Tamil Nadu is working on the restoration of the Adyar River. The Environmentalist Foundation of India is a volunteering group working towards wildlife conservation and habitat restoration.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA resident of Chennai is called a \"Chennaite\". According to 2011 census, the city had a population of 4,646,732, within an area of . Post expansion of the city to , the Chennai Municipal Corporation was renamed as Greater Chennai Corporation and the population including the new city limits as per the 2011 census was 6,748,026. As of 2019[ [update]], 40 per cent of the 1.788\u00a0million families in the city live below the poverty line. As of 2017[ [update]], the city had 2.2\u00a0million households, with 40 per cent of the residents not owning a house. There are about 1,131 slums in the city housing more than 300,000 households.\nAdministration and politics.\nAdministration.\nThe city is governed by the Greater Chennai Corporation (formerly \"Corporation of Madras\"), which was established on 29 September 1688. It is the oldest surviving municipal corporation in India and the second oldest surviving corporation in the world. In 2011, the jurisdiction of the Chennai Corporation was expanded from to an area of , divided into three regions North, South and Central covering 200 wards. The corporation is headed by a mayor, elected by the councillors, who are elected through a popular vote by the residents.\nThe Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority (CMDA) is the nodal agency responsible for the planning and development of the Chennai Metropolitan Area, which is spread over an area of , covering the Chennai district and parts of Tiruvallur, Kanchipuram and Chengalpattu districts. The metropolitan area consists of four municipal corporations, 12 municipalities and other smaller panchayats.\nAs the capital of the state of Tamil Nadu, the city houses the state executive and legislative headquarters primarily in the secretariat buildings in Fort St George. Madras High Court is the highest judicial authority in the state, whose jurisdiction extends across Tamil Nadu and Puducherry.\nLaw and order.\nThe Greater Chennai Police (GCP) is the primary law enforcement agency in the city and is headed by a commissioner of police. The Greater Chennai Police is a division of the Tamil Nadu Police, the administrative control of which lies with the Home ministry of the Government of Tamil Nadu. Greater Chennai Traffic Police (GCTP) is responsible for the traffic management in the city. The metropolitan suburbs are policed by the Chennai Metropolitan Police, headed by the Chennai Police Commissionerate, and the outer district areas of the CMDA are policed by respective police departments of Tiruvallur, Kanchipuram, Chengalpattu and Ranipet districts.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], Greater Chennai had 135 police stations across four zones with 20,000 police personnel. As of 2021[ [update]], the crime rate in the city was 101.2 per hundred thousand people. It was ranked as the second most safest city in India by National Crime Records Bureau in 2023. In 2009, Madras Central Prison, the major prison and one of the oldest in India was demolished with the prisoners moved to the newly constructed Puzhal Central Prison.\nPolitics.\nWhile the major part of the city falls under three parliamentary constituencies (Chennai North, Chennai Central and Chennai South), the Chennai metropolitan area is spread across five constituencies. It elects 28 MLAs to the state legislature. Being the capital of the Madras Province that covered a large area of the Deccan region, Chennai remained the centre of politics during the British colonial era. Chennai is the birthplace of the idea of the Indian National Congress, which was founded by the members of the Theosophical Society movement based on the idea conceived in a private meeting after a Theosophical convention held in the city in December 1884. The city has hosted yearly conferences of the Congress seven times, playing a major part in the Indian independence movement. Chennai is also the birthplace of regional political parties such as the South Indian Welfare Association in 1916 which later became the Justice Party and Dravidar Kazhagam.\nPolitics is characterized by a mix of regional and national political parties. During the 1920s and 1930s, the Self-Respect Movement, spearheaded by Theagaroya Chetty and E. V. Ramaswamy emerged in Madras. Congress dominated the political scene post Independence in the 1950s and 1960s under C. Rajagopalachari and later K. Kamaraj. The Anti-Hindi agitations led to the rise of Dravidian parties with Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) forming the first government under C. N. Annadurai in 1967. In 1972, a split in the DMK resulted in the formation of the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) led by M. G. Ramachandran. The two Dravidian parties continue to dominate electoral politics, the national parties usually aligning as junior partners to the two major Dravidian parties. Many film personalities became politicians and later chief ministers, including C. N. Annadurai, M. Karunanidhi, M. G. Ramachandran, Janaki Ramachandran and Jayalalithaa.\nCulture.\nLanguages.\nTamil\u00a0is the language spoken by most of Chennai's population; English is largely spoken by white-collar workers. As per the 2011 census, Tamil is the most spoken language with 3,640,389 (78.3%) of speakers followed by Telugu (432,295), Urdu (198,505), Hindi (159,474) and Malayalam (104,994). Madras Bashai is a variety of the Tamil spoken by people in the city. It originated with words introduced from other languages such as English and Telugu on the Tamil originally spoken by the native people of the city. Korean, Japanese, French, Mandarin Chinese, German and Spanish are spoken by foreign expatriates residing in the city.\nReligion and ethnicity.\nChennai is home to a diverse population of ethno-religious communities. As per census of 2011, Chennai's population was majority Hindu (80.73%) with 9.45% Muslim, 7.72% Christian, 1.27% others and 0.83% with no religion or not indicating any religious preference. Tamils form majority of the population with minorities including Telugus, Marwaris, Gujaratis, Parsis, Sindhis, Odias, Goans, Kannadigas, Anglo-Indians, Bengalis, Punjabis, and Malayalees. The city also has a significant expatriate population. As of 2001[ [update]], out of the 2,937,000 migrants in the city, 61.5% were from other parts of the state, 33.8% were from rest of India and 3.7% were from outside the country.\nArchitecture.\nWith the history of Chennai dating back centuries, the architecture of Chennai ranges in a wide chronology. The oldest buildings in the city date from the 6th to 8th centuries CE, which include the Kapaleeshwarar Temple in Mylapore and the Parthasarathy Temple in Triplicane, built in the Dravidian architecture encompassing various styles developed during the reigns of different empires. In Dravidian architecture, the Hindu temples consisted of large mantapas with gate-pyramids called \"gopurams\" in quadrangular enclosures that surround the temple. The Gopuram, a monumental tower usually ornate at the entrance of the temple forms a prominent feature of Koils and whose origins can be traced back to the Pallavas who built the group of monuments in Mamallapuram. The associated \"Agraharam\" architecture, which consists of traditional row houses can still be seen in the areas surrounding the temples. Chennai has the second highest number of heritage buildings in the country.\nWith the Mugals influence in mediaeval times and the British later, the city saw a rise in a blend of Hindu, Islamic and Gothic revival styles, resulting in the distinct Indo-Saracenic architecture. The architecture for several institutions followed the Indo-Saracenic style with the Chepauk Palace designed by Paul Benfield amongst the first Indo-Saracenic buildings in India. Other buildings in the city from the era designed in this style of architecture include Fort St. George (1640), Amir Mahal (1798), Government Museum (1854), Senate House of the University of Madras (1879), Victoria Public Hall (1886), Madras High Court (1892), Bharat Insurance Building (1897), Ripon Building (1913), College of Engineering (1920) and Southern Railway headquarters (1921).\nGothic revival-style buildings include the Chennai Central and Chennai Egmore railway stations. The Santhome Church, which was originally built by the Portuguese in 1523 and is believed to house the remains of the apostle St. Thomas, was rebuilt in 1893, in neo-Gothic style. By the early 20th century, the art deco made its entry upon the city's urban landscape with buildings in George Town including the United India building (presently housing LIC) and the Burma Shell building (presently the Chennai House), both built in the 1930s, and the Dare House built in 1940 examples of this architecture. After Independence, the city witnessed a rise in Modernism, and the completion of the LIC Building in 1959, the tallest building in the country at that time, marked the transition from lime-and-brick construction to concrete columns.\nThe presence of the weather radar at the Chennai Port prohibited the construction of buildings taller than 60\u00a0m around a radius of 10\u00a0km till 2009. This resulted in the central business district expanding horizontally, unlike other metropolitan cities, while the peripheral regions began experiencing vertical growth with the construction of taller buildings with the tallest building at .\nArts.\nChennai is a major centre for music, art and dance in India. The city is called the Cultural Capital of South India. Madras Music Season, initiated by Madras Music Academy in 1927, is celebrated every year during the month of December and features performances of traditional Carnatic music by artists from the city. Madras University introduced a course of music, as part of the Bachelor of Arts curriculum in 1930. Gaana, a combination of various folk music, is sung mainly in the working-class area of North Chennai. Chennai Sangamam, an art festival showcasing various arts of South India is held every year. Chennai has been featured in UNESCO Creative Cities Network list since October 2017 for its old musical tradition.\nChennai has a diverse theatre scene and is a prominent centre for\u00a0Bharata Natyam, a classical dance form that originated in Tamil Nadu and the oldest dance form in India. Cultural centres in the city include Kalakshetra and Government Music College. Chennai is also home to some choirs, who during the Christmas season stage various carol performances across the city in Tamil and English.\nChennai is home to many museums, galleries, and other institutions that engage in arts research and are major tourist attractions. Established in the early 18th century, the Government Museum and the National Art Gallery are amongst the oldest in the country. The museum inside the premises of Fort St. George maintains a collection of objects of the British era. The museum is managed by the Archaeological Survey of India and has in its possession, the first Flag of India hoisted at Fort St George after the declaration of India's Independence on 15 August 1947.\nChennai is the base for Tamil cinema, nicknamed Kollywood, alluding to the neighbourhood of Kodambakkam where several film studios are located. The history of cinema in South India started in 1897 when a European exhibitor first screened a selection of silent short films at the Victoria Public Hall in the city. Swamikannu Vincent purchased a film projector and erected tents for screening films which became popular in the early 20th century. Keechaka Vadham, the first film in South India, was produced in the city and released in 1917. Gemini and Vijaya Vauhini studios, established in the 1940s, were amongst the largest and earliest in the country. Chennai hosts many major film studios, including AVM Productions, the oldest surviving studio in India.\nCuisine.\nChennai cuisine is predominantly South Indian with rice as its base. Most local restaurants still retain their rural flavour, with many restaurants serving food over a banana leaf. Eating on a banana leaf is an old custom and imparts a unique flavour to the food and is considered healthy. Idly and dosa are popular breakfast dishes. Chennai has an active street food culture and various cuisine options for dining including North Indian, Chinese and continental. The influx of industries in the early 21st century also bought distinct cuisines from other countries such as Japanese and Korean to the city. Chennai was the only South Asian city to be ranked among National Geographic's \"Top 10 food cities\" in 2015. Chennai was named as the most vegan friendly city in India in 2018.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Chennai consistently exceeded national average growth rates due to reform-oriented economic policies in the 1970s. With the presence of two major ports, an international airport, and a converging road and rail networks, Chennai is often referred to as the \"Gateway to South India\". According to the Globalization and World Cities Research Network, Chennai is amongst the cities most integrated with the global economy, classified as a beta-city. As of 2023[ [update]], Chennai had an estimated GDP of $143.9\u00a0billion, ranking it among the most productive metro areas in India. Chennai has a diversified industrial base anchored by different sectors including automobiles, software services, hardware, healthcare and financial services. As of 2021[ [update]], Chennai is amongst the top export districts in the country, with more than US$2563 billion in exports.\nThe city has a permanent exhibition complex Chennai Trade Centre at Nandambakkam. The city hosts the Tamil Nadu Global Investors Meet, a business summit organized by the Government of Tamil Nadu. With about 62% of the population classified as affluent with less than 1% asset-poor, Chennai has the fifth highest number of millionaires.\nChennai is among the major information technology (IT) hubs of India. Tidel Park, established in 2000, was amongst the first and largest IT parks in Asia. The presence of SEZs and government policies have contributed to the growth of the sector, which has attracted foreign investments and job seekers from other parts of the country. In the 2020s, the city has become a major provider of SaaS and has been dubbed the \"SaaS Capital of India\".\nThe automotive industry in Chennai accounts for more than 35% of India's overall automotive components and automobile output, earning the nickname \"Detroit of India\". A large number of automotive companies have their manufacturing bases in the city. Integral Coach Factory in Chennai manufactures railway coaches and other rolling stock for the Indian Railways. Ambattur Industrial Estate housing various manufacturing units is among the largest small-scale industrial estates in the country. Chennai contributes more than 50 per cent of India's leather exports. Chennai is a major electronics hardware exporter.\nThe city was home to the now-defunct Madras Stock Exchange, India's third-largest by trading volume behind the Bombay Stock Exchange and the National Stock Exchange of India. Madras Bank, the first European-style banking system in India, was established on 21 June 1683 followed by first commercial banks such as Bank of Hindustan (1770) and General Bank of India (1786). Bank of Madras merged with two other presidency banks to form Imperial Bank of India in 1921 which in 1955 became the State Bank of India, the largest bank in India. Chennai is the headquarters of nationalized banks such as Indian Bank and Indian Overseas Bank. Chennai hosts the south zonal office of the Reserve Bank of India, the country's central bank, along with its zonal training centre and staff College, one of the two colleges run by the bank. The city also houses a permanent back office of the World Bank. About 400 financial industry businesses are headquartered in the city.\nDRDO, India's premier defence research agency, operates various facilities in Chennai. Heavy Vehicles Factory of the AVANI, headquartered in Chennai, manufactures Armoured fighting vehicles, Main battle tanks, tank engines and armoured clothing for the use of the Indian Armed Forces. ISRO, the premier Indian space agency primarily responsible for performing tasks related to space exploration, operates research facilities in the city. As per Euromonitor, Chennai is the fourth-most visited city in India by international tourists and 36th internationally in 2019. Medical tourism forms an important part of the city's economy, with more than 40% of total medical tourists visiting India making it to Chennai.\nInfrastructure.\nWater supply.\nThe city's water supply and sewage treatment are managed by the Chennai MetroWater Supply and Sewage Board. Water is drawn from Red Hills Lake and Chembarambakkam Lake, the major water reservoirs in the city and treated at water treatment plants located at Kilpauk, Puzhal, Chembarambakkam and supplied to the city through 27 water distribution stations. The city receives 530\u00a0million litres per day (mld) of water from Krishna River through Telugu Ganga project and 180 mld of water from the Veeranam lake project. 100 million litres of treated water per day is produced from the Minjur desalination plant, the country's largest seawater desalination plant. Chennai is predicted to face a deficit of 713 mld of water by 2026 as the demand is projected at 2,248 mld and supply estimated at 1,535 mld. The city's sewer system was designed in 1910, with some modifications in 1958.\nWaste management.\nChennai generates 4,500 tonnes of garbage every day, of which 429 tonnes are plastic waste. The Greater Chennai Corporation undertakes garbage collection and processing with collection in some of the wards contracted to private companies. As of 2023[ [update]], an average of 150 tonnes of garbage disposal is done in two landfill sites at Kodungaiyur and Pallikaranai daily. In market and business areas, the conservancy work is done during the night. As of 2022[ [update]], there are public toilets in 943 locations, managed by the city corporation.\nCommunication.\nChennai is one of four Indian cities connected by undersea fibre-optic cables and is the landing point of SMW4 (connecting with Europe, Middle East and Southeast Asia), i2i and TIC (connecting with Singapore), BBG (connecting with Middle East, Southeast Asia and Sri Lanka), Gulf Bridge International (connecting with Middle East), and BRICS (connecting with Brazil, Russia, China and South Africa) with long i2i having the world's largest design capacity of 8.4 terabits per second. As of 2023[ [update]], four mobile phone service companies operate GSM networks including Bharti Airtel, BSNL, Vodafone Idea and Reliance Jio offering 4G and 5G mobile services. Wireline and broadband services are offered by five major operators and other smaller local operators. Chennai is amongst the cities with a high internet usage and penetration. As of 2022[ [update]], the city had the highest average broadband speed among Indian cities, with a recorded download speed of 32.67\u00a0Mbit/s.\nPower.\nElectricity distribution is done by the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board headquartered in Chennai. As of 2023[ [update]], the city consumes an average of 2,750 MW of power daily, which is above 18% of the total power consumption of 15,000 MW by the state of Tamil Nadu and ranks the second highest among all cities nationally. The city has over 248,000 streetlights maintained by the corporation. Major fossil fuel power plants in the city include North Chennai Thermal Power Station, GMR Vasavi Diesel Power Plant, Ennore Thermal Power Station, Basin Bridge Gas Turbine Power Station, Madras Atomic Power Station and Vallur Thermal Power Project. Madras Atomic Power Station located at Kalpakkam about south of the city is a comprehensive nuclear power production, fuel reprocessing, and waste treatment facility and is the first fully indigenous nuclear power station in India.\nHealth care.\nChennai has a well-developed health infrastructure, including both government-run and private hospitals. The corporation runs 138 primary health centres, 14 secondary health centres, three maternity hospitals and three veterinary health centres. The corporation also runs six diagnostic centres, 37 shelters and 10 health centres for the homeless. The city attracts many health tourists from abroad and other states and has been termed as India's health capital. Major government run hospitals include Government General Hospital, Government multi-super specialty hospital, Kilpauk medical college hospital, Government Royapettah Hospital, Stanley medical college hospital, Government hospital of thoracic medicine, Adyar Cancer Institute, TB Sanatorium and National Institute of Siddha. The Government General Hospital was started by 16 November 1664 and was the first major hospital in India. Major private hospitals in the city include Apollo Hospitals, Billroth Hospitals, Dr. Mehta's Hospital, Fortis Malar Hospital, Madras Medical Mission, MIOT Hospitals, Sankara Nethralaya, SRM Medical College Hospital and Research Centre, Sri Ramachandra Medical College and Research Institute, Global Hospitals, Chettinad Hospitals, Kauvery Hospital and Vijaya Hospitals. Corporation is responsible for administration of polio vaccine for eligible age groups. King Institute of Preventive Medicine and Research established in 1899 is a research institute specializing in preventive medicine and vaccination.\nMedia.\nNewspaper publishing started in Chennai with the launch of the weekly \"The Madras Courier\" in 1785. It was followed by the weeklies \"The Madras Gazette\" and \"The Government Gazette\" in 1795. \"The Spectator\", founded in 1836 was the first English newspaper in Chennai to be owned by an Indian and became the city's first daily newspaper in 1853. The first Telugu journal printed from Madras was\u00a0\"Satya Doota\"\u00a0in 1835, and the first Tamil newspaper,\u00a0\"Swadesamitran\",\u00a0was launched in 1899. Chennai has several newspapers and magazines published in various languages including Tamil, English and Telugu. The major dailies with a circulation of more than 100,000 copies per day include \"The Hindu\", \"Dina Thanthi\", \"Dinakaran\", \"The Times of India\", \"Dina Malar\" and \"The Deccan Chronicle\". Several periodicals and local newspapers prevalent in select localities also bring out editions from the city.\nThe government run Doordarshan broadcasts terrestrial and satellite television channels from its Chennai centre set up in 1974. Many private satellite television networks including\u00a0Sun Network, one of India's largest broadcasting companies, are based in the city. The cable TV service is entirely controlled by the state government while DTH and IPTV is available via various private operators. Radio broadcasting began in 1924 by the Madras Presidency Radio Club. All India Radio was established in 1938. The city has four AM and 11 FM radio stations operated by All India Radio, Hello FM, Suryan FM, Radio Mirchi, Radio City and BIG FM among others.\nOthers.\nFire services are handled by the Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services, which operates 33 operating fire stations. The corporation also owns 52 community halls across the city. Postal services are handled by India Post, which operates 568 post offices, of which nearly 460 operate from rented premises. The first post office was established on 1 June 1786 at Fort St. George on 1 June 1786.\nTransport.\nAir.\nThe aviation history of Chennai began in 1910, when Giacomo D'Angelis built the first powered flight in Asia and tested it in Island Grounds. In 1915, Tata Air Mail started an airmail service between Karachi and Madras marking the beginning of civil aviation in India. In March 1930, a discussion initiated by pilot G. Vlasto led to the founding of Madras Flying Club. On 15 October 1932, J. R. D. Tata flew a Puss Moth aircraft carrying air mail from Karachi to Bombay's Juhu Airstrip and the flight was continued to Madras piloted by aviator Nevill Vintcent marking the first scheduled commercial flight. The city is served by Chennai International Airport located in Tirusulam, around southwest of the city centre. It is the fourth-busiest airport in India in terms of passenger traffic and cargo handled. While the existing airport is undergoing expansion with an addition of , a new greenfield airport has been proposed to handle additional traffic.\nThe region comes under the purview of the Southern Air Command of the Indian Air Force. The Air Force operates an air base at Tambaram. The Indian Navy operates airbases at Arakkonam and Chennai.\nRail.\nThe history of railway in Chennai began in 1832, when the first railway line in India was proposed between\u00a0Little Mount\u00a0and\u00a0Chintadripet\u00a0in the city which became operational in 1837. The Madras Railway was established later in 1845 and the construction on the first main line between Madras and Arcot started in 1853, which became operational in 1856. In 1944, all the railway companies operating in British India were taken over by the Government. In December 1950, the Central Advisory Committee for Railways approved the plan for Indian Railways into six zonal systems and the Southern Railway zone was created on 14 April 1951 by merging three state railways, namely, the Madras and Southern Mahratta Railway, the South Indian Railway Company, and the Mysore State Railway with Chennai as the headquarters. The city has four major railway terminals at Chennai Central, Egmore, Beach and Tambaram. Chennai Central, city's largest station provides access to other major stations nationally and is amongst the busiest stations in the country.\nChennai has a well-established suburban railway network operated by Southern railway, which was established in 1928. The Mass Rapid Transit System (MRTS) is an elevated urban mass transit system established in 1995 operating on a single line from Chennai Beach to Velachery.\nChennai Metro is a rapid transit rail system in Chennai that was opened in 2015. As of 2023, the metro system consists of two operational lines operating across with 41 stations. The Chennai metro system is being expanded with a proposed addition of three more lines and an extension of .\nRoad.\nChennai has an extensive road network covering about as of 2023. Chennai is one of the termini of the Golden Quadrilateral system of National Highways. As a part of the network, the city is connected to Mumbai and Kolkata via NH\u00a048 and NH\u00a016 respectively. In addition, NH\u00a032, and NH\u00a0716 originate from the city. The road network also consists of state highways which serve as arterial roads and two peripheral roads (inner and outer ring roads). There are grade separators and flyovers at major intersections. There are two expressways under construction: Chennai Port\u2013Maduravoyal Expressway and Bangalore\u2013Chennai Expressway.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], there are over six million registered vehicles in the city. Public bus transport is handled by the Metropolitan Transport Corporation of Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation, which is run by the Government of Tamil Nadu. It was established in 1947 when private buses operating in Madras presidency were nationalized by the government and runs about 3233 buses As of 2023[ [update]]. State Express Transport Corporation Limited (SETC), established in 1980, runs long-distance express services exceeding 250\u00a0km and above and links the city with other important cities and adjoining states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and the Union Territory of Puducherry. SETC operates various classes of services such as semi-deluxe, ultra-deluxe and air-conditioned with advance booking and reservation on all of its routes. Chennai Mofussil Bus Terminus is one of the largest bus stations in Asia and caters to outstation buses. The other means of road transport in the city include vans, auto rickshaws, on-call metered taxis and tourist taxis.\nWater.\nChennai has two major ports Chennai and Ennore which are managed by the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways of the Government of India. There are three minor ports, which are managed by the department of highways and minor ports of Government of Tamil Nadu. Royapuram fishing harbour is used by fishing boats. Indian Navy has a major base at Chennai.\nEducation.\nChennai is a major educational hub and home to some of the premium educational institutions in the country. The city has a 90.33% literacy rate and ranks second among the major Indian metropolitan city centres. Chennai has a mix of public and private schools with the public school system managed by the school education department of Government of Tamil Nadu. As of 2023[ [update]], there are 420 public schools run by Greater Chennai Corporation. Public schools run by the Chennai Corporation are all affiliated with the Tamil Nadu State Board, while private schools may be affiliated with either of Tamil Nadu Board of Secondary Education, Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE), Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (ICSE) or National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS). School education starts with two years of Kindergarten from age three onwards and then follows the Indian 10+2 plan, ten years of school and two years of higher secondary education.\nThe University of Madras was founded in 1857 and is one of India's first modern universities. Colleges for science, arts, and commerce degrees are typically affiliated with the University of Madras, which has six campuses in the city. Indian Institute of Technology Madras is a premier institute of engineering and College of Engineering, Guindy, Anna University founded in 1794 is the oldest engineering college in India.\nOfficers Training Academy of the Indian Army is headquartered in the city. There are eight government-run medical colleges in the city including one dental college, three for traditional medicine and four for modern medicine apart from multiple private colleges operating under the purview of Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University in Chennai. Madras Medical College was established in 1835 and is one of the oldest medical colleges in India.\nChennai has many libraries with the major ones being the Connemara Public Library (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt; 1896), one of the four National Depository Centres in India that receive a copy of all newspapers and books published in the country and the Anna Centenary Library, the largest library in Asia. Chennai has two CSIR research institutions namely Central Leather Research Institute and Structural Engineering Research Centre. Chennai book fair is an annual book fair organized by the Booksellers and Publishers Association of South India (BAPASI) and is typically held in December\u2013January.\nTourism and recreation.\nWith temples, beaches and centres of historical and cultural significance including the UNESCO Heritage Site of Mahabalipuram, Chennai is one of the most-visited cities in India with 11 million domestic and 630,000 foreign tourists visiting in 2020. The gateway to the southern part of India, Chennai was ranked among the top hundred destinations by Euromonitor. As of 2018[ [update]], the city has about 7,000 luxury rooms across four- and five-star categories, with 85 per cent of the room demand coming from business travellers. Chennai has a coastline with many beaches including the Marina spanning which is the second-longest urban beach in the world and Elliot's Beach south of the Adyar delta.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], Chennai has 835 public parks maintained by the corporation. The largest park is the 358-acre Tholkappia Poonga, developed to restore the fragile ecosystem of the Adyar estuary. Semmozhi Poonga is a botanical garden maintained by the horticulture department. Madras Crocodile Bank is a reptile zoo located south of the city and has one of the largest collections of reptiles in the country. Arignar Anna zoological park is a large urban zoo with more than two million visitors annually. Guindy National Park is a protected area within the city limits and has a children's park and a snake park associated with it. Chennai also houses several theme parks and amusement parks.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], there are 120 cinema screens and multiplexes. Stage plays and dramas of different genres and languages are enacted in theatres across the city. Chennai is also home to several malls. The city is an important market for jewellery. Anna Nagar and Nungambakkam are amongst the expensive retail zones in the country.\nSports.\nCricket is the most popular sport in Chennai and was introduced in 1864 with the foundation of the Madras Cricket Club. The M.A. Chidambaram Stadium, established in 1916, is one of the oldest cricket stadiums in India and has hosted matches during multiple ICC Cricket World Cups. Other cricketing venues include Chemplast Cricket Ground and Guru Nanak College Ground. Prominent cricketers from the city include S. Venkataraghavan, Kris Srikkanth, and Ravichandran Ashwin. Established in 1987, MRF Pace Foundation is a bowling academy based in Chennai. Chennai is home to the most successful Indian Premier League cricket team Chennai Super Kings and hosted the finals during the 2011, 2012, and 2024 seasons.\nJawaharlal Nehru Stadium is a multi-purpose venue which hosts football and athletics and also houses a multi\u2013purpose indoor complex for volleyball, basketball, kabaddi and table tennis. Chennai hosted the 1995 South Asian Games. Football club Chennaiyin FC competes in Indian Super League (ISL), the top tier association football league of India and uses the Nehru Stadium for their home matches. Mayor Radhakrishnan Stadium is associated with hockey and was venue for the international hockey tournament the 2005 Men's Champions Trophy and the 2007 Men's Asia Cup. Water sports are played in the Velachery Aquatic Complex. Chennai was the host of the only ATP World Tour event in India, the Chennai Open held at SDAT Tennis Stadium from 1997 to 2017. Vijay Amritraj, Mahesh Bhupathi Ramesh Krishnan and Somdev Devvarman were professional grand slam tennis players from Chennai. Chennai was home to Chennai Slam, two-time national champion of India's top professional basketball division, the UBA Pro Basketball League.\nMadras Boat Club (founded in 1846) and Royal Madras Yacht Club (founded in 1911) promote sailing, rowing and canoeing sports in Chennai. Inaugurated in 1990, Madras Motor Race Track was the first permanent racing circuit in India and hosts formula racing events. Formula One driver Karun Chandhok was from the city. Horse racing is held at the Guindy Race Course and the city has two 18-hole golf courses, the Cosmopolitan Club and the Gymkhana Club established in the late nineteenth century. Chennai is often dubbed \"India's chess capital\" as the city is home to multiple chess grandmasters including world champions Viswanathan Anand and Gukesh Dommaraju. The city played host to the World Chess Championship 2013 and 44th Chess Olympiad in 2022. Other prominent sports persons from the city include table tennis player Sharath Kamal and two\u2013time world carrom champion, Maria Irudayam.\nInternational relations.\nForeign missions.\nThe consular presence in the city dates back to 1794, when William Abbott was appointed US consular agent for South India. As of 2022[ [update]], there are 60 foreign representations in Chennai, including 16 consulates general and 28 honorary consulates. American Consulate in Chennai is amongst the top employment-based visa processing centres. The Foreigners Regional Registration Office (FRRO) is in charge of immigration and registration activities in the city.\nSister cities.\nChennai has sister city relationships with the following cities of the world:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45141", "revid": "3131428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45141", "title": "Moonie (disambiguation)", "text": "A Moonie is a member of the Unification Church of the United States.\nMoonie may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45144", "revid": "2179844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45144", "title": "Shavian alphabet", "text": "Phonemic, featural alphabet for English\nThe Shavian alphabet ( ; also known as the Shaw alphabet) is a constructed alphabet conceived as a way to provide simple, phonemic orthography for the English language to replace the inefficiencies and difficulties of conventional spelling using the Latin alphabet. It was posthumously funded by and named after the playwright George Bernard Shaw and designed by Ronald Kingsley Read, a professional signwriter and letterer. \nShaw set three main criteria: the new alphabet should be \nLetters.\nThe Shavian alphabet consists of three types of letters: \"tall\" (with an ascender), \"deep\" (with a descender) and \"short\". All vowels but the consonant\u2013vowel ligature \"yew\" are short. Among consonants, the short letters are liquids (r, l) and nasals (m, n); these, the semivowels (y, w) and the heng letters (h, ng) are derived from each other through rotation or reflection. Tall letters are voiceless consonants, excepting Yea and Hung . A tall letter rotated 180\u00b0, with the tall part now extending below the baseline, becomes a deep letter, representing the corresponding voiced consonants (except Haha ). These rotation pairs, with the exception of the \"heng\" consonants, are the same letters that are paired in Pitman shorthand. Affricates, several diphthongs, and rhotic vowels are ligatures. The alphabet is therefore to some extent featural.\nThere are no separate uppercase or lowercase letters as in the Latin script; instead of using capitalization to mark proper nouns, a \"namer-dot\" (\u00b7) is placed before a name. Sentences are typically not started with a namer-dot, unless it is otherwise called for. All other punctuation and word spacing is similar to conventional orthography.\nEach character in the Shavian alphabet requires only a single stroke to be written on paper. The writing utensil needs to be lifted up only once when writing each character, thus enabling faster overall writing than Latin script.\nSpelling in \"Androcles\" follows the phonemic distinctions of Received Pronunciation except for explicitly indicating vocalic \"r\" with the above ligatures. Most dialectal variations of English pronunciation can be regularly produced from this spelling, but those who do not make certain distinctions, particularly in the vowels, find it difficult to produce the canonical spellings spontaneously. For instance, most North American dialects merge and (the father\u2013bother merger), though standard English orthography is a guide.\nThere is no ability to indicate word stress, so \"billow\" and \"below\" are both spelled , and \"diploid\" and \"deployed\" are both spelled . However, in most cases the reduction of unstressed vowels is sufficient to distinguish word pairs that are distinguished only by stress in spoken discourse. For instance, the noun \"convict\" and the verb \"convict\" can be spelled \"\u02c8k\u0252nv\u026akt\" and \"k\u0259nv\u026akt\", respectively.\nAdditionally, five common words are abbreviated as single letters. The words the\" (), \"of (), \"and\" (), to\" (), and often for\" () are written with the single letters indicated.\nHistory.\nGeorge Bernard Shaw, the writer, critic and playwright, was a vocal critic of English spelling because it often deviates from the alphabetic principle. Shaw had served from 1926 to 1939 on the BBC's Advisory Committee on Spoken English, which included several exponents of phonetic writing. He also knew Henry Sweet, creator of Current Shorthand (and a prototype for the character of Henry Higgins), although Shaw himself for years wrote his literary works in Pitman shorthand. However, he found its limitations frustrating as well and realized that it was not a suitable replacement for traditional orthography, making the production of printed material difficult and impossible to type. Shaw desired and advocated a phonetic spelling reform, and this called for a new alphabet.\nAll of his interest in spelling and alphabet reform was made clear in Shaw's will of June 1950, in which provision was made for (Isaac) James Pitman, with a grant in aid from the Public Trustee, to establish a Shaw Alphabet. Following Shaw's death in November 1950, and after some legal dispute, the Trustee announced a worldwide competition to design such an alphabet, with the aim of producing a system that would be an economical way of writing and of printing the English language. A contest for the design of the new alphabet was won by four people, including Ronald Kingsley Read who had corresponded extensively with Shaw for several years regarding such an alphabet. Read was then appointed to amalgamate the four designs to produce the new alphabet.\nDue to the contestation of Shaw's will, the trust charged with developing the new alphabet could afford to publish only one book: a version of Shaw's play \"Androcles and the Lion\", in a bi-alphabetic edition with both conventional and Shavian spellings (1962 Penguin Books, London). Copies were sent to major libraries in English-speaking countries.\nOther print literature.\nBetween 1963 and 1965, 8 issues of the journal, \"Shaw-script\", were published by Read in Worcester, U.K. The journal used Shaw's Alphabet, and much of the content was submitted by Shaw enthusiasts. In more recent years, there have been several published works of classical literature transliterated into Shavian.\nThe first, released in 2012, was the works of Edgar Allan Poe entitled \"Poe Meets Shaw: The Shaw Alphabet Edition of Edgar Allan Poe\", by Tim Browne. This book was published via Shaw Alphabet Books and had two editions in its original release. One, like \"Androcles and the Lion\", had Shavian side-by-side with the Latin equivalent and the other was a Shavian-only edition.\nThe second, released in 2013, was an edition of \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\", transcribed into Shavian by Thomas Thurman. This was published as a Shaw-only edition with no side-by-side Latin equivalent. The Shavian fonts were designed by Michael Everson.\nIn 2019, a print version of \"Pride and Prejudice\" was published in Shaw-only form by the website Shavian.info. \nDisagreement.\nSome disagreement has arisen among the Shavian community in regard to sound\u2013symbol assignments, which have been the topic of frequent arguments. Primarily, this has concerned the alleged reversal of two pairs of letters.\nHaha\u2013Hung reversal.\nThe most frequent disagreement of the letter reversals has been over the Haha\u2013Hung pair. The most convincing evidence suggesting this reversal is in the names of the letters: the unvoiced letter Haha is deep, while the voiced Hung, which suggests a lower position, is tall. This is often assumed to be a clerical error introduced in the rushed printing of the Shavian edition of \"Androcles and the Lion\". This reversal obscures the system of tall letters as voiceless consonants and deep letters as voiced consonants.\nProponents of traditional Shavian, however, have suggested that Kingsley Read may not have intended for this system to be all-encompassing, though it seems that vertical placement alone served this purpose in an earlier version of Shavian, before the rotations were introduced. Also, Read may have intentionally reversed these letters, perhaps to emphasize that these letters represent unrelated sounds, which happen to occur in complementary distribution.\nBoth sides of the debate have suggested other reasons, including associations with various styles of Latin letters (namely, the \u27e8g\u27e9 in \u27e8-ing\u27e9, often written with a bottom-loop in script) and the effect of letter-height on the coastlines of words, but whether Read considered any of these is uncertain. Since the letter representing the same sound in Read's Quikscript appears identical to \"Hung\", it is doubtful that Read reversed the letter twice by mistake. Either he always intended that letter shape or he thought it best to leave things as they were, especially as a corrected \u27e8ng\u27e9 in hasty or careless writing might be confused with Hung \"\ud801\udc63\".\nAir\u2013Err reversal.\nTwo other letters that are often alleged to have been reversed\u2014intentionally or not\u2014are the ligatures Air \"\ud801\udc7a\" and Err \"\ud801\udc7b\". They are both made up of Roar \"\ud801\udc6e\" and an unknown first part. Attempts to construct derivations of the ligatures suggest that the pronunciations and the shapes are reversed, and may assure a less conservative pronunciation of Air \"\ud801\udc69\", though this is not necessary.\nThough the shape of Air \"\ud801\udc7a\" suggests a derivation from Ado \"\ud801\udc69\" + Ado \"\ud801\udc69\" + Roar \"\ud801\udc6e\" (which would give ), its name suggests a derivation either from Egg \"\ud801\udc67\" + Ado \"\ud801\udc69\" + Roar \"\ud801\udc6e\" (reflecting the conservative pronunciation ) or from Egg \"\ud801\udc67\" + Egg \"\ud801\udc67\" + Roar \"\ud801\udc6e\" (reflecting the contemporary pronunciation ).\nIn contrast, the name of Err \"\ud801\udc7b\" suggests a derivation from Ado \"\ud801\udc69\" + Ado \"\ud801\udc69\" + Roar \"\ud801\udc6e\" (which would suggest \"\ud801\udc7a\"), both because the closest short approximation of the conservative pronunciation is and because the contemporary pronunciation is . Its shape suggests a derivation either from Egg \"\ud801\udc67\" + Ado \"\ud801\udc69\" + Roar \"\ud801\udc6e\" (reflecting the conservative pronunciation ) or from Egg \"\ud801\udc67\" + Egg \"\ud801\udc67\" + Roar \"\ud801\udc6e\" (which would give ).\nRead, likely being an RP speaker born in 1887, would almost certainly not have had the contemporary pronunciation of Air, so that is unlikely to be relevant. It is possible that he either approximated Err as (which would not contradict with his for Air) and flipped the initial stroke of Air from something like \"\ud801\udc78\" to \"\ud801\udc7a\" so as to avoid confusion with Are \"\ud801\udc78\", or that the hypothesised derivations of the ligatures are incorrect and bear no relation to pronunciation.\nVariants.\nQuikscript.\nSome years after the initial publication of the Shaw alphabet, Read expanded it to create Quikscript, also known as the Read Alphabet or the Second Shaw Alphabet. Quikscript is intended to be more useful for handwriting, and to that end is more cursive and uses more ligatures. It is also intended to be closer to shorthand, with a \"senior Quikscript\" mode providing many more shortenings. Some letter forms are roughly the same in both alphabets, though the rotation symmetry of tall\u2013deep pairs is sacrificed for connected handwriting. See the separate article for more details.\nShavian in Esperanto (\u015cava alfabeto).\nAn adaptation of Shavian to another language, Esperanto, was developed by John Wesley Starling; though not widely used, at least one booklet has been published with transliterated sample texts. As that language is already spelled phonemically, direct conversion between Latin and Shavian letters can be performed, though several ligatures are added for the common combinations of vowels with \"n\" and \"s\" and some common short words. Vowels use the letters of the orthographically equivalent short vowels in English (i.e. \"\u0103 \u0115 \u012d \u014f \u016d\"), except that \"o\" and \"u\" are reversed, as are \"j\" and \"w\". The \"oo\"-vowel letters are reassigned to \"m\" and \"n\", and the unneeded letters for \"th\" and \"ng\" are assigned to \"c\" and \"\u0125\".\nPronunciations that differ from their English values are marked in bold blue.\nShaw Alphabet.\nIn 1996, Paul Vandenbrink devised the self-styled Shaw Alphabet, or the Revised Shaw Abjad, which was further revised in 2001. It is based on the Hebrew script and makes many changes to the shapes and names of the letters, though it is largely unknown.\nUnicode.\nShavian was added to the Unicode Standard in April 2003 with the release of version 4.0. Esperanto ligatures are not supported. \nBlock.\nThe Unicode block for Shavian is U+10450\u2013U+1047F and is in Plane 1 (the Supplementary Multilingual Plane).\nFonts.\nWhile the Shavian alphabet was added to Unicode 4.0 in 2003, Unicode Shavian fonts are still quite rare. Although a brief list of fonts with known Shavian coverage can be found on https://. Before it was standardized, fonts were made that include Shavian letters in the places of Roman letters, and/or in an agreed-upon location in the Unicode private use area, allocated from the ConScript Unicode Registry and now superseded by the official Unicode standard.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45145", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45145", "title": "Hubble sequence", "text": "Galaxy morphological classification scheme advocated by Edwin Hubble\nThe Hubble sequence is a morphological classification scheme for galaxies published by Edwin Hubble in 1926. It is often colloquially known as the Hubble tuning-fork diagram because the shape in which it is traditionally represented resembles a tuning fork.\nIt was invented by John Henry Reynolds and Sir James Jeans.\nThe tuning fork scheme divided regular galaxies into three broad classes \u2013 ellipticals, lenticulars and spirals \u2013 based on their visual appearance (originally on photographic plates). A fourth class contains galaxies with an irregular appearance. The Hubble sequence is the most commonly used system for classifying galaxies, both in professional astronomical research and in amateur astronomy.\nClasses of galaxies.\nEllipticals.\nOn the left (in the sense that the sequence is usually drawn) lie the ellipticals. Elliptical galaxies have relatively smooth, featureless light distributions and appear as ellipses in photographic images. They are denoted by the letter E, followed by an integer n representing their degree of ellipticity in the sky. By convention, n is ten times the ellipticity of the galaxy, rounded to the nearest integer, where the ellipticity is defined as for an ellipse with a the semi-major axis length and b the semi-minor axis length. The ellipticity increases from left to right on the Hubble diagram, with near-circular (E0) galaxies situated on the very left of the diagram. It is important to note that the ellipticity of a galaxy on the sky is only indirectly related to the true 3-dimensional shape (for example, a flattened, discus-shaped galaxy can appear almost round if viewed face-on or highly elliptical if viewed edge-on). Observationally, the most flattened \"elliptical\" galaxies have ellipticities (denoted E7). However, from studying the light profiles and the ellipticity profiles, rather than just looking at the images, it was realised in the 1960s that the E5\u2013E7 galaxies are probably misclassified lenticular galaxies with large-scale disks seen at various inclinations to our line-of-sight. Observations of the kinematics of early-type galaxies further confirmed this.\nExamples of elliptical galaxies: M49, M59, M60, M87, NGC 4125.\nLenticulars.\nAt the centre of the Hubble tuning fork, where the two spiral-galaxy branches and the elliptical branch join, lies an intermediate class of galaxies known as lenticulars and given the symbol S0. These galaxies consist of a bright central bulge, similar in appearance to an elliptical galaxy, surrounded by an extended, disk-like structure. Unlike spiral galaxies, the disks of lenticular galaxies have no visible spiral structure and are not actively forming stars in any significant quantity.\nWhen simply looking at a galaxy's image, lenticular galaxies with relatively face-on disks are difficult to distinguish from ellipticals of type E0\u2013E3, making the classification of many such galaxies uncertain. When viewed edge-on, the disk becomes more apparent and prominent dust-lanes are sometimes visible in absorption at optical wavelengths.\nAt the time of the initial publication of Hubble's galaxy classification scheme, the existence of lenticular galaxies was purely hypothetical. Hubble believed that they were necessary as an intermediate stage between the highly flattened \"ellipticals\" and spirals. Later observations (by Hubble himself, among others) showed Hubble's belief to be correct and the S0 class was included in the definitive exposition of the Hubble sequence by Allan Sandage. Missing from the Hubble sequence are the early-type galaxies with intermediate-scale disks, in between the E0 and S0 types, Martha Liller denoted them ES galaxies in 1966.\nLenticular and spiral galaxies, taken together, are often referred to as disk galaxies. The bulge-to-disk flux ratio in lenticular galaxies can take on a range of values, just as it does for each of the spiral galaxy morphological types (Sa, Sb, etc.).\nExamples of lenticular galaxies: M85, M86, NGC 1316, NGC 2787, NGC 5866, Centaurus A.\nSpirals.\nOn the right of the Hubble sequence diagram are two parallel branches encompassing the spiral galaxies. A spiral galaxy consists of a flattened disk, with stars forming a (usually two-armed) spiral structure, and a central concentration of stars known as the bulge. Roughly half of all spirals are also observed to have a bar-like structure, with the bar extending from the central bulge, and the arms begin at the ends of the bar. In the tuning-fork diagram, the regular spirals occupy the upper branch and are denoted by the letter S, while the lower branch contains the barred spirals, given the symbol SB. Both type of spirals are further subdivided according to the detailed appearance of their spiral structures. Membership of one of these subdivisions is indicated by adding a lower-case letter to the morphological type, as follows:\nHubble originally described three classes of spiral galaxy. This was extended by G\u00e9rard de Vaucouleurs to include a fourth class:\nAlthough strictly part of the de Vaucouleurs system of classification, the Sd class is often included in the Hubble sequence. The basic spiral types can be extended to enable finer distinctions of appearance. For example, spiral galaxies whose appearance is intermediate between two of the above classes are often identified by appending two lower-case letters to the main galaxy type (for example, Sbc for a galaxy that is intermediate between an Sb and an Sc).\nOur own Milky Way is generally classed as Sc or SBc, making it a barred spiral with well-defined arms.\nExamples of regular spiral galaxies: (visually) M31 (Andromeda Galaxy), M74, M81, M104 (Sombrero Galaxy), M51a (Whirlpool Galaxy), NGC 300, NGC 772.\nExamples of barred spiral galaxies: M91, M95, NGC 1097, NGC 1300, NGC1672, NGC 2536, NGC 2903.\nIrregulars.\nGalaxies that do not fit into the Hubble sequence, because they have no regular structure (either disk-like or ellipsoidal), are termed irregular galaxies. Hubble defined two classes of irregular galaxy:\nIn his extension to the Hubble sequence, de Vaucouleurs called the Irr I galaxies 'Magellanic irregulars', after the Magellanic Clouds \u2013 two satellites of the Milky Way which Hubble classified as Irr I. The discovery of a faint spiral structure in the Large Magellanic Cloud led de Vaucouleurs to further divide the irregular galaxies into those that, like the LMC, show some evidence for spiral structure (these are given the symbol Sm) and those that have no obvious structure, such as the Small Magellanic Cloud (denoted Im). In the extended Hubble sequence, the Magellanic irregulars are usually placed at the end of the spiral branch of the Hubble tuning fork.\nExamples of irregular galaxies: M82, NGC 1427A, Large Magellanic Cloud, Small Magellanic Cloud.\nPhysical significance.\nElliptical and lenticular galaxies are commonly referred to together as \"early-type\" galaxies, while spirals and irregular galaxies are referred to as \"late types\". This nomenclature is the source of the common, but erroneous, belief that the Hubble sequence was intended to reflect a supposed evolutionary sequence, from elliptical galaxies through lenticulars to either barred or regular spirals. In fact, Hubble was clear from the beginning that no such interpretation was implied:\nThe nomenclature, it is emphasized, refers to position in the sequence, and temporal connotations are made at one's peril. The entire classification is purely empirical and without prejudice to theories of evolution...\nThe evolutionary picture appears to be lent weight by the fact that the disks of spiral galaxies are observed to be home to many young stars and regions of active star formation, while elliptical galaxies are composed of predominantly old stellar populations. In fact, current evidence suggests the opposite: the early Universe appears to be dominated by spiral and irregular galaxies. In the currently favored picture of galaxy formation, present-day ellipticals formed as a result of mergers between these earlier building blocks; while some lenticular galaxies may have formed this way, others may have accreted their disks around pre-existing spheroids. Some lenticular galaxies may also be evolved spiral galaxies, whose gas has been stripped away leaving no fuel for continued star formation, although the galaxy LEDA 2108986 opens the debate on this.\nShortcomings.\nA common criticism of the Hubble scheme is that the criteria for assigning galaxies to classes are subjective, leading to different observers assigning galaxies to different classes (although experienced observers usually agree to within less than a single Hubble type). Although not really a shortcoming, since the 1961 \"Hubble Atlas of Galaxies\", the primary criteria used to assign the morphological type (a, b, c, etc.) has been the nature of the spiral arms, rather than the bulge-to-disk flux ratio, and thus a range of flux ratios exist for each morphological type, as with the lenticular galaxies.\nAnother criticism of the Hubble classification scheme is that, being based on the appearance of a galaxy in a two-dimensional image, the classes are only indirectly related to the true physical properties of galaxies. In particular, problems arise because of orientation effects. The same galaxy would look very different, if viewed edge-on, as opposed to a face-on or 'broadside' viewpoint. As such, the early-type sequence is poorly represented: The ES galaxies are missing from the Hubble sequence, and the E5\u2013E7 galaxies are actually S0 galaxies. Furthermore, the barred ES and barred S0 galaxies are also absent.\nVisual classifications are also less reliable for faint or distant galaxies, and the appearance of galaxies can change depending on the wavelength of light in which they are observed.\nNonetheless, the Hubble sequence is still commonly used in the field of extragalactic astronomy and Hubble types are known to correlate with many physically relevant properties of galaxies, such as luminosities, colours, masses (of stars and gas) and star formation rates.\nIn June\u00a02019, citizen scientists in the Galaxy Zoo project argued that the usual Hubble classification, particularly concerning spiral galaxies, may not be supported by evidence. Consequently, the scheme may need revision.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45146", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45146", "title": "CP/M", "text": "Discontinued family of computer operating systems\nCP/M, originally standing for Control Program/Monitor and later Control Program for Microcomputers, is a mass-market operating system created in 1974 for Intel 8080/85-based microcomputers by Gary Kildall of Digital Research, Inc. CP/M is a disk operating system and its purpose is to organize files on a magnetic storage medium, and to load and run programs stored on a disk. Initially confined to single-tasking on 8-bit processors and no more than 64 kilobytes of memory, later versions of CP/M added multi-user variations and were migrated to 16-bit processors.\nCP/M's core components are the \"Basic Input/Output System\" (BIOS), the \"Basic Disk Operating System\" (BDOS), and the \"Console Command Processor\" (CCP). The BIOS consists of drivers that deal with devices and system hardware. The BDOS implements the file system and provides system services to applications. The CCP is the command-line interpreter and provides some built-in commands.\nCP/M eventually became the \"de facto\" standard and the dominant operating system for microcomputers, in combination with the S-100 bus computers. This computer platform was widely used in business through the late 1970s and into the mid-1980s. CP/M increased the market size for both hardware and software by greatly reducing the amount of programming required to port an application to a new manufacturer's computer. An important driver of software innovation was the advent of (comparatively) low-cost microcomputers running CP/M, as independent programmers and hackers bought them and shared their creations in user groups. CP/M was eventually displaced in popularity by DOS following the 1981 introduction of the IBM PC.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nGary Kildall originally developed CP/M during 1974, as an operating system to run on an Intel Intellec-8 development system, equipped with a Shugart Associates 8-inch floppy-disk drive interfaced via a custom floppy-disk controller. It was written in Kildall's own PL/M (\"Programming Language for Microcomputers\"). Various aspects of CP/M were influenced by the TOPS-10 operating system of the DECsystem-10 mainframe computer, which Kildall had used as a development environment.\nCP/M supported a wide range of computers based on the 8080 and Z80 CPUs. An early outside licensee of CP/M was Gnat Computers, an early microcomputer developer out of San Diego, California. In 1977, the company was granted the license to use CP/M 1.0 for any micro they desired for $90. Within the year, demand for CP/M was so high that Digital Research was able to increase the license to tens of thousands of dollars.\nUnder Kildall's direction, the development of CP/M 2.0 was mostly carried out by John Pierce in 1978. Kathryn Strutynski, a friend of Kildall from Naval Postgraduate School (NPS), became the fourth employee of Digital Research Inc. in early 1979. She started by debugging CP/M 2.0, and later became influential as key developer for CP/M 2.2 and CP/M Plus. Other early developers of the CP/M base included Robert \"Bob\" Silberstein and David \"Dave\" K. Brown.\nCP/M originally stood for \"Control Program/Monitor\", a name which implies a resident monitor\u2014a primitive precursor to the operating system. However, during the conversion of CP/M to a commercial product, trademark registration documents filed in November 1977 gave the product's name as \"Control Program for Microcomputers\". The CP/M name follows a prevailing naming scheme of the time, as in Kildall's PL/M language, and Prime Computer's PL/P (\"Programming Language for Prime\"), both suggesting IBM's PL/I; and IBM's CP/CMS operating system, which Kildall had used when working at the NPS. This renaming of CP/M was part of a larger effort by Kildall and his wife with business partner, Dorothy McEwen to convert Kildall's personal project of CP/M and the Intel-contracted PL/M compiler into a commercial enterprise. The Kildalls intended to establish the Digital Research brand and its product lines as synonymous with \"microcomputer\" in the consumer's mind, similar to what IBM and Microsoft together later successfully accomplished in making \"personal computer\" synonymous with their product offerings. Intergalactic Digital Research, Inc. was later renamed via a corporation change-of-name filing to Digital Research, Inc.\nInitial success.\nBy September 1981, Digital Research had sold more than CP/M licenses; \"InfoWorld\" stated that the actual market was likely larger because of sublicenses. Many different companies produced CP/M-based computers for many different markets; the magazine stated that \"CP/M is well on its way to establishing itself as \"the\" small-computer operating system\". Even companies with proprietary operating systems, such as Heath/Zenith (HDOS), offered CP/M as an alternative for their 8080/Z80-based systems; by contrast, no comparable standard existed for computers based on the also popular 6502 CPU. They supported CP/M because of its large library of software. The Xerox 820 ran the operating system because \"where there are literally thousands of programs written for it, it would be unwise not to take advantage of it\", Xerox said. (Xerox included a Howard W. Sams CP/M manual as compensation for Digital Research's documentation, which \"InfoWorld\" described as atrocious, incomplete, incomprehensible, and poorly indexed.) By 1984, Columbia University used the same source code to build Kermit binaries for more than a dozen different CP/M systems, plus two generic versions. The operating system was described as a \"software bus\", allowing multiple programs to interact with different hardware in a standardized way. Programs written for CP/M were typically portable among different machines, usually requiring only the specification of the escape sequences for control of the screen and printer. This portability made CP/M popular, and much more software was written for CP/M than for operating systems that ran on only one brand of hardware. One restriction on portability was that certain programs used the extended instruction set of the Z80 processor and would not operate on an 8080 or 8085 processor. Another was graphics routines, especially in games and graphics programs, which were generally machine-specific as they used direct hardware access for speed, bypassing the OS and BIOS (this was also a common problem in early DOS machines).\nBill Gates claimed that the Apple II with a Z-80 SoftCard was the single most-popular CP/M hardware platform. Digital Research stated in 1982 that the operating system had been licensed for more than 450 types of computer systems. Many different brands of machines ran the operating system, some notable examples being the Altair 8800, the IMSAI 8080, the Osborne 1 and Kaypro luggables, and MSX computers. The best-selling CP/M-capable system of all time was probably the Amstrad PCW. In the UK, CP/M was also available on Research Machines educational computers (with the CP/M source code published as an educational resource), and for the BBC Micro when equipped with a Z80 co-processor. Furthermore, it was available for the Amstrad CPC series, the Commodore 128, TRS-80, and later models of the ZX Spectrum. CP/M\u00a03 was also used on the NIAT, a custom handheld computer designed for A. C. Nielsen's internal use with 1\u00a0MB of SSD memory.\nMulti-user.\nIn 1979, a multi-user compatible derivative of CP/M was released. MP/M allowed multiple users to connect to a single computer, using multiple terminals to provide each user with a screen and keyboard. Later versions ran on 16-bit processors.\nCP/M Plus.\nThe last 8-bit version of CP/M was version 3, often called CP/M\u00a0Plus, released in 1983. Its BDOS was designed by David K. Brown. It incorporated the bank switching memory management of MP/M in a single-user single-task operating system compatible with CP/M\u00a02.2 applications. CP/M\u00a03 could therefore use more than 64\u00a0KB of memory on an 8080 or Z80 processor. The system could be configured to support date stamping of files. The operating system distribution software also included a relocating assembler and linker. CP/M\u00a03 was available for the last generation of 8-bit computers, notably the Amstrad PCW, the Amstrad CPC, the ZX Spectrum +3, the Commodore 128, MSX machines and the Radio Shack TRS-80 Model 4.\n16-bit versions.\nThere were versions of CP/M for some 16-bit CPUs as well.\nThe first version in the 16-bit family was CP/M-86 for the Intel 8086 in November 1981. Kathryn Strutynski was the project manager for the evolving CP/M-86 line of operating systems. At this point, the original 8-bit CP/M became known by the retronym \"CP/M-80\" to avoid confusion.\nCP/M-86 was expected to be the standard operating system of the new IBM PCs, but DRI and IBM were unable to negotiate development and licensing terms. IBM turned to Microsoft instead, and Microsoft delivered PC\u00a0DOS based on 86-DOS. Although CP/M-86 became an option for the IBM PC after DRI threatened legal action, it never overtook Microsoft's system. Most customers were repelled by the significantly greater price IBM charged for CP/M-86 over PC DOS ( and , respectively).\nWhen Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) put out the Rainbow 100 to compete with IBM, it came with CP/M-80 using a Z80 chip, CP/M-86 or MS-DOS using an 8088 microprocessor, or CP/M-86/80 using both. The Z80 and 8088 CPUs ran concurrently. A benefit of the Rainbow was that it could continue to run 8-bit CP/M software, preserving a user's possibly sizable investment as they moved into the 16-bit world of MS-DOS. A similar dual-processor adaption for the CompuPro System 816 was named CP/M 8-16. The CP/M-86 adaptation for the 8085/8088-based Zenith Z-100 also supported running programs for both of its CPUs.\nSoon following CP/M-86, another 16-bit version of CP/M was \"CP/M-68K\" for the Motorola 68000. The original version of CP/M-68K in 1982 was written in Pascal/MT+68k, but it was ported to C later on. CP/M-68K, already running on the Motorola EXORmacs systems, was initially to be used in the Atari ST computer, but Atari decided to go with a newer disk operating system called GEMDOS. CP/M-68K was also used on the SORD M68 and M68MX computers.\nIn 1982, there was also a port from CP/M-68K to the 16-bit Zilog Z8000 for the Olivetti M20, written in C, named \"CP/M-8000\".\nThese 16-bit versions of CP/M required application programs to be re-compiled for the new CPUs. Some programs written in assembly language could be automatically translated for a new processor. One tool for this was Digital Research's XLT86, which translated .ASM source code for the Intel 8080 processor into .A86 source code for the Intel 8086. The translator would also optimize the output for code size and take care of calling conventions, so that CP/M-80 and MP/M-80 programs could be ported to the CP/M-86 and MP/M-86 platforms automatically. XLT86 itself was written in PL/I-80 and was available for CP/M-80 platforms as well as for VAX/VMS.\nDisplacement by MS-DOS.\nBy the early 1980s an estimated 2000 CP/M applications existed. Many expected that it would be the standard operating system for 16-bit computers. In 1980 IBM approached Digital Research, at Bill Gates' suggestion, to license a forthcoming version of CP/M for its new product, the IBM Personal Computer. Upon the failure to obtain a signed unilateral non-disclosure agreement, the talks failed, and IBM instead contracted with Microsoft to provide an operating system.\nMany of the basic concepts and mechanisms of early versions of MS-DOS resemble those of CP/M. Internals like file-handling data structures are identical, and both refer to disk drives with a letter (codice_1, codice_2, etc.). MS-DOS's main innovation was its FAT file system. This similarity made it easier to port popular CP/M software like WordStar and dBase. However, CP/M's concept of separate user areas for files on the same disk was never ported to MS-DOS. Since MS-DOS has access to more memory (as few IBM PCs were sold with less than 64\u00a0KB of memory, while CP/M can run in 16\u00a0KB if necessary), more commands are built into the command-line shell, making MS-DOS somewhat faster and easier to use on floppy-based computers.\nAlthough one of the first peripherals for the IBM PC was the Baby Blue card, a SoftCard-like expansion card that lets the PC run 8-bit CP/M software like WordStar not yet available for it, and \"BYTE\" in 1982 described MS-DOS and CP/M as David and Goliath, the magazine stated that MS-DOS was \"much more user-friendly, faster, with many more advantages, and fewer disadvantages\". \"InfoWorld\" stated in 1984 that efforts to introduce CP/M to the home market had been largely unsuccessful and most CP/M software was too expensive for home users. In 1986 the magazine stated that Kaypro had stopped production of 8-bit CP/M-based models to concentrate on sales of MS-DOS compatible systems, long after most other vendors had ceased production of new equipment and software for CP/M. CP/M rapidly lost market share as the microcomputing market moved to the IBM-compatible platform, and never regained its former popularity. \"Byte\" magazine, one of the leading industry magazines for microcomputers, essentially ceased covering CP/M products within a few years of the introduction of the IBM PC. For example, in 1983 there were still a few advertisements for S-100 boards and articles on CP/M software, but by 1987 these were no longer found in the magazine.\nLater versions of CP/M-86 made significant strides in performance and usability and were made compatible with MS-DOS. To reflect this compatibility the name was changed, and CP/M-86 became DOS Plus, which in turn became DR-DOS.\nZCPR.\nZCPR (the Z80 Command Processor Replacement) was introduced on 2 February 1982 as a drop-in replacement for the standard Digital Research console command processor (CCP) and was initially written by a group of computer hobbyists who called themselves \"The CCP Group\". They were Frank Wancho, Keith Petersen (the archivist behind Simtel at the time), Ron Fowler, Charlie Strom, Bob Mathias, and Richard Conn. Richard was, in fact, the driving force in this group (all of whom maintained contact through email).\nZCPR1 was released on a disk put out by SIG/M (Special Interest Group/Microcomputers), a part of the Amateur Computer Club of New Jersey.\nZCPR2 was released on 14 February 1983. It was released as a set of ten disks from SIG/M. ZCPR2 was upgraded to 2.3, and also was released in 8080 code, permitting the use of ZCPR2 on 8080 and 8085 systems.\nConn and Frank Gaude formed Echelon Inc. to publish the next version of ZCPR as a commercial product, while still distributing it as free software. ZCPR3 was released on 14 July 1984, as a set of nine disks from SIG/M. The code for ZCPR3 could also be compiled (with reduced features) for the 8080 and would run on systems that did not have the requisite Z80 microprocessor. Features of ZCPR as of version 3 included shells, aliases, I/O redirection, flow control, named directories, search paths, custom menus, passwords, and online help. In January 1987, Richard Conn stopped developing ZCPR, and Echelon asked Jay Sage (who already had a privately enhanced ZCPR 3.1) to continue work on it. Thus, ZCPR 3.3 was developed and released. ZCPR 3.3 no longer supported the 8080 series of microprocessors, and added the most features of any upgrade in the ZCPR line. ZCPR 3.3 also included a full complement of utilities with considerably extended capabilities. While enthusiastically supported by the CP/M user base of the time, ZCPR alone was insufficient to slow the demise of CP/M.\nHardware model.\nA minimal 8-bit CP/M system would contain the following components:\nThe only hardware system that CP/M, as sold by Digital Research, would support was the Intel 8080 Development System. Manufacturers of CP/M-compatible systems customized portions of the operating system for their own combination of installed memory, disk drives, and console devices. CP/M would also run on systems based on the Zilog Z80 processor since the Z80 was compatible with 8080 code. While the Digital Research distributed core of CP/M (BDOS, CCP, core transient commands) did not use any of the Z80-specific instructions, many Z80-based systems used Z80 code in the system-specific BIOS, and many applications were dedicated to Z80-based CP/M machines.\nDigital Research subsequently partnered with Zilog and American Microsystems to produce Personal CP/M, a ROM-based version of the operating system aimed at lower-cost systems that could potentially be equipped without disk drives. First featured in the Sharp MZ-800, a cassette-based system with optional disk drives, Personal CP/M was described as having been \"rewritten to take advantage of the enhanced Z-80 instruction set\" as opposed to preserving portability with the 8080. American Microsystems announced a Z80-compatible microprocessor, the S83, featuring 8\u00a0KB of in-package ROM for the operating system and BIOS, together with comprehensive logic for interfacing with 64-kilobit dynamic RAM devices. Unit pricing of the S83 was quoted as $32 in 1,000 unit quantities.\nOn most machines the bootstrap was a minimal bootloader in ROM combined with some means of minimal bank switching or a means of injecting code on the bus (since the 8080 needs to see boot code at Address 0 for start-up, while CP/M needs RAM there); for others, this bootstrap had to be entered into memory using front-panel controls each time the system was started.\nCP/M used the 7-bit ASCII set. The other 128 characters made possible by the 8-bit byte were not standardized. For example, one Kaypro used them for Greek characters, and Osborne machines used the 8th bit set to indicate an underlined character. WordStar used the 8th bit as an end-of-word marker. International CP/M systems most commonly used the ISO 646 norm for localized character sets, replacing certain ASCII characters with localized characters rather than adding them beyond the 7-bit boundary.\nComponents.\nWhile running, the CP/M operating system loaded into memory has three components:21\nThe BIOS and BDOS are memory-resident, while the CCP is memory-resident unless overwritten by an application, in which case it is automatically reloaded after the application finished running. A number of transient commands for standard utilities are also provided. The transient commands reside in files with the extension .COM on disk.\nThe BIOS directly controls hardware components other than the CPU and main memory. It contains functions such as character input and output and the reading and writing of disk sectors. The BDOS implements the CP/M file system and some input/output abstractions (such as redirection) on top of the BIOS. The CCP takes user commands and either executes them directly (internal commands such as DIR to show a directory or ERA to delete a file) or loads and starts an executable file of the given name (transient commands such as PIP.COM to copy files or STAT.COM to show various file and system information). Third-party applications for CP/M are also essentially transient commands.\nThe BDOS, CCP and standard transient commands are the same in all installations of a particular revision of CP/M, but the BIOS portion is always adapted to the particular hardware.\nAdding memory to a computer, for example, means that the CP/M system must be reinstalled to allow transient programs to use the additional memory space. A utility program (MOVCPM) is provided with system distribution that allows relocating the object code to different memory areas. The utility program adjusts the addresses in absolute jump and subroutine call instructions to new addresses required by the new location of the operating system in processor memory. This newly patched version can then be saved on a new disk, allowing application programs to access the additional memory made available by moving the system components. Once installed, the operating system (BIOS, BDOS and CCP) is stored in reserved areas at the beginning of any disk which can be used to boot the system. On start-up, the bootloader (usually contained in a ROM firmware chip) loads the operating system from the disk in drive codice_1.\nBy modern standards CP/M is primitive, owing to the extreme constraints on program size. With version 1.0 there is no provision for detecting a changed disk. If a user changes disks without manually rereading the disk directory the system writes on the new disk using the old disk's directory information, ruining the data stored on the disk. From version 1.1 or 1.2 onwards, changing a disk then trying to write to it before its directory is read will cause a fatal error to be signalled. This avoids overwriting the disk but requires a reboot and loss of the data to be stored on disk.\nThe majority of the complexity in CP/M is isolated in the BDOS, and to a lesser extent, the CCP and transient commands. This meant that by porting the limited number of simple routines in the BIOS to a particular hardware platform, the entire OS would work. This significantly reduced the development time needed to support new machines, and was one of the main reasons for CP/M's widespread use. Today this sort of abstraction is common to most OSs (a hardware abstraction layer), but at the time of CP/M's birth, OSs were typically intended to run on only one machine platform, and multilayer designs were considered unnecessary.\nConsole Command Processor.\nThe Console Command Processor, or CCP, accepts input from the keyboard and conveys results to the terminal. CP/M itself works with either a printing terminal or a video terminal. All CP/M commands have to be typed in on the command line. The console most often displays the codice_4 prompt, to indicate the current default disk drive. When used with a video terminal, this is usually followed by a blinking cursor supplied by the terminal. The CCP awaits input from the user. A CCP internal command, of the form drive letter followed by a colon, can be used to select the default drive. For example, typing codice_2 and pressing enter at the command prompt changes the default drive to B, and the command prompt then becomes codice_6 to indicate this change.\nCP/M's command-line interface was patterned after the Concise Command Language used in operating systems from Digital Equipment, such as RT-11 for the PDP-11 and OS/8 for the PDP-8. Commands take the form of a keyword followed by a list of parameters separated by spaces or special characters. Similar to a Unix shell builtin, if an internal command is recognized, it is carried out by the CCP itself. Otherwise it attempts to find an executable file on the currently logged disk drive and (in later versions) user area, loads it, and passes it any additional parameters from the command line. These are referred to as \"transient\" programs. On completion, BDOS will reload the CCP if it has been overwritten by application programs \u2014 this allows transient programs a larger memory space.\nThe commands themselves can sometimes be obscure. For instance, the command to duplicate files is named codice_7 (Peripheral-Interchange-Program), the name of the old DEC utility used for that purpose. The format of parameters given to a program was not standardized, so that there is no single option character that differentiated options from file names. Different programs can and do use different characters.\nThe CP/M Console Command Processor includes DIR, ERA, REN, SAVE, TYPE, and USER as built-in commands. Transient commands in CP/M include ASM, DDT, DUMP, ED, LOAD, MOVCPM, PIP, STAT, SUBMIT, and SYSGEN.\nCP/M Plus (CP/M Version 3) includes DIR (display list of files from a directory except those marked with the SYS attribute), DIRSYS / DIRS (list files marked with the SYS attribute in the directory), ERASE / ERA (delete a file), RENAME / REN (rename a file), TYPE / TYP (display contents of an ASCII character file), and USER / USE (change user number) as built-in commands: CP/M 3 allows the user to abbreviate the built-in commands. Transient commands in CP/M 3 include COPYSYS, DATE, DEVICE, DUMP, ED, GET, HELP, HEXCOM, INITDIR, LINK, MAC, PIP, PUT, RMAC, SET, SETDEF, SHOW, SID, SUBMIT, and XREF.\nBasic Disk Operating System.\nThe Basic Disk Operating System, or BDOS, provides access to such operations as opening a file, output to the console, or printing. Application programs load processor registers with a function code for the operation, and addresses for parameters or memory buffers, and call a fixed address in memory. Since the address is the same independent of the amount of memory in the system, application programs run the same way for any type or configuration of hardware.\nBasic Input Output System.\nThe Basic Input Output System or BIOS, provides the lowest level functions required by the operating system.\nThese include reading or writing single characters to the system console and reading or writing a sector of data from the disk. The BDOS handles some of the buffering of data from the diskette, but before CP/M\u00a03.0 it assumes a disk sector size fixed at 128 bytes, as used on single-density 8-inch floppy disks. Since most 5.25-inch disk formats use larger sectors, the blocking and deblocking and the management of a disk buffer area is handled by model-specific code in the BIOS.\nCustomization is required because hardware choices are not constrained by compatibility with any one popular standard. For example, some manufacturers designed built-in integrated video display systems, while others relied on separate computer terminals. Serial ports for printers and modems can use different types of UART chips, and port addresses are not fixed. Some machines use memory-mapped I/O instead of the 8080 I/O address space. All of these variations in the hardware are concealed from other modules of the system by use of the BIOS, which uses standard entry points for the services required to run CP/M such as character I/O or accessing a disk block. Since support for serial communication to a modem is very rudimentary in the BIOS or may be absent altogether, it is common practice for CP/M programs that use modems to have a user-installed overlay containing all the code required to access a particular machine's serial port.\nApplications.\nWordStar, one of the first widely used word processors, and dBase, an early and popular database program for microcomputers, were originally written for CP/M. Two early outliners, KAMAS (Knowledge and Mind Amplification System) and its cut-down successor Out-Think (without programming facilities and retooled for 8080/V20 compatibility) were also written for CP/M, though later rewritten for MS-DOS. Turbo Pascal, the ancestor of Borland Delphi, and Multiplan, the ancestor of Microsoft Excel, also debuted on CP/M before MS-DOS versions became available. VisiCalc, the first-ever spreadsheet program, was made available for CP/M. Another company, Sorcim, created its SuperCalc spreadsheet for CP/M, which would go on to become the market leader and de facto standard on CP/M. Supercalc would go on to be a competitor in the spreadsheet market in the MS-DOS world. AutoCAD, a CAD application from Autodesk debuted on CP/M. A host of compilers and interpreters for popular programming languages of the time (such as BASIC, Borland's Turbo Pascal, FORTRAN and even PL/I) were available, among them several of the earliest Microsoft products.\nCP/M software often comes with installers that adapts it to a wide variety of computers. A Kaypro II owner, for example, would obtain software on Xerox 820 format, then copy it to and run it from Kaypro-format disks. The source code for BASIC programs is easily accessible, and most forms of copy protection are ineffective on the operating system. While copy-protected programs for contemporary operating systems often use nonstandard disk formats that other software cannot read, CP/M users expect cross-software compatibility for their files; an unreadable disk is by definition not in a CP/M format.\nThe lack of standardized graphics support limited video games, but various character and text-based games were ported, such as \"Telengard\", \"Gorillas\", \"Hamurabi\", \"Lunar Lander\", along with early interactive fiction including the \"Zork\" series and \"Colossal Cave Adventure\". Text adventure specialist Infocom was one of the few publishers to consistently release their games in CP/M format. Lifeboat Associates started collecting and distributing user-written \"free\" software. One of the first was XMODEM, which allowed reliable file transfers via modem and phone line. Another program native to CP/M was the outline processor KAMAS.\nTransient Program Area.\nIn the original version of CP/M for the 8080, 8085, and Z80, the read/write memory between address 0100 hexadecimal and the location just before address stored at 0006H (the lowest address of the BDOS) is the \"Transient Program Area\" (TPA) available for CP/M application programs. Although all Z80 and 8080 processors could address 64 kilobytes of memory, the amount available for application programs could vary, depending on the design of the particular computer. Some computers used large parts of the address space for such things as BIOS ROMs, or video display memory. As a result, some systems had more TPA memory available than others. Bank switching was a common technique that allowed systems to have a large TPA while switching out ROM or video memory space as needed. CP/M\u00a03.0 allowed parts of the BDOS to be in bank-switched memory as well.\nDebugging application.\nCP/M came with a Dynamic Debugging Tool, nicknamed DDT (after the insecticide, i.e. a bug-killer), which allowed memory and program modules to be examined and manipulated, and allowed a program to be executed one step at a time.\nResident programs.\nCP/M originally did not support the equivalent of terminate and stay resident (TSR) programs as under DOS. Programmers could write software that could intercept certain operating system calls and extend or alter their functionality. Using this capability, programmers developed and sold auxiliary desk accessory programs, such as SmartKey, a keyboard utility to assign any string of bytes to any key.\nCP/M\u00a03, however, added support for dynamically loadable \"Resident System Extensions\" (RSX). A so-called \"null command file\" could be used to allow CCP to load an RSX without a transient program. Similar solutions like RSMs (for \"Resident System Modules\") were also retrofitted to CP/M\u00a02.2 systems by third-parties.\nSoftware installation.\nAlthough CP/M provided some hardware abstraction to standardize the interface to disk I/O or console I/O, application programs still typically required installation to make use of all the features of such equipment as printers and terminals. Often these were controlled by escape sequences which had to be altered for different devices. For example, the escape sequence to select bold face on a printer would have differed among manufacturers, and sometimes among models within a manufacturer's range. This procedure was not defined by the operating system; a user would typically run an installation program that would either allow selection from a range of devices, or else allow feature-by-feature editing of the escape sequences required to access a function. This had to be repeated for each application program, since there was no central operating system service provided for these devices.\nThe initialization codes for each model of printer had to be written into the application. To use a program such as Wordstar with more than one printer (say, a fast dot-matrix printer or a slower but presentation-quality daisy wheel printer), a separate version of Wordstar had to be prepared, and one had to load the Wordstar version that corresponded to the printer selected (and exiting and reloading to change printers).\nDisk formats.\nIBM System/34 and IBM 3740's 128 byte/sector, single-density, single-sided format is CP/M's standard 8-inch floppy-disk format. No standard 5.25-inch CP/M disk format exists, with Kaypro, Morrow Designs, Osborne, and others each using their own. Certain formats were more popular than others. Most software was available in the Xerox 820 format, and other computers such as the Kaypro II were compatible with it, but \"InfoWorld\" estimated in September 1981 that \"about two dozen formats were popular enough that software creators had to consider them to reach the broadest possible market\". JRT Pascal, for example, provided versions on 5.25-inch disk for North Star, Osborne, Apple, Heath/Zenith hard sector and soft sector, and Superbrain, and one 8-inch version. Ellis Computing also offered its software for both Heath formats, and 16 other 5.25-inch formats including two different TRS-80 CP/M modifications. Lifetree and some other software distributors also converted CP/M applications to various systems.\nVarious formats were used depending on the characteristics of particular systems and to some degree the choices of the designers. CP/M supports options to control the size of reserved and directory areas on the disk, and the mapping between logical disk sectors (as seen by CP/M programs) and physical sectors as allocated on the disk. There are many ways to customize these parameters for every system but once they are set, no standardized way exists for a system to load parameters from a disk formatted on another system.\nWhile almost every CP/M system with 8-inch drives can read the aforementioned IBM single-sided, single-density format, for other formats the degree of portability between different CP/M machines depends on the type of disk drive and controller used since many different floppy types existed in the CP/M era in both 8-inch and 5.25-inch sizes. Disks can be hard or soft sectored, single or double density, single or double sided, 35 track, 40 track, 77 track, or 80 track, and the sector layout, size and interleave can vary widely as well. Although translation programs can allow the user to read disk types from different machines, the drive type and controller are also factors. By 1982, soft-sector, single-sided, 40-track 5.25-inch disks had become the most popular format to distribute CP/M software on as they were used by the most common consumer-level machines of that time, such as the Apple II, TRS-80, Osborne 1, Kaypro II, and IBM PC. A translation program allows the user to read any disks on his machine that had a similar format; for example, the Kaypro II can read TRS-80, Osborne, IBM PC, and Epson disks. Other disk types such as 80 track or hard sectored are completely impossible to read. The first half of double-sided disks (like those of the Epson QX-10) can be read because CP/M accessed disk tracks sequentially with track 0 being the first (outermost) track of side 1 and track 79 (on a 40-track disk) being the last (innermost) track of side 2. Apple II users are unable to use anything but Apple's GCR format and so have to obtain CP/M software on Apple format disks or else transfer it via serial link.\nThe fragmented CP/M market, requiring distributors either to stock multiple formats of disks or to invest in multiformat duplication equipment, compared with the more standardized IBM PC disk formats, was a contributing factor to the rapid obsolescence of CP/M after 1981.\nOne of the last notable CP/M-capable machines to appear was the Commodore\u00a0128 in 1985, which had a Z80 for CP/M support in addition to its native mode using a 6502-derivative CPU. Using CP/M required either a 1571 or 1581 disk drive which could read soft-sector 40-track MFM-format disks.\nThe first computer to use a 3.5-inch floppy drive, the Sony SMC-70, ran CP/M\u00a02.2. The Commodore 128, Bondwell-2 laptop, Micromint/Ciarcia SB-180, MSX and TRS-80 Model\u00a04 (running Montezuma CP/M\u00a02.2) also supported the use of CP/M with 3.5-inch floppy disks. CP/AM, Applied Engineering's version of CP/M for the Apple II, also supported 3.5-inch disks (as well as RAM disks on RAM cards compatible with the Apple II Memory Expansion Card). The Amstrad PCW ran CP/M using 3-inch floppy drives at first, and later switched to the 3.5 inch drives.\nFile system.\nFile names were specified as a string of up to eight characters, followed by a period, followed by a file name extension of up to three characters (\"8.3\" filename format). The extension usually identified the type of the file. For example, codice_8 indicated an executable program file, and codice_9 indicated a file containing ASCII text. Characters in filenames entered at the command prompt were converted to upper case, but this was not enforced by the operating system. Programs (MBASIC is a notable example) were able to create filenames containing lower-case letters, which then could not easily be referenced at the command line.\nEach disk drive was identified by a drive letter, for example, drive codice_10 and drive codice_11. To refer to a file on a specific drive, the drive letter was prefixed to the file name, separated by a colon, e.g., codice_12. With no drive letter prefixed, access was to files on the current default drive.\nFile size was specified as the number of 128-byte \"records\" (directly corresponding to disk sectors on 8-inch drives) occupied by a file on the disk. There was no generally supported way of specifying byte-exact file sizes. The current size of a file was maintained in the file's File Control Block (FCB) by the operating system. Since many application programs (such as text editors) prefer to deal with files as sequences of characters rather than as sequences of records, by convention text files were terminated with a control-Z character (ASCII SUB, hexadecimal 1A). Determining the end of a text file therefore involved examining the last record of the file to locate the terminating control-Z. This also meant that inserting a control-Z character into the middle of a file usually had the effect of truncating the text contents of the file.\nWith the advent of larger removable and fixed disk drives, disk de-blocking formulas were employed which resulted in more disk blocks per logical file allocation block. While this allowed for larger file sizes, it also meant that the smallest file which could be allocated increased in size from 1\u00a0KB (on single-density drives) to 2\u00a0KB (on double-density drives) and so on, up to 32\u00a0KB for a file containing only a single byte. This made for inefficient use of disk space if the disk contained a large number of small files.\nFile modification time stamps were not supported in releases up to CP/M\u00a02.2, but were an optional feature in MP/M and CP/M\u00a03.0.\nCP/M\u00a02.2 had no subdirectories in the file structure, but provided 16 numbered user areas to organize files on a disk. To change user one had to simply type \"User X\" at the command prompt, X being the user number. Security was non-existent and considered unnecessary on a personal computer. The user area concept was to make the single-user version of CP/M somewhat compatible with multi-user MP/M systems. A common patch for the CP/M and derivative operating systems was to make one user area accessible to the user independent of the currently set user area. A USER command allowed the user area to be changed to any area from 0 to 15. User 0 was the default. If one changed to another user, such as USER 1, the material saved on the disk for this user would only be available to USER 1; USER 2 would not be able to see it or access it. However, files stored in the USER 0 area were accessible to all other users; their location was specified with a prefatory path, since the files of USER 0 were only visible to someone logged in as USER 0. The user area feature arguably had little utility on small floppy disks, but it was useful for organizing files on machines with hard drives. The intent of the feature was to ease use of the same computer for different tasks. For example, a secretary could do data entry, then, after switching USER areas, another employee could use the machine to do billing without their files intermixing.\nGraphics.\nAlthough graphics-capable S-100 systems existed from the commercialization of the S-100 bus, CP/M did not provide any standardized graphics support until 1982 with GSX (Graphics System Extension). Owing to the small amount of available memory, graphics was never a common feature associated with 8-bit CP/M operating systems. Most systems could only display rudimentary ASCII art charts and diagrams in text mode or by using a custom character set. Some computers in the Kaypro line and the TRS-80 Model 4 had video hardware supporting block graphics characters, and these were accessible to assembler programmers and BASIC programmers using the codice_13 command. The Model 4 could display 640 by 240 pixel graphics with an optional high resolution board.\nDerivatives.\nOfficial.\nSome companies made official enhancements of CP/M based on Digital Research source code.\nAn example is IMDOS for the IMSAI 8080 computer made by IMS Associates, Inc., a clone of the famous Altair 8800.\nCompatible.\nOther CP/M compatible OSes were developed independently and made no use of Digital Research code. Some contemporary examples were:\nEnhancements.\nSome CP/M compatible operating systems extended the basic functionality so far that they far exceeded the original, for example the multi-processor capable TurboDOS.\nEastern bloc.\nA number of CP/M-80 derivatives existed in the former Eastern Bloc under various names, including SCP (Single User Control Program), SCP/M, CP/A, CP/J, CP/KC, CP/KSOB, CP/L, CP/Z, MICRODOS, BCU880, ZOAZ, OS/M, TOS/M, ZSDOS, M/OS, COS-PSA, DOS-PSA, CSOC, CSOS, CZ-CPM, DAC, HC and others. There were also CP/M-86 derivatives named SCP1700, CP/K and K8918-OS. They were produced by the East German VEB Robotron and others.\nLegacy.\nA number of behaviors exhibited by Microsoft Windows are a result of backward compatibility with MS-DOS, which in turn attempted some backward compatibility with CP/M. The drive letter and 8.3 filename conventions in MS-DOS (and early Windows versions) were originally adopted from CP/M. The wildcard matching characters used by Windows (? and *) are based on those of CP/M, as are the reserved filenames used to redirect output to a printer (\"PRN:\"), and the console (\"CON:\"). The drive names A and B were used to designate the two floppy disk drives that CP/M systems typically used; when hard drives appeared, they were designated C, which survived into MS-DOS as the codice_14 command prompt. The control character codice_15 marking the end of some text files can also be attributed to CP/M. Various commands in DOS were modelled after CP/M commands; some of them even carried the same name, like DIR, REN/RENAME, or TYPE (and ERA/ERASE in DR-DOS). File extensions like codice_9 or codice_8 are still used to identify file types on many operating systems.\nIn 1997 and 1998, Caldera released some CP/M\u00a02.2 binaries and source code under an open source license, also allowing the redistribution and modification of further collected Digital Research files related to the CP/M and MP/M families through Tim Olmstead's \"The Unofficial CP/M Web site\" since 1997. After Olmstead's death on 12 September 2001, the distribution license was refreshed and expanded by Lineo, who had meanwhile become the owner of those Digital Research assets, on 19 October 2001.\nIn October 2014, to mark the 40th anniversary of the first presentation of CP/M, the Computer History Museum released early source code versions of CP/M.\nAs of 2018[ [update]], there are a number of active vintage, hobby and retro-computer people and groups, and some small commercial businesses, still developing and supporting computer platforms that use CP/M (mostly 2.2) as the host operating system."}
{"id": "45148", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45148", "title": "8-bit computing", "text": "Computer architectures using an 8-bit word\nIn computer architecture, 8-bit integers or other data units are those that are 8 bits wide (1 octet). Also, 8-bit central processing unit (CPU) and arithmetic logic unit (ALU) architectures are those that are based on registers or data buses of that size. Memory addresses (and thus address buses) for 8-bit CPUs are generally larger than 8-bit, usually 16-bit. 8-bit microcomputers are microcomputers that use 8-bit microprocessors.\nThe term '8-bit' is also applied to the character sets that could be used on computers with 8-bit bytes, the best known being various forms of extended ASCII, including the ISO/IEC 8859 series of national character sets\u00a0\u2013 especially Latin 1 for English and Western European languages.\nThe IBM System/360 introduced byte-addressable memory with 8-bit bytes, as opposed to bit-addressable or decimal digit-addressable or word-addressable memory, although its general-purpose registers were 32 bits wide, and addresses were contained in the lower 24 bits of those addresses. Different models of System/360 had different internal data path widths; the IBM System/360 Model 30 (1965) implemented the 32-bit System/360 architecture, but had an 8-bit native path width, and performed 32-bit arithmetic 8 bits at a time.\nThe first widely adopted 8-bit microprocessor was the Intel 8080, being used in many hobbyist computers of the late 1970s and early 1980s, often running the CP/M operating system; it had 8-bit data words and 16-bit addresses. The Zilog Z80 (compatible with the 8080) and the Motorola 6800 were also used in similar computers. The Z80 and the MOS Technology 6502 8-bit CPUs were widely used in home computers and second- and third-generation game consoles of the 1970s and 1980s. Many 8-bit CPUs or microcontrollers are the basis of today's ubiquitous embedded systems.\nHistorical context.\n8-bit microprocessors were the first widely used microprocessors in the computing industry, marking a major shift from mainframes and minicomputers to smaller, more affordable systems. The introduction of 8-bit processors in the 1970s enabled the production of personal computers, leading to the popularization of computing and setting the foundation for the modern computing landscape.\nThe 1976 Zilog Z80, one of the most popular 8-bit CPUs (though with 4-bit ALU, at least in the original), was discontinued in 2024 (its product line Z84C00), with Last Time Buy (LTB) orders by 14 June 2024.\nDetails.\nAn 8-bit register can store 28 different values. The range of integer values that can be stored in 8 bits depends on the integer representation used. With the two most common representations, the range is 0 through 255 (28 \u2212 1) for representation as an (unsigned) binary number, and \u2212128 (\u22121 \u00d7 27) through 127 (27 \u2212 1) for representation as two's complement.\n8-bit CPUs use an 8-bit data bus and can therefore access 8 bits of data in a single machine instruction. The address bus is typically a double octet (16 bits) wide, due to practical and economical considerations. This implies a direct address space of 64\u00a0KB (65,536 bytes) on most 8-bit processors.\nMost home computers from the 8-bit era fully exploited the address space, such as the BBC Micro (Model B) with 32\u00a0KB of RAM plus 32\u00a0KB of ROM. Others like the very popular Commodore 64 had full 64\u00a0KB RAM, plus 20\u00a0KB ROM, meaning with 16-bit addressing not all of the RAM could be used by default (e.g. from the included BASIC language interpreter in ROM); without exploiting bank switching, which allows for breaking the 64\u00a0KB (RAM) limit in some systems. Other computers would have as low as 1\u00a0KB (plus 4\u00a0KB ROM), such as the Sinclair ZX80 (while the later very popular ZX Spectrum had more memory), or even only 128 bytes of RAM (plus storage from a ROM cartridge), as in an early game console Atari 2600 and thus 8-bit addressing would have been enough for the RAM, if it would not have needed to cover ROM too). The Commodore 128, and other 8-bit systems, meaning still with 16-bit addressing, could use more than 64\u00a0KB, i.e. 128\u00a0KB RAM, also the BBC Master with it expandable to 512\u00a0KB of RAM.\nWhile in general 8-bit CPUs have 16-bit addressing, in some architectures both are available, such as in the MOS Technology 6502 CPU, where the zero page is used extensively, saving one byte in the instructions accessing that page, and also having 16-bit addressing instructions that take 2 bytes for the address plus 1 for the opcode. \nSome index registers, such as the two in the 6502, are 8-bit. This limits the size of the arrays addressed using indexed addressing instructions to objects of up to 256 bytes without requiring more complicated code. Other 8-bit CPUs, such as the Motorola 6800 and Intel 8080, have 16-bit index registers.\nNotable 8-bit CPUs.\nThe first commercial 8-bit processor was the Intel 8008 (1972) which was originally intended for the Datapoint 2200 intelligent terminal. Most competitors to Intel started off with such character oriented 8-bit microprocessors. Modernized variants of these 8-bit machines are still one of the most common types of processor in embedded systems.\nThe MOS Technology 6502, and variants of it, were used in personal computers, such as the Apple I, Apple II, Atari 8-bit computers, BBC Micro, PET, VIC-20, and in home video game consoles such as the Atari 2600 and the Nintendo Entertainment System.\nUse for training, prototyping, and general hardware education.\n8-bit processors continue to be designed for general education about computer hardware, as well as for hobbyists' interests. One such CPU was designed and implemented using 7400-series integrated circuits on a breadboard. Designing 8-bit CPUs and their respective assemblers is a common training exercise for engineering students, engineers, and hobbyists. FPGAs are used for this purpose.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45150", "revid": "188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45150", "title": "Hex digit", "text": ""}
{"id": "45151", "revid": "38516105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45151", "title": "Curly brace family", "text": ""}
{"id": "45154", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45154", "title": "Eli\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez", "text": "Cuban boy in 2000 international custody dispute\nEli\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez Brotons (born December 6, 1993) is a Cuban engineer and politician. As a six-year-old child, he was at the center of a high-profile international custody dispute between members of his family that also involved Cuba and the United States.\nOn November 21, 1999, Eli\u00e1n's mother, her partner, and Eli\u00e1n fled Cuba by boat as part of a group of refugees attempting to reach the United States. The boat sank during the journey, and Eli\u00e1n's mother, along with most of the passengers, drowned. Eli\u00e1n was found floating on an inner tube and rescued by two fishermen, who turned him over to the U.S. Coast Guard. Eli\u00e1n was taken to a hospital and treated for dehydration and minor cuts. In addition to Eli\u00e1n, a young couple survived and reached shore separately.\nThe Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) granted Eli\u00e1n temporary permission to stay in the U.S. and placed him with his great-uncle, L\u00e1zaro Gonz\u00e1lez, in Miami. His great-uncle wanted Eli\u00e1n to remain in the country, while his father, Juan Miguel Gonz\u00e1lez, sought his return to Cuba. This led to a high-profile and protracted custody battle involving his father, his Miami relatives, and U.S. and Cuban officials. Eli\u00e1n was returned to his father's custody after an INS raid on his Miami relatives' home on April 22, 2000. They returned to Cuba when the legal dispute concluded on June 28, 2000.\nEli\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez grew up in Cuba, earned an engineering degree, and worked as an industrial engineer. In 2023, he was elected to the National Assembly of People's Power, representing C\u00e1rdenas, Cuba.\nEarly life.\nEli\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez was born December 6, 1993, to divorced parents. Although his parents divorced in 1991 after six years of marriage, the couple would separate for good in 1996, but both remained close with their son. They split custody of Eli\u00e1n, who spent up to five nights a week with his father or one of his grandmothers and the rest of the time with his mother.\nJourney to Florida.\nOn November 21, 1999, Gonz\u00e1lez, his mother Elizabeth Brotons Rodr\u00edguez, and twelve others left Cuba on a small aluminum boat with a faulty engine; Gonz\u00e1lez's mother and ten others died in the crossing, and their bodies were never recovered. Gonz\u00e1lez floated at sea on an inner tube until he was rescued by two fishermen, who handed him over to the United States Coast Guard. The two other survivors of the journey, a young couple, made it to the Florida coast separately.\nAccording to Gonz\u00e1lez's adult cousin Marisleysis, Eli\u00e1n told her that the boat's motor broke down and they tried in vain to bail out the water with nylon bags, but a storm doomed their efforts. He told her he tried to help get the water out and his mother's boyfriend placed him in an inner tube for safety. \"He said afterwards that he fell asleep and that when he woke up he never saw his mother again\". He said, \"I think she drowned too because she didn't know how to swim\".\nNivaldo Fern\u00e1ndez Ferr\u00e1n, one of the three survivors on the boat, said, \"Elizabeth protected her son to the end\". According to Fern\u00e1ndez Ferr\u00e1n, they set out on their trip at 4\u00a0am, dragging inflated rubber floats, or inner tubes, in case they needed them. As they encountered bad weather, the boat's engine failed and the craft began to fill with water. After it went under, the passengers clung to the inner tubes in cold water, with waves reaching heights of three to four meters (10 to 13 feet).\nAfterwards, the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) released Gonz\u00e1lez to his paternal great-uncle, L\u00e1zaro. According to \"The Washington Post\", Gonz\u00e1lez's father, Juan Miguel Gonz\u00e1lez Quintana, had telephoned L\u00e1zaro from Cuba on November 22, 1999, to advise that Gonz\u00e1lez and his mother had left Cuba without Juan Miguel's knowledge, and to watch for their arrival.\nCustody dispute in the United States.\nThe U.S. legislation system had enacted the Cuban Adjustment Act in 1966, which sought to provide political asylum for Cubans who fled their country in the hopes of a new life. Under the act, Cuban refugees without visas entering the United States were paroled, and after a year could apply for permanent resident status. The US also issued 20,000 lottery visas every year to Cuban emigrants under the wet foot, dry foot policy. Under this policy, those who reached the mainland were granted asylum, while those who were intercepted at sea by the U.S. Coast Guard were sent back to Cuba.\nL\u00e1zaro Gonz\u00e1lez, backed by local Cuban Americans, took the position that the boy should remain in the United States and not be returned to his father. Marisleysis Gonz\u00e1lez (L\u00e1zaro's adult daughter) became Eli\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez's caregiver and spokesperson for the paternal relatives. Also, Armando Gutierrez, a local Cuban-American businessman, became a spokesman. At the same time, Juan Miguel, with the support of Cuban authorities, demanded that his son be returned to Cuba.\nOn January 21, 2000, Eli\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez's grandmothers, Mariela Quintana and Raquel Rodr\u00edguez, flew from Havana to the United States to seek their grandson's return to Cuba. While they were able to meet with the boy only once at the Miami Beach home of Barry University president Sister Jeanne O'Laughlin, they journeyed to Washington and met with congressmen and Attorney General Janet Reno. After nine days of media coverage (during which Republican lawmakers acknowledged they did not have the votes to pass a bill to give Gonz\u00e1lez U.S. citizenship), they returned to Cuba to \"a hero's welcome\".\nOn January 28, the Spanish foreign minister Abel Matutes called for the boy's return to Cuba, stating that international law dictated the return. Meanwhile, the Gonz\u00e1lez family in Miami denied allegations that they had offered Juan Miguel a house and a car if he abandoned the action and joined his son in Miami. Juan Miguel said he was uninterested in emigrating.\nThrough January and February, Juan Miguel sent a number of open letters to the U.S. government\u2014published in, among other places, the Cuban newspaper \"Granma\"\u2014demanding the return of his son and refusing the Miami relatives' demands.\nChicago-based fathers' rights attorney Jeffery M. Leving spearheaded the amicus brief, which set the foundation of the custody case to reunite Gonz\u00e1lez with his father in Cuba. Manuel Gonz\u00e1lez, Eli\u00e1n Gonzalez's great-uncle, later retained Leving to reunite Gonz\u00e1lez with his father.\nOn March 21, Judge Kevin Michael Moore of the United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida dismissed the relatives' petition for asylum which they had filed on behalf of Eli\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez. L\u00e1zaro vowed to appeal. On March 29, Miami-Dade County mayor Alex Penelas was joined by 22 other civic leaders in a speech in downtown Miami. Penelas indicated that the municipality would not cooperate with Federal authorities on any repatriation of the boy, and would not lend police assets or any other assistance in taking the boy.\nOn April 14, a video was released in which Eli\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez told Juan Miguel that he wanted to stay in the United States. However, many thought that he had been coached, as a male voice was heard off-camera directing the young boy. In a September 2005 interview with \"60 Minutes\" after being sent back to Cuba, Gonz\u00e1lez stated that during his stay in the U.S., his family members were \"telling me bad things about [my father]\", and \"were also telling me to tell him that I did not want to go back to Cuba, and I always told them I wanted to.\"\nEli\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez remained a subject of media attention as he went to Walt Disney World Resort one day, then met with politicians the next. Throughout the custody battle, opinion polls showed that a majority of Americans believed Gonz\u00e1lez should be returned to his father in Cuba, and that doing so was in the boy's best interest.\nAttorney General Janet Reno ordered the return of Eli\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez to his father and set a deadline of April 13, 2000, but the Miami relatives defied the order. Negotiations continued for several days as the house was surrounded by protesters as well as police. The relatives insisted on guarantees that they could live with the child for several months and retain custody, and that Gonz\u00e1lez would not be returned to Cuba. Negotiations carried on throughout the night, but Reno stated that the relatives rejected all workable solutions.\nOn April 19, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit in Atlanta ruled that Gonz\u00e1lez must remain in the U.S. until his family in Miami could appeal for an asylum hearing in May.\nOn January 10, 2000, a Florida state court had ruled that the Florida family court was able to decide the merit of motion related with temporary custody by L\u00e1zaro Gonz\u00e1lez, stating that Eli\u00e1n should stay with the Miami relatives until a further custody hearing. However, Attorney General Janet Reno declared that the federal courts are responsible for deciding this case, and that the Miami relatives must appeal to the federal court. Here, the objective of Reno was to provide the relatives with a chance to provide \"any information\" they could that would be \"relevant in the decision\". She again emphasized that the INS commissioner had declared that the father speaks for the son, and that his wishes were to have his son returned to him.\nThe judge's order cleared the way for Gonz\u00e1lez to be returned to his father's custody. On April 19, Reno accepted a last-ditch offer at mediation between Gonz\u00e1lez's relatives from University of Miami president Edward T. Foote II, Carlos Saladrigas, and Carlos de la Cruz. However, a day later Reno made the decision to remove Gonz\u00e1lez from the house if the negotiations failed and instructed law enforcement officials to determine the best time to obtain the boy. They decided to hold the raid on either Saturday, April 22, or Monday, April 24, to avoid Good Friday or Easter Sunday. President Bill Clinton urged Reno to keep the negotiations going but approved the raid if they failed.\nDe la Cruz and Saladrigas convinced Gonzalez's relatives in Miami and their attorney Aaron Podhurst to allow Juan Miguel temporary custody over Eli\u00e1n while custody negotiations took place in a safe house in Miami. However, Juan Miguel and his attorney Gregory B. Craig rejected the deal and demanded that the boy be brought to Washington, D.C. They announced their reservations to the deal on the early morning of April 22, a matter of hours before the raid. Reno subsequently called L\u00e1zaro Gonz\u00e1lez at 2:00 am asking him to hand Eli\u00e1n over to the United States Marshals Service with the promise that she would fly to Miami in the morning to personally negotiate. However, the family refused out of fear that the government would remove Eli\u00e1n from Miami and that doing so would allow Cuban diplomats to abduct him. Fifteen minutes later, President Clinton and Chief of Staff John Podesta told Reno that she could have more time to negotiate with the family, but that she could order the raid if she so chose. Reno subsequently demanded that the family hand over Elian by 4 am without informing them of the impending raid. After being informed of the decision, Marisleysis said to a United States Department of Justice community relations officer, \"You think we just have cameras in the house? If people try to come in, they could be hurt.\"\nSeizure and reactions.\nIn the pre-dawn hours of Saturday, April 22, 2000, agents of the United States Border Patrol's special BORTAC unit, as part of an operation in which more than 130 Immigration and Naturalization Service personnel took part, approached the house, knocked on the door, and identified themselves. When no one responded, they entered. At the same time, pepper-spray and mace were employed against persons outside who attempted to interfere. In the confusion, Armando Gutierrez called in Alan Diaz, of the Associated Press, to enter the house and enter a room with Gonz\u00e1lez, his great-uncle's wife Angela L\u00e1zaro, her niece, the niece's young son, and Donato Dalrymple (one of the two men who had rescued him from the ocean). They waited in the room listening to agents searching the house. Diaz took a widely publicized photograph of a border patrol agent confronting Dalrymple and the boy. INS subsequently flew six-year-old Elian out of Miami aboard a Justice Prisoner and Alien Transportation System aircraft.\nINS also stated in the days after the raid that they had identified as many as two dozen persons who were \"prepared to thwart any government operation\", some of whom had concealed weapons while others had criminal records.\nApproximately 100 people protested against the raid as it took place, with some calling the INS agents \"assassins\". Then-New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani described BORTAC agents involved in the seizure of Elian as \"storm troopers\" at least six times. Federal Law Enforcement Officers Association reacted with \"strong disgust and dismay\" to the Nazi imagery and demanded Giuliani's apology. Hillary Clinton, then running against Giuliani for the 2000 United States Senate election in New York, agreed with FLEOA in asking for an apology. Giuliani refused to apologize, although he stated his criticism was aimed at President Clinton and Attorney General Reno. He later withdrew from the race for unrelated reasons.\nPublic opinion about the INS raid on the Miami Gonz\u00e1lez's house was widely polarized. There were two major focuses in media coverage of the event: the raid and the family reunions. A \"Time\" magazine issue showed a photo of a joyful Gonz\u00e1lez being reunited with his father (the caption says \"Papa!\"), while \"Newsweek\" ran an issue that focused on the raid, entitled \"Seizing Eli\u00e1n\".\nThe struggle between Gonz\u00e1lez's American family and his father was portrayed in the 2000 television film, \"A Family In Crisis: The Elian Gonzales Story\", which starred Esai Morales as Eli\u00e1n's father, Juan Miguel Gonzalez; Laura Harring as Eli\u00e1n's cousin Marisleysis Gonzalez; and Alec Roberts in the title role.\nReturn to father's custody.\nFour hours after he was taken from the house in Miami, Gonz\u00e1lez and his father were reunited at Andrews Air Force Base. The next day, the White House released a photograph showing a smiling Gonz\u00e1lez reunited with his father, which the Miami relatives disputed by stating that it was a fake Gonz\u00e1lez in the photograph. Later, Gonz\u00e1lez and his family were taken to the Aspen Institute Wye River Conference Center in Maryland (formerly known as \"Wye Plantation\"). The media were barred from access to the family.\nWhile the family was still at Andrews, the Miami Gonz\u00e1lez relatives flew to Washington demanding to see Eli\u00e1n. They and their escort, New Hampshire senator Bob Smith, were turned away from the base by guards. The May 5, 2000, \"Miami Herald\" reported that Gonz\u00e1lez was joined by his classmates (without their parents) and his teacher from his hometown, C\u00e1rdenas. The newspaper \"Granma\" released pictures of Eli\u00e1n in his Jos\u00e9 Mart\u00ed Pioneer Organization uniform. On May 6, 2000, attorney Craig took Gonz\u00e1lez and Juan Miguel to a dinner in the Georgetown neighborhood of Washington, DC, hosted by Smith and Elizabeth Bagley.\nAfter Gonz\u00e1lez was returned to his father's custody, he remained in the U.S. while the Miami relatives exhausted their legal options. A three-judge federal panel had ruled that he could not go back to Cuba until he was granted an asylum hearing, but the case turned on the right of the relatives to request that hearing on behalf of the boy. On June 1, 2000, the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that Eli\u00e1n was too young to file for asylum; only his father could speak for him, and the relatives lacked legal standing. On June 28, 2000, the U.S. Supreme Court declined to review the decision. In the afternoon of the same day, seven months and one week after Eli\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez left Cuba, he and his family, along with his classmates and teacher, boarded two chartered planes at Dulles International Airport in Dulles, Virginia, for Jos\u00e9 Mart\u00ed International Airport in Havana.\nPolitical ramifications.\nCommentators have suggested that the Eli\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez affair may have been a factor in voters' decisions in the 2000 United States presidential election, which was decided by the United States Supreme Court's \"Bush v. Gore\" decision halting the 2000 United States presidential election recount in Florida and awarding the state's 25 electoral votes to the Republican Party candidate George W. Bush. The Gonzalez case is believed to have been a major factor in Bush's narrow lead in the state as the raid caused Cuban-Americans in Florida to strongly favor him over the Democratic Party nominee Al Gore. Polls in 2001 indicated that Bush captured 80 percent of the Florida Cuban-American vote in 2000, 50,000 votes more than the previous Republican nominee Bob Dole's 65 percent of the Florida Cuban-American vote in the 1996 United States presidential election. Later, the 2020 HBO documentary \"537 Votes\" argued that Bush may have achieved as high as 88 percent of the Florida Cuban-American vote. Gore's handling of the matter may have angered the predominantly Republican Cuban community over the boy's return to Cuba. Gore initially supported Republican legislation to give the boy and his father permanent residence status, but later supported the administration position. He was attacked by both sides in the dispute for his equivocal position.\nIn Cuba, the Eli\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez matter generated popular mobilization across the island seeking Gonz\u00e1lez's return. Acting on the popular sentiment, Fidel Castro launched a campaign called the Battle of Ideas, which centered on a series of educational initiatives designed to advance socialist ideals including the revolutionary New Man.139\nLife in Cuba.\nYouth and schooling.\nAfter his return to Cuba, Eli\u00e1n Gonz\u00e1lez lived with his father, stepmother, and three brothers in C\u00e1rdenas, where his father, Juan Miguel, was a waiter at an Italian restaurant at Josone Park, in Varadero, near C\u00e1rdenas. Eli\u00e1n's father was interviewed at the restaurant in 2004 by Keith Morrison of the NBC News program \"Dateline NBC\" and \"Cover to Cover\" on CNBC. Juan Miguel filmed a home video on which Gonz\u00e1lez was shown doing his arithmetic homework with him in their dining room, going to bed in his bedroom with his two younger half-brothers, and attending karate lessons.\nMorrison's TV report also showed an 18th-century building in C\u00e1rdenas which was previously used as a fire station and which was renovated and inaugurated on July 14, 2001, as a museum, called \"Museo de la Batalla de Ideas\" (\"Museum of the Battle of Ideas\"), which includes an exhibition room dedicated to Gonz\u00e1lez, which houses a life-size bronze statue of Gonz\u00e1lez raising a clenched fist. The former Gonz\u00e1lez home in Miami has similarly been turned into a museum, with the boy's bedroom left unaltered. Juan Miguel is also a member of the National Assembly of People's Power and has attended events for the Communist Party of Cuba with Gonz\u00e1lez, who has been called up to the stage to meet Fidel Castro.\nIn September 2005, Gonz\u00e1lez was interviewed by \"60 Minutes\" and stated during the interview that Fidel Castro was a friend, and that he considers Castro \"not only as a friend but as a father\"; Gonz\u00e1lez's aunt, Angela Gonz\u00e1lez, said she doubted whether the interview represented his true beliefs because of the controls imposed by Cuba on information. In December 2006, an ill Fidel Castro was unable to attend Gonz\u00e1lez's 13th birthday celebration, so his brother Ra\u00fal attended instead.\nOn August 16, 2006, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit affirmed the dismissal of an excessive force lawsuit brought by Dalrymple and others against the federal government and Reno.\nGonz\u00e1lez joined the Young Communist Union of Cuba in June 2008 shortly after graduating from junior high school. At age 15, he began military school. In a November 2013 speech, Gonz\u00e1lez described his time in the United States as \"very sad times for me, which marked me for my whole life\", asserting that the Cuban Adjustment Act led to the denial of his rights, including \"the right to be together with my father, the right to keep my nationality and to remain in my cultural context\".\nCollege and political career.\nIn the 2010s, Gonz\u00e1lez studied to be an industrial engineer, and hoped to marry his high school girlfriend and fianc\u00e9e after finishing college. In July 2016, he received a degree in industrial engineering from the University of Matanzas, and read a letter to Fidel Castro from his graduating class, vowing \"to fight from whatever trench the revolution demands\". After graduating in 2016, Gonz\u00e1lez began working as a technology specialist at a state-run company that makes large plastic water tanks. On Father's Day in 2020, Gonz\u00e1lez announced that he and his fianc\u00e9e were expecting a daughter within the following months.\nIn 2013 Gonz\u00e1lez led the Cuban delegation to the 18th World Festival of Youth and Students in Quito, Ecuador. In an interview with CNN en Espa\u00f1ol he blamed his mother's death on economic impact of the United States embargo against Cuba, which he held to be responsible for the economic underdevelopment of the country. Gonz\u00e1lez also stated that he was happy that he did not stay in the United States, saying that he would have been manipulated into becoming a \"performer\" for the Cuban dissident movement and the American media. He also stated, \"I don't profess to have any religion, but if I did my God would be Fidel Castro.\"\nIn 2015, Gonz\u00e1lez was elected to lead his local Committee for the Defense of the Revolution, prompting speculation that he was preparing for a political career. In an interview with the Communist Party of Cuba's official newspaper \"Granma\" that year\",\" Gonzalez defended socialism and stated that economic liberalization could result in Cuba becoming a poorer \"colony\" dominated by the United States. In another interview with ABC News he reiterated his condemnation of the embargo and satisfaction with the outcome of the custody dispute, but expressed hope for better Cuba\u2013United States relations in the future and stated he would like to return to the United States one day \"to give my love to the American people\".\nIn 2017, a documentary on his life called \"Eli\u00e1n\" was released. The film premiered on April 19, 2017, at the Tribeca Film Festival. It opened in limited release in May, and appeared on CNN Films in August 2017.\nGonz\u00e1lez was nominated by the municipal assembly of C\u00e1rdenas to run as its candidate for the National Assembly of People's Power in the 2023 Cuban parliamentary election. He was elected unopposed along with the CPC's slate of 470 candidates and sworn into office in April 2023.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45158", "revid": "16405733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45158", "title": "Tatian", "text": "2nd century Syriac Christian writer and theologian\nTatian of Adiabene, or Tatian the Syrian or Tatian the Assyrian, (; ; ; ; c.\u2009120 \u2013 c.\u2009180 AD) was an Assyrian Christian writer and theologian of the 2nd century.\nTatian's most influential work is the Diatessaron, a Biblical paraphrase, or \"harmony\", of the four gospels that became the standard text of the four gospels in the Syriac-speaking churches until the 5th-century, after which it gave way to the four separate gospels in the Peshitta version.\nLife.\nConcerning the date and place of his birth, little is known beyond what Tatian tells about himself in his \"Oratio ad Graecos\", chap. xlii (\"Ante-Nicene Fathers\", ii. 81\u201382): that he was born in \"the land of the Assyrians\", scholarly consensus is that he died c.\u2009AD 185, perhaps in Adiabene.\nHe travelled to Rome, where he first encountered Christianity. During his prolonged stay in Rome, according to his own representation, his abhorrence of the pagan cults sparked deep reflections on religious problems. Through the Old Testament, he wrote, he grew convinced of the unreasonableness of paganism. He adopted the Christian religion and became the pupil of Justin Martyr. During this period Christian philosophers competed with Greek sophists. Like Justin, Tatian opened a Christian school in Rome.\nKnowledge of Tatian's life following the death of Justin in AD 165 is to some extent obscure. Irenaeus remarks (\"Haer.\", I., xxviii. 1, \"Ante-Nicene Fathers,\" i. 353) that after the death of Justin, he was expelled from the church for his Encratitic (ascetic) views, as well as for being a follower of the gnostic leader Valentinius. Eusebius refers to a belief that Tatian had founded the Encratitic sect. It is clear that Tatian left Rome, perhaps to reside for a while in either Greece or Alexandria, where he may have taught Clement of Alexandria. Epiphanius relates that Tatian established a school in Mesopotamia, the influence of which extended to Antioch in Syria, and was felt in Cilicia and especially in Pisidia.\nThe early development of the Church of the East furnishes a commentary on Tatian's attitude in practical life. Thus, for Aphrahat, baptism conditions the taking of a vow in which the catechumen promises celibacy. This shows how firmly Tatian's views were established in the Syriac Christian area, and it supports the supposition that Tatian was the missionary of the countries around the Euphrates.\nWritings.\nHis \"Oratio ad Graecos\" (Address to the Greeks) condemns paganism as worthless, and praises the reasonableness and high antiquity of Christianity. As early as Eusebius, Tatian was praised for his discussions of the antiquity of Moses and of Jewish legislation, and it was because of this chronological section that his \"Oratio\" was not generally condemned.\nHis other major work was the \"Diatessaron\", a \"harmony\" or synthesis of the four New Testament Gospels into a combined narrative of the life of Jesus. Ephrem the Syrian referred to it as the \"Evangelion da Mehallete\" (\"The Gospel of the Mixed\"), and it was practically the only gospel text used in Assyria during the 3rd and 4th centuries.\nIn the mid 5th century the Diatessaron was replaced in those Assyrian churches that used it by the four original Gospels. Rabbula, Bishop of Edessa, ordered the priests and deacons to see that every church should have a copy of the separate Gospels (\"Evangelion da Mepharreshe\"), and Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, removed more than two hundred copies of the \"Diatessaron\" from the churches in his diocese. The Syriac Sinaitic manuscript of gospels was produced in between AD 411 and 435 as a result of his edict.\nA number of recensions of the \"Diatessaron\" are extant. The earliest, part of the Eastern family of recensions, is preserved in Ephrem's \"Commentary\" on Tatian's work, which itself is preserved in two versions: an Armenian translation preserved in two copies, and a copy of Ephrem's original Syriac text from the late 5th/early 6th century, which has been edited by Louis Leloir (Paris, 1966). Other translations include translations made into Arabic, Persian, and Old Georgian. A fragment of a narrative about the Passion found in the ruins of Dura-Europos in 1933 was once thought to have been from the \"Diatessaron\", but more recent scholarly judgement does not connect it directly to Tatian's work.\nThe earliest member of the Western family of recensions is the Latin Codex Fuldensis, written at the request of bishop Victor of Capua in 545 AD. Although the text is clearly dependent on the Vulgate, the order of the passages is distinctly how Tatian arranged them. Tatian's influence can be detected much earlier in such Latin manuscripts as the Old Latin translation of the Bible, in Novatian's surviving writings, and in the Roman Antiphony. After the Codex Fuldensis, it would appear that members of the Western family led an underground existence, popping into view over the centuries in an Old High German translation (c.\u2009830), a Dutch (c.\u20091280), a Venetian manuscript of the 13th century, and a Middle English manuscript from 1400 that was once owned by Samuel Pepys.\nIn a lost writing entitled \"On Perfection according to the Doctrine of the Savior,\" Tatian designates matrimony as a symbol of the tying of the flesh to the perishable world and ascribed the \"invention\" of matrimony to the devil. He distinguishes between the old and the new man; the old man is the law, the new man the Gospel. Other lost writings of Tatian include a work written before the \"Oratio ad Graecos\" that contrasts the nature of man with the nature of the animals, and a \"Problematon biblion\", which aimed to present a compilation of obscure Scripture sayings.\nTheology.\nThe starting-point of Tatian's theology is a strict monotheism which becomes the source of the moral life. Originally, the human soul possessed faith in one God, but lost it with the fall. In consequence, under the rule of demons, man sank into the abominable error of polytheism. By monotheistic faith, the soul is delivered from the material world and from demonic rule and is united with God. God is spirit (\"pneuma\"), but not the physical or stoical \"pneuma;\" he was alone before the creation, but he had within himself potentially the whole creation. Some scholars consider Tatian's creation theology as the beginning of teaching \"ex nihilo\" (creation from \"nothing\").\nThe means of creation was the \"dynamis logike\" (\"power expressed in words\"). At first there\nproceeded from God the Logos who, generated in the beginning, was to produce the world by creating matter from which the whole creation sprang. Creation is penetrated by the \"pneuma hylikon\", \"world spirit,\" which is common to angels, stars, men, animals, and plants. This world spirit is lower than the divine \"pneuma,\" and becomes in man the \"psyche\" or \"soul,\" so that on the material side and in his soul man does not differ essentially from the animals; though at the same time he is called to a peculiar union with the divine spirit, which raises him above the animals. This spirit is the image of God in man, and to it man's immortality is due.\nThe first-born of the spirits (identified with Satan) fell and caused others to fall, and thus the demons originated. The fall of the spirits was brought about through their desire to separate man from God, in order that he might serve not God but them. Man, however, was implicated in this fall, lost his blessed abode and his soul was deserted by the divine spirit, and sank into the material sphere, in which only a faint reminiscence of God remained alive.\nAs by freedom man fell, so by freedom he may turn again to God. The Spirit unites with the souls of those who walk uprightly; through the prophets he reminds men of their lost likeness to God. Although Tatian does not mention the name of Jesus, his doctrine of redemption culminates in his Christology.\nHistoriography.\nUnlike Justin, who had related the new Christian doctrine to philosophy, Tatian manifests a violent rejection of the forms of philosophical literature with which he is familiar and consequently turns to a safer literary genre: the writing of history.\nHe thus recapitulates his treatise: Thus I believe I have summarily but with all my rigor analyzed the treatises of the sages, their 'chronologies' (\u03c7\u03c1\u03cc\u03bd\u03bf\u03b9) and their archives (\u03bd\u03b1\u03b3\u03c1\u03b1\u03c6\u03b1\u03af), each one in particular\" (Tatian Oratio ad Graecos 41.2-3).\nTatian gives the voice for the first time in the Christian lexicon to \u03bd\u03b1\u03b3\u03c1\u03b1\u03c6\u03ae, annals or documentary chronology.\nTatian claims that the Greeks learned historiography from the Egyptians (Oratio ad Graecos 1.1), who possessed exact techniques for chronology (38.1). For the Syriac the Greeks are skillful literati, bad philosophers, but they can never be good historians, for \"for those who have a disjointed chronology it is impossible to say what is true of history\" (31.4). The Greeks are embellishers of language and, in general, with respect to productive and artistic techniques they are skilled imitators, not creators or discoverers: \"stop calling imitations inventions\" (Oratio ad Graecos 1.1).\nHe then asserts that the Greeks received from other cultures all the disciplines that they managed to practice: divination by dreams, prognostication by the stars, observation of the flight of birds, the art of sacrifice, astronomy, magic, geometry, the alphabet, poetry, singing, the mysteries, plastic arts, anagraphic records, the manufacture of musical instruments and metallurgy (1.1-2) he specifies in each case the nation from which the knowledge that the Greeks have of the arts comes from.\nHowever, although he does not recognize the inventive capacity of the Greeks, Tatian describes himself as a prudent historian on the model of Thucydides, whom he never names. He presents himself as a scholar of documentation \"with all my rigor &lt;for you&gt;\" (Oratio 41.2.13) Thucydides' principle. He also distinguishes between annals and documents that are within the historian's reach and things that fall outside his direct knowledge (Oratio ad Graecos 20.2), another of Thucydides' principles. He then accepts the caution of the Greek historians who rejected the mythological 'archaeology' with which the ancient ethnographers and historians (Titus Livy) had covered the dark path between the known facts and the legendary origin of each city or ethnic group. Another characteristic of the rigorous historian is the personal inspection of places and cities with the discernment of the various types of documentation and sources:\nWell then, all these things I do not expound because I learned them from another but because, traveling through many lands I have been a teacher of your own doctrines and have examined many arts and conceptions and finally I was able to study with attention the variety of statues brought by you to the city of Rome. For I do not seek to confirm my doctrines, as the vulgar do, with opinions foreign to my own, but 'I wish to compose anagraphs' (\u03c4\u1f74\u03bd \u1f00\u03bd\u03b1\u03b3\u03c1\u03b1\u03c6\u1f74\u03bd \u03c3\u03c5\u03bd\u03c4\u03ac\u03c3\u03c3\u03c3\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd \u03b2\u03bf\u03cd\u03bb\u03bf\u03bc\u03b1\u03b9) on all those things which by myself I have understood (Oratio ad Graecos 35.1).\nWhat Tatian seems to propose is thus not a philosophy, theology, or exegesis of some revealed text, but a historical truth that attentive study can achieve. \nNor does he do mythology because in impugning the mythologists as a whole, he uses an argument consonant with the critical historians: Greek theology is mythology, literary invention, with no content of truth. For the first time the voice \u03bc\u03c5\u03b8\u03bf\u03bb\u03bf\u03b3\u03af\u03b1 appears in the Christian lexicon (Oratio ad Graecos 40.1); it specifically signifies the falsification of the philosophy of Moses perpetrated by the Greeks. Their poetry is shameful but, nevertheless, not false in an absolute way, because the 'gods' exist and act: they are the 'demons', who impinge on the deviation of human behavior and are the ones who manage the destructive and evil culture of the whole Greek \u03c0\u03b1\u03b9\u03b4\u03b5\u03af\u03b1. Greek theology, then, is seen not as a praeparatio evangelica but as a degradatio mosaica, that is, as an imitative corruption of the writings of the Bible (40.1).\nConsequently he ends up sustaining several theses, the main one being that Moses is older than all the legislators and writers of humanity (31; 36.2-40.1); that there is no plurality of gods but creational monarchy (Oratio ad Graecos 29.2); that there is no plurality of worlds but only one with only one final judgment to come, which is to be universal (Oratio ad Graecos 6.1).\nThe literary genre of the Oratio is still that of apologetics, with elements of diatribe and protreptic. Sterling has called it \"apologetic historiography.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45159", "revid": "8565473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45159", "title": "Olivine", "text": "Mineral of magnesium iron silicate\nThe mineral olivine () is a magnesium iron silicate with the chemical formula . It is a type of nesosilicate or orthosilicate. The primary component of the Earth's upper mantle, it is a common mineral in Earth's subsurface, but weathers quickly on the surface. Olivine has many uses, such as the gemstone peridot (or chrysolite), as well as industrial applications like metalworking processes. \nThe ratio of magnesium to iron varies between the two endmembers of the solid solution series: forsterite (Mg-endmember: Mg2SiO4) and fayalite (Fe-endmember: Fe2SiO4). Compositions of olivine are commonly expressed as molar percentages of forsterite (Fo) and/or fayalite (Fa) (\"e.g.\", Fo70Fa30, or just Fo70 with Fa30 implied). Forsterite's melting temperature is unusually high at atmospheric pressure, almost , while fayalite's is much lower \u2013\u00a0about . Melting temperature varies smoothly between the two endmembers, as do other properties. Olivine incorporates only minor amounts of elements other than oxygen (O), silicon (Si), magnesium (Mg) and iron (Fe). Manganese (Mn) and nickel (Ni) commonly are the additional elements present in highest concentrations.\nOlivine gives its name to the group of minerals with a related structure (the olivine group) \u2013\u00a0which includes tephroite (Mn2SiO4), monticellite (CaMgSiO4), larnite (Ca2SiO4) and kirschsteinite (CaFeSiO4) (commonly also spelled kirschteinite).\nOlivine's crystal structure incorporates aspects of the orthorhombic P Bravais lattice, which arise from each silica (SiO4) unit being joined by metal divalent cations with each oxygen in SiO4 bound to three metal ions. It has a spinel-like structure similar to magnetite but uses one quadrivalent and two divalent cations M22+ M4+O4 instead of two trivalent and one divalent cations.\nIdentification and paragenesis.\nOlivine is named for its typically olive-green color, though it may alter to a reddish color from the oxidation of iron.\nTranslucent olivine is sometimes used as a gemstone called peridot (\"p\u00e9ridot\", the French word for olivine). It is also called chrysolite (or \"chrysolithe\", from the Greek words for gold and stone), though this name is now rarely used in the English language. Some of the finest gem-quality olivine has been obtained from a body of mantle rocks on Zabargad Island in the Red Sea.\nOlivine occurs in both mafic and ultramafic igneous rocks and as a primary mineral in certain metamorphic rocks. Mg-rich olivine crystallizes from magma that is rich in magnesium and low in silica. That magma crystallizes to mafic rocks such as gabbro and basalt. Ultramafic rocks usually contain substantial olivine, and those with an olivine content of over 40% are described as peridotites. Dunite has an olivine content of over 90% and is likely a cumulate formed by olivine crystallizing and settling out of magma or a vein mineral lining magma conduits. Olivine and high pressure structural variants constitute over 50% of the Earth's upper mantle, and olivine is one of the Earth's most common minerals by volume. The metamorphism of impure dolomite or other sedimentary rocks with high magnesium and low silica content also produces Mg-rich olivine, or forsterite.\nFe-rich olivine fayalite is relatively much less common, but it occurs in igneous rocks in small amounts in rare granites and rhyolites, and extremely Fe-rich olivine can exist stably with quartz and tridymite. In contrast, Mg-rich olivine does not occur stably with silica minerals, as it would react with them to form orthopyroxene ().\nMg-rich olivine is stable to pressures equivalent to a depth of about within Earth. Because it is thought to be the most abundant mineral in Earth's mantle at shallower depths, the properties of olivine have a dominant influence upon the rheology of that part of Earth and hence upon the solid flow that drives plate tectonics. Experiments have documented that olivine at high pressures (12\u00a0GPa, the pressure at depths of about ) can contain at least as much as about 8900 parts per million (weight) of water, and that such water content drastically reduces the resistance of olivine to solid flow. Moreover, because olivine is so abundant, more water may be dissolved in olivine of the mantle than is contained in Earth's oceans.\nOlivine pine forest (a plant community) is unique to Norway. It is rare and found on dry olivine ridges in the fjord districts of Sunnm\u00f8re and Nordfjord.\nExtraterrestrial occurrences.\nMg-rich olivine has also been discovered in meteorites, on the Moon and Mars, falling into infant stars, as well as on asteroid 25143 Itokawa. Such meteorites include chondrites, collections of debris from the early Solar System; and pallasites, mixes of iron-nickel and olivine. The rare A-type asteroids are suspected to have a surface dominated by olivine.\nThe spectral signature of olivine has been seen in the dust disks around young stars. The tails of comets (which formed from the dust disk around the young Sun) often have the spectral signature of olivine, and the presence of olivine was verified in samples of a comet from the Stardust spacecraft in 2006. Comet-like (magnesium-rich) olivine has also been detected in the planetesimal belt around the star Beta Pictoris.\nCrystal structure.\nMinerals in the olivine group crystallize in the orthorhombic system (space group P\"bnm\") with isolated silicate tetrahedra, meaning that olivine is a nesosilicate. The structure can be described as a hexagonal, close-packed array of oxygen ions with half of the octahedral sites occupied with magnesium or iron ions and one-eighth of the tetrahedral sites occupied by silicon ions.\nThere are three distinct oxygen sites (marked O1, O2 and O3 in the figure), two distinct metal sites (M1 and M2) and only one distinct silicon site. O1, O2, M2 and Si all lie on mirror planes, while M1 exists on an inversion center. O3 lies in a general position.\nHigh-pressure polymorphs.\nAt the high temperatures and pressures found at depth within the Earth the olivine structure is no longer stable. Below depths of about olivine undergoes an exothermic phase transition to the sorosilicate, wadsleyite and, at about depth, wadsleyite transforms exothermically into ringwoodite, which has the spinel structure. At a depth of about , ringwoodite decomposes into silicate perovskite () and ferropericlase () in an endothermic reaction. These phase transitions lead to a discontinuous increase in the density of the Earth's mantle that can be observed by seismic methods. They are also thought to influence the dynamics of mantle convection in that the exothermic transitions reinforce flow across the phase boundary, whereas the endothermic reaction hampers it.\nThe pressure at which these phase transitions occur depends on temperature and iron content. At , the pure magnesium end member, forsterite, transforms to wadsleyite at and to ringwoodite at pressures above . Increasing the iron content decreases the pressure of the phase transition and narrows the wadsleyite stability field. At about 0.8 mole fraction fayalite, olivine transforms directly to ringwoodite over the pressure range . Fayalite transforms to Fe2SiO4 spinel at pressures below . Increasing the temperature increases the pressure of these phase transitions.\nWeathering.\nOlivine is one of the less stable common minerals on the surface according to the Goldich dissolution series. It alters into iddingsite (a combination of clay minerals, iron oxides and ferrihydrite) readily in the presence of water. Artificially increasing the weathering rate of olivine, e.g. by dispersing fine-grained olivine on beaches, has been proposed as a cheap way to sequester CO2. The presence of iddingsite on Mars would suggest that liquid water once existed there, and might enable scientists to determine when there was last liquid water on the planet.\nBecause of its rapid weathering, olivine is rarely found in sedimentary rock.\nMining.\nNorway.\nNorway is the main source of olivine in Europe, particularly in an area stretching from \u00c5heim to Tafjord, and from Hornindal to Flems\u00f8y in the Sunnm\u00f8re district. There is also olivine in Stad Municipality. About 50% of the world's olivine for industrial use is produced in Norway. At Svarthammaren in Norddal Municipality (now Fjord Municipality), olivine was mined from around 1920 to 1979, with a daily output up to . Olivine was also obtained from the construction site of the hydro power stations in Tafjord. At Robbervika in Norddal municipality an open-pit mine has been in operation since 1984. The characteristic red color is reflected in several local names with \"red\" such as \"Raudbergvik\" (Red rock bay) or \"Raudnakken\" (Red ridge).\nHans Str\u00f8m in 1766 described the olivine's typical red color on the surface and the blue color within. Str\u00f8m wrote that in Norddal district large quantities of olivine were broken from the bedrock and used as sharpening stones.\nKallskaret near Tafjord is a nature reserve with olivine.\nApplications.\nOlivine is used as a substitute for dolomite in steel works.\nThe aluminium foundry industry uses olivine sand to cast objects in aluminium. Olivine sand requires less water than silica sands while still holding the mold together during handling and pouring of the metal. Less water means less gas (steam) to vent from the mold as metal is poured into the mold.\nIn Finland, olivine is marketed as an ideal rock for sauna stoves because of its comparatively high density and resistance to weathering under repeated heating and cooling.\nGem-quality olivine is used as a gemstone called peridot.\nExperimental uses.\nRemoval of atmospheric CO2 via reaction with crushed olivine has been considered. The end-products of the very slow reaction are silicon dioxide, magnesium carbonate, and iron oxides. A public benefit corporation, Project Vesta, is investigating this approach on beaches which increase the agitation and surface area of crushed olivine through wave action.\nAnother experimental use for olivine is in making carbon-neutral or carbon-negative cement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45160", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45160", "title": "Chrysolite", "text": "Chrysolite may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45162", "revid": "50535372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45162", "title": "Peridot", "text": "Green gem-quality mineral\nPeridot ( ), sometimes called chrysolite, is a yellow-green transparent variety of olivine. Peridot is one of the few gemstones that occur in only one color.\nPeridot can be found in mafic and ultramafic rocks occurring in lava and peridotite xenoliths of the mantle. The gem occurs in silica-deficient rocks such as volcanic basalt and pallasitic meteorites. Along with diamonds, peridot is one of only two gems observed to be formed not in Earth's crust, but in the molten rock of the upper mantle. Gem-quality peridot is rare on Earth's surface due to its susceptibility to alteration during its movement from deep within the mantle and weathering at the surface. Peridot has a chemical formula of .\nPeridot is one of the birthstones for the month of August.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the name \"peridot\" is uncertain. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" suggests an alteration of Anglo\u2013Norman (classical Latin -), a kind of opal, rather than the Arabic word , meaning \"gemstone\".\nThe \"Middle English Dictionary\"'s entry on \"peridot\" includes several variations: , , and \u2009\u2014\u2009other variants substitute \"y\" for letter \"i\" used here.\nThe earliest use of the word in English is possibly in the 1705 register of the St.\u00a0Albans Abbey: The dual entry is in Latin with the translation to English listed as \"peridot\". It records that on his death in 1245, Bishop John bequeathed various items, including peridot gems, to the Abbey.\nAppearance.\nPeridot is one of the few gemstones that occur in only one color: an olive-green. The intensity and tint of the green, however, depends on the percentage of iron in the crystal structure, so the color of individual peridot gems can vary from yellow, to olive, to brownish-green. In rare cases, peridot may have a medium-dark toned, pure green with no secondary yellow hue or brown mask. Lighter-colored gems are due to lower iron concentrations.\nMineral properties.\nCrystal structure.\nThe molecular structure of peridot consists of isomorphic olivine, silicate, magnesium and iron in an orthorhombic crystal system. In an alternative view, the atomic structure can be described as a hexagonal, close-packed array of oxygen ions with half of the octahedral sites occupied by magnesium or iron ions and one-eighth of the tetrahedral sites occupied by silicon ions.\nSurface property.\nOxidation of peridot does not occur at natural surface temperature and pressure but begins to occur slowly at with rates increasing with temperature. The oxidation of the olivine occurs by an initial breakdown of the fayalite component, and subsequent reaction with the forsterite component, to give magnetite and orthopyroxene.\nOccurrence.\nGeologically.\nOlivine, of which peridot is a type, is a common mineral in mafic and ultramafic rocks, often found in lava and in peridotite xenoliths of the mantle, which lava carries to the surface; however, gem-quality peridot occurs in only a fraction of these settings. Peridots can also be found in meteorites.\nPeridots can be differentiated by size and composition. A peridot formed as a result of volcanic activity tends to contain higher concentrations of lithium, nickel and zinc than those found in meteorites.\nOlivine is an abundant mineral, but gem-quality peridot is rather rare due to its chemical instability on Earth's surface. Olivine is usually found as small grains and tends to exist in a heavily weathered state, unsuitable for decorative use. Large crystals of forsterite, the variety most often used to cut peridot gems, are rare; as a result, peridot is considered to be precious.\nIn the ancient world, the mining of peridot was called \"topazios\" then, on St.\u00a0John's Island, in the Red Sea began about 300\u00a0BCE.\nThe principal source of peridot olivine today is the San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation in Arizona, US.\nIt is also mined at another location in Arizona, and in Arkansas, Hawaii, Nevada, and New Mexico at Kilbourne Hole, in the US; and in Australia, Brazil, China, Egypt, Kenya, Mexico, Myanmar (Burma), Norway, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, and Tanzania.\nIn meteorites.\nPeridot crystals have been collected from some pallasite meteorites. The most commonly studied pallasitic peridot belongs to the Indonesian Jeppara meteorite, but others exist such as the Brenham, Esquel, Fukang, and Imilac meteorites. Pallasitic (extraterrestrial) peridot differs chemically from its earthbound counterpart, in that pallasitic peridot lacks nickel.\nGemology.\nOrthorhombic minerals, like peridot, have biaxial birefringence defined by three principal axes: \u03b1, \u03b2, and \u03b3. Refractive index readings of faceted gems can range around \u03b1 = 1.651, \u03b2 = 1.668, and \u03b3 = 1.689, with a biaxial positive birefringence of 0.037\u20130.038. With decreasing magnesium and increasing iron concentration, the specific gravity, color darkness and refractive indices increase, and the shifts toward the \u03b3 index. Increasing iron concentration ultimately forms the iron-rich end-member of the olivine solid solution series fayalite.\nA study of Chinese peridot gem samples determined the hydro-static specific gravity to be 3.36\u00a0. The visible-light spectroscopy of the same Chinese peridot samples showed light bands between 493.0\u2013481.0\u00a0nm, the strongest absorption at 492.0\u00a0nm.\nThe largest cut peridot olivine is a specimen in the gem collection of the Smithsonian Museum in Washington, D.C.\nInclusions are common in peridot crystals but their presence depends on the location where it was found and the geological conditions that led to its crystallization.\nCultural history.\nPeridot has been prized since the earliest civilizations for its claimed protective powers to drive away fears and nightmares, according to superstitions. There is a superstition that it carries the gift of \"inner radiance\", sharpening the mind and opening it to new levels of awareness and growth, helping one to recognize and realize one's destiny and spiritual purpose.\nPeridot olivine is the birthstone for the month of August.\nPeridot has often been mistaken for emerald beryl and other green gems. Noted gemologist G.F. Kunz discussed the confusion between beryl and peridot in many church treasures, most notably the \"Three Magi treasure\" in the Dom of Cologne, Germany.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45163", "revid": "24484530", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45163", "title": "Speech organ", "text": ""}
{"id": "45165", "revid": "33965554", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45165", "title": "Orthoclase", "text": "Tectosilicate mineral found in igneous rock\nOrthoclase, or orthoclase feldspar (endmember formula KAlSi3O8), is an important tectosilicate mineral which forms igneous rock. The name is from the Ancient Greek for \"straight fracture\", because its two cleavage planes are at right angles to each other. It is a type of alkali feldspar, also known as potassium feldspar or K-spar. The gem known as moonstone (see below) is largely composed of orthoclase.\nFormation and subtypes.\nOrthoclase is a common constituent of most granites and other felsic igneous rocks and often forms huge crystals and masses in pegmatite.\nTypically, the pure potassium endmember of orthoclase forms a solid solution with albite, the sodium endmember (NaAlSi3O8) of plagioclase. While slowly cooling within the earth, sodium-rich albite lamellae form by exsolution, enriching the remaining orthoclase with potassium. The resulting intergrowth of the two feldspars is called perthite.\nThe higher-temperature polymorph of KAlSi3O8 is sanidine. Sanidine is common in rapidly cooled volcanic rocks such as obsidian and felsic pyroclastic rocks, and is notably found in trachytes of the Drachenfels, Germany. The lower-temperature polymorph of KAlSi3O8 is microcline.\nAdularia is a low temperature form of either microcline or orthoclase originally reported from the low temperature hydrothermal deposits in the Adula Alps of Switzerland. It was first described by Ermenegildo Pini in 1781. The optical effect of adularescence in moonstone is typically due to adularia.\nThe largest documented single crystal of orthoclase was found in the Ural Mountains in Russia. It measured around and weighed around .\nApplications.\nTogether with the other potassium feldspars, orthoclase is a common raw material for the manufacture of some glasses and some ceramics such as porcelain, and as a constituent of scouring powder.\nSome intergrowths of orthoclase and albite have an attractive pale luster and are called moonstone when used in jewelry. Most moonstones are translucent and white, although grey and peach-colored varieties also occur. In gemology, their luster is called adularescence and is typically described as creamy or silvery white with a \"billowy\" quality. It is the state gem of Florida.\nThe gemstone commonly called \"rainbow moonstone\" is more properly a colorless form of labradorite and can be distinguished from \"true\" moonstone by its greater transparency and play of color, although their value and durability do not greatly differ.\nOrthoclase is one of the ten defining minerals of the Mohs scale of mineral hardness, on which it is listed as having a hardness of 6.\nNASA's \"Curiosity\" rover discovery of high levels of orthoclase in Martian sandstones suggested that some Martian rocks may have experienced complex geological processing, such as repeated melting.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45166", "revid": "2510232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45166", "title": "Microcline", "text": "Igneous rock-forming tectosilicate mineral\nMicrocline (KAlSi3O8) is an important igneous rock-forming tectosilicate mineral. It is a potassium-rich alkali feldspar. Microcline typically contains minor amounts of sodium. It is common in granite and pegmatites. Microcline forms during slow cooling of orthoclase; it is more stable at lower temperatures than orthoclase. Sanidine is a polymorph of alkali feldspar stable at yet higher temperature. Microcline may be clear, white, pale-yellow, brick-red, or green; it is generally characterized by cross-hatch twinning that forms as a result of the transformation of monoclinic orthoclase into triclinic microcline.\nThe chemical compound name is potassium aluminium silicate, and it is known as E number reference E555.\nGeology.\nMicrocline may be chemically the same as monoclinic orthoclase, but because it belongs to the triclinic crystal system, the prism angle is slightly less than right angles; hence the name \"microcline\" from the Greek \"small slope\". It is a fully ordered triclinic modification of potassium feldspar and is dimorphous with orthoclase. Microcline is identical to orthoclase in many physical properties, and can be distinguished by x-ray or optical examination. When viewed under a polarizing microscope, microcline exhibits a minute multiple twinning which forms a grating-like structure that is unmistakable.\nPerthite is either microcline or orthoclase with thin lamellae of exsolved albite.\nAmazon stone, or amazonite, is a green variety of microcline. It is not found anywhere in the Amazon Basin, however. The Spanish explorers who named it apparently confused it with another green mineral from that region.\nThe largest documented single crystals of microcline were found in Devil's Hole Beryl Mine, Colorado, US and measured ~50 \u00d7 36 \u00d7 14 m. This could be one of the largest crystals of any material found so far.\nMicrocline is exceptionally active ice-nucleating agent in the atmosphere. Recently it has been possible to understand how water binds to the microcline surface.\nAs food additive.\nThe chemical compound name is potassium aluminium silicate, and it is known as E number reference E555. It was the subject in 2018 of a Call for technical and toxicological data from the EFSA.\nIn 2008, it (along with other aluminium compounds) was the subject of a Scientific Opinion of the Panel on Food Additives, Flavourings, Processing Aids and Food Contact Materials from the EFSA.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45167", "revid": "40524816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45167", "title": "Anorthoclase", "text": "Alkali feldspar mineral\nThe mineral anorthoclase ((Na,K)AlSi3O8) is a crystalline solid solution in the alkali feldspar series, in which the proportion of the sodium-aluminium silicate member exceeds the potassium-aluminium silicate member. It typically consists of between 64 and 90 percent of NaAlSi3O8 and between 10 and 36 percent of KAlSi3O8.\nStructure and stability.\nAnorthoclase is an intermediate member of the high albite \u2013 sanidine alkali feldspar solid solution series. Intermediate members of this series, high albite, anorthoclase and high sodium sanidine are stable at temperatures of and above. Below only very limited solution exists (less than about 5% on both the low albite and microcline ends). Anorthoclase and high albite exhibit triclinic symmetry, whereas sanidine and the low temperature orthoclase have monoclinic symmetry. If the high temperature intermediate composition alkali feldspars are allowed to cool slowly, exsolution occurs and a perthite structure results.\nOccurrence.\nAnorthoclase occurs in high temperature sodium rich volcanic and hypabyssal (shallow intrusive) rocks. The mineral is typically found as a constituent of the fine grained matrix or as small phenocrysts which may occur as loose crystals in a weathered rock.\nIt was first described in 1885 for an occurrence on Pantelleria Island, Trapani Province, Sicily. The name is from the Greek \u03b1\u03bd-, \u03bf\u03c1\u03b8\u03cc\u03c2 and \u03ba\u03bb\u03ac\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2 (not cleaving at right-angles), for its oblique cleavage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45168", "revid": "49032930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45168", "title": "Plagioclase", "text": "Type of feldspar\nPlagioclase ( ) is a series of tectosilicate (framework silicate) minerals within the feldspar group. Rather than referring to a particular mineral with a specific chemical composition, plagioclase is a continuous solid solution series, more properly known as the plagioclase feldspar series. This was first shown by the German mineralogist Johann Friedrich Christian Hessel (1796\u20131872) in 1826. The series ranges from albite to anorthite endmembers (with respective compositions NaAlSi3O8 to CaAl2Si2O8), where sodium and calcium atoms can substitute for each other in the mineral's crystal lattice structure. Plagioclase in hand samples is often identified by its polysynthetic crystal twinning or \"record-groove\" effect.\nPlagioclase is a major constituent mineral in Earth's crust and is consequently an important diagnostic tool in petrology for identifying the composition, origin and evolution of igneous rocks. Plagioclase is also a major constituent of rock in the highlands of the Moon. Analysis of thermal emission spectra from the surface of Mars suggests that plagioclase is the most abundant mineral in the crust of Mars.\nIts name comes from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'oblique' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'fracture', in reference to its two cleavage angles.\nProperties.\nPlagioclase is the most common and abundant mineral group in the Earth's crust. Part of the feldspar family of minerals, it is abundant in igneous and metamorphic rock, and it is also common as a detrital mineral in sedimentary rock. It is not a single mineral, but is a solid solution of two end members, albite or sodium feldspar () and anorthite or calcium feldspar (). These can be present in plagioclase in any proportion from pure anorthite to pure albite. The composition of plagioclase can thus be written as where \"x\" ranges from 0 for pure albite to 1 for pure anorthite. This solid solution series is known as the plagioclase series. The composition of a particular sample of plagioclase is customarily expressed as the mol% of anorthite in the sample. For example, plagioclase that is 40\u00a0mol% anorthite would be described as An40 plagioclase.\nThe ability of albite and anorthite to form solid solutions in any proportions at elevated temperature reflects the ease with which calcium and aluminium can substitute for sodium and silicon in the plagioclase crystal structure. Although a calcium ion has a charge of +2, versus +1 for a sodium ion, the two ions have very nearly the same effective radius. The difference in charge is accommodated by the coupled substitution of aluminium (charge +3) for silicon (charge +4), both of which can occupy tetrahedral sites (surrounded by four oxygen ions). This contrasts with potassium, which has the same charge as sodium, but is a significantly larger ion. As a result of the size and charge difference between potassium and calcium, there is a very wide miscibility gap between anorthite and potassium feldspar, (), the third common rock-forming feldspar end member. Potassium feldspar does form a solid solution series with albite, due to the identical charges of sodium and potassium ions, which is known as the alkali feldspar series. Thus, almost all feldspar found on Earth is either plagioclase or alkali feldspar, with the two series overlapping for pure albite. When a plagioclase composition is described by its anorthite mol% (such as An40 in the previous example) it is assumed that the remainder is albite, with only a minor component of potassium feldspar.\nPlagioclase of any composition shares many basic physical characteristics, while other characteristics vary smoothly with composition. The Mohs hardness of all plagioclase species is 6 to 6.5, and cleavage is perfect on [001] and good on [010], with the cleavage planes meeting at an angle of 93 to 94 degrees. It is from this slightly oblique cleavage angle that plagioclase gets its name, Ancient Greek ( 'oblique') + ( 'fracture'). The name was introduced by August Breithaupt in 1847. There is also a poor cleavage on [110] rarely seen in hand samples.\nThe luster is vitreous to pearly and the diaphaneity is transparent to translucent. The tenacity is brittle, and the fracture is uneven or conchoidal, but the fracture is rarely observed due to the strong tendency of the mineral to cleave instead. At low temperature, the crystal structure belongs to the triclinic system, space group \"P1\" Well-formed crystals are rare and are most commonly sodic in composition. Well-shaped samples are instead typically cleavage fragments. Well-formed crystals are typically bladed or tabular parallel to [010].\nPlagioclase is usually white to greyish-white in color, with a slight tendency for more calcium-rich samples to be darker. Impurities can infrequently tint the mineral greenish, yellowish, or flesh-red. Ferric iron (Fe3+) gives a pale yellow color in plagioclase feldspar from Lake County, Oregon. The specific gravity increases smoothly with calcium content, from 2.62 for pure albite to 2.76 for pure anorthite, and this can provide a useful estimate of composition if measured accurately. The index of refraction likewise varies smoothly from 1.53 to 1.58, and, if measured carefully, this also gives a useful composition estimate.\nPlagioclase almost universally shows a characteristic polysynthetic twinning that produces twinning striations on [010]. These striations allow plagioclase to be distinguished from alkali feldspar. Plagioclase often also displays Carlsbad, Baveno, and Manebach Law twinning.\nPlagioclase series members.\nThe composition of a plagioclase feldspar is typically denoted by its overall fraction of anorthite (%An) or albite (%Ab). There are several named plagioclase feldspars that fall between albite and anorthite in the series. The following table shows their compositions in terms of constituent anorthite and albite percentages.\nThe distinction between these minerals cannot easily be made in the field. The composition can be roughly determined by specific gravity, but accurate measurement requires chemical or optical tests. The composition in a crushed grain mount can be obtained by the Tsuboi method, which yields an accurate measurement of the minimum refractive index that in turn gives an accurate composition. In thin section, the composition can be determined by either the Michel L\u00e9vy or Carlsbad-albite methods. The former relies on accurate measure of minimum index of refraction, while the latter relies on measuring the \"extinction angle\" under a polarizing microscope. The extinction angle is an optical characteristic and varies with the albite fraction (%Ab).\nIntermediate members.\nThe intermediate members of the plagioclase group are very similar to each other and normally cannot be distinguished except by their optical properties. The specific gravity in each member (albite 2.62) increases 0.02 per 10% increase in anorthite (2.75).\nPetrogenesis.\nPlagioclase is the primary aluminium-bearing mineral in mafic rocks formed at low pressure. It is normally the first and most abundant feldspar to crystallize from a cooling primitive magma. Anorthite has a much higher melting point than albite, and, as a result, calcium-rich plagioclase is the first to crystallize. The plagioclase becomes more enriched in sodium as the temperature drops, forming Bowen's continuous reaction series. However, the composition with which plagioclase crystallizes also depends on the other components of the melt, so it is not by itself a reliable thermometer.\nThe liquidus of plagioclase (the temperature at which the plagioclase first begins to crystallize) is about for olivine basalt, with a composition of 50.5 wt% silica; in andesite with a silica content of 60.7 wt%; and in dacite with a silica content of 69.9 wt%. These values are for dry magma. The liquidus is greatly lowered by the addition of water, and much more for plagioclase than for mafic minerals. The eutectic (minimum melting mixture) for a mixture of anorthite and diopside shifts from 40 wt% anorthite to 78 wt% anorthite as the water vapor pressure goes from 1 bar to 10 kbar. The presence of water also shifts the composition of the crystallizing plagioclase towards anorthite. The eutectic for this wet mixture drops to about .\nCrystallizing plagioclase is always richer in anorthite than the melt from which it crystallizes. This \"plagioclase effect\" causes the residual melt to be enriched in sodium and silicon and depleted in aluminium and calcium. However, the simultaneous crystallization of mafic minerals not containing aluminium can partially offset the depletion in aluminium. In volcanic rock, the crystallized plagioclase incorporates most of the potassium in the melt as a trace element.\nNew plagioclase crystals nucleate only with difficulty, and diffusion is very slow within the solid crystals. As a result, as a magma cools, increasingly sodium-rich plagioclase is usually crystallized onto the rims of existing plagioclase crystals, which retain their more calcium-rich cores. This results in compositional zoning of plagioclase in igneous rocks. In rare cases, plagioclase shows reverse zoning, with a more calcium-rich rim on a more sodium-rich core. Plagioclase also sometimes shows oscillatory zoning, with the zones fluctuating between sodium-rich and calcium-rich compositions, though this is usually superimposed on an overall normal zoning trend.\nClassification of igneous rocks.\nPlagioclase is very important for the classification of crystalline igneous rocks. Generally, the more silica is present in the rock, the fewer the mafic minerals, and the more sodium-rich the plagioclase. Alkali feldspar appears as the silica content becomes high. Under the QAPF classification, plagioclase is one of the three key minerals, along with quartz and alkali feldspar, used to make the initial classification of the rock type. Low-silica igneous rocks are further divided into dioritic rocks having sodium-rich plagioclase (An&lt;50) and gabbroic rocks having calcium-rich plagioclase (An&gt;50). Anorthosite is an intrusive rock composed of at least 90% plagioclase.\nAlbite is an end member of both the alkali and plagioclase series. However, it is included in the alkali feldspar fraction of the rock in the QAPF classification.\nIn metamorphic rocks.\nPlagioclase is also common in metamorphic rock. Plagioclase tends to be albite in low-grade metamorphic rock, while oligoclase to andesine are more common in medium- to high-grade metamorphic rock. Metacarbonate rock sometimes contains fairly pure anorthite.\nIn sedimentary rocks.\nFeldspar makes up between 10 and 20 percent of the framework grains in typical sandstones. Alkali feldspar is usually more abundant than plagioclase in sandstone because Alkali feldspars are more resistant to chemical weathering and more stable, but sandstone derived from volcanic rock contains more plagioclase. Plagioclase weathers relatively rapidly to clay minerals such as smectite.\nAt the Mohorovi\u010di\u0107 discontinuity.\nThe Mohorovi\u010di\u0107 discontinuity, which defines the boundary between the Earth's crust and the upper mantle, is thought to be the depth where feldspar disappears from the rock. While plagioclase is the most important aluminium-bearing mineral in the crust, it breaks down at the high pressure of the upper mantle, with the aluminium tending to be incorporated into clinopyroxene as \"Tschermak's molecule\" () or in jadeite . At still higher pressure, the aluminium is incorporated into garnet.\nExsolution.\nAt very high temperatures, plagioclase forms a solid solution with potassium feldspar, but this becomes highly unstable on cooling. The plagioclase separates from the potassium feldspar, a process called \"exsolution\". The resulting rock, in which fine streaks of plagioclase (\"lamellae\") are present in potassium feldspar, is called perthite.\nThe solid solution between anorthite and albite remains stable to lower temperatures, but ultimately becomes unstable as the rock approaches ambient surface temperatures. The resulting exsolution results in very fine lamellar and other intergrowths, normally detected only by sophisticated means. However, exsolution in the andesine to labradorite compositional range sometimes produces lamellae with thicknesses comparable to the wavelength of visible light. This acts like a diffraction grating, causing the labradorite to show the beautiful play of colors known as \"chatoyance\".\nUses.\nIn addition to its importance to geologists in classifying igneous rocks, plagioclase finds practical use as construction aggregate, as dimension stone, and in powdered form as a filler in paint, plastics, and rubber. Sodium-rich plagioclase finds use in the manufacture of glass and ceramics.\nAnorthosite could someday be important as a source of aluminium.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45169", "revid": "7528757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45169", "title": "The Godfather (novel)", "text": "1969 novel by Mario Puzo\nThe Godfather is a crime novel by Italian American author Mario Puzo. Originally published on 10 March 1969 by G. P. Putnam's Sons, the novel details the story of a fictional Mafia family in New York City and Long Island, headed by Vito Corleone: the Godfather. The novel covers the years 1945 to 1955 and includes the backstory of Vito Corleone from early childhood to adulthood.\nThe first in a series of novels, \"The Godfather\" is noteworthy for introducing Italian words like \"consigliere\", \"caporegime\", \"Cosa Nostra\", and \"omert\u00e0\" to an English-speaking audience. It was adapted into the iconic 1972 film of the same name, which won the Academy Award for Best Picture. Two film sequels, featuring original storylines that include contributions by Puzo himself, were released in 1974 and 1990.\nSummary.\nThe Corleone family and Five Families form the New York Mafia. After World War II, the families avoid open warfare in favour of mutual cooperation. The peace is broken after Don Vito Corleone is shot by men working for drug kingpin Virgil \"The Turk\" Sollozzo. Two of Corleone's sons, Santino (Sonny) and Michael, take an active role in the family business with the help of \"consigliere\" Tom Hagen and the family's two \"caporegimes\", Peter Clemenza and Salvatore Tessio. When Michael murders Sollozzo and his bodyguard, corrupt NYPD Captain Mark McCluskey, the conflict escalates into a full-scale war which results in Sonny's murder. Michael must return from hiding in Sicily to assume control of the family as the new Don. Under his retired father's tutelage, Michael orchestrates a plan to exact revenge, while relocating the Corleone family's power base to Las Vegas in order to further his goal of legitimizing the family and getting them out of organized crime. This encompasses the murder of all of the Corleone family's enemies, including Michael's brother-in-law Carlo Rizzi, who played a part in Sonny's murder. After selling all of the family's remaining businesses in New York, the Corleones permanently move to Las Vegas.\nMain characters.\nThe Corleone family patriarch is Vito Corleone (the Don), whose surname represents the Sicilian town of his birth, Corleone. His birth name is Vittorio Andolini, but after immigrating to the United States following the deaths of his parents and brother, he changed it to the name of his home village as one of his few acts of sentimentality. Vito fathered four children: Sonny Corleone, Fredo Corleone, Michael Corleone, and Connie Corleone. He also has an informally adopted German-Irish-American son, Tom Hagen, who became the Corleone family's \"consigliere\" (counselor). Vito Corleone is also godfather to the famous singer and movie star Johnny Fontane. The godfather referred to in the title is Vito, but the story's main character becomes Michael. The novel's central storyline details Michael's destiny to succeed his father as the head of the family empire, despite his desire to lead an Americanized life with his girlfriend (and eventual wife) Kay Adams.\nThe Corleone family is a criminal organization with national influence, notably protection, gambling, and union racketeering. Serving as the Don's underboss is his oldest son, Sonny. The operational side of the organization is headed by two \"caporegimes\", Peter Clemenza and Salvatore Tessio. Other significant members of the organization include Connie's abusive husband Carlo Rizzi and enforcers Luca Brasi and Al Neri.\nReception.\nIn \"The New York Times\", Roger Jellinek wrote that the book was \"bound to be hugely successful, and not simply because the Mafia is in the news. Mr. Puzo's novel is a voyeur\u2019s dream, a skillful fantasy of violent personal power without consequences. The victims of the Corleone 'family' are hoods, or corrupt cops \u2013 nobody you or I would actually want to know. Just business, as Don Vito would say, not personal. You never glimpse regular people in the book, let alone meet them, so there is no opportunity to sympathize with anyone but the old patriarch, as he makes the world safe for his beloved 'family.'\" The novel remained on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list for 67 weeks and sold over nine million copies in two years.\nThe novel is #53 on the PBS The Great American Read list of \"America's 100 most-loved books\". In the UK, the novel was #91 on the 2003 BBC The Big Read list of the top 200 novels in the United Kingdom, based on the goal of finding the \"Nation's Best-loved Novel\".\nFilm adaptation.\nThe 1972 film adaptation of the novel was released with Marlon Brando as Don Vito Corleone and Al Pacino as Michael Corleone, directed by Francis Ford Coppola. Mario Puzo assisted with both the writing of the screenplay and other production tasks. The film grossed approximately $269 million worldwide and won various awards, including three Academy Awards, five Golden Globes and one Grammy. The film is considered to be tremendously significant in cinematic history. The sequel, \"The Godfather Part II\" won six Oscars, and became the first sequel to win the Academy Award for Best Picture.\nThe film's plot follows the novel except for such details as backstories of some characters that are excluded, although they were filmed. Some of this footage was included in later re-edited versions, such as \"The Godfather Saga.\" The subplot involving Johnny Fontane in Hollywood was not filmed. The most significant deviation of the film from the novel was that the latter had a more positive ending than the film, in which Kay Corleone accepts Michael's decision to take over his father's business. The film ends with Kay's realization of Michael's callousness, a theme that would develop in the second and third films, which are largely not based on the original novel. Vito Corleone's backstory appeared in the second film, with his character portrayed by Robert De Niro.\nAudio adaptations.\nThe novel has had at least two full-cast audio adaptations. The first one was a full-cast audio edition released by Brilliance Audio in 1986. A second full-cast audio adaptation was released by Polish audiobook company Audioteka and stars Janusz Gojas as Don Corleone. A more conventional audiobook recording, also produced by Brilliance Audio, was narrated by Joe Mantegna.\nSequels.\nIn 1984, Puzo's literary sequel to \"The Godfather\" was published. Titled \"The Sicilian\", it chronicles the life of \"Giuliano\" (Salvatore Giuliano) but the Corleone family is featured heavily throughout, Michael Corleone in particular. Chronologically this story sits between Michael's exile to Sicily in 1950 (Book VI) and his return to the United States (Book VII). For copyright reasons, the Corleone family involvement was cut from the Michael Cimino film adaptation, which is not considered part of the \"Godfather\" film series.\nIn 2004, Random House published a sequel to Puzo's \"The Godfather\", \"The Godfather Returns\", by Mark Winegardner. A further sequel by Winegardner, \"The Godfather's Revenge\", was released in 2006. These novels continue the story from Puzo's novel.\n\"The Godfather Returns\" picks up the story immediately after the end of Puzo's \"The Godfather\". It covers the years 1955 to 1962, as well as providing significant backstory for Michael Corleone's character prior to the events of the first novel. The events of the film \"The Godfather Part II\" all take place within the timeframe of this novel, but are only mentioned in the background. The novel contains an appendix that attempts to correlate the events of the novels with the events of the films.\n\"The Godfather's Revenge\" covers the years 1963 to 1964.\nContinuing Puzo's habit, as seen in \"The Godfather\", of featuring characters who are close analogs of real-life events and public figures (as Johnny Fontane is an analog of Frank Sinatra), Winegardner features in his two \"Godfather\" novels analogs of Joseph, John F. and Robert F. Kennedy, as well as alleged organized crime figure Carlos Marcello (Carlo Tramonti). In \"The Godfather Returns\", Winegardner also dramatizes the sweep of organized crime arrests that took place in Apalachin, New York, in 1957.\nWinegardner uses all of the characters from the Puzo novels and created a few of his own, most notably Nick Geraci, a Corleone soldier who plays a pivotal role in the sequel novels. Winegardner further develops characters from the original novel, such as Fredo Corleone, Tom Hagen, and Johnny Fontane.\nIn 2012, a prequel, based on an unproduced screenplay by Mario Puzo titled \"The Family Corleone\", was written by Ed Falco. It tells the story of how Vito Corleone rises to Don and how Sonny Corleone and Tom Hagen enter the family business.\nLiterary references.\nThe Corleone family closely resembles the Karamazov family in \"The Brothers Karamazov\": a powerful father, an impulsive oldest son, a philosophical son, a sweet-tempered son, and an adopted stepson who is maintained as an employee. Honor\u00e9 de Balzac's novel \"Le P\u00e8re Goriot\" (1835) has been the inspiration for notable lines that have gained wide popularity in cinema history. Similarly, Puzo opened his 1969 novel with an epigraph popularly attributed to Balzac: \"Behind every great fortune there is a crime.\" The saying is most likely evolved over time from Balzac's original text: \"The secret of a great success for which you are at a loss to account is a crime that has never been found out because it was properly executed.\"\n\"I'm gonna make him an offer he can't refuse\" was included in both the original Puzo novel and in the film adaptation. It is the second-ranking cinematic quote included in AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes (2005) by the American Film Institute. Its origin may be from the same work to which Balzac is credited with the opening epigraph. Balzac wrote of Vautrin telling Eugene: \"In that case, I will make you an offer that no one would decline.\"\nReal-life influences.\nLarge parts of the novel are based upon reality, notably the history of the \"Five Families\", the Mafia organization in New York and the surrounding area. The novel also includes many allusions to real-life mobsters and their associates. For example, Johnny Fontane is based on Frank Sinatra, and Moe Greene on Bugsy Siegel. In addition, the character of Vito Corleone was a composite of real-life organized crime bosses Frank Costello and Carlo Gambino.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "45170", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45170", "title": "Elvish languages of Middle-earth", "text": "Group of fictional languages in the fantasy works of J. R. R. Tolkien\nThe Elvish languages of Middle-earth, constructed by J. R. R. Tolkien, include Quenya and Sindarin. These were the various languages spoken by the Elves of Middle-earth as they developed as a society throughout the Ages. In his pursuit for realism and in his love of language, Tolkien was especially fascinated with the development and evolution of language through time. Tolkien created two almost fully developed languages and a dozen more in various beginning stages as he studied and reproduced the way that language adapts and morphs. A philologist by profession, he spent much time on his constructed languages. In the collection of letters he had written, posthumously published by his son, Christopher Tolkien, he stated that he began stories set within this secondary world, the realm of Middle-earth, not with the characters or narrative as one would assume, but with a created set of languages. The stories and characters serve as conduits to make those languages come to life. Inventing language was always a crucial piece to Tolkien's mythology and world building. As Tolkien stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The invention of languages is the foundation. The 'stories' were made rather to provide a world for the languages than the reverse. To me a name comes first and the story follows.\nTolkien created scripts for his Elvish languages, of which the best known are Sarati, Tengwar, and Cirth.\nExternal history.\nLanguage construction.\nJ. R. R. Tolkien began to construct his first \"Elvin tongue\" c. 1910\u20131911 while he was at the King Edward's School, Birmingham and which he later named \"Quenya\" (c. 1915). At that time, Tolkien was already familiar with Latin, Greek, Italian, Spanish, and three ancient Germanic languages: Gothic, Old Norse, and Old English. He had invented several cryptographic codes such as Animalic, and two or three constructed languages including Naffarin. He then discovered Finnish, which he described many years later as \"like discovering a complete wine-cellar filled with bottles of an amazing wine of a kind and flavour never tasted before. It quite intoxicated me.\" \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The ingredients in Quenya are various, but worked out into a self-consistent character not precisely like any language that I know. Finnish, which I came across when I first begun to construct a 'mythology' was a dominant influence, but that has been much reduced [now in late Quenya]. It survives in some features: such as the absence of any consonant combinations initially, the absence of the voiced stops \"b, d, g\" (except in \"mb, nd, ng, ld, rd\", which are favoured) and the fondness for the ending \"-inen, -ainen, -oinen\", also in some points of grammar, such as the inflexional endings \"-sse\" (rest at or in), \"-nna\" (movement to, towards), and \"-llo\" (movement from); the personal possessives are also expressed by suffixes; there is no gender.\nTolkien with his Quenya pursued a double aesthetic goal: \"classical and inflected\". This urge was the motivation for his creation of a 'mythology'. While the language developed, he needed speakers, history for the speakers and all real dynamics, like war and migration: \"It was primarily linguistic in inspiration and was begun in order to provide the necessary background of 'history' for Elvish tongues\".\nThe Elvish languages underwent countless revisions in grammar, mostly in conjugation and the pronominal system. The Elven vocabulary was not subject to sudden or extreme change; except during the first conceptual stage c.\u00a01910\u2013c.\u00a01920. Tolkien sometimes changed the \"meaning\" of an Elvish word, but he almost never disregarded it once invented, and he kept on refining its meaning, and countlessly forged new synonyms. Moreover, Elven etymology was in a constant flux. Tolkien delighted in inventing new etymons for his Elvish vocabulary.\nFrom the outset, Tolkien used comparative philology and the tree model as his major tools in his constructed languages. He usually started with the phonological system of the proto-language and then proceeded in inventing for each daughter language the many mechanisms of sound change needed.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I find the construction and the interrelation of the languages an aesthetic pleasure in itself, quite apart from \"The Lord of the Rings\", of which it was/is in fact independent.\nTolkien stated that he intentionally designed Sindarin to be in relation to Quenya as medieval Welsh is to Latin. Nelson Goering analysed this claim, finding it broadly reasonable, if the relationships are allowed to be of different kinds.\nIn the early 30s Tolkien decided that the proto-language of the Elves was Valarin, the tongue of the gods or Valar: \"The language of the Elves derived in the beginning from the Valar, but they change it even in the learning, and moreover modified and enriched it constantly at all times by their own invention.\" In his \"Comparative Tables\", Tolkien describes the mechanisms of sound change in the following daughter languages: \"Qenya, Lindarin\" (a dialect of Qenya), \"Telerin, Old Noldorin\" (or \"F\u00ebanorian\"), \"Noldorin\" (or \"Gondolinian\"), \"Ilkorin\" (esp. of Doriath), \"Danian of Ossiriand, East Danian, Taliska, West Lemberin, North Lemberin, and East Lemberin\".\nIn his lifetime J.R.R. Tolkien never ceased to experiment on his constructed languages, and they were subjected to many revisions. They had many grammars with substantial differences between different stages of development. After the publication of \"The Lord of the Rings\" (1954\u20131955), the grammar rules of his major Elvish languages Quenya, Telerin and Sindarin went through very few changes (this is late Elvish 1954\u20131973).\n \"The linguistic papers published in \"Vinyar Tengwar\" and \"Parma Eldalamberon\" are listed in the Bibliography of this article.\"\nPublication of Tolkien's linguistic papers.\nTwo magazines (\"Vinyar Tengwar\", from its issue 39 in July 1998, and \"Parma Eldalamberon\", from its issue 11 in 1995) are exclusively devoted to the editing and publishing of J.R.R. Tolkien's gigantic mass of previously unpublished linguistic papers, including those omitted by Christopher Tolkien from \"The History of Middle-earth\".\nInternal history.\nAt the time of the \"Lhammas\" and \"The Etymologies\", 1937.\nThe Elvish languages are a family of several related languages and dialects. In 1937, Tolkien drafted the \"Lhammas\" and \"The Etymologies\", both edited and published in the 1987 \"The Lost Road and Other Writings\". They depict a tree of languages analogous to that of the Indo-European languages that Tolkien knew as a philologist.\nThis was internally consistent, but for one thing, the history of the Noldor, central to the story. Their language, Noldorin, evolved very slowly in the changeless atmosphere of Valinor. Tolkien had developed its linguistics in some detail. With their return to Beleriand, the language was evidently sharply distinct from Qenya, implying rapid change. As Tolkien worked on \"The Lord of the Rings\", starting soon after \"The Hobbit\" was published in 1937, the matter troubled him. He came up with a radical solution: the Noldor adopted the local language, Sindarin, as spoken by the Sindar or Grey-Elves, when they settled in Beleriand. That allowed Noldorin to be, more plausibly, a scarcely-altered dialect of Quenya; and it freed up his linguistically-developed material to be rebadged as Sindarin, which would have had a long time to evolve in Middle-earth. This was to some extent an awkward solution, as Sindarin had quite different origins, and could have developed rather differently. Tolkien reshaped his \"Tree of Tongues\" accordingly.\n\"The Etymologies\" is Tolkien's etymological dictionary of the Elvish languages, contemporaneous with the . It is a list of roots of the Proto-Elvish language, from which he built his many Elvish languages, especially Quenya, Noldorin and Ilkorin. \"The Etymologies\", never meant to be published, does not form a unified whole, but incorporates layer upon layer of changes. In his introduction to \"The Etymologies\", Christopher Tolkien wrote that his father was \"more interested in the processes of change than he was in displaying the structure and use of the languages at any given time.\"\nWith \"The Lord of the Rings\".\nThe story of the Elvish languages as conceived by Tolkien from when he began working on \"The Lord of the Rings\" is that they all originated from Primitive Quendian or Quenderin, the proto-language of all the Elves who awoke together in the far east of Middle-earth, Cuivi\u00e9nen, and began \"naturally\" to make a language. With the sundering of the Elves, all the Elvish languages are presumed to be descendants of this common ancestor, including the two languages that Tolkien developed most fully, Quenya and Sindarin, as shown in the tree diagram.\nIn detail, Tolkien invented two subfamilies (subgroups) of the Elvish languages. \"The language of the Quendelie (Elves) was thus very early sundered into the branches Eldarin and Avarin\". These further subdivided as follows:\nFictional philology.\nA tradition of philological study of Elvish languages exists within the fiction of Tolkien's frame stories:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nElven philologists are called the \"Lambengolmor\"; in Quenya, \"lambe\" means \"spoken language\" or \"verbal communication.\" Known members of the Lambengolmor were R\u00famil, who invented the first Elvish script (the Sarati), F\u00ebanor who later enhanced and further developed this script into his Tengwar, which later was spread to Middle-earth by the Exiled Noldor and remained in use ever after, and Pengolodh, who is credited with many works, including the \"Osanwe-kenta\" and the \"Lhammas\" or \"The 'Account of Tongues' which Pengolodh of Gondolin wrote in later days in Tol-eress\u00eba\".\nElvish scripts.\nTolkien wrote out most samples of Elvish languages with the Latin alphabet, but within the fiction he imagined many writing systems for his Elves. The best-known are the \"Tengwar of F\u00ebanor\", but the first system he created, c. 1919, is the \"Tengwar of R\u00famil\", also called the sarati. In chronological order, Tolkien's scripts are:\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nThis section lists the many sources by Tolkien documenting Elvish texts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks.\nA small fraction of Tolkien's accounts of Elvish languages was published in his novels and scholarly works during his lifetime.\nPosthumously:\nPosthumous articles.\nMany of Tolkien's writings on his invented languages have been annotated and published by Carl F. Hostetter in the journals \"Vinyar Tengwar\" and \"Parma Eldalamberon\", as follows:\n \"Ataremma\" (\"Pater Noster\" in Quenya) versions I\u2013VI, p. 4\u201326\n \"Aia Mar\u00eda\" (\"Ave Maria\" in Quenya) versions I\u2013IV, pp. 26\u201336\n \"Alcar i Ataren\" (\"Gloria Patri\" in Quenya), pp. 36\u201338\n \"Litany of Loreto\" in Quenya, pp. 11\u201320.\n \"Ort\u00edrielyanna\" (\"Sub tuum praesidium\" in Quenya), pp. 5\u201311\n \"Alcar mi tarmenel na Erun\" (\"Gloria in Excelsis Deo\" in Quenya), pp. 31\u201338.\n \"Ae Adar N\u00edn\" (\"Pater Noster\" in Sindarin) \"Vinyar Tengwar\" 44, pp. 21\u201330.\nSee also Douglas A. Anderson, \"Carl F. Hostetter: A Checklist\", Tolkien Studies 4 (2007)."}
{"id": "45173", "revid": "50993481", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45173", "title": "Carabinieri", "text": "Italian police force\nThe are the national gendarmerie of Italy who primarily carry out domestic and foreign policing duties. It is one of Italy's main law enforcement agencies, alongside the and the . As with the but in contrast to the , the are a military force. As the fourth branch of the Italian Armed Forces, they come under the authority of the Ministry of Defence; for activities related to inland public order and security, they functionally depend on the Ministry of the Interior. In practice, there is a significant overlap between the jurisdiction of the and , and both of them are contactable through 112, the European Union's Single Emergency number. Unlike the , the have responsibility for policing the military, and a number of members regularly participate in military missions abroad.\nThey were originally founded as the police force of the Kingdom of Sardinia, the forerunner of the Kingdom of Italy. During the process of Italian unification, the were appointed as the \"First Force\" of the new national military organization. Although the assisted in the suppression of opposition during the rule of Benito Mussolini, they were also responsible for his downfall and many units were disbanded during World War II by Nazi Germany, which resulted in large numbers of joining the Italian resistance movement.\nIn 2000, they were separated from the Army to become a separate branch of the Italian Armed Forces. have policing powers that can be exercised at any time and in any part of the country, and they are always permitted to carry their assigned weapon as personal equipment (Beretta 92FS pistols).\nThe are often referred to as (The Reputable or The Meritorious) as they are a trusted and prestigious law enforcement institution in Italy. The first official account of the use of this term to refer to the Carabinieri dates back to 24 June 1864.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nInspired by the French gendarmerie, the corps was created by King Victor Emmanuel I of Sardinia with the aim of providing the Savoyard state of the Kingdom of Sardinia with a police corps. After French soldiers had occupied Turin at the end of the 18th century and later abandoned it to the Kingdom of Sardinia, the Royal Carabinieri Corps was instituted under the Royal Patents of 13 July 1814. The name is derived from the French word \"carabinier\", meaning \"soldier armed with a carbine.\"\nThe new force was divided into divisions on the scale of one division for each province. The divisions were further divided into companies and subdivided into lieutenancies, which commanded and coordinated the local police stations and were distributed throughout the national territory in direct contact with the public.\nIn 1868, the Cuirassiers Regiment or \"Corazzieri\" was formed, initially as a cavalry escort of honour for the sovereign, and since 1946 for the President of the Republic. The Italian unification saw the number of divisions increased, and on 24 January 1861, the \"Carabinieri\" were appointed the \"First Force\" of the new national military organization.\nIn May 1915, Italian troops marched to encompass South Tyrol, a territory of their former allies Austria-Hungary, in the Italian front . The defenders had sufficient time to prepare strong fortifications there, and at the Karst Plateau to the east. The Italians, under the overall command of General Luigi Cadorna, found themselves repeatedly repulsed in harsh fighting. The role of the Carabinieri was to act as barrier troops, setting up machine gun posts to control the rear of the attacking regiments and prevent desertion.\n1930s and 1940s.\nDuring Fascist Italy (1922\u20131943) under Benito Mussolini, the Carabinieri were one of the police forces entrusted with suppressing opposition in Italy. During the same period, while part of the Italian African Police (mainly in the late 1930s), they were involved in atrocities in colonial Italian East Africa during the Second Italo-Ethiopian War. During World War II, they fought in their function as military police against the Allied forces, and against Yugoslav Partisans as part of the Italian occupation force of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia.\nAfter the fall of the Fascist regime in Italy on 25 July 1943, on the orders of the king, Mussolini was arrested by the Carabinieri as he left the king's private residence in Rome and subsequently imprisoned on Campo Imperatore by Carabinieri forces. After the armistice between Italy and Allied armed forces on 3 September 1943 and the country's split into the fascist Italian Social Republic in the north and the Kingdom of Italy in the south, the Carabinieri split into two groups.\nIn the Kingdom of Italy, the Carabinieri Command for Liberated Italy was founded in Bari, mobilizing new units for the Italian war of liberation. These units were attached to the Italian Liberation Corps and the six Italian Combat Groups of the Italian Co-Belligerent Army, fighting with the Allied forces.\nIn the fascist Social Republic in the North, the regime organized the National Republican Guard (composed of Carabinieri, former officers from the Italian African Police, Guardia di Finanza and customs police), to employ it as a military police and rapid-deployment anti-guerrilla force. GNR was later joined (but not taken over) by the Black Brigades, which represented a new militant incarnation of the Fascist party.\nDue to the role the Carabinieri had played in the downfall of Mussolini, and since one of the few units which fought the German occupation of Rome were the Granatieri di Sardegna Mechanized Brigade regiments and the II Carabinieri cadet battalion, the Germans did not view the Carabinieri as loyal to the fascist cause. They disarmed the force and began the deportation of 8,000 officers to Germany for forced labour on 6 October 1943; the Italian Colonial Police took over their jobs.\nSubsequently, large numbers of Carabinieri joined the Italian resistance movement to fight German and Italian fascists. Nonetheless, some 45,000 officers remained on the job and as of March 1944, this group was the only national security force in Italy.\nAfter the war the Carabinieri counted at least 2735 fallen and 6500 wounded, out of approximately 14,000 who had joined the Resistance in northern and central Italy. In Yugoslavia, the Carabinieri formed a battalion of the Italian 182nd Armored Infantry Regiment \"Garibaldi\", which fought alongside the Yugoslav partisans against the Wehrmacht and the Croatian Usta\u0161e. The battalion lost over 80% of its members in combat and was awarded the Silver Medal of Military Valor to commemorate the fallen.\nOne notable act of heroism in this era came from Vice Brigadiere Salvo D'Acquisto, who was executed by Nazi Germany in Palidoro (near Rome) during World War II. D'Acquisto exchanged his life for the lives of citizens due to be executed in retaliation for the killing of a German soldier; instead, he claimed responsibility and was executed for the offence.\nPresent day.\nThe Carabinieri were in the forefront of many internal conflicts in Italy in the late 20th century, such as the Years of Lead (against the Red Brigades) and the Second Mafia War (against the Corleonesi Mafia). They participated, and lost men, in events such as the Peteano massacre in 1972, Circonvallazione massacre in 1982, and the murder of Emanuele Basile. Until 2000, the Carabinieri were part of the Italian Army. On 31 March 2000, they were separated to become the fourth branch of the Italian Armed Forces. Interpol summarizes this force (part of the Ministry of Defence) as having a \"nationwide remit for crime investigations. It also serves as the military police for the Italian armed forces and can be called upon for national defence action.\"\nAccording to Europol (the EU's law enforcement agency), the Carabinieri Corps' military duties include \"contributing to national defence, participating in military operations in Italy and abroad, executing military police functions and ensuring the security of Italian diplomatic and consular representations\". As a national police force, it \"carries out public order and security policing, as well as investigative activities on its own initiative or at the request of the judicial authorities\". Europol also states that the force is \"supplemented by the Specialized Carabinieri Commands, responsible for safeguarding the primary interests of the community: from the protection of the environment, health, work and national cultural heritage, to the observance of community and agri-food regulations, to the suppression of forgery [of] currency\".\nIn recent years Carabinieri units have been dispatched on peacekeeping missions, including Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq. In 2003, 12 Carabinieri were killed in a suicide bombing on their base in Nasiriyah, near Basra in southern Iraq, in the largest Italian military loss of life in a single action since the Second World War. One of the previous projects included training and assisting the Afghan National Security Forces, the Afghan National Police, and the Afghan National Civil Order Police. In Iraq, Carabinieri have trained 13,000 police officers; during the ISIS destruction of historic sites, Italy dispatched troops from the Carabinieri's Command to protect cultural heritage.\nAt the Sea Island Conference of the G8 in 2004, Carabinieri were given a mandate to establish a Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Units to spearhead the development of training and doctrinal standards for civilian police units attached to international peacekeeping missions.\nThe State Forestry Corps was dissolved on 31 December 2016 and personnel with forestry police function were militarized and absorbed by the Carabinieri.\nOrganization.\nThe corps is headed by the ', consisting of the \"Comandante Generale\" (a General), the ' (a Lieutenant General) and the Chief of Staff, all located in Rome. The Chief of Staff directs, coordinates and supervises all activities of the force. It directly supervises the Directors of Administration, Health, Engineering, the motor pool and the Veterinary Commission. On the Deputy Chiefs of Staff depend the National Center for Recruitment and Selection, the Administration National Center and the Legislation Office.\nTerritorial Organization.\nThe Carabinieri are organised on a territorial basis for law-enforcement missions. The territorial organization represents the core of the institution; it contains 80 percent of the force and is organized hierarchically in five inter-regional commands, 19 regional commands and 102 provincial commands, 504 Company Commands and\n4,672 Station Commands and lieutenancies.\nThe territorial organization includes four heliborne units:\nSpecialist and Mobile Units Command Organization.\nOutside the territorial organisation, the Specialist and Mobile Units Command \"Palidoro\" (, based in Rome) controls the Carabinieri Mobile Units Division, the Carabinieri Specialist Units Division and the ROS.\nCarabinieri Specialist Units Division.\nThe Carabinieri Specialist Units Division is the Carabinieri formation, established in 2001, dedicated to the performance of specialist police activities and the support to the Territorial Organizations. The Division directs, controls, and coordinates its own units, which carry out tasks related to the protection of Italian artistic heritage, to the currency protection, to the protection of Italian embassies abroad, to the health protection, to the labour policing, to Bank of Italy needs, to the Carabinieri forensics police services. In addition, the Division provides Carabinieri air support.\nMobile Units Division.\nThe Carabinieri Mobile Units Division is located in Rome and has two brigades tasked with mass manoeuvres during emergencies, defending the nation and participating in military operations abroad. It supports public order and territorial control in urban areas, and contributes to the operations of civil authorities in terms of public safety. 1st Mobile Brigade, whose headquarters is located in Rome and includes six Regiments and four Battalions mainly employed in public order tasks. 2nd Mobile Brigade headquartered in Livorno includes the Gruppo di Intervento Speciale special forces group, the 1st Paratroopers Carabinieri Regiment \"Tuscania\", and the 7th \"Trentino-Alto Adige\" and 13th \"Friuli-Venezia Giulia\" regiments, which, together with the Multinational Specialized Unit, are mainly engaged in international missions.\nSpecial forces.\nThe Gruppo di Intervento Speciale is one of the seven Italian special forces.\nROS.\nThe ROS (\"Raggruppamento Operativo Speciale\" or Special Operational Group) is an elite unit founded in 1990 to deal with organised crime (Mafia and others), subversive activities, terrorism and more complex types of crime. An anti-crime section is found in every city and district public prosecutor's office.\nSpecial Tasks Departments.\nSpecial Tasks Departments are outside the ordinary organisational framework and are used for special missions:\n\"Corazzieri\" (Cuirassiers) are an elite corps and honour guard of the President of the Italian Republic, located in the Quirinal Palace. They are distinguished by their uniforms and height (the minimum height for admission is ). They have almost no other everyday duties, although they may be seen patrolling occasionally. \nOther departments are in service to constitutional bodies such as, the Presidency of the Republic, the Senate, Parliament, the Judiciary, the prime minister and the National Council of Economy and Labour. Carabinieri also perform military police and security duties for the Ministry of Defence, military high commands, the offices of the military judiciary and allied military organisations in Italy and abroad. They also have personnel attached to the Department of Public Security in various departments, as well as anti-Mafia and anti-drug investigative task forces. \"Carabinieri\" officers are charged with surveillance and security at Italian embassies and consulates abroad, performing the same services entrusted to the Marine Corps Embassy Security Group in United States diplomatic and consular offices.\nTogether with the Polizia di Stato and the Guardia di Finanza, the Carabinieri is also responsible for border control.\nCommand Unit for environmental, agri-food and forestry protection.\nThe specialized \"Comando unit\u00e0 per la tutela forestale, ambientale, e agroalimentare\" has its headquarters in Rome, and 15 regional commands and approximately 700 Station Commands around the country, with 7,000 personnel. Its missions are preventing production and distribution of illicit agri-foodstuffs, environmental and biodiversity protection, prevention of poaching, and suppression of all criminal organizations that, with their activity, affect the environment. In the Unit, there are also 29 NOEs (\"Nucleo Operativo Ecologico\"), teams highly specialized in complex investigations in environmental matters against organized crime.\nWar service.\nThe main battles in which the Carabinieri took part before World War I are:\nFor its contributions during the First World War, the Corps was awarded its first Gold Medal of Military Valor\nIn World War II, Carabinieri fought in the following battles:\nFrom 1943 to 1945, the Carabinieri were accountable to the Control Commission of the Allied Military Government (AMGOT). Their reorganization and reform was organized by Colonel Arthur Young, a British police officer seconded as Director of Public Safety and Director of Security.\nUniforms.\nThe Carabinieri, as a military and police force, have various uniforms for different functions. For each type of uniform there are seasonal variants and (except for service, combat and historical) versions for men and women. How, when and why they are to be worn is dictated by the \"\"R-11 \"Regulation on Uniforms for the Carabinieri Arma\"\" published by the Carabinieri General Command in 1988.\nThe uniforms of the Carabinieri are divided into: \nThose of service, representation and GUI/GUE are a derivation of the ordinary.\nHistory.\nOriginally, the Carabinieri were issued a distinctive uniform in black with silver braid around the collar and cuffs, edges trimmed in scarlet and epaulettes in silver. The mounted division had white fringes, and the infantry had light blue. Their headgear was a distinctive bicorne, popularly called the \"lucerna\" (in use only for historical uniform and ceremonies).\nThey still use a version of the historic uniform today for ceremonies.\nDesign.\nThe uniform that the Gendarmerie wore in 1814 consisted of a turquoise fabric buttoned suit with a blue collar and padded gloves. Since 1822, some small changes have been made to the uniform. Officials and Marshals had silver swords and sabres, both in a black leather scabbard. At the beginning of the 20th Century, the rules of the dress code were reinforced because of World War I.\nTroopers had three different types of uniforms: the \"Complete uniform\", the \"Ordinary uniform\", and the \"Effort uniform\". The Carabinieri's uniform at that time was made of a green-grey cloth material, and was used by all soldiers.\nHistorical and Ceremonial (Special) uniform.\nFor historical and ceremonial use, the Carabinieri uniform consists of a distinctive black uniform made of silver braids around the collar and cuffs, edges trimmed in scarlet and epaulettes in silver. The fringes of the mounted division are white, and the infantry has light blue. The headgear used is the traditional two-pointed hat for Carabinieri, known as the Lucerna, also called a bicorne.\nDuring the 1980s Giorgio Armani designed the new more modern uniforms.\nOrdinary uniform.\nThe modern Carabinieri Force uniform is coloured in black for every seasonal version, with small variations on a weather basis (coat or wind jacket), and is composed of:\nThe uniform is accompanied by accessories such as:\nThere are differences for season, duties, rank and location. For instance, in the summer, the four-button jacket, white shirt and tie are replaced with a short-sleeved blue shirt.\nDepending on the weather conditions, the uniform can be worn with a waterproof coat (or beaver cloth for officers) and an anorak. Inside the military installations, the jacket can be removed or replaced with the \"V-neck\" sweater.\nIn 2020, new 'bomber-style jackets', with appropriate logos, were introduced, which can be worn instead of the four-button jacket. The white cross belt is still worn on top, and either a roll-neck base layer or a white shirt and tie is worn underneath.\nAccessories are the same, although \"Wanted in Rome\" reported that: \"The old leather holster will also be retired, replaced by an external belt with a quick-release holster, made of plastic material. The old gloves will be replaced with modern, cut-resistant gloves. However, style has not been sacrificed for function, begging the question, are the Carabinieri of Rome the most stylish police force in the world?\" \nHeaddress.\nThe regulation peaked cap is rigid with a \"frieze\" of the Carabinieri (metallic for pinned, Carabinieri and students, embroidered in silver fabric for NCOs, gilded for the inspectors and officers while for the generals the frieze is the eagle of the staff with RI monogram in the centre, silver for brigade and division generals, gold for corps generals). The commanding officers of the department wear the frieze embroidered in gold-edged with red.\nThe official emblem is placed at the center of the cap.\nEach cap is black and has a wimple held by two rounded buttons, the wimple is black for carabinieri, pinned, brigadiers and students; for the chief brigadiers the wimple is also black but with the addition of a silver galloncino mottled with black. The wimple becomes silver mottled with black in the center from the rank of marshal to that of chief marshal with the number of chevrons increasing as the rank increases. For the major marshals, the wimple is silver edged in red with three silver gallons flecked with black; for the top rank of non-commissioned officers, i.e. the lieutenant, the wiggle is silver edged in red with four silver braids edged in red.\nFor the lower officers, the wiggle and the braids are entirely in silver without streaks, for the superior officers, the wiggle becomes a double braided cord always silver with silver braids. Finally, for the general officers, the wimple becomes a silver braid with silver braids.\nOther forms of headdress include berets and mountain-style caps. Carabinieri MP Units also wear a dark navy blue beret.\nService uniform.\nThe service uniform is essentially the same as the ordinary uniform but is adapted for the specific duty of the soldier.\nE.g.:\nRepresentative (dress) uniform.\n\"(For carabinieri, NCOs, warrant officers, officers.)\"\nThe representative uniform is essentially the same as the ordinary uniform, but worn for more formal, but still on duty occasions, where the ordinary and ceremonial uniforms are unsuitable. It differs from the ordinary uniform for the following elements:\nSometimes the pistol is worn with the sword, other times it is not. The cap worn is the peaked cap.\nOperational uniform.\nThe operational uniform is worn for public order (riot) situations, raids, cross-country work and is worn for operations only.\nIt is blue in color with red piping and a 'Polychrome' uniform.\nIt consists of:\nA \"particular\" version of this uniform is worn by the soldiers of the Special Intervention Group, as well as the following departments: The \"Tuscania\" CC Parachute Regiment, Carabinieri Regiment on Horseback and Airborne Squadrons CC Cacciatori. The colours (for the trousers and jacket) are often camouflage rather than blue and red and maroon/red (for the beret) rather than blue.\nRiot helmets, body-armour, equipment vests, rescue helmets etc., are worn when necessary.\nGymnastic.\nIt consists of a tracksuit (jacket and pants), t-shirt and shorts.\nThe suit consists of a jacket and long trousers in blue fabric, with red inserts. The jacket is made up of a body with a central zip, two detachable sleeves with a zip and a collar.\nThe trousers consist of two leggings, an elastic waistband with a drawstring at the waist and a zip at the bottom. The jacket, the T-shirt and the shorts bear the \"frieze\" of the Carabinieri.\nOther.\nThere are also evening-dress style (mess kit) uniforms for dinners and galas, as well as variations for the above uniform for occasions (e.g. medals, sabres to be worn etc.).\n\"The full set of different Carabinieri uniforms today is presented here (http://).\"\nFemales.\nThe uniforms adopted for female staff are essentially an adaptation of the male ones.\nThe variants concern the buttoning, the shape of the jackets (without upper pockets), the use of skirts inside the Offices, off-duty or with formal uniforms and shoes.\nNo changes were made to any other items of clothing/equipment already in use by male personnel.\nDecorations.\nThe State Color of the Carabinieri bears the following decorations:\nVehicles and equipment.\nUntil very recently the Italian police (including the \"Carabinieri\") operated only Italian-made vehicles, but that changed with the introduction of Land Rover Defenders and Subarus into service. Normal \"Carabinieri\" patrol vehicles are dark blue with a white roof, with a red stripe along the side. Carabinieri license plates begin with \"CC\" or previously with \"EI\" (formerly Esercito Italiano, Italian Army), and a Carabinieri car is traditionally called a \"Gazzella\" (gazelle). Small or medium-sized cars are used for ordinary patrol work, with larger and more powerful vehicles being used for emergency response, highway patrol, and special services. The vehicles of the \"Carabinieri\" military police and mobile units are painted in NATO camouflage scheme as done with the other Italian Armed Forces vehicles.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45177", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45177", "title": "Negative binomial distribution", "text": "Probability distribution\n&lt;/math&gt;\n | kurtosis = formula_1\n | entropy = \n | mgf = formula_2\n | char = formula_3\n | pgf = formula_4\n | fisher = formula_5\n | moments = formula_6 formula_7\nIn probability theory and statistics, the negative binomial distribution, also called a Pascal distribution, is a discrete probability distribution that models the number of failures in a sequence of independent and identically distributed Bernoulli trials before a specified/constant/fixed number of successes formula_8 occur. For example, we can define rolling a 6 on some dice as a success, and rolling any other number as a failure, and ask how many failure rolls will occur before we see the third success (formula_9). In such a case, the probability distribution of the number of failures that appear will be a negative binomial distribution.\nAn alternative formulation is to model the number of total trials (instead of the number of failures). In fact, for a specified (non-random) number of successes (\"r\"), the number of failures (\"n\" \u2212 \"r\") is random because the number of total trials (\"n\") is random. For example, we could use the negative binomial distribution to model the number of days n (random) a certain machine works (specified by r) before it breaks down.\nThe negative binomial distribution has a variance formula_10, with the distribution becoming identical to Poisson in the limit formula_11 for a given mean formula_12 (i.e. when the failures are increasingly rare). Here formula_13 is the success probability of each Bernoulli trial. This can make the distribution a useful overdispersed alternative to the Poisson distribution, for example for a robust modification of Poisson regression. In epidemiology, it has been used to model disease transmission for infectious diseases where the likely number of onward infections may vary considerably from individual to individual and from setting to setting. More generally, it may be appropriate where events have positively correlated occurrences causing a larger variance than if the occurrences were independent, due to a positive covariance term.\nThe term \"negative binomial\" is likely due to the fact that a certain binomial coefficient that appears in the formula for the probability mass function of the distribution can be written more simply with negative numbers.\nDefinitions.\nImagine a sequence of independent Bernoulli trials: each trial has two potential outcomes called \"success\" and \"failure.\" In each trial the probability of success is formula_14 and of failure is formula_15. We observe this sequence until a predefined number formula_8 of successes occurs. Then the random number of observed failures, formula_17, follows the negative binomial distribution:\nformula_18\nProbability mass function.\nThe probability mass function of the negative binomial distribution is\nformula_19\nwhere r is the number of successes, k is the number of failures, and p is the probability of success on each trial.\nHere, the quantity in parentheses is the binomial coefficient, and is equal to\nformula_20\nNote that \u0393(\"r\") is the Gamma function.\nThere are k failures chosen from \"k\" + \"r\" \u2212 1 trials rather than \"k\" + \"r\" because the last of the \"k\" + \"r\" trials is by definition a success.\nThis quantity can alternatively be written in the following manner, explaining the name \"negative binomial\":\nformula_21\nNote that by the last expression and the binomial series, for every 0 \u2264 \"p\" &lt; 1 and formula_22,\nformula_23\nhence the terms of the probability mass function indeed add up to one as below.\nformula_24\nTo understand the above definition of the probability mass function, note that the probability for every specific sequence of r\u00a0successes and k\u00a0failures is \"p\"\"r\"(1 \u2212 \"p\")\"k\", because the outcomes of the \"k\" + \"r\" trials are supposed to happen independently. Since the r-th success always comes last, it remains to choose the k\u00a0trials with failures out of the remaining \"k\" + \"r\" \u2212 1 trials. The above binomial coefficient, due to its combinatorial interpretation, gives precisely the number of all these sequences of length \"k\" + \"r\" \u2212 1.\nCumulative distribution function.\nThe cumulative distribution function can be expressed in terms of the regularized incomplete beta function:\nformula_25\nIt can also be expressed in terms of the cumulative distribution function of the binomial distribution:\nformula_28\nAlternative formulations.\nSome sources may define the negative binomial distribution slightly differently from the primary one here. The most common variations are where the random variable X is counting different things. These variations can be seen in the table here:\nEach of the four definitions of the negative binomial distribution can be expressed in slightly different but equivalent ways. The first alternative formulation is simply an equivalent form of the binomial coefficient, that is: formula_29. The second alternate formulation somewhat simplifies the expression by recognizing that the total number of trials is simply the number of successes and failures, that is: formula_30. These second formulations may be more intuitive to understand, however they are perhaps less practical as they have more terms.\nIn negative binomial regression, the distribution is specified in terms of its mean, formula_33, which is then related to explanatory variables as in linear regression or other generalized linear models. From the expression for the mean m, one can derive formula_34 and formula_35. Then, substituting these expressions in the one for the probability mass function when r is real-valued, yields this parametrization of the probability mass function in terms of\u00a0m:\nformula_36\nThe variance can then be written as formula_37. Some authors prefer to set formula_38, and express the variance as formula_39. In this context, and depending on the author, either the parameter r or its reciprocal \u03b1 is referred to as the \"dispersion parameter\", \"shape parameter\" or \"clustering coefficient\", or the \"heterogeneity\" or \"aggregation\" parameter. The term \"aggregation\" is particularly used in ecology when describing counts of individual organisms. Decrease of the aggregation parameter r towards zero corresponds to increasing aggregation of the organisms; increase of r towards infinity corresponds to absence of aggregation, as can be described by Poisson regression.\nAlternative parameterizations.\nSometimes the distribution is parameterized in terms of its mean \u03bc and variance \"\u03c3\"2:\nformula_40\nAnother popular parameterization uses r and the failure odds \u03b2:\nformula_41\nExamples.\nLength of hospital stay.\nHospital length of stay is an example of real-world data that can be modelled well with a negative binomial distribution via negative binomial regression.\nSelling candy.\nPat Collis is required to sell candy bars to raise money for the 6th grade field trip. Pat is (somewhat harshly) not supposed to return home until five candy bars have been sold. So the child goes door to door, selling candy bars. At each house, there is a 0.6 probability of selling one candy bar and a 0.4 probability of selling nothing.\n\"What's the probability of selling the last candy bar at the\" n-th \"house?\"\nSuccessfully selling candy enough times is what defines our stopping criterion (as opposed to failing to sell it), so k in this case represents the number of failures and r represents the number of successes. Recall that the NB(\"r\", \"p\") distribution describes the probability of k failures and r successes in \"k\" + \"r\" Bernoulli(\"p\") trials with success on the last trial. Selling five candy bars means getting five successes. The number of trials (i.e. houses) this takes is therefore \"k\" + 5 = \"n\". The random variable we are interested in is the number of houses, so we substitute \"k\" = \"n\" \u2212 5 into a NB(5, 0.4) mass function and obtain the following mass function of the distribution of houses (for \"n\" \u2265 5):\nformula_42\n\"What's the probability that Pat finishes on the tenth house?\"\nformula_43\n\"What's the probability that Pat finishes on or before reaching the eighth house?\"\nTo finish on or before the eighth house, Pat must finish at the fifth, sixth, seventh, or eighth house. Sum those probabilities:\nformula_44\nformula_45\n\"What's the probability that Pat exhausts all 30 houses that happen to stand in the neighborhood?\"\nThis can be expressed as the probability that Pat does not finish on the fifth through the thirtieth house:\nformula_46\nBecause of the rather high probability that Pat will sell to each house (60 percent), the probability of her \"not\" fulfilling her quest is vanishingly slim.\nProperties.\nExpectation.\nThe expected total number of trials needed to see r successes is formula_47. Thus, the expected number of \"failures\" would be this value, minus the successes:\nformula_48\nExpectation of successes.\nThe expected total number of failures in a negative binomial distribution with parameters (\"r\", \"p\") is \"r\"(1 \u2212 \"p\")/\"p\". To see this, imagine an experiment simulating the negative binomial is performed many times. That is, a set of trials is performed until r successes are obtained, then another set of trials, and then another etc. Write down the number of trials performed in each experiment: \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", ... and set \"a\" + \"b\" + \"c\" + ... \n \"N\". Now we would expect about \"Np\" successes in total. Say the experiment was performed n times. Then there are \"nr\" successes in total. So we would expect \"nr\" \n \"Np\", so \"N\"/\"n\" \n \"r\"/\"p\". See that \"N\"/\"n\" is just the average number of trials per experiment. That is what we mean by \"expectation\". The average number of failures per experiment is \"N\"/\"n\" \u2212 \"r\" = \"r\"/\"p\" \u2212 \"r\" = \"r\"(1 \u2212 \"p\")/\"p\". This agrees with the mean given in the box on the right-hand side of this page.\nA rigorous derivation can be done by representing the negative binomial distribution as the sum of waiting times. Let formula_49 with the convention formula_17 represents the number of failures observed before formula_8 successes with the probability of success being formula_14. And let formula_53 where formula_54 represents the number of failures before seeing a success. We can think of formula_54 as the waiting time (number of failures) between the formula_56th and formula_57th success. Thus\nformula_58\nThe mean is \nformula_59\nwhich follows from the fact formula_60.\nVariance.\nWhen counting the number of failures before the r-th success, the variance is\u00a0\"r\"(1 \u2212 \"p\")/\"p\"2. \nWhen counting the number of successes before the r-th failure, as in alternative formulation (3) above, the variance is\u00a0\"rp\"/(1 \u2212 \"p\")2.\nRelation to the binomial theorem.\nSuppose Y is a random variable with a binomial distribution with parameters n and p. Assume \"p\" + \"q\" = 1, with \"p\", \"q\" \u2265 0, then\nformula_61\nUsing Newton's binomial theorem, this can equally be written as:\nformula_62\nin which the upper bound of summation is infinite. In this case, the binomial coefficient\nformula_63\nis defined when n is a real number, instead of just a positive integer. But in our case of the binomial distribution it is zero when \"k\" &gt; \"n\". We can then say, for example\nformula_64\nNow suppose \"r\" &gt; 0 and we use a negative exponent:\nformula_65\nThen all of the terms are positive, and the term\nformula_66\nis just the probability that the number of failures before the r-th success is equal to k, provided r is an integer. (If r is a negative non-integer, so that the exponent is a positive non-integer, then some of the terms in the sum above are negative, so we do not have a probability distribution on the set of all nonnegative integers.)\nNow we also allow non-integer values of r.\nRecall from above that\nThe sum of independent negative-binomially distributed random variables \"r\"1 and \"r\"2 with the same value for parameter p is negative-binomially distributed with the same p but with r-value\u00a0\"r\"1 + \"r\"2.\nThis property persists when the definition is thus generalized, and affords a quick way to see that the negative binomial distribution is infinitely divisible.\nRecurrence relations.\nThe following recurrence relations hold:\nFor the probability mass function\nformula_67\nFor the moments formula_68\nformula_69\nFor the cumulants\nformula_70\nRelated distributions.\nPoisson distribution.\nConsider a sequence of negative binomial random variables where the stopping parameter r goes to infinity, while the probability p of success in each trial goes to one, in such a way as to keep the mean of the distribution (i.e. the expected number of failures) constant. Denoting this mean as \u03bb, the parameter p will be \"p\" = \"r\"/(\"r\" + \"\u03bb\")\nformula_72\nUnder this parametrization the probability mass function will be\nformula_73\nNow if we consider the limit as \"r\" \u2192 \u221e, the second factor will converge to one, and the third to the exponent function:\nformula_74\nwhich is the mass function of a Poisson-distributed random variable with expected value\u00a0\u03bb.\nIn other words, the alternatively parameterized negative binomial distribution converges to the Poisson distribution and r controls the deviation from the Poisson. This makes the negative binomial distribution suitable as a robust alternative to the Poisson, which approaches the Poisson for large r, but which has larger variance than the Poisson for small r.\nformula_75\nGamma\u2013Poisson mixture.\nThe negative binomial distribution also arises as a continuous mixture of Poisson distributions (i.e. a compound probability distribution) where the mixing distribution of the Poisson rate is a gamma distribution. That is, we can view the negative binomial as a Poisson(\"\u03bb\") distribution, where \u03bb is itself a random variable, distributed as a gamma distribution with shape r and scale \"\u03b8\" = (1 \u2212 \"p\")/\"p\" or correspondingly rate \"\u03b2\" = \"p\"/(1 \u2212 \"p\").\nTo display the intuition behind this statement, consider two independent Poisson processes, \"Success\" and \"Failure\", with intensities p and 1 \u2212 \"p\". Together, the Success and Failure processes are equivalent to a single Poisson process of intensity 1, where an occurrence of the process is a success if a corresponding independent coin toss comes up heads with probability p; otherwise, it is a failure. If r is a counting number, the coin tosses show that the count of successes before the r-th failure follows a negative binomial distribution with parameters r and 1 \u2212 \"p\". The count is also, however, the count of the Success Poisson process at the random time T of the r-th occurrence in the Failure Poisson process. The Success count follows a Poisson distribution with mean \"pT\", where T is the waiting time for r occurrences in a Poisson process of intensity 1 \u2212 \"p\", i.e., T is gamma-distributed with shape parameter r and intensity 1 \u2212 \"p\". Thus, the negative binomial distribution is equivalent to a Poisson distribution with mean \"pT\", where the random variate T is gamma-distributed with shape parameter r and intensity (1 \u2212 \"p\"). The preceding paragraph follows, because \"\u03bb\" = \"pT\" is gamma-distributed with shape parameter r and intensity (1 \u2212 \"p\")/\"p\".\nThe following formal derivation (which does not depend on r being a counting number) confirms the intuition.\nformula_76\nBecause of this, the negative binomial distribution is also known as the gamma\u2013Poisson (mixture) distribution. The negative binomial distribution was originally derived as a limiting case of the gamma-Poisson distribution.\nDistribution of a sum of geometrically distributed random variables.\nIf \"Y\"\"r\" is a random variable following the negative binomial distribution with parameters r and p, and support {0, 1, 2, ...}, then \"Y\"\"r\" is a sum of r independent variables following the geometric distribution (on {0, 1, 2, ...}) with parameter p. As a result of the central limit theorem, \"Y\"\"r\" (properly scaled and shifted) is therefore approximately normal for sufficiently large\u00a0r.\nFurthermore, if \"B\"\"s\"+\"r\" is a random variable following the binomial distribution with parameters \"s\" + \"r\" and p, then\nformula_77\nIn this sense, the negative binomial distribution is the \"inverse\" of the binomial distribution.\nThe sum of independent negative-binomially distributed random variables \"r\"1 and \"r\"2 with the same value for parameter p is negative-binomially distributed with the same p but with r-value\u00a0\"r\"1 + \"r\"2.\nThe negative binomial distribution is infinitely divisible, i.e., if Y has a negative binomial distribution, then for any positive integer n, there exist independent identically distributed random variables \"Y\"1, ..., \"Y\"\"n\" whose sum has the same distribution that Y has.\nRepresentation as compound Poisson distribution.\nThe negative binomial distribution NB(\"r\", \"p\") can be represented as a compound Poisson distribution: Let formula_78 denote a sequence of independent and identically distributed random variables, each one having the logarithmic series distribution Log(\"p\"), with probability mass function\nformula_79\nLet N be a random variable, independent of the sequence, and suppose that N has a Poisson distribution with mean \u03bb \n \u2212\"r\" ln(1 \u2212 \"p\"). Then the random sum\nformula_80\nis NB(\"r\", \"p\")-distributed. To prove this, we calculate the probability generating function \"G\"\"X\" of X, which is the composition of the probability generating functions \"G\"\"N\" and \"G\"\"Y\"1. Using\nformula_81\nand\nformula_82\nwe obtain\nformula_83\nwhich is the probability generating function of the NB(\"r\", \"p\") distribution.\nThe following table describes four distributions related to the number of successes in a sequence of draws:\n(\"a\",\"b\",0) class of distributions.\nThe negative binomial, along with the Poisson and binomial distributions, is a member of the (\"a\", \"b\", 0) class of distributions. All three of these distributions are special cases of the Panjer distribution. They are also members of a natural exponential family.\nStatistical inference.\nParameter estimation.\nMVUE for \"p\".\nSuppose p is unknown and an experiment is conducted where it is decided ahead of time that sampling will continue until r successes are found. A sufficient statistic for the experiment is k, the number of failures.\nIn estimating p, the minimum variance unbiased estimator is\nformula_84\nMaximum likelihood estimation.\nWhen r is known, the maximum likelihood estimate of p is\nformula_85\nbut this is a biased estimate. Its inverse (\"r\" + \"k\")/\"r\", is an unbiased estimate of 1/\"p\", however.\nWhen r is unknown, the maximum likelihood estimator for p and r together only exists for samples for which the sample variance is larger than the sample mean. The likelihood function for N iid observations (\"k\"1, ..., \"k\"\"N\") is\nformula_86\nfrom which we calculate the log-likelihood function\nformula_87\nTo find the maximum we take the partial derivatives with respect to r and p and set them equal to zero:\nformula_88 and\nformula_89\nwhere\nformula_90 is the digamma function.\nSolving the first equation for p gives:\nformula_91\nSubstituting this in the second equation gives:\nformula_92\nThis equation cannot be solved for r in closed form. If a numerical solution is desired, an iterative technique such as Newton's method can be used. Alternatively, the expectation\u2013maximization algorithm can be used.\nOccurrence and applications.\nWaiting time in a Bernoulli process.\nLet k and r be integers with k non-negative and r positive. In a sequence of independent Bernoulli trials with success probability p, the negative binomial gives the probability of k successes and r failures, with a failure on the last trial. Therefore, the negative binomial distribution represents the probability distribution of the number of successes before the r-th failure in a Bernoulli process, with probability p of successes on each trial.\nConsider the following example. Suppose we repeatedly throw a die, and consider a 1 to be a failure. The probability of success on each trial is 5/6. The number of successes before the third failure belongs to the infinite set {0, 1, 2, 3, ...}. That number of successes is a negative-binomially distributed random variable.\nWhen \"r\" = 1 we get the probability distribution of number of successes before the first failure (i.e. the probability of the first failure occurring on the (\"k\" + 1)-st trial), which is a geometric distribution:\nformula_93\nOverdispersed Poisson.\nThe negative binomial distribution, especially in its alternative parameterization described above, can be used as an alternative to the Poisson distribution. It is especially useful for discrete data over an unbounded positive range whose sample variance exceeds the sample mean. In such cases, the observations are overdispersed with respect to a Poisson distribution, for which the mean is equal to the variance. Hence a Poisson distribution is not an appropriate model. Since the negative binomial distribution has one more parameter than the Poisson, the second parameter can be used to adjust the variance independently of the mean. See Cumulants of some discrete probability distributions.\nAn application of this is to annual counts of tropical cyclones in the North Atlantic or to monthly to 6-monthly counts of wintertime extratropical cyclones over Europe, for which the variance is greater than the mean. In the case of modest overdispersion, this may produce substantially similar results to an overdispersed Poisson distribution.\nNegative binomial modeling is widely employed in ecology and biodiversity research for analyzing count data where overdispersion is very common. This is because overdispersion is indicative of biological aggregation, such as species or communities forming clusters. Ignoring overdispersion can lead to significantly inflated model parameters, resulting in misleading statistical inferences. The negative binomial distribution effectively addresses overdispersed counts by permitting the variance to vary quadratically with the mean. An additional dispersion parameter governs the slope of the quadratic term, determining the severity of overdispersion. The model's quadratic mean-variance relationship proves to be a realistic approach for handling overdispersion, as supported by empirical evidence from many studies. Overall, the NB model offers two attractive features: (1) the convenient interpretation of the dispersion parameter as an index of clustering or aggregation, and (2) its tractable form, featuring a closed expression for the probability mass function.\nIn genetics, the negative binomial distribution is commonly used to model data in the form of discrete sequence read counts from high-throughput RNA and DNA sequencing experiments.\nIn epidemiology of infectious diseases, the negative binomial has been used as a better option than the Poisson distribution to model overdispersed counts of secondary infections from one infected case (super-spreading events).\nMultiplicity observations (physics).\nThe negative binomial distribution has been the most effective statistical model for a broad range of multiplicity observations in particle collision experiments, e.g., formula_94 (See for an overview), and is argued to be a scale-invariant property of matter, providing the best fit for astronomical observations, where it predicts the number of galaxies in a region of space. The phenomenological justification for the effectiveness of the negative binomial distribution in these contexts remained unknown for fifty years, since their first observation in 1973. In 2023, a proof from first principles was eventually demonstrated by Scott V. Tezlaf, where it was shown that the negative binomial distribution emerges from symmetries in the dynamical equations of a canonical ensemble of particles in Minkowski space. Roughly, given an expected number of trials formula_95 and expected number of successes formula_96, where\nformula_97\nan isomorphic set of equations can be identified with the parameters of a relativistic current density of a canonical ensemble of massive particles, via\nformula_98\nwhere formula_99 is the rest density, formula_100 is the relativistic mean square density, formula_101 is the relativistic mean square current density, and formula_102, where formula_103 is the mean square speed of the particle ensemble and formula_104 is the speed of light\u2014such that one can establish the following bijective map:\nformula_105\nA rigorous alternative proof of the above correspondence has also been demonstrated through quantum mechanics via the Feynman path integral.\nHistory.\nThis distribution was first studied in 1713 by Pierre Remond de Montmort in his \"Essay d'analyse sur les jeux de hazard\", as the distribution of the number of trials required in an experiment to obtain a given number of successes. It had previously been mentioned by Pascal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45178", "revid": "46177067", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45178", "title": "Process (computing)", "text": "Particular execution of a computer program\nIn computing, a process is the instance of a computer program that is being executed by one or many threads. There are many different process models, some of which are light weight, but almost all processes (even entire virtual machines) are rooted in an operating system (OS) process which comprises the program code, assigned system resources, physical and logical access permissions, and data structures to initiate, control and coordinate execution activity. Depending on the OS, a process may be made up of multiple threads of execution that execute instructions concurrently.\nWhile a computer program is a passive collection of instructions typically stored in a file on disk, a process is the execution of those instructions after being loaded from the disk into memory. Several processes may be associated with the same program; for example, opening up several instances of the same program often results in more than one process being executed.\nMultitasking is a method to allow multiple processes to share processors (CPUs) and other system resources. Each CPU (core) executes a single process at a time. However, multitasking allows each processor to switch between tasks that are being executed without having to wait for each task to finish (preemption). Depending on the operating system implementation, switches could be performed when tasks initiate and wait for completion of input/output operations, when a task voluntarily yields the CPU, on hardware interrupts, and when the operating system scheduler decides that a process has expired its fair share of CPU time (e.g, by the Completely Fair Scheduler of the Linux kernel).\nA common form of multitasking is provided by CPU's time-sharing that is a method for interleaving the execution of users' processes and threads, and even of independent kernel tasks \u2013 although the latter feature is feasible only in preemptive kernels such as Linux. Preemption has an important side effect for interactive processes that are given higher priority with respect to CPU bound processes, therefore users are immediately assigned computing resources at the simple pressing of a key or when moving a mouse. Furthermore, applications like video and music reproduction are given some kind of real-time priority, preempting any other lower priority process. In time-sharing systems, context switches are performed rapidly, which makes it seem like multiple processes are being executed simultaneously on the same processor. This seemingly-simultaneous execution of multiple processes is called concurrency.\nFor security and reliability, most modern operating systems prevent direct communication between independent processes, providing strictly mediated and controlled inter-process communication.\nRepresentation.\nIn general, a computer system process consists of (or is said to \"own\") the following resources:\nThe operating system holds most of this information about active processes in data structures called process control blocks. Any subset of the resources, typically at least the processor state, may be associated with each of the process' threads in operating systems that support threads or \"child\" processes.\nThe operating system keeps its processes separate and allocates the resources they need, so that they are less likely to interfere with each other and cause system failures (e.g., deadlock or thrashing). The operating system may also provide mechanisms for inter-process communication to enable processes to interact in safe and predictable ways.\nMultitasking and process management.\nA multitasking operating system may just switch between processes to give the appearance of many processes executing simultaneously (that is, in parallel), though in fact only one process can be executing at any one time on a single CPU (unless the CPU has multiple cores, then multithreading or other similar technologies can be used).\nIt is usual to associate a single process with a main program, and child processes with any spin-off, parallel processes, which behave like asynchronous subroutines. A process is said to \"own\" resources, of which an \"image\" of its program (in memory) is one such resource. However, in multiprocessing systems \"many\" processes may run off of, or share, the same reentrant program at the same location in memory, but each process is said to own its own \"image\" of the program.\nProcesses are often called \"tasks\" in embedded operating systems. The sense of \"process\" (or task) is \"something that takes up time\", as opposed to \"memory\", which is \"something that takes up space\".\nThe above description applies to both processes managed by an operating system, and processes as defined by process calculi.\nIf a process requests something for which it must wait, it will be blocked. When the process is in the blocked state, it is eligible for swapping to disk, but this is transparent in a virtual memory system, where regions of a process's memory may be really on disk and not in main memory at any time. Even portions of active processes/tasks (executing programs) are eligible for swapping to disk, if the portions have not been used recently. Not all parts of an executing program and its data have to be in physical memory for the associated process to be active.\nProcess states.\nAn operating system kernel that allows multitasking needs processes to have certain states. Names for these states are not standardised, but they have similar functionality.\nInter-process communication.\nWhen processes need to communicate with each other they must share parts of their address spaces or use other forms of inter-process communication (IPC).\nFor instance in a shell pipeline, the output of the first process needs to pass to the second one, and so on. Another example is a task that has been decomposed into cooperating but partially independent processes which can run simultaneously (i.e., using concurrency, or true parallelism \u2013 the latter model is a particular case of concurrent execution and is feasible whenever multiple CPU cores are available for the processes that are ready to run).\nIt is even possible for two or more processes to be running on different machines that may run different operating system (OS), therefore some mechanisms for communication and synchronization (called communications protocols for distributed computing) are needed (e.g., the Message Passing Interface {MPI}).\nHistory.\nBy the early 1960s, computer control software had evolved from monitor control software, for example IBSYS, to executive control software. Over time, computers got faster while computer time was still neither cheap nor fully utilized; such an environment made multiprogramming possible and necessary. Multiprogramming means that several programs run concurrently. At first, more than one program ran on a single processor, as a result of underlying uniprocessor computer architecture, and they shared scarce and limited hardware resources; consequently, the concurrency was of a \"serial\" nature. On later systems with multiple processors, multiple programs may run concurrently in \"parallel\".\nPrograms consist of sequences of instructions for processors. A single processor can run only one instruction at a time: it is impossible to run more programs at the same time. A program might need some resource, such as an input device, which has a large delay, or a program might start some slow operation, such as sending output to a printer. This would lead to processor being \"idle\" (unused). To keep the processor busy at all times, the execution of such a program is halted and the operating system switches the processor to run another program. To the user, it will appear that the programs run at the same time (hence the term \"parallel\").\nShortly thereafter, the notion of a \"program\" was expanded to the notion of an \"executing program and its context\". The concept of a process was born, which also became necessary with the invention of re-entrant code. Threads came somewhat later. However, with the advent of concepts such as time-sharing, computer networks, and multiple-CPU shared memory computers, the old \"multiprogramming\" gave way to true multitasking, multiprocessing and, later, multithreading.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45180", "revid": "42", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45180", "title": "Dresden, Germany", "text": ""}
{"id": "45181", "revid": "22624187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45181", "title": "Clara Schumann", "text": "German pianist and composer (1819\u20131896)\nClara Josephine Schumann (; ; n\u00e9e Wieck; 13 September 1819 \u2013 20 May 1896) was a German pianist, composer, and piano teacher. Regarded as one of the most distinguished pianists of the Romantic era, she exerted her influence over the course of a 61-year concert career, changing the format and repertoire of the piano recital by lessening the importance of purely virtuosic works. She also composed solo piano pieces, a piano concerto, chamber music, choral pieces, and songs.\nShe grew up in Leipzig, where both her father Friedrich Wieck and her mother Mariane were pianists and piano teachers. In addition, her mother was a singer. Clara was a child prodigy, and was trained by her father. She began touring at age eleven, and was successful in Paris and Vienna, among other cities. She married the composer Robert Schumann, on 12 September 1840, and the couple had eight children. Together, they encouraged Johannes Brahms and maintained a close relationship with him. She gave the public premieres of many works by her husband and by Brahms.\nAfter Robert Schumann's early death, she continued her concert tours in Europe for decades, frequently with the violinist Joseph Joachim and other chamber musicians. Beginning in 1878, she was an influential piano educator at Dr. Hoch's Konservatorium in Frankfurt, where she attracted international students. She edited the publication of her husband's work. Schumann died in Frankfurt, but was buried in Bonn beside her husband.\nSeveral films have focused on Schumann's life, the earliest being \"Tr\u00e4umerei\" (\"Dreaming\") of 1944. A 2008 film, \"Geliebte Clara\" (\"Beloved Clara\"), was directed by Helma Sanders-Brahms. An image of Clara Schumann from an 1835 lithograph by Andreas Staub was featured on the 100 Deutsche Mark banknote from 1989 to 2002. Interest in her compositions began to revive in the late 20th century, and her 2019 bicentenary prompted new books and exhibitions.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nFamily.\nClara Josephine Wieck was born in Leipzig on 13 September 1819 to Friedrich Wieck and his wife Mariane (\"n\u00e9e\" Tromlitz). Her mother was a famous singer in Leipzig who performed weekly piano and soprano solos at the Gewandhaus. Clara's parents had irreconcilable differences, in part due to her father's unyielding nature. Prompted by an affair between her mother and Adolph Bargiel, her father's friend, the Wiecks were divorced in 1825, with Mariane later marrying Bargiel. Five-year-old Clara remained with her father while Mariane and Bargiel eventually moved to Berlin, limiting contact between Clara and her mother to written letters and occasional visits.\nChild prodigy.\nFrom an early age, Clara's father planned her career and life down to the smallest detail. She started receiving basic piano instruction from her mother at the age of four. After her mother moved out, she began taking daily one-hour lessons from her father. They included subjects such as piano, violin, singing, theory, harmony, composition, and counterpoint. She then had to practice for two hours every day. Her father followed the methods in his own book, \"Wiecks pianistische Erziehung zum sch\u00f6nen Anschlag und zum singenden Ton\" (\"Wieck's Piano Education for a Delicate Touch and a Singing Sound.\") Her musical studies came largely at the expense of her broader general education, although she still studied religion and languages under her father's control of the family.\nClara Wieck made her official debut on 28 October 1828 at the Gewandhaus in Leipzig, at age nine. The same year, she performed at the Leipzig home of Ernst Carus, director of the mental hospital at Colditz Castle. There, she met another gifted young pianist who had been invited to the musical evening, Robert Schumann, who was nine years older. Schumann admired Clara's playing so much that he asked permission from his mother to stop studying law, which had never interested him much, and take music lessons with Clara's father. While taking lessons, he rented a room in the Wieck household and stayed about a year.\nFrom September 1831 to April 1832, Clara toured Paris and other European cities, accompanied by her father. In Weimar, she performed a bravura piece by Henri Herz for Goethe, who presented her with a medal with his portrait and a written note saying: \"For the gifted artist Clara Wieck\". During that tour, the violinist Niccol\u00f2 Paganini, who was also in Paris, offered to appear with her. Her Paris recital was poorly attended because many people had fled the city due to an outbreak of cholera. The tour marked her transition from a child prodigy to a young woman performer.\nSuccess in Vienna.\nFrom December 1837 to April 1838, at the age of 18, Wieck performed a series of recitals in Vienna. Franz Grillparzer, Austria's leading dramatic poet, wrote a poem entitled \"Clara Wieck and Beethoven\" after hearing her perform Beethoven's \"Appassionata\" sonata during one of these recitals. She performed to sell-out crowds and laudatory critical reviews; Benedict Randhartinger, a friend of Franz Schubert, gave her an autographed copy of Schubert's \"Erlk\u00f6nig\", inscribing it \"To the celebrated artist, Clara Wieck.\" Chopin described her playing to Franz Liszt, who came to hear one of Wieck's concerts and subsequently praised her extravagantly in a letter that was published in the Parisian \"Revue et Gazette Musicale\" and later, in translation, in the Leipzig journal \"Neue Zeitschrift f\u00fcr Musik\". On 15 March, she was named a \"K\u00f6nigliche und Kaiserliche \u00d6sterreichische Kammer-virtuosin\" (\"Royal and Imperial Austrian Chamber Virtuoso\"), Austria's highest musical honor.\nAn anonymous music critic, describing her Vienna recitals, said: \"The appearance of this artist can be regarded as epoch-making... In her creative hands, the most ordinary passage, the most routine motive acquires a significant meaning, a colour, which only those with the most consummate artistry can give.\"\nLasting relationships.\nRobert Schumann.\nRobert Schumann was a little more than nine years older than Wieck. In 1837, when she was 18, he proposed to her and she accepted. Robert then asked her father for her hand in marriage. Friedrich was strongly opposed to the marriage, and refused his permission. Robert and Clara decided to go to court and sue him. The judge allowed the marriage, which took place in Sch\u00f6nefeld church on 12 September 1840, the day before Clara's 21st birthday, when she attained majority status. From then on, the couple maintained a joint musical and personal diary of their life together.\nIn February 1854, Robert Schumann had a mental collapse, attempted suicide, and was admitted, at his request, to a sanatorium in the village of Endenich near Bonn, where he stayed for the last two years of his life. In March 1854, Brahms, Joachim, Albert Dietrich, and Julius Otto Grimm spent time with Clara Schumann, playing music for her and with her to divert her mind from the tragedy. Brahms composed some private piano pieces for her to console her: four piano pieces and a set of variations on a theme by Robert Schumann that she had also written variations on a year earlier, as her Op. 20. The music by Brahms was not intended to be published, but for her alone. Brahms later thought to publish them anonymously, but eventually they were issued as his four Ballades, Op. 10, and \"Variations on a Theme by Robert Schumann\", Op. 9. Brahms dedicated the variations to both Schumanns, hoping that Robert would be released soon and rejoined with his family.\nFor the entire two years of Robert Schumann's stay at the institution, his wife was not permitted to visit him, while Brahms visited him regularly. When it was apparent that Robert was near death, she was finally admitted to see him. He appeared to recognize her, but could only speak a few words. Robert Schumann died two days later, on 29 July 1856.\nJoseph Joachim.\nThe Schumanns first met violinist Joseph Joachim in November 1844, when he was 14 years old. A year later, Clara Schumann wrote in her diary that in a concert on 11 November 1845, \"little Joachim was very much liked. He played a new violin concerto by Felix Mendelssohn, which is said to be wonderful.\" In May 1853, they heard Joachim play the solo part in Beethoven's Violin Concerto. She wrote that he played \"with a finish, a depth of poetic feeling, his whole soul in every note, so ideally, that I have never heard violin-playing like it, and I can truly say that I have never received so indelible an impression from any virtuoso.\" A lasting friendship developed between Clara and Joseph, which for more than forty years never failed her in things great or small, never wavered in its loyalty.\nOver her career, Schumann gave over 238 concerts with Joachim in Germany and Britain, more than with any other artist. The two were particularly noted for their playing of Beethoven's violin sonatas.\nJohannes Brahms.\nIn early 1853, the then-unknown 20-year-old Johannes Brahms met Joachim and made a very favorable impression. Brahms received from him a letter of introduction to Robert Schumann, and thus presented himself at the Schumanns' home in D\u00fcsseldorf. Brahms played some of his piano solo compositions for the Schumanns, and they were deeply impressed. Robert published an article highly lauding Brahms, and Clara wrote in the diary that Brahms \"seemed as if sent straight from God\".\nDuring Robert Schumann's last years, confined to an asylum, Brahms was a strong presence for the Schumann family. His letters indicate his strong feelings for Clara. Their relationship has been interpreted as somewhere between friendship and love, and Brahms always maintained the utmost respect for her, as a woman and a talented musician.\nBrahms played his First Symphony for her before its premiere. She gave some advice about the Adagio, which he took to heart. She expressed her appreciation of the Symphony as a whole, but mentioned her dissatisfaction with the endings of the third and fourth movements. She was the first to perform many of his works in public, including the \"Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Handel\", a solo piano work written by Brahms in 1861.\nConcert tours.\nClara Schumann first toured England in April 1856, while her husband was still living but unable to travel. She was invited to play in a London Philharmonic Society concert by conductor William Sterndale Bennett, a good friend of Robert's. She was displeased with the little time spent on rehearsals: \"They call it a rehearsal here if a piece is played through once.\" She wrote that musical \"artists\" in England \"allow themselves to be treated as inferiors.\" She was happy, though, to hear the cellist Alfredo Piatti play with \"a tone, a bravura, a certainty, such as I never heard before\". In May 1856, she played Robert Schumann's Piano Concerto in A minor with the New Philharmonic Society conducted by Dr Wylde, who as she said had \"led a dreadful rehearsal\" and \"could not grasp the rhythm of the last movement\". Still, she returned to London the following year and continued to perform in Britain for the next 15 years.\nIn October\u2013November 1857, Schumann and Joachim went on a recital tour to Dresden and Leipzig. St. James's Hall in London, which opened in 1858, hosted a series of \"Popular Concerts\" of chamber music. Joachim visited London annually beginning in 1866. Schumann also spent many years in London participating in the Popular Concerts with Joachim and the celebrated Italian cellist Carlo Alfredo Piatti. Second violinist Louis Ries (nephew of composer Ferdinand Ries) and violist J. B. Zerbini usually played on the same concert programs. George Bernard Shaw, the leading playwright and also a music critic, wrote that the Popular Concerts helped greatly to spread and enlighten musical taste in England.\nIn January 1867, Schumann toured Edinburgh and Glasgow, Scotland, along with Joachim, Piatti, Ries, and Zerbini. Two sisters, Louisa and Susanna Pyne, singers and managers of an opera company in England, and a man named Saunders, made all the arrangements. She was accompanied by her oldest daughter Marie, who wrote from Manchester to her friend Rosalie Leser that in Edinburgh the pianist \"was received with tempestuous applause and had to give an encore, so had Joachim. Piatti, too, is always tremendously liked.\" Marie also wrote: \"For the longer journeys we had a saloon [car], comfortably furnished with arm-chairs and sofas... the journey ... was very comfortable.\" On this occasion, the musicians were not \"treated as inferiors\".\nLater life.\nConcerts.\nSchumann still performed actively in the 1870s and 1880s. She performed extensively and regularly throughout Germany during these decades, and had engagements in Austria, Hungary, Belgium, Holland, and Switzerland. When in Basel, Switzerland, she often stayed with the Von der M\u00fchll family. She continued her annual winter-spring concert tours of England, giving 16 of them between 1865 and 1888, often with violinist Joachim. In the meantime, beginning in the spring of 1863, Clara Schumann, accompanied by her seven children, began spending the holiday months in Lichtenthal, a town near Baden-Baden. This summer residence became a family meeting place after her intense work schedule, since her children were living apart in different cities across Europe. It was also a setting for constant music-making, owing to visits from prominent figures and friends such as Brahms and Joachim.\nShe took a break from concert performances, beginning in January 1874, cancelling her usual England tour due to an arm injury. In July, she consulted a doctor, who having massaged the arm, advised her to practice for only one hour a day. She rested for the remainder of the year before returning to the concert stage in March 1875. She had not fully recovered, and experienced more neuralgia in her arm again in May, reporting that she \"could not write on account of my arm\". By October 1875, she had recovered enough to begin another tour in Germany.\nIn addition to solo piano recitals, chamber music, and accompanying singers, she continued to perform frequently with orchestras. In 1877, she performed Beethoven's Fifth Piano Concerto in Berlin, with Woldemar Bargiel conducting, her half-brother by her mother's second marriage, and had tremendous success. In 1883, she performed Beethoven's \"Choral Fantasy\" with the newly-formed Berlin Philharmonic, and was enthusiastically celebrated, although she was playing with an injured hand in great pain, having fallen on a staircase the previous day. Later that year she played Beethoven's Fourth Piano Concerto (with her own cadenzas) with Joachim conducting the same orchestra, again to great acclaim.\nIn 1885, Schumann once again joined Joachim conducting Mozart's Piano Concerto in D minor, again playing her own cadenzas. The following day, she played her husband's Piano Concerto with Bargiel conducting. \"I think I played fresher than ever\", she wrote to Brahms, \"What I liked very much about the concert was that I was able to give Woldemar the direction of it, who had longed for such an opportunity for years.\"\nShe played her last public concert in Frankfurt on 12 March 1891. The last work she played was Brahms's \"Variations on a Theme by Haydn\", in a version for two pianos, with James Kwast.\nTeaching.\nIn 1878, Schumann was appointed the first piano teacher of the new Dr. Hoch's Konservatorium in Frankfurt. She had chosen Frankfurt among offers from Stuttgart, Hannover, and Berlin, because the director, Joachim Raff, had accepted her conditions: she could not teach more than 1-1/2 hours per day, was free to teach at her home, and had four months of vacation and time off for short tours in winter. She demanded two assistants, with her daughters Marie and Eugenie in mind.\nShe was the only woman on the faculty. Her fame attracted students from abroad, including Britain and the United States. She trained only advanced pupils, mostly young women, while her two daughters gave lessons to beginners. Among her 68 known students who made a musical career were Leonard Borwick, Fanny Davies, John Arthur St. Oswald Dykes, Ilona Eibensch\u00fctz, Nanette Falk (1835-1928), Carl Friedberg, Amina Goodwin, Natalia Janotha, Adelina de Lara, Marie Olson (1867-1916), Jane Roeckel, Franklin Taylor and Mary Wurm. The Konservatorium held events to celebrate her 50th year on stage in 1878 and her 60th career anniversary ten years later. She held the teaching post until 1892 and contributed greatly to the improvement of modern piano playing technique.\nDeath.\nClara Schumann suffered a stroke on 26 March 1896, and died on 20 May at age 76. She was buried in Bonn at Alter Friedhof next to her husband, according to her own wish.\nFamily life.\nRobert Schumann gave his wife a diary on their wedding day. His first entry indicates that it should act as an autobiography of the family's personal lives, especially of the couple, and of their desires and accomplishments in the arts. It also functioned as a record of their artistic endeavors and growth. She fully accepted the arrangement of a shared diary, as evidenced by her many entries. It demonstrates her loyal love for her husband, with a desire to combine two lives into one artistically, although this life-long goal involved risks.\nThe couple remained joint partners in both family life and their careers. She premiered many of his works, from solo piano works to her own piano versions of his orchestral works.\nShe often took charge of finances and general household affairs. Part of her responsibility included earning money by giving concerts, though she continued to play throughout her life, not just for the income but because she was an artist by training and nature. The burden of family duties increased over time and narrowed her ability as an artist. As a flourishing composer's wife, she was limited in her own explorations.\nShe was the main breadwinner for her family and the sole one after her husband was hospitalized and then died. She gave concerts and taught, and she did most of the work of organizing her own concert tours. She hired a housekeeper and a cook to keep house while she was away on her long tours.\nClara Schumann had eight children in 13 years:\nA number of personal difficulties occurred in her life. Her husband was permanently institutionalized after a mental collapse. Her eldest living son Ludwig suffered from mental illness like his father and, in her words, eventually had to be \"buried alive\" in an institution. She became deaf in later life, and she often needed a wheelchair. Not only did her husband predecease her, but so did four of their children. Their first son, Emil, died in 1847, aged only 1. Their daughter Julie died in 1872, leaving two small children aged only 2 and 7, then raised by their grandmother. In 1879, their son Felix died aged 24. In 1891, their son Ferdinand died at the age of 41, leaving his children to her care.\nTheir oldest child Marie was of great support and help to her mother, taking the position of household cook. Marie also dissuaded her mother from continuing to burn letters that she had received from Brahms which he had asked her to destroy. Another daughter, Eugenie, who had been too young when her father died to remember him, wrote a book, \"Erinnerungen\" (Memoirs), published in 1925, covering her parents and Brahms.\nSchumann famously rescued her children from violence during the May Uprising in Dresden in 1849. On the evening of 3 May, Robert and Clara heard that the revolution against King Frederick Augustus II of Saxony for not accepting the \"constitution for a German Confederation\" had arrived in Dresden. Most family members left and hid in a \"neighbourhood security brigade\", but on 7 May, she bravely walked back to Dresden to rescue her three children who had been left with a maid, defying a pack of armed men who confronted her, then walked back out of the city through the dangerous areas again.\nMusic.\nPerformance repertoire.\nDuring her lifetime, Schumann was an internationally renowned concert pianist. Over 1,300 concert programs from her performances throughout Europe between 1831 through 1889 have been preserved. She championed the works of her husband and other contemporaries such as Brahms, Chopin and Mendelssohn.\nThe Schumanns were admirers of Chopin, especially of his \"Variations on \"L\u00e0 ci darem la mano\"\", and she played the piece herself. When she was 14 and her future husband 23, he wrote to her:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tomorrow precisely at eleven o'clock I will play the adagio from Chopin's Variations and at the same time I shall think of you very intently, exclusively of you. Now my request is that you should do the same, so that we may see and meet each other in spirit.\u2014\u200a\nIn her early years, her repertoire, selected by her father, was showy and in the style common to the time, with works by Friedrich Kalkbrenner, Adolf von Henselt, Sigismond Thalberg, Henri Herz, Johann Peter Pixis, Carl Czerny and her own compositions. She turned to including compositions by Baroque composers such as Domenico Scarlatti and Johann Sebastian Bach, but performed especially contemporary music by Chopin, Mendelssohn and her husband, whose music did not attain popularity until the 1850s.\nIn 1835, she performed her Piano Concerto in A minor with the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra, conducted by Mendelssohn. On 4 December 1845, she premiered Robert Schumann's Piano Concerto in Dresden. Following the advice of Brahms she performed Mozart's Piano Concerto in C minor at the Hanoverian court and in Leipzig.\nAlong with Arabella Goddard she was one of the first woman pianists to perform Beethoven's Hammerklavier Sonata in public, doing so on two occasions before 1856. Her busiest years as a performer were between 1856 and 1873, after her husband's death. During this period, she experienced success as a performer in Britain, where her 1865 performance of Beethoven's Piano Concerto in G major was met with enormous applause. As a chamber musician, she often gave concerts with violinist Joachim. In her later career, she frequently accompanied lieder singers in recitals.\nCompositions.\nAs part of the broad musical education given to her by her father, Clara Wieck learned to compose, and from childhood to middle age she produced a good body of work. Clara wrote that \"composing gives me great pleasure... there is nothing that surpasses the joy of creation, if only because through it one wins hours of self-forgetfulness, when one lives in a world of sound\". Her Op. 1 was \"Quatre Polonaises pour le pianoforte\" composed in 1831, and Op. 5 \"4 Pi\u00e8ces caract\u00e9ristiques\" in 1836, all piano pieces for her recitals. She wrote her Piano Concerto in A minor at age 14, with some help from her future husband. She planned a second piano concerto, but only a \"Konzertsatz\" in F minor from 1847 survived.\nAfter her marriage, she turned to lieder and choral works. The couple wrote and published one joint composition in 1841, setting a cycle of poems by Friedrich R\u00fcckert called \"Liebesfr\u00fchling\" (\"Spring of Love\") in \"Zw\u00f6lf Lieder auf F. R\u00fcckerts Liebesfr\u00fchling\", her Op. 12 and his Op. 37. Her chamber works include the Piano Trio in G minor, Op. 17 (1846) and Three Romances for Violin and Piano, Op. 22 (1853), inspired by her husband's birthday. They were dedicated to Joachim, who performed them for George V of Hanover, who declared them a \"marvellous, heavenly pleasure\".\nAs she grew older, she became more preoccupied with other responsibilities in life and found it hard to compose regularly, writing, \"I once believed that I possessed creative talent, but I have given up this idea; a woman must not desire to compose\u00a0\u2013 there has never yet been one able to do it. Should I expect to be the one?\" Her husband also expressed concern about the effect on her composing output:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Clara has composed a series of small pieces, which show a musical and tender ingenuity such as she has never attained before. But to have children, and a husband who is always living in the realm of imagination, does not go together with composing. She cannot work at it regularly, and I am often disturbed to think how many profound ideas are lost because she cannot work them out.\u2014\u200a\nShe produced one to eight compositions every year beginning at age 11, until her output stopped in 1848, producing only a choral work that year for her husband's birthday and leaving her second piano concerto unfinished. These two works, while reserved for her opus 18 and 19, were never published. Five years later, however, when she was 34 in 1853, the year she met Brahms, she engaged in a flurry of composing, resulting in 16 pieces that year: a set of piano variations on an \"Album Leaf\" of her husband (his Op. 99 No. 4), eight \"Romances\" for piano solo and for violin and piano, and seven songs. These works were published a year later, after Robert's confinement, as her Op. 20 through 23.\nFor the next 43 years of her life, she only composed piano transcriptions of works by her husband and Brahms, including 41 transcriptions of Robert Schumann's lieder (commissioned by a publisher in 1872), and a short piano duet commissioned for a friend's wedding anniversary in 1879. In the last year of her life, she left several sketches for piano preludes, designed for piano students, as well as some published cadenzas for her performances of Beethoven and Mozart piano concertos.\nMost of Clara Schumann's music was never played by anyone else and largely forgotten until a resurgence of interest in the 1970s. Today her compositions are increasingly performed and recorded.\nEditor.\nSchumann was the authoritative editor, aided by Brahms and others, of her husband's works for the publishing firm of Breitkopf &amp; H\u00e4rtel. She also edited 20 sonatas by Domenico Scarlatti, letters (\"Jugendbriefe\") by her husband in 1885, and his piano works with fingering and other instructions (\"Fingersatz und Vortragsbezeichnungen\") in 1886.\n\"War of the Romantics\".\nIn the early 1840s the Schumanns were interested in the works of Franz Liszt and his young composer friends of what eventually became known as the New German School, but in the second half of the decade they both became openly hostile toward Liszt because of their more musically conservative outlook and beliefs, Clara more so than Robert, as she had long been the more conservative aesthete in the Schumann marriage. By the mid-1850s, after Robert's decline, the young Brahms had joined the cause, and to promote her ideals and protect what she saw as an attack on her husband's beliefs, she, Brahms, and Joseph Joachim formed a group of conservative musicians who defended Robert Schumann's critical ideals of the legacy and respectability of music, the pinnacle of which had been Beethoven.\nThe opposing side of this \"War of the Romantics\", a group of radical progressives in music (most of them from Weimar) led by Liszt and Richard Wagner, desired to escape composing under the shadow of Beethoven, but to transcend the old forms and ideas of what music had been and instead create what music \"should\" be for the future. The Weimar school promoted the idea of \"program music\", while both the Schumanns and Brahms of the Leipzig/Berlin school were strict in their stance that music must and can only be \"absolute music\", a term derisively coined by Wagner.\nOne of Clara Schumann's difficulties with Liszt stemmed from a philosophical difference in performance practice. He believed that the artist, through physical and emotional performance, interpreted music for the audience. When he performed, Liszt flailed his arms, tossed his head, and pursed his lips, inspiring a Lisztomania across Europe which has been compared to the Beatlemania of female fans of The Beatles over a century later. Clara, in contrast, came to believe that the personality of the musician should be suppressed so that the composer's vision would be clearly evident to listeners.\nPartisans led active campaigns with public demonstrations at concerts, writings published in the press denigrating reputations, and other public slights designed to embarrass their adversaries. Brahms published a manifesto for the \"Serious Music\" side on 4 May 1861, signed by Clara Schumann, Joachim, Albert Dietrich, Woldemar Bargiel, and twenty others, which decried the purveyors of the \"Music of the Future\" as \"contrary to the innermost spirit of music, strongly to be deplored and condemned\". The \"New Weimar Club\", a formal society with Liszt at its center, held an anniversary celebration of the \"Neue Zeitschrift f\u00fcr Musik\", the magazine Robert Schumann had founded, in his birthplace Zwickau, and conspicuously neglected to invite members of the opposing party, including his widow, Clara. Clara Schumann ceased to perform any of Liszt's works, and she suppressed her husband's dedication to Liszt of his \"Fantasie in C major\" when she published his complete works. When she heard that Liszt and Richard Wagner would be participating in a Beethoven centenary festival in Vienna in 1870, she refused to attend.\nIn describing the works of the opposing school, Clara Schumann was particularly scathing of Wagner, writing of his \"Tannh\u00e4user\", that he \"wears himself out in atrocities\", describing \"Lohengrin\" as \"horrible\", and referring to \"Tristan und Isolde\" as \"the most repugnant thing I have ever seen or heard in all my life\". She also complained that Wagner had spoken of her husband, Mendelssohn, and Brahms in a \"scornful\" way. Wagner had poked fun at the musical conservatives in an essay, portraying them as \"a musical temperance society\" awaiting a Messiah. She held Anton Bruckner's Seventh Symphony in very low esteem and wrote to Brahms, describing it as \"a horrible piece\". Bruckner's symphonies were seen as representative of the New Music due to their advanced harmony, massive orchestration and extended time-scale. Schumann was more impressed, however, with the early First Symphony in F minor by Richard Strauss; this was before Strauss began composing the highly programmatic music for which he later became famous.\nBrahms secretly held Wagner's music in high esteem, and eventually publicly praised Liszt's works as well. Several of the proponents and signers of the manifesto, including Joachim, relented and joined the \"other side\". The controversy eventually died down, but Clara Schumann remained steadfast in her disapproval of the New German School's music.\nLegacy.\nImpact during her lifetime.\nAlthough Schumann was not widely recognized as a composer for many years after her death, she had a lasting effect as a pianist. Trained by her father to play by ear and memorize, she gave public performances from memory as early as age thirteen, a fact noted as exceptional by her reviewers. She was one of the first pianists to perform from memory, making it the standard for concerts. She was also instrumental in changing the kind of program expected of concert pianists. In her early career, before her marriage, she played the customary bravura pieces designed to showcase the artist's technique, often in the form of arrangements or variations on popular themes from operas, written by virtuosos such as Thalberg, Herz, or Henselt. As it was customary to play one's own compositions, she included at least one of her own works in every program, such as Variations on a Theme by Bellini (Op. 8) and the popular Scherzo (Op. 10). However, as she became a more independent artist, her repertoire contained mainly music by leading composers.\nSchumann influenced pianists through her teaching, which emphasized expression and a singing tone, with technique subordinated to the intentions of the composer. One of her students, Mathilde Verne, carried her teaching to England where she taught, among others, Solomon. Another of her students, Carl Friedberg, carried the tradition to the Juilliard School in America, where his students included Nina Simone, Malcolm Frager, and Bruce Hungerford.\nShe was also instrumental in getting the works of Robert Schumann recognized, appreciated and added to the repertoire. She promoted his works tirelessly throughout her life.\nFilm.\nClara Schumann has been portrayed on screen many times. \"Tr\u00e4umerei\" (\"Dreaming\"), the oldest known Schumann film, premiered on 3 May 1944 in Zwickau. Possibly the best-known film is \"Song of Love (1947)\" starring Katharine Hepburn as Clara, Paul Henreid as Robert, and Robert Walker as Brahms.\nIn 1954, Loretta Young portrayed her on \"The Loretta Young Show\" in Season 1, Episode 26: \"The Clara Schumann Story\" (first aired on 21 March 1954), in which she supports the composing career of her husband, played by George Nader, alongside Shelley Fabares and Carleton G. Young.\nTwo more recent German films are \"Fr\u00fchlingssinfonie\" (\"Spring Symphony\") (1983), starring Nastassja Kinski as Clara, and the 2008 Helma Sanders-Brahms' film \"Geliebte Clara\" (\"Beloved Clara\"), where she is portrayed by Martina Gedeck.\nTheater.\nClara Schumann's life has been explored in the chamber opera \"Clara\" by composer Victoria Bond and librettist Barbara Zinn-Krieger and the two-act opera \"Ghost Variations\" by composer Tony Manfredonia and librettist Aiden K. Feltkamp. \"Twin Spirits\", a live theatrical performance involving a chamber ensemble of actors, singers, and musicians, also delves into Clara Schumann's life story. Elfriede Jelinek wrote the play \"Clara S, musikalische Trag\u00f6die\" (1982) about a fictional meeting between Clara Schumann and Gabriele D'Annunzio.\nBanknote and conservatory.\nAn image of Clara Schumann from an 1835 lithograph by Andreas Staub was featured on the 100 Deutsche Mark banknote from 2 January 1989 until the adoption of the euro on 1 January 2002. The back of the banknote shows a grand piano she played and the exterior of Dr. Hoch's Konservatorium. The great hall of the conservatory's new building is named after her.\nMedia.\nCompared to her contemporaries, Schumann's music is not often found in media or soundtracks, except in documentaries and educational films. In \"Geliebte Clara (Beloved Clara),\" selections from \"Three Romances\", Op. 11, are her only compositions displayed in the film, played by pianist Jen\u00f5 Jand\u00f3. The \"Clara\" motif of five descending notes, initially written by her husband in her \"Romance Varie\" was re-interpreted many times by both her husband and Johannes Brahms. The motif is strongly associated with the love between Clara and Robert; it can be heard throughout the film \"Song of Love (1947).\" In the British science fiction television series Doctor Who, character Clara Oswald has a leitmotif which is somewhat similar to the \"Clara\" motif.\nSchumann's music is found in educational material, emphasizing her stature and remarkable presence as a female composer in a male dominated field. Her music is recorded and compiled by artists in the 21st century, such as Lara Downes's 2019 Album \"For Love Of You\", a compilation of music by Robert and Clara Schumann, released in celebration of the bicentenary of her birth.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEncyclopedias.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNewspapers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOnline sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45182", "revid": "48296011", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45182", "title": "Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award", "text": "Award of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences\nThe Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award is awarded periodically by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to \"creative producers, whose bodies of work reflect a consistently high quality of motion picture production\". The award is named for Irving Thalberg, head of the Production Division of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, who developed the company's reputation for sophisticated films. The trophy itself was originally a bust of Thalberg rather than the familiar Oscar statuette. However, it is still counted as an \"Honorary Oscar\". The bust of Thalberg was last used in 2018 when the award was presented to Kathleen Kennedy and Frank Marshall. When the award was next presented at the 15th Governors Awards to Barbara Broccoli and Michael G. Wilson in 2024, the Oscar statuette was used instead.\nThe award was established in 1937 and was first presented at the 10th Academy Awards, in March 1938. Since 2009, it has been presented at the separate Governors Awards rather than at the main Academy Awards ceremony. \nThe Award has been awarded 39 times to date. Katharine Hepburn made her only appearance at an Oscar ceremony to present the award to her long-time friend Lawrence Weingarten at the 46th Academy Awards ceremony in 1974.\nOther nominees.\nThe 11th Academy Awards, where the award was won by , marks the only occasion for which non-winning nominations were announced. The other nominees were: Samuel Goldwyn, Joe Pasternak, David O. Selznick, Hunt Stromberg, Walter Wanger, Darryl F. Zanuck.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45184", "revid": "35939985", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45184", "title": "Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award", "text": "Award\nThe Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award is awarded periodically by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) at the Governors Awards ceremonies for an individual's \"outstanding contributions to humanitarian causes\". Prior to 2009 and in 2021, this award was presented during the main Oscars ceremony. The award category was instituted in 1956 and first awarded at the 29th Academy Awards, in March 1957. Unlike the Academy Award of Merit, the awards are restricted with the nomination and voting limited to industry professionals that are members of the Board of Governors of AMPAS.\nHistory.\nThe award is named after Danish American screen actor and humanitarian Jean Hersholt (1886\u20131956), who served as president of the Motion Picture Relief Fund for 18 years. He also served as president of AMPAS from 1945 to 1949. Winners of the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award are presented with an Academy Award Oscar statuette. As of the 92nd Academy Awards, there have been 39 awards presented, two of which were posthumous.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45185", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45185", "title": "Billy Wilder", "text": "American filmmaker (1906\u20132002)\nBilly Wilder ( , ; born Samuel Wilder; June 22, 1906 \u2013 March 27, 2002) was an American filmmaker and screenwriter. Born in Sucha Beskidzka, at the time in Austria-Hungary (now Poland), Wilder's career in Hollywood spanned five decades, and he is regarded as one of the most brilliant and versatile filmmakers of classical Hollywood cinema. He received seven Academy Awards (among 21 nominations), a BAFTA Award, the Cannes Film Festival's Palme d'Or and two Golden Globe Awards.\nIn 1916, when Wilder was ten years old, his family moved from Galicia to Vienna, where he worked as a journalist instead of attending university. Wilder's career as a screenwriter started in Berlin, where he relocated in his early adulthood. The rise of the Nazi Party and antisemitism in Germany saw him move to Paris. He then moved to Hollywood in 1934, and had a major hit when he, Charles Brackett and Walter Reisch wrote the screenplay for the Academy Award-nominated film \"Ninotchka\" (1939). Wilder established his directorial reputation and received his first nomination for the Academy Award for Best Director with \"Double Indemnity\" (1944), a film noir based on the novel by James M. Cain with a screenplay by Wilder and Raymond Chandler. Wilder won the Best Director and Best Screenplay Academy Awards for \"The Lost Weekend\" (1945), which also won the Academy Award for Best Picture.\nIn the 1950s, Wilder directed and co-wrote a string of critically acclaimed films, including the Hollywood-set drama \"Sunset Boulevard\" (1950), for which he won his second screenplay Academy Award; \"Ace in the Hole\" (1951), \"Stalag 17\" (1953) and \"Sabrina\" (1954). Wilder directed and co-wrote three films in 1957: \"The Spirit of St. Louis\", \"Love in the Afternoon\" and \"Witness for the Prosecution\". During this period, Wilder also directed Marilyn Monroe in two films, \"The Seven Year Itch\" (1955) and \"Some Like It Hot\" (1959). In 1960, Wilder co-wrote, directed and produced the critically acclaimed film \"The Apartment\". It won Wilder Academy Awards for Best Picture, Best Director and Best Original Screenplay.\nOther notable films Wilder directed include \"One, Two, Three\" (1961), \"Irma la Douce\" (1963), \"Kiss Me, Stupid\" (1964), \"The Fortune Cookie\" (1966) and \"Avanti!\" (1972).\nWilder received various honors over his career, including the AFI Life Achievement Award in 1986, the Kennedy Center Honors in 1990, the National Medal of Arts in 1993 and the BAFTA Fellowship Award in 1995. He also received the Directors Guild of America's Lifetime Achievement Award, the Laurel Award for Screenwriting Achievement and the Producers Guild of America's Lifetime Achievement Award.\nSeven of his films are preserved in the United States National Film Registry of the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\".\nEarly life.\nSamuel Wilder () was born on June 22, 1906, to a Jewish family in Sucha, a small town in Galicia, present-day Poland, then part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Years later in Hollywood, he would describe it as being \"Half an hour from Vienna. By telegraph.\" His parents were Eugenia (n\u00e9e\u00a0Dittler), from Zakopane, and Max Wilder, from Stanislawczyk; they met in Krak\u00f3w where Billy spent his early years. His mother described him as a \"rambunctious kid\"; inspired by Buffalo Bill's Wild West shows, which she saw while living briefly in New York, she nicknamed him \"Billie\", which he changed to \"Billy\" upon moving to America.\nWilder's elder brother, W. Lee Wilder, was also a filmmaker. His parents had a successful cake shop in Sucha's train station that flourished into a chain of railroad cafes. Eugenia and Max Wilder did not persuade their son to join the family business. Max moved to Krak\u00f3w to manage a hotel before moving to Vienna and dying when Billy was 22 years old. After the family moved to Vienna, Wilder became a journalist instead of attending the University of Vienna. In 1926, jazz band leader Paul Whiteman was on tour in Vienna where he was interviewed by Wilder. Whiteman liked young Wilder enough that he took him with the band to Berlin, where Wilder was able to make more connections in entertainment. Before achieving success as a writer, he was a taxi dancer in Berlin.\nCareer.\nEarly work.\nAfter writing crime and sports stories as a stringer for local newspapers, he was eventually offered a regular job at a Berlin tabloid. Developing an interest in film, he began working as a screenwriter. From 1929 to 1933, he produced twelve German films. He collaborated with several other novices (Fred Zinnemann and Robert Siodmak) on the 1930 film \"People on Sunday\". Eschewing the German Expressionist styles of F. W. Murnau and Fritz Lang, \"People on Sunday\" was considered as a groundbreaking example of the Neue Sachlichkeit or New Objectivity movement in German cinema. Furthermore, this genre of Strassenfilm (\"street film\") paved way to the birth of Italian neorealism and the French New Wave. He wrote the screenplay for the 1931 film adaptation of a novel by Erich K\u00e4stner, \"Emil and the Detectives\", also screenplays for the comedy \"The Man in Search of His Murderer\" (1931), the operetta \"Her Grace Commands\" (1931) and the comedy \"A Blonde Dream\" (1932), all of them produced in the Babelsberg Studios in Potsdam near Berlin. In 1932, Wilder collaborated with the writer and journalist Felix Salten on the screenplay for \"Scampolo\". After Adolf Hitler's rise to power, Wilder went to Paris, where he made his directorial debut film \"Mauvaise Graine\" (1934). He relocated to Hollywood prior to its release.\nAfter arriving in Hollywood in 1934, Wilder continued working as a screenwriter. He became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1939, having spent time in Mexico waiting for the government after his six-month card expired in 1934, an episode reflected in his 1941 \"Hold Back the Dawn\". Wilder's first significant success was \"Ninotchka\", a collaboration with fellow German immigrant Ernst Lubitsch. The romantic comedy starred Greta Garbo (generally known as a tragic heroine in film melodramas), and was popularly and critically acclaimed. With the byline \"Garbo Laughs!\", it also took Garbo's career in a new direction. The film marked Wilder's first Academy Award nomination, which he shared with co-writer Charles Brackett (although their collaboration on \"Bluebeard's Eighth Wife\" and \"Midnight\" had been well received). Wilder co-wrote many of his films with Brackett from 1938 to 1950. Brackett described their collaboration process: \"The thing to do was suggest an idea, have it torn apart and despised. In a few days it would be apt to turn up, slightly changed, as Wilder's idea. Once I got adjusted to that way of working, our lives were simpler.\"\n1940s.\nWilder continued his screenwriting career with a series of box office hits in the early 1940s, including the romantic drama \"Hold Back the Dawn\" and the screwball comedy \"Ball of Fire\". Both films earned him nominations for the 1941 Academy Awards in the categories of Best Adapted Screenplay and Best Story respectively. Wilder made his Hollywood directorial debut in 1942 with \"The Major and the Minor\", a comedy starring Ginger Rogers and Ray Milland.\nWilder's mother, stepfather, and grandmother were all victims of the Holocaust. For decades it was assumed that they had been killed at Auschwitz, but, while researching Polish and Israeli archives, his Austrian biographer Andreas Hutter discovered in 2011 that they were each murdered in different locations: his mother, Eugenia \"Gitla\" Siedlisker, in 1943 at Plasz\u00f3w; his stepfather, Bernard \"Berl\" Siedlisker, in 1942 at Belzec; and his grandmother, Balbina Baldinger, died in 1943 in the ghetto in Nowy Targ.\nWilder's third Hollywood film as director, the film noir \"Double Indemnity\" (1944), starring Fred MacMurray, Barbara Stanwyck and Edward G. Robinson, was a major hit. It was nominated for seven Academy Awards including Best Picture, Director, Screenplay and Actress; Wilder co-wrote it with Raymond Chandler. The film not only set conventions for the noir genre (such as \"venetian blind\" lighting and voice-over narration), but is a landmark in the battle against Hollywood censorship. Based on James M. Cain's novel, it featured two love triangles and a murder plotted for insurance money. While the book was popular with the reading public, it had been considered unfilmable under the Hays Code because adultery was central to the plot.\nIn 1945, the Psychological Warfare Department of the United States Department of War produced an American documentary film directed by Wilder. The film known as \"Death Mills\", or , was intended for German audiences to educate them about the atrocities committed by the Nazi regime. For the German version, \"Die Todesm\u00fchlen\", Hanu\u0161 Burger is credited as the writer and director, while Wilder supervised the editing. Wilder is credited with the English-language version.\nAlso in 1945, Wilder adapted from Charles R. Jackson's novel \"The Lost Weekend\" into a film of the same name. It was the first major American film with a serious examination of alcoholism, another difficult theme under the Production Code. It follows an alcoholic writer (Ray Milland) opposing the protestations of his girlfriend (Jane Wyman). The film earned critical acclaim after it premiered at the Cannes Film Festival and competed in the main competition, where it received the Festival's top prize, the Palme d'Or, and four Academy Awards including for Best Picture. Wilder earned the Oscars for Best Director and Best Screenplay and Milland won Best Actor. The film is one of four to win both the Academy Award for Best Picture and the Cannes Film Festival's Palme d'Or, alongside \"Marty\", \"Parasite\" and \"Anora\".\n1950s.\nIn 1950, Wilder co-wrote and directed the cynical noir film \"Sunset Boulevard\". It follows a reclusive silent film actress (Gloria Swanson), who dreams of a comeback with delusions of her greatness from a bygone era. She accompanies an aspiring screenwriter (William Holden), who becomes her gigolo partner. This critically acclaimed film was the final film Wilder collaborated with Brackett. The film was nominated for eleven Academy Awards; together Wilder and Brackett won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay.\nIn 1951, Wilder directed \"Ace in the Hole\" (a.k.a. \"The Big Carnival\") starring Kirk Douglas in a tale of media exploitation of a caving accident. The idea had been pitched over the phone to Wilder's secretary by Victor Desny. Desny sued Wilder for breach of an implied contract in the California copyright case \"Wilder v Desny\", ultimately receiving a settlement of $14,350. Although a critical and commercial failure at the time, its reputation has grown over the years. The following year, Wilder announced plans to direct and produce a film version of the Sophocles tragedy \"Oedipus Rex\", adapted for the screen by Walter Reisch. They planned to shoot the film on location in Greece in Technicolor, but it never went into production.\nSubsequently, Wilder directed three adaptations of Broadway plays, war drama \"Stalag 17\", for which William Holden won the Best Actor Academy Award, romantic comedy \"Sabrina\", for which Audrey Hepburn was nominated for Best Actress, and romantic comedy \"The Seven Year Itch\", which features the iconic image of Marilyn Monroe standing on a subway grate as her white dress is blown upwards by a passing train. Wilder was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director for the first two films and shared a nomination for Best Screenplay for the second. He was interested in doing a film with one of the classic slapstick comedy acts of the Hollywood Golden Age. He first considered, and rejected, a project to star Laurel and Hardy. He held discussions with Groucho Marx concerning a new Marx Brothers comedy, tentatively titled \"A Day at the U.N\". The project was abandoned after Chico Marx died in 1961.\nIn 1957, three films Wilder directed were released: biopic \"The Spirit of St. Louis\", starring James Stewart as Charles Lindbergh, romantic comedy \"Love in the Afternoon\"\u2014Wilder's first screenplay with I. A. L. Diamond, who would become his regular partner\u2014featuring Gary Cooper, Maurice Chevalier and Audrey Hepburn, and courtroom drama \"Witness for the Prosecution\", featuring Tyrone Power, Marlene Dietrich and Charles Laughton. Wilder received an Academy Award nomination for Best Director for the last film.\nIn 1959, Wilder reunited with Monroe in the United Artists released Prohibition-era farce film \"Some Like It Hot\". It was released, however, without a Production Code seal of approval, which was withheld due to the film's unabashed sexual comedy, including a central cross-dressing theme. Jack Lemmon and Tony Curtis played musicians disguised as women to escape pursuit by a Chicago gang. Curtis's character courts a singer (Monroe), while Lemmon is wooed by Joe E. Brown\u00a0\u2013 setting up the film's final joke in which Lemmon reveals that his character is a man and Brown blandly replies \"Well, nobody's perfect\". A box office success, the film was lightly regarded by film critics during its original release, although it did receive six Academy Award nominations, including for Best Director and Best Screenplay. But its critical reputation grew prodigiously; in 2000, the American Film Institute selected it as the best American comedy ever made. In 2012, the British Film Institute decennial \"Sight and Sound\" poll of the world's film critics rated it as the 43rd best movie ever made, and the second-highest-ranking comedy.\n1960s.\nIn 1960, Wilder directed the comedy romance film \"The Apartment\". It follows an insurance clerk (Lemmon), who allows his coworkers to use his apartment to conduct extramarital affairs until he meets an elevator woman (Shirley MacLaine). The film was a critical success with \"The New York Times\" film critic Bosley Crowther, who called the film \"gleeful, tender, and even sentimental\" and Wilder's direction \"ingenious\". The film received ten Academy Awards nominations and won five awards, including three for Wilder: Best Picture, Best Director and Best Screenplay.\nWilder directed the Cold War political farce film \"One, Two, Three\" (1961), starring James Cagney, which won critical praise with \"Variety\" writing, \"Billy Wilder's \"One, Two, Three\" is a fast-paced, high-pitched, hard-hitting, lighthearted farce crammed with topical gags and spiced with satirical overtones. Story is so furiously quick-witted that some of its wit gets snarled and smothered in overlap.\" It was followed by the romantic comedy \"Irma la Douce\" (1963) starring Lemmon and MacLaine. The film was the fifth highest-grossing film of the year. Wilder received a Writers Guild of America Award nomination for his screenplay. Wilder then wrote and directed the sex comedy film \"Kiss Me, Stupid\" starring Dean Martin, Kim Novak, and Ray Walston, who was a last minute replacement for ailing Peter Sellers. The film was criticized by some critics for vulgarity, with Bosley Crowther blaming the film for giving American movies the reputation of \"deliberate and degenerate corruptors of public taste and morals\". A. H. Weiler of the \"New York Times\" called the film \"pitifully unfunny\". Wilder gained his final Academy Award nomination and a Writers Guild of America Award nomination for the screenplay of \"The Fortune Cookie\", which he co-produced through his independent film company, Phalanx Productions. It was the first film pairing Jack Lemmon with Walter Matthau. The film was titled \"Meet Whiplash Willie\" in the United Kingdom. In 1970, he directed \"The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes\", also made through Phalanx Productions, which was intended as a major roadshow theatrical release, but to Wilder's dismay was heavily cut by the studio.\nFinal films.\nHe produced and directed the comedy film \"Avanti!\", again through Phalanx Productions, which follows a businessman (Lemmon) attempting to retrieve the body of his deceased father from Italy. Wilder received two Golden Globe Award nominations for Best Director and Best Screenplay, and a Writers Guild of America Award nomination. Wilder directed \"The Front Page\" based on the Broadway play of the same name. It was a significant financial success with low budget. His final films, \"Fedora\" and \"Buddy Buddy\", failed to impress critics or the public, although \"Fedora\" has since been re-evaluated and is now considered favorably. Wilder had hoped to make Thomas Keneally's \"Schindler's Ark\" as his final film, saying \"I wanted to do it as a kind of memorial to my mother and my grandmother and my stepfather,\" who had all been murdered in the Holocaust. He praised Steven Spielberg's adaptation, \"Schindler's List\". To those who denied the Holocaust, Wilder wrote in a German newspaper, \"If the concentration camps and the gas chambers were all imaginary, then please tell me\u2014where is my mother?\"\nDirectorial style.\nWilder's directorial choices reflected his belief in the primacy of writing. He avoided, especially in the second half of his career, the exuberant cinematography of Alfred Hitchcock and Orson Welles because, in Wilder's opinion, shots that called attention to themselves would distract the audience from the story. Wilder's films have tight plotting and memorable dialogue. Despite his conservative directorial style, his subject matter often pushed the boundaries of mainstream entertainment. Once a subject was chosen, he would begin to visualize in terms of specific artists. His belief was that no matter how talented the actor, none were without limitations and the result would be better if you bent the script to their personality rather than force a performance beyond their limitations. Wilder was skilled at working with actors, coaxing silent era legends Gloria Swanson and Erich von Stroheim out of retirement for roles in \"Sunset Boulevard\". Regarding Wilder's more comedic films, Roger Ebert wrote: \"he took the characters seriously, or at least as seriously as the material allowed, and got a lot of the laughs by playing scenes straight.\"\nFor \"Stalag 17\", Wilder squeezed an Oscar-winning performance out of a reluctant William Holden (Holden had wanted to make his character more likable; Wilder refused). At a casting meeting, Wilder reportedly said, \"I'm tired of clich\u00e9d typecasting\u2014the same people in every film.\" An example of this is Wilder's casting of Fred MacMurray in \"Double Indemnity\" and \"The Apartment\". MacMurray had become Hollywood's highest-paid actor portraying a decent, thoughtful character in light comedies, melodramas, and musicals; Wilder cast him as a womanizing schemer. Humphrey Bogart shed his tough-guy image to give one of his warmest performances in \"Sabrina\". James Cagney, not usually known for comedy, was memorable in a high-octane comic role for Wilder's \"One, Two, Three\". Wilder coaxed a very effective performance out of Monroe in \"Some Like It Hot\".\nIn total, he directed fourteen different actors in Oscar-nominated performances: Barbara Stanwyck in \"Double Indemnity\", Ray Milland in \"The Lost Weekend\", William Holden in \"Sunset Boulevard\" and \"Stalag 17\", Gloria Swanson, Erich von Stroheim and Nancy Olson in \"Sunset Boulevard\", Robert Strauss in \"Stalag 17\", Audrey Hepburn in \"Sabrina\", Charles Laughton in \"Witness for the Prosecution\", Elsa Lanchester in \"Witness for the Prosecution\", Jack Lemmon in \"Some Like It Hot\" and \"The Apartment\", Jack Kruschen in \"The Apartment\", Shirley MacLaine in \"The Apartment\" and \"Irma la Douce\" and Walter Matthau in \"The Fortune Cookie\". Wilder mentored Lemmon, and was the first director to pair him and Matthau in \"The Fortune Cookie\". Wilder and Lemmon worked on seven films.\nPolitics.\nWilder opposed the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC). He co-created the Committee for the First Amendment, of 500 Hollywood personalities and stars to \"support those professionals called upon to testify before the HUAC who had classified themselves as hostile with regard to the interrogations and the interrogators\". Some anti-Communists wanted those in the cinema industry to take oaths of allegiance. The Screen Directors Guild had a vote by show of hands. Only John Huston and Wilder opposed. Huston said, \"I am sure it was one of the bravest things that Billy, as a naturalized German, had ever done. There were 150 to 200 directors at this meeting, and here Billy and I sat alone with our hands raised in protest against the loyalty oath.\"\nWilder was not affected by the Hollywood blacklist. Of the blacklisted 'Hollywood Ten' he said, \"Of the ten, two had talent, and the rest were just unfriendly.\" In general, Wilder disliked formula and genre films. Wilder reveled in poking fun at those who took politics too seriously. In \"Ball of Fire\", his burlesque queen 'Sugarpuss' points at her sore throat and complains \"Pink? It's as red as the \"Daily Worker\" and just as sore.\" Later, she gives the overbearing and unsmiling housemaid the name \"Franco\".\nRetirement.\nWilder received the American Film Institute (AFI) Life Achievement Award in 1986. He received the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award in 1988, the Kennedy Center Honors in 1990 and the National Medal of Arts in 1993. He has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Wilder became well known for owning one of the finest and most extensive art collections in Hollywood, mainly collecting modern art. As he described it in the mid-80s, \"It's a sickness. I don't know how to stop myself. Call it bulimia if you want \u2013 or curiosity or passion. I have some Impressionists, some Picassos from every period, some mobiles by Calder. I also collect tiny Japanese trees, glass paperweights, and Chinese vases. Name an object and I collect it.\" Wilder's artistic ambitions led him to create a series of works of his own. By the early '90s, Wilder had amassed many plastic-artistic constructions, many of which were made in collaboration with artist Bruce Houston. In 1993, art dealer Louis Stern, a longtime friend, helped organize an exhibition of Wilder's work at his Beverly Hills gallery. The exhibition was titled \"Billy Wilder's March\u00e9 aux Puces\" and the \"Variations on the Theme of Queen Nefertete\" segment was notably popular. This series featured busts of the Egyptian queen wrapped \"\u00e0 la\" Christo, or splattered \"\u00e0 la\" Jackson Pollock, or sporting a Campbell's soup can in homage to Andy Warhol.\nPersonal life and death.\nWilder married Judith Coppicus on December 22, 1936. The couple had twins, Victoria and Vincent (born 1939), but Vincent died shortly after birth. They divorced in 1946. Wilder met Audrey Young while filming \"The Lost Weekend\". They were married on June 30, 1949.\nWilder died of pneumonia on March 27, 2002. He was buried at Pierce Brothers Westwood Village Memorial Park and Mortuary. A French newspaper, \"Le Monde\", titled the front-page obituary: \"Billy Wilder is dead. Nobody is perfect\", a reference to the last line of \"Some Like It Hot\".\nLegacy.\n\"Don't be boring\". \u2014 Billy Wilder\nWilder holds a significant place in the history of Hollywood censorship for expanding the range of acceptable subject matter. He directed two of film noir's definitive films, \"Double Indemnity\" and \"Sunset Boulevard\". Along with Woody Allen and the Marx Brothers, he leads the list of films on the American Film Institute's AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs and he earned the top spot on it with \"Some Like It Hot\". Also on the list are \"The Apartment\" and \"The Seven Year Itch\", which he directed, and \"Ball of Fire\" and \"Ninotchka\", which he co-wrote. The AFI listed \"Double Indemnity\", \"Sunset Boulevard\", \"Some Like It Hot\" and \"The Apartment\" on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies. Wilder was ranked 6th in director's poll on Sight &amp; Sound's 2002 list of \"The Greatest Directors of All Time\". In 1996, \"Entertainment Weekly\" ranked Wilder at No. 24 in its \"50 Greatest Directors\" list. Wilder was ranked at No. 19 on \"Empire\"'s \"Top 40 Greatest Directors of All-Time\" list in 2005. In 2007, \"Total Film\" magazine ranked Wilder at No. 13 on its \"100 Greatest Film Directors Ever\" list. Wilder was voted at No. 4 on the \"Greatest Directors of 20th Century\" poll conducted by Japanese film magazine \"Kinema Junpo\".\nSeven of his films are preserved in the United States National Film Registry of the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\". Anthony Lane writes that \"Double Indemnity\", \"The Seven Year Itch\", \"Sunset Boulevard\" and \"The Apartment\" are \"part of the lexicon of moviegoing\" and that \"Some Like It Hot\" is a \"national treasure.\" Roger Ebert asked, \"Of all the great directors of Hollywood's golden age, has anybody made more films that are as fresh and entertaining to this day as Billy Wilder's?...And who else can field three contenders among the greatest closing lines of all time?\", citing the closing lines of \"Sunset Boulevard\", \"Some Like It Hot\", and \"The Apartment\".\nWhen \"Belle \u00c9poque\" won the 1993 Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, Spanish filmmaker Fernando Trueba said in his acceptance speech: \"I would like to believe in God in order to thank him. But I just believe in Billy Wilder... so thank you, Mr. Wilder.\" According to Trueba, Wilder called him the day after and told him: \"Fernando, it's God.\" French filmmaker Michel Hazanavicius thanked Billy Wilder in the 2012 Best Picture Oscar acceptance speech for \"The Artist\": \"I would like to thank the following three people, I would like to thank Billy Wilder, I would like to thank Billy Wilder, and I would like to thank Billy Wilder.\" Wilder's 12 Academy Award nominations for screenwriting were a record until 1997 when Woody Allen received a 13th nomination for \"Deconstructing Harry\". In 2017, Vulture.com named Wilder the greatest screenwriter of all time. He directed fourteen actors in Oscar-nominated performances. Wilder's epitaph, a paraphrase of the last line of \"Some Like It Hot\", is \"I'm a writer but then nobody's perfect.\"\nAwards and honors.\nWilder received twenty-one nominations at the Academy Awards, winning six. In total, he received twelve nominations for his screenwriting, eight for his direction, and one for producing. He won both the Academy Award for Best Director and the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay for both \"The Lost Weekend\" (1945) and \"The Apartment\" (1960). The former was awarded the Grand Prix du Festival International du Film at the Cannes Film Festival, and the latter also won him the BAFTA Award for Best Film. Wilder garnered eight Directors Guild of America Award nominations, with the sole win for his work on \"The Apartment\". He received seven nominations at the Golden Globe Awards, winning Best Director for \"The Lost Weekend\" and \"Sunset Boulevard\" (1950). He won seven Writers Guild of America Awards including two Laurel Awards for Screenwriting Achievement. He garnered a number of lifetime achievement awards including the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award, the BAFTA Fellowship, the David O. Selznick Achievement Award in Theatrical Motion Pictures, and the Honorary Golden Bear from the Berlin International Film Festival.\nOscar-related performances.\nUnder Wilder's direction, these actors have received Oscar nominations and wins for their performances in their respective roles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45186", "revid": "45186589", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45186", "title": "Orem, Utah", "text": "Orem is a city in Utah County, Utah, United States, in the north central part of the state. It is adjacent to Provo, Lindon, and Vineyard and is approximately south of Salt Lake City.\nOrem is one of the principal cities of the Provo-Orem, Utah Metropolitan Statistical Area, which includes all of Utah and Juab counties. The 2020 population was 98,129, while the 2010 population was 88,328 making it the 6th most populous city in Utah. Utah Valley University is located in Orem.\nHistory.\nAt one time the area was known as \"Sharon\", a Biblical name for a mostly level strip of land running between mountains and the sea, and the name of the Vermont birth town of Joseph Smith, founder of the Latter Day Saint movement. Another former name was \"Provo Bench.\"\nUnlike many other early Utah communities, Orem's houses were not originally clustered in a town composed of regular city blocks. Instead, Orem's farmers dispersed their homes, building them along the territorial highway (now called State Street) and other major roads so that they could be close to both transportation corridors and to their fields and orchards.\nIn an apparent attempt to attract more investment to the town and provide an easy way for the large population of farmers with orchards to ship produce, in 1914 it was named after Walter C. Orem, President of the Salt Lake and Utah Railroad in the early 1900s. Orem was incorporated on May 5, 1919.\nAssassination of Charlie Kirk.\nOn September 10, 2025, Charlie Kirk, an American right-wing activist and co-founder of Turning Point USA, was assassinated on the campus of Utah Valley University in Orem during the first college campus stop on The American Comeback Tour event. Kirk was taking questions and debating attendees when he was shot in the neck. According to the Associated Press, the shot came from the Losee Student Success Center, approximately from where Kirk was speaking.\nGeography.\nOrem is in a high desert, with an average elevation of . According to the United States Census Bureau, the city covers an area of , all land. Orem is near the eastern shore of Utah Lake, bordering Provo on the east and south, Vineyard to the west, Lindon contiguous to the north, and Mount Timpanogos/Wasatch Mountain range to the east.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of 2011 the 88,112 residents of Orem had a racial and ethnic composition of 89.3% white, 0.9% black or African American, 0.9% Native American, 1.6% Asian, 0.5% Pacific Islander Americans, 4% non-Hispanics reporting some other race, 2.9% two or more races reported and 14.8% Hispanic, as Orem has a large Mexican American community with other Latinos residing in the city. This contrasts with the census of 2000, which showed a racial makeup of 90.80% White, 0.33% African American, 0.73% Native American, 1.45% Asian, 0.86% Pacific Islander, 3.64% from other races, and 2.18% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 8.56% of the population.\nThe 2000 Census counted 84,324 people, 23,382 households, and 19,079 families. The population density at that time was . There were 24,166 housing units at an average density of . \nThere were 23,382 households, out of which 48.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 69.0% were married couples living together, 9.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 18.4% were non-families. 12.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.57 and the average family size was 3.93.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 35.4% under the age of 18, 17.4% from 18 to 24, 25.8% from 25 to 44, 14.5% from 45 to 64, and 6.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 24 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.2 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $52,703, and the median income for a family was $59,066. Males had a median income of $42,249 versus $30,742 for females. The per capita income for the city was $20,971. About 10.3% of families and 13.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16% of those under age 18 and 6% of those age 65 or over.\nAs of 2002, over 97% of all church-going citizens of Orem are members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Due to the high numbers of Latter-day Saints in the area, Church President Russell M. Nelson announced a temple in Orem on October 5, 2019. The temple is located south of the Interstate 15 exit at University Parkway on South Geneva Road.\nEducation.\nOrem is in the Alpine School District and is home to three high schools, three junior high schools, and 14 elementary schools. An education center of Utah State University is also in Orem.\nUtah Valley University.\nUtah Valley University is a public university operated by the state of Utah. UVU is one of the United States' only Open Enrollment Universities, accepting all applicants. UVU offers a wide variety of bachelor's and master's degrees. It is Utah's largest and fastest-growing public university, with over 43,000 undergraduates.\nThe campus's notable features include the UCCU Center, the Digital Learning Center library, the Hal Wing Track and Field Complex, and the Woodbury School of Business. The Roots of Knowledge stained glass display is in the Fulton Library on campus.\nGovernment.\nOrem has a council\u2013manager government. The mayor and council members are elected and serve part-time, while the city manager is appointed and serves full-time. Six city council members serve alongside the mayor. The mayor and city council are elected to staggered four-year terms. The Orem City Center Complex on State Street housed city staffer offices from 1969 until 2025, when a new city hall was built. The old city hall was 3D scanned before it was demolished.\nList of mayors of Orem (years served):\nEconomy.\nOrem has a wide variety of stores and businesses. It is also home to University Place, Utah County's oldest mall, opened in March 1973.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the city's 2023 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the city's top employers are:\nCompany startups.\nSeveral notable companies started in Orem:\nArts and culture.\nAnnual cultural events.\nOremfest is an annual, multi-day summer festival that has included different activities over the years, but most recently has featured a charity golf tournament, pool party, outdoor concert, volunteer opportunities, car show, and parade. Oremfest originated in 1949 to celebrate the completion of State Street. Other events traditionally included in the festival: a baby contest, a boutique, the Rotary Club Breakfast, a 5K Fun Run, fireworks, a carnival, and vendor booths.\nThe festival came to be known as Summerfest, until Orem city officials received a cease-and-desist letter in 2022 from Milwaukee World Festival Inc., based on that city's Summerfest music festival trademark and usage of the name dating back to 1969. In lieu of signing a licensing agreement to use the Summerfest name, the Orem city council opted instead to rebrand to Oremfest. Other Utah cities like South Jordan, however, obtained permission use the trademarked Summerfest name for their own festivals.\nSince 2020, the Orem Farmer's Market runs weekly at City Center Park from mid-summer into the fall, and includes over 200 vendors of crafts and baked goods. The market also features food trucks and live musical performances.\nAs of 2025, other city arts &amp; cultural events through fall and winter include:\nLibrary.\nOrem's first library opened in 1939, before eventually relocating. The new Orem Public Library was built on the same lot as city hall, adjacent to City Center Park, under Mayor Winston Crawford's tenure in 1971. The library features stained glass art depicting several fairy tales at a window near the children's storytelling wing, the piece was created by artist Tom Holdman at the beginning of his career. Library Hall is an events space used for author visits, film screenings, and other programs, and includes an art gallery in the d\u014dTERRA South Lobby.\nSports.\nOrem has been home to a number of professional sports teams in addition to being the home to Utah Valley University's Wolverines athletic teams. The Orem Owlz minor league baseball team, a rookie league affiliate of the Los Angeles Angels, began play in 2005. The Owlz won 5 championships and had more than 90 major league players as part of the team. The Owlz played their home games at UCCU Ballpark on the campus of Utah Valley University. The stadium has a capacity of 5,000 spectators. The Owlz competed in the Pioneer League against teams from Colorado, Idaho, Montana and one team in Utah \u2013 the Ogden Raptors. They relocated to Windsor, Colorado, in 2021 and became the Northern Colorado Owlz.\nOrem has also been the home to two indoor football teams as well as a G League professional basketball team. In 1998, the Utah Catzz played their only season in the Professional Indoor Football League as the league only lasted one season. The Utah Flash was an NBA G League affiliate of the Philadelphia 76ers that was established in 2007. \nTransportation.\nPublic transit.\nSeveral modes of transportation are available in Orem. The Utah Transit Authority operates the Frontrunner train, Utah Valley Express (UVX) bus rapid transit and regular bus service in the city. The Orem station serves Utah Transit Authority's \"FrontRunner\" train. The UVX route runs from Orem Central Station through UVU and along University Parkway through Orem's uptown near its southern boundary with Provo, which is where the opposite end of the bus line is located.\nMajor highways.\nThe road system includes an Interstate highway, US highways, state highways, and city-maintained roads. Interstate 15 runs through the west side of Orem with four interchanges in the city. US Highway 89 (State Street) runs northwest\u2013southeast through the middle of the city, while US Highway 189 (University Avenue) passes through a short section of northeast Orem. There are also four state routes that pass through the city \u2013 SR-52 (800 North/Canyon Parkway), SR-114 (Geneva Road), SR-241 (1600 North), and SR-265 (University Parkway).\nNotable people.\nNotable groups include:\nCity parks.\nOrem has more than 20 parks throughout the city. In 2017, the Orem Splash Pad opened at Palisade Park. The Splash Pad uses per minute and has a weave spray nozzle as well as 22 other spray nozzles. The Skate Park opened in 2002 and has of cemented space for extreme sport use. City Center Park is home to the annual Orem Summerfest as well as concerts and other cultural events. City parks include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSister cities.\nOrem has one sister city in \u00dcr\u00fcmqi, China, according to the Utah League of Cities and Towns and the Utah Sister Cities Coalition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45188", "revid": "50454883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45188", "title": "Paul Muni", "text": "American stage and film actor (1895\u20131967)\nPaul Muni (born Frederich Meshilem Meier Weisenfreund; September 22, 1895 \u2013 August 25, 1967) was an American stage and film actor from Chicago. He started his acting career in the Yiddish theater and during the 1930s, he was considered one of the most prestigious actors at the Warner Bros. studio and was given the rare privilege of choosing his own parts.\nMuni often played powerful characters, such as the lead role in \"Scarface\" (1932), and was known for his intense preparation for his parts, often immersing himself in the study of the real characters' traits and mannerisms. He was also highly skilled in makeup techniques, a talent that he had learned from his parents, who were also actors, and from his early years on stage with the Yiddish theater in Chicago. At the age of 12, he played the stage role of an 80-year-old man, and in the film \"Seven Faces,\" he played seven characters.\nMuni appeared in 22 films and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor five times, winning the award for his role in the 1936 film \"The Story of Louis Pasteur\". He also won the Volpi Cup for Best Actor for the same film. He also starred in numerous Broadway plays and won the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play for his role in the 1955 production of \"Inherit the Wind\".\nEarly life and career.\nMuni was born in 1895 as Frederich Meier Weisenfreund to a Jewish family in Lemberg, Galicia, then Austro-Hungarian Empire (now Lviv, Ukraine). His Hebrew name was Meshilem. His parents were Salli (born Khaya Tsilke Fishler) and Phillip Weisenfreund. He learned Yiddish as his first language. When he was seven, he emigrated with his family to the United States in 1902; they settled in Chicago.\nAs a boy, he was known as \"Moony\". He started his acting career in the Yiddish theatre in Chicago with his parents, who were both actors. As a teenager, he developed skill in creating makeup, which enabled him to play much older characters. Film historian Robert Osborne notes that Muni's makeup skills were so creative that for most of his roles, \"he transformed his appearance so completely, he was dubbed 'the new Lon Chaney.'\" In his first stage role at the age of 12, Muni played the role of an 80-year-old man. He was quickly recognized by Maurice Schwartz, who signed him to perform in his Yiddish Art Theater.\nA 1925 \"New York Times\" article mentioned Sam Kasten's and Muni's performances at the People's Theater among the highlights of the year's Yiddish theater season, describing them as second only to Ludwig Satz.\nMuni began acting on Broadway in 1926. His first role was that of an elderly Jewish man in the play \"We Americans\", written by playwrights Max Siegel and Milton Herbert Gropper. It was the first time that he had acted in English.\nIn 1921, he married Bella Finkel (February 8, 1898 \u2013 October 1, 1971), an actress in the Yiddish theatre and daughter of Moishe Finkel. They remained married until Muni's death in 1967.\nHollywood.\nIn 1929, Muni was signed by Fox. His name was simplified and anglicized to Paul Muni (derived from his nickname of youth \"Moony\"). His acting talents were quickly recognized, and he received an Oscar nomination for his first film, \"The Valiant\" (1929), although the film fared poorly at the box office. His second film, \"Seven Faces\" (also 1929), was also a financial failure. Unhappy with the roles offered to him, he returned to Broadway, where he starred in a major hit play, \"Counsellor at Law\".\nMuni soon returned to Hollywood to star in provocative pre-Code films such as \"Scarface\" and \"I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang\" (both 1932). For his role in \"I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang\", Muni was nominated for an Oscar for Best Actor. His acclaim as a result of his performance impressed Warner Bros., which signed him to a long-term contract, publicizing him as \"the screen's greatest actor.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI had been wanting to see \"Scarface\" since 1974 ... The film just stopped me in my tracks. All I wanted to do was imitate Paul Muni. His acting went beyond the boundaries of naturalism into another kind of expression. It was almost abstract what he did. It was almost uplifting.\nAl Pacino\n\"Scarface\", part of a cycle of gangster films at the time, was written by Ben Hecht and directed by Howard Hawks. Critic Richard Corliss noted in 1974 that while it was a serious gangster film, it also \"manages both to congratulate journalism for its importance and to chastise it for its chicanery, by underlining the newspapers' complicity in promoting the underworld image.\"\nIn 1935, Muni starred in \"Black Fury\". At the 8th Academy Awards, Muni was not officially nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor, but he came in second on the basis of write-in votes, which were allowed that year.\nMuni persuaded Warner Bros. to take a financial risk by producing the successful historical biography \"The Story of Louis Pasteur\", which was released in 1936. This became Muni's first of many biographical roles. Until that film, most Warner Bros. stories had originated from current events and major news stories, with the notable exceptions of George Arliss's earlier biographical films \"Disraeli\", \"Alexander Hamilton\" and \"Voltaire\". Muni won an Oscar for his performance.\nMuni played other historical figures, including \u00c9mile Zola in \"The Life of Emile Zola\" (1937), for which he was again nominated for an Oscar. The film won Best Picture and was interpreted as indirectly attacking the repression of Nazi Germany. He also played the lead role in \"Juarez\" (1939).\nIn 1937, Muni played a Chinese peasant with a new bride in a film adaptation of Pearl Buck's novel \"The Good Earth\". The film was a re-creation of a revolutionary period in China and included special effects for a locust attack and the overthrow of the government. Because Muni was not of Asian descent, when producer Irving Thalberg offered him the role, he said, \"I'm about as Chinese as [President] Herbert Hoover.\"\nDissatisfied with life in Hollywood, Muni chose not to renew his contract. He returned to the screen only occasionally in later years for such roles as Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin's teacher in \"A Song to Remember\" (1945). In 1946, he played a rare comic role in \"Angel on My Shoulder\".\nLater career.\nMuni then focused most of his energies on stage work, and occasionally on television roles. In 1946, he appeared on Broadway in \"A Flag is Born\", written by Ben Hecht, to help promote the creation of a Jewish state in Israel. This play was directed by Luther Adler and co-starred Marlon Brando. Years later, in response to a question put to him by Alan King, Brando stated that Muni was the greatest actor he ever saw. At London's Phoenix Theatre on July 28, 1949, Muni began a run as Willy Loman in the first British production of \"Death of a Salesman\" by Arthur Miller. He took over from Lee J. Cobb, who had played the principal role in the original Broadway production. Both productions were directed by Elia Kazan.\nIn 1952, Muni traveled to Italy to star in \"Stranger on the Prowl\", directed by Joseph Losey, partly as an act of solidarity and support for blacklisted friends living abroad in exile.\nA few years later, during 1955 and 1956, Muni had his biggest stage success in the United States as the crusading lawyer, Henry Drummond (based on Clarence Darrow), in \"Inherit the Wind\", winning a Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Play. In late August 1955, Muni was forced to withdraw from the play due to a serious eye ailment causing deterioration in his eyesight. He was later replaced by actor Melvyn Douglas.\nIn early September 1955, Muni, then 59 years old, was diagnosed with a tumor of the left eye. The eye was removed in an operation at Mt. Sinai Hospital in New York. His right eye was reported to be normal. In early December 1955, Muni returned to his starring role as Henry Drummond in \"Inherit the Wind\".\nHis last movie role was as an aging doctor in \"The Last Angry Man\" (1959), and he was again nominated for an Oscar. After that, Muni mostly retired from acting to deal with failing eyesight and other health problems. He made his final screen appearance on television, in a guest role on the dramatic series \"Saints and Sinners\" in 1962.\nActing techniques, reputation and legacy.\nMuni was noted for his intense preparation for his roles, especially the biographies. While preparing for \"The Story of Louis Pasteur\", Muni said, \"I read most everything that was in the library, and everything I could lay my hands on that had to do with Pasteur, with Lister, or with his contemporaries.\" He did the same in preparing for his role as Henry Drummond, based on Clarence Darrow, in the play \"Inherit the Wind\". He read what he could find, talked to people who knew Darrow personally, and studied physical mannerisms from photographs of him. \"To Paul Muni, acting was not just a career, but an obsession\", writes \"The New York Times\". They note that despite his enormous success both on Broadway and in films, \"he threw himself into each role with a sense of dedication.\" Playwright Arthur Miller commented that Muni \"was pursued by a fear of failure.\"\nAs Muni was born into an acting family, with both of his parents professional actors, \"he learned his craft carefully and thoroughly.\" On stage, \"a Muni whisper could reach the last balcony of any theater\", writes the \"Times\". It wrote that his style \"had drawn into it the warmth of the Yiddish stage\", in which he made his debut at the age of 12. In addition, his technique in using makeup \"was a work of art.\" Combined with acting which followed no \"method\", he perfected his control of voice and gestures into an acting style that was \"unique.\"\nFilm historian David Shipman described Muni as \"an actor of great integrity\", noting he meticulously prepared for his roles. Muni was widely recognized as eccentric if talented: he objected to anyone wearing red in his presence, and he could often be found between sessions playing his violin. Over the years, he became increasingly dependent on his wife, Bella, a dependence which increased as his failing eyesight turned to blindness in his final years. Muni was \"inflexible on matters of taste and principle\", once turning down an $800,000 movie contract because he was not happy with the studio's choice of film roles.\nAlthough Muni was considered one of the best film actors of the 1930s, some film critics, such as David Thomson and Andrew Sarris, accuse him of overacting. Thomson described Muni as \"a crucial negative illustration in any argument as to what constitutes screen acting.\"\nGerman director William Dieterle, who directed him in his three biopics, also frequently accused him of overacting, despite his respect for the actor.\nPersonal life.\nIn his private life, Muni was considered to be very shy and was uncomfortable with being recognized in public. He enjoyed reading and taking walks with his wife in secluded sections of Central Park.\nMuni campaigned for the re-election of President Herbert Hoover in 1932.\nAfter retiring from acting, he lived in California. In his den, which he called his \"Shangri-La\", he spent time reading books and listening to the radio.\nDeath.\nMuni died of a heart disorder in Montecito, California in 1967 at the age of 71. He is interred at the Hollywood Forever Cemetery in Hollywood.\nLegacy and honors.\nMuni had four official Academy Award nominations for Best Actor, winning for \"The Story of Louis Pasteur\" (1936) and receiving official nominations for \"I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang\" (1932), \"The Life of Emile Zola\" (1937) and \"The Last Angry Man\" (1959). His nomination for the film \"The Valiant\" (1929) is unofficial because at the 2nd Academy Awards, acting nominees were not announced, only the winners' names. Muni's performance in \"Black Fury\" was not nominated for an Oscar. (Note that the Academy's website includes both \"The Valiant\" and \"Black Fury\" among Muni's nominated performances.)\nIn popular culture.\nReferring to his childhood during the Great Depression, Hawkeye Pierce in the \"Hawkeye\" episode of the television series \"M*A*S*H*\" says: \"You knew where you stood in those days. Franklin Roosevelt was always president, Joe Louis was always the champ, and Paul Muni played everybody.\"\nMuni and George Raft appeared as characters in the fifth season of \"Boardwalk Empire\", meeting with Al Capone to discuss the film \"Scarface\".\nComedian and actor Paul Mooney took his stage name, which was also his childhood nickname, from Muni.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45189", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45189", "title": "Brandy", "text": "Spirit produced by distilling wine\nBrandy is a liquor produced by distilling wine. Brandy generally contains 35\u201360% alcohol by volume (70\u2013120 US proof) and is typically consumed as an after-dinner digestif. Some brandies are aged in wooden casks. Others are coloured with caramel colouring to imitate the effect of ageing, and some are produced using a combination of ageing and colouring. Varieties of wine brandy can be found across the winemaking world. Among the most renowned are Cognac and Armagnac from southwestern France.\nIn a broader sense, the term \"brandy\" also denotes liquors obtained from the distillation of pomace (yielding pomace brandy), or mash or wine of any other fruit (fruit brandy). These products are also called \"eau de vie\" (literally \"water of life\" in French).\nHistory.\nThe origins of brandy are tied to the development of distillation. While the process was known in classical times, it was not significantly used for beverage production until the 15th century. In the early 16th-century French brandy helped kickstart the cross-Atlantic triangle trade when it took over the central role of the Portuguese fortified wine due to its higher alcohol content and ease of shipping. Canoemen and guards on the African side of the trade were generally paid in brandy. By the late 17th century, the cheaper rum had replaced brandy as the exchange alcohol of choice in the triangle trade.\nInitially, wine was distilled as a preservation method and to make it easier for merchants to transport. It is also thought that wine was originally distilled to lessen the tax, which was assessed by volume. The intent was to add the water removed by distillation back to the brandy shortly before consumption. It was discovered that after being stored in wooden casks, the resulting product improved over the original distilled spirit. In addition to removing water, the distillation process led to the formation and decomposition of numerous aromatic compounds, fundamentally altering the distillate composition from its source. Non-volatile substances such as pigments, sugars, and salts remained behind in the still. As a result, the distillate taste was often quite unlike the sources.\nAs described in the 1728 edition of \"Cyclopaedia\", the following method was used to distill brandy:\nA cucurbit was filled half full of the liquor from which brandy was to be drawn and then raised with a little fire until about one-sixth part was distilled, or until that which falls into the receiver was entirely flammable. This liquor, distilled only once, was called the \"spirit of wine\" or \"brandy\". Purified by another distillation (or several more), this was called \"spirit of wine rectified\". The second distillation was made in [a] \"balneo mariae\" and in a glass cucurbit, and the liquor was distilled to about one-half the quantity. This was further rectified as long as the operator thought it necessary to produce brandy.\nTo shorten these several distillations, which were long and troublesome, a chemical instrument was invented that reduced them to a single distillation. A portion was ignited to test the purity of the rectified spirit of wine. The liquor was good if a fire consumed the entire contents without leaving any impurities behind. Another, better test involved putting a little gunpowder in the bottom of the spirit. The liquor was good if the gunpowder could ignite after the spirit was consumed by fire. (Hence the modern \"proof\" to describe alcohol content.)\nAs most brandies have been distilled from grapes, the regions of the world producing excellent brandies have roughly paralleled those areas producing grapes for viniculture. At the end of the 19th century, the western European markets, including by extension their overseas empires, were dominated by French and Spanish brandies and eastern Europe was dominated by brandies from the Black Sea region, including Bulgaria, the Crimea, Georgia and Armenia. In 1877, the Ararat brandy brand was established in Yerevan, Armenia. It became one of the top brandy brands over time and during the Yalta Conference, Winston Churchill was so impressed with the Armenian brandy Dvin given to him by Joseph Stalin that he asked for several cases of it to be sent to him each year. Reportedly 400 bottles of Dvin were shipped to Churchill annually. In 1884, David Sarajishvili founded a brandy factory in Tbilisi, Georgia, a crossroads for Turkish, Central Asian, and Persian trade routes and a part of the Russian Empire at the time.\nTechnology.\nExcept for a few major producers, brandy production and consumption tend to have a regional character, and thus production methods significantly vary. Wine brandy is produced from a variety of grape cultivars. A special selection of cultivars, providing distinct aroma and character, is used for high-quality brandies, while cheaper ones are made from whichever wine is available.\nBrandy is made from so-called base wine, which significantly differs from regular table wines. It is made from early grapes to achieve higher acid concentration and lower sugar levels. Base wine generally contains smaller amounts (up to 20\u00a0mg/L) of sulphur than regular wines, as it creates undesired copper(II) sulfate in reaction with copper in the pot stills. The yeast sediment produced during the fermentation may or may not be kept in the wine, depending on the brandy style.\nBrandy is distilled from the base wine in two phases. First, a large part of water and solids is removed from the base, obtaining so-called \"low wine\", a concentrated wine with 28\u201330% ABV. In the second stage, low wine is distilled into brandy. The liquid exits the pot still in three phases, referred to as the \"heads\", \"heart\", and \"tails\", respectively. The first part, the \"head\", has an alcohol concentration of about 83% (166 US proof) and an unpleasant odour. The weak portion on the end, the \"tail\", is discarded along with the head, and they are generally mixed with another batch of low wine, thereby entering the distillation cycle again. The middle heart fraction, the richest in aromas and flavours, is preserved for later maturation.\nDistillation does not simply enhance the alcohol content of wine. The heat under which the product is distilled and the material of the still (usually copper) cause chemical reactions during distillation. This leads to the formation of numerous new volatile aroma components, changes in relative amounts of aroma components in the wine, and the hydrolysis of components such as esters.\nBrandy is usually produced in pot stills (batch distillation), but the column still can also be used for continuous distillation. The distillate obtained in this manner has a higher alcohol concentration (approximately 90% ABV) and is less aromatic. The choice of the apparatus depends on the style of brandy produced. Cognac and South African brandy are examples of brandy produced in batches while many American brandies use fractional distillation in column stills.\nChemistry.\nChemical compounds in brandy.\nSome of the key compounds found in brandy include:\nEthanol (C2H5OH): The primary alcohol responsible for intoxication.\nEsters: Such as ethyl acetate, contributing to fruity flavors.\nAldehydes: Like acetaldehyde, adding to the aroma.\nTannins: From the wood, providing astringency.\nAging.\nAfter distillation, the unaged brandy is placed into oak barrels to mature. Usually, brandies with a natural golden or brown colour are aged in oak casks (single-barrel ageing). Some brandies, particularly those from Spain, are aged using the solera system, where the producer changes the barrel each year. After a period of ageing, which depends on the style, class and legal requirements, the mature brandy is mixed with distilled water to reduce alcohol concentration and bottled. Some brandies have caramel colour and sugar added to simulate the appearance of barrel ageing.\nConsumption.\nServing.\nBrandy is traditionally served at room temperature (neat) from a snifter, a wine glass or a tulip glass. When drunk at room temperature, it is often slightly warmed by holding the glass cupped in the palm or by gentle heating. Excessive heating of brandy may cause the alcohol vapour to become too strong, causing its aroma to become overpowering. Brandy-drinkers who like their brandy warmed may ask for the glass to be heated before the brandy is poured.\nBrandy may be added to other beverages to make several popular cocktails; these include the Brandy Sour, the Brandy Alexander, the Sidecar, the Brandy Daisy, and the Brandy Old Fashioned.\nAnglo-Indian usage has \"brandy-pawnee\" (brandy with water).\nCulinary uses.\nBrandy is a common deglazing liquid used in making pan sauces for steak and other meat. It creates a more intense flavour in some soups, notably onion soup.\nIn English Christmas cooking, brandy is a common flavouring in traditional foods such as Christmas cake, brandy butter, and Christmas pudding. It is also commonly used in drinks such as mulled wine and eggnog, drunk during the festive season.\nBrandy is used to flamb\u00e9 dishes such as cr\u00eape Suzette and cherries jubilee while serving. Brandy is traditionally poured over a Christmas pudding and set alight before serving. The use of flamb\u00e9 can retain as much as 75% of the alcohol in the brandy.\nHistorical medical uses.\nIn the 19th century, brandy was often used as medical treatment due to its alleged \"stimulating\" qualities. It was also used by many European explorers of tropical Africa, who suggested that regular, moderate doses of brandy might help a traveller to cope with fever, depression, and stress. These views fell out of favour in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, with suggestions that people were using brandy's \"medical\" qualities as an excuse for social drinking.\nTerminology and legal definitions.\nThe term \"brandy\" is a shortening of the archaic English \"brandewine\" or \"brandywine\", which was derived from the Dutch word \"brandewijn\", itself derived from \"gebrande wijn\", which literally means \"burned wine\" and whose cognates include \"br\u00e4nnvin\" and \"brenniv\u00edn\". In Germany, the term \"Branntwein\" refers to any distilled spirits, while \"Weinbrand\" refers specifically to distilled wine from grapes.\nIn the general colloquial usage of the term, brandy may also be made from pomace and from fermented fruit other than grapes. If a beverage comes from a particular fruit (or multiple fruits) other than exclusively grapes, or from the must of such fruit, it may be referred to as a \"fruit brandy\" or \"fruit spirit\" or named using the specific fruit, such as \"peach brandy\", rather than just generically as \"brandy\". If pomace is the raw material, the beverage may be called \"pomace brandy\", \"marc brandy\", \"grape marc\", \"fruit marc spirit\", or \"grape marc spirit\", \"marc\" being the pulp residue after the juice has been pressed from the fruit.\nGrape pomace brandy may be designated as \"grappa\" or \"grappa brandy\". Apple brandy may be referred to as \"applejack\", although the process of \"jacking\" which was originally used in its production involved no distillation. There is also a product called \"grain brandy\" that is made from grain spirits.\nWithin particular jurisdictions, specific regulatory requirements regarding the labelling of products identified as brandy exist. For example:\nWithin the European Union, the German term \"Weinbrand\" is legally equivalent to the English term \"brandy\", but outside the German-speaking countries, it is particularly used to designate brandy from Austria and Germany.\nLabelling of grades.\nBrandy has a traditional age grading system, although its use is unregulated outside of Cognac and Armagnac. These indicators can usually be found on the label near the brand name:\nIn the case of Brandy de Jerez, the classifies it according to:\nRussian brandy (traditionally called \"Cognac\" within the country), as well as brandies from many other post-Soviet states, uses the traditional Russian grading system that is similar to the French one, but extends it significantly:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45190", "revid": "36170109", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45190", "title": "Carl Maria von Weber", "text": "German composer (1786\u20131826)\nCarl Maria Friedrich Ernst von Weber (c.\u200918 November 1786\u00a0\u2013 5 June 1826) was a German composer, conductor, virtuoso pianist, guitarist, and critic in the late Classical and early Romantic eras. Best known for his operas, he was a crucial figure in the development of German \"Romantische Oper\" (German Romantic opera).\nThroughout his youth, his father, Franz Anton, relentlessly moved the family between Hamburg, Salzburg, Freiberg, Augsburg and Vienna. Consequently he studied with many teachers\u2014his father, Johann Peter Heuschkel, Michael Haydn, Giovanni Valesi, Johann Nepomuk Kalcher, and Georg Joseph Vogler\u2014under whose supervision he composed four operas, none of which survive complete. He had a modest output of non-operatic music, which includes two symphonies, two concertos and a concertino for clarinet and orchestra, a bassoon concerto, a horn concertino, two concertos and a Konzertst\u00fcck for piano and orchestra, piano pieces such as \"Invitation to the Dance\"; and many pieces that featured the clarinet, usually written for the virtuoso clarinetist Heinrich Baermann.\nHis mature operas\u2014\"Silvana\" (1810), \"Abu Hassan\" (1811), \"Der Freisch\u00fctz\" (1821), \"Die drei Pintos\" (comp. 1820\u201321), \"Euryanthe\" (1823), \"Oberon\" (1826)\u2014had a major impact on subsequent German composers including Marschner, Meyerbeer, and Wagner; his compositions for piano influenced those of Mendelssohn, Chopin and Liszt. His best known work, \"Der Freisch\u00fctz\", remains among the most significant German operas.\nLife and career.\nChildhood.\nCarl Maria Friedrich Ernst von Weber was born around 18 November 1786 in Eutin, Bishopric of L\u00fcbeck. He was the eldest of the three children of Franz Anton von Weber and his second wife, Genovefa Brenner, a Viennese singer. He was baptized Catholic on 20 November 1786 with the name Carl Friedrich Ernst; the alternative second name Maria appeared only later. His brother and sister died in infancy. Both parents were Catholic and originally came from the far south of Germany. The \"von\" was an affectation of his father's, who was not an aristocrat and who claimed descent from a south German noble family which was already extinct at the time.\nIn April 1779, Franz Anton had been appointed director of the prince-bishopric orchestra, Eutin, which, however, was dissolved in 1781 because of spending cuts. He then took the position of Eutin's municipal music director. Dissatisfied with this position, he resigned in 1787 and founded a theatre company in Hamburg. After a brief stay in Vienna, he joined the theatre company of Johann Friedrich Toscani (husband of Elisabeth Toscani) and Peter Carl Santorini, who performed in Kassel, Marburg, and Hofgeismar. He tried repeatedly to establish a lasting company of his own but had only intermittent success.\nFranz Anton's half-brother, Franz Fridolin Weber, married C\u00e4cilia Stamm and had four daughters\u2014Josepha, Aloysia, Constanze, and Sophie\u2014all of whom became notable singers. Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart attempted to woo Aloysia, composing several pieces for her. After she rejected his advances, Mozart went on to marry Constanze; thus Mozart's wife was a cousin of Carl Maria von Weber.\nA gifted violinist, Franz Anton had ambitions of turning Weber into a child prodigy like Mozart. Weber was born with a congenital hip disorder and did not begin to walk until he was four. But by then, he was already a capable singer and pianist.\nEducation.\nFranz Anton gave Weber a comprehensive education, which was frequently interrupted by the family's moves. In 1796, Weber continued his musical education in Hildburghausen, Thuringia, where he was instructed by the oboist Johann Peter Heuschkel. After moving to Salzburg in autumn 1797, Weber studied from 1798 with Michael Haydn, younger brother of the better-known Joseph Haydn, who agreed to teach Weber free of charge.\nHis time in Salzburg was overshadowed by the death of his mother Genovefa, who succumbed to tuberculosis on 13 March 1798, and that of his one-year-old sister Antonetta on 29 December 1798 in Munich. After the death of Carl's mother, his paternal aunt Adelaide took over the care of him.\nA visit to Joseph Haydn in Vienna, presumably in hope of advanced teaching, was fruitless. In autumn 1798, Weber moved to Munich where he studied singing with Johann Evangelist Wallishauser and composing with Johann Nepomuk Kalcher, who supervised Weber's first opera, \"Die Macht der Liebe und des Weins\" (\"The Power of Love and Wine\"). Like his other compositions of that period, this opera is lost. Six fughettas for piano of the twelve-year-old Weber were published in Leipzig.\nWeber's musical education was extended by a mastering of lithography which he learned in the workshop of Alois Senefelder (the inventor of the process) and Franz Glei\u00dfner (autumn 1799). A set of his \"Variations for the Pianoforte\" was lithographed by Weber himself.\nIn 1800, the family moved to Freiberg in Saxony, where Weber, then 14 years old, wrote an opera called \"Das stumme Waldm\u00e4dchen\" (\"The Silent Forest Maiden\"). It was produced at the Freiberg and Chemnitz theatres and later in Saint Petersburg (1804), Vienna (1804/1805) and Prague (1806). The young Weber also began to publish articles as a music critic, for example in the \"Leipziger Neue Zeitung\" in 1801.\nIn 1801, the family returned to Salzburg, where Weber resumed his studies with Michael Haydn. Weber composed his third opera \"Peter Schmoll und seine Nachbarn\" (\"Peter Schmoll and His Neighbours\") of which his teacher approved. After a concert tour in 1802 the Webers returned to Augsburg where it is believed \"Peter Schmoll\" premiered.\nIn mid 1803, Weber continued his studies in Vienna with Abb\u00e9 Vogler, founder of important music schools in Mannheim, Stockholm, and Darmstadt. Another famous pupil of Vogler in Darmstadt was Jakob Meyer Beer, later known as Giacomo Meyerbeer, who became a close friend of Weber. In letters they addressed each other as \"brother\".\nEarly career 1804\u20131810.\nVogler recommended the 17-year-old Weber for the post of Director at the Breslau Opera in 1804; Weber was offered and accepted the post. He sought to reform the Opera by pensioning off older singers, expanding the orchestra, and tackling a more challenging repertoire. His ambitious and dedicated work as director of the orchestra was acknowledged, though his tempi were frequently criticized as too fast. As the daily routine did not leave sufficient time for his own creative work, Weber did not seek to extend his two-year appointment.\nAfter an interlude at the court of Duke Eugen of W\u00fcrttemberg, who resided in Silesia, Weber served from 1807 to 1810 in Stuttgart as private secretary to Duke Ludwig, brother of King Frederick I of W\u00fcrttemberg. Weber's time in W\u00fcrttemberg was plagued with troubles. He fell deeply into debt and became entangled in the financial manipulations of his employer, e.g. the sale of confirmations of ducal service which exempted the purchaser from military service. Weber was arrested and charged with embezzlement and bribery. As he could disprove the allegations, the case was brought under civil law to avoid compromising the \"de facto\" manipulator, the brother of the king. Weber agreed to pay the costs (the last payment was made in 1816) and was banished from W\u00fcrttemberg together with his father.\nAs a sobering side effect, Weber started to keep a diary to list his expenses and correspondence, and make occasional comments on special events.\nWeber remained prolific as a composer during this period, writing a quantity of religious music, mainly for the Catholic mass. This, however, earned him the hostility of conservatives working for the re-establishment of traditional chant in liturgy. In his biography of Weber, Warrack notes that Weber was an accomplished guitarist. It was in this year that his first song with guitar accompaniment, \"Liebeszauber\", was printed. Some of his most original and innovative songs were written during the following years, including \"Er an Sie\" (1808) and \"Was zieht zu deinem Zauberkreise\" (1809).\nLater career 1810\u20131826.\nIn 1810, Weber visited several cities throughout Germany; 1811 was a pivotal year in his career when he met and worked with the Munich court clarinetist Heinrich Baermann and composed the Concertino in E\u266d Major, Op. 26, J. 109, and the two concerti J. 114 and J. 118 for him; from December 1811 through March 1812, Weber went on tour with Baermann playing the clarinet works, and it was some of the final concerts on this tour that changed public, critical, and royal opinions of Weber's work, and helped him to mount a successful performance of \"Silvana\" in Berlin later that year. \nFrom 1813 to 1816, he was director of the Opera in Prague; from 1816 to 1817 he worked in Berlin, and from 1817 onwards he was director of the prestigious Opera in Dresden, working hard to establish a German opera, in reaction to the Italian opera which had dominated the European music scene since the 18th century. He was inspired in this endeavour by the ideals of the \"Sturm und Drang\" period, and also by the German folk song collection \"Des Knaben Wunderhorn\" by Arnim and Brentano. It was in 1816 that he wrote the Duet Op. 38 for guitar and piano, possibly inspired by similar works printed in Vienna by such composers as Hummel and Diabelli. On 4 November 1817, he married Caroline Brandt, a singer who created the title role of \"Silvana\". In 1819, he wrote perhaps his most famous piano piece, \"Invitation to the Dance\".\nThe successful premiere of \"Der Freisch\u00fctz\" on 18 June 1821 in Berlin led to performances all over Europe. On the very morning of the premiere, Weber finished his \"Konzertst\u00fcck in F minor for Piano and Orchestra\", and he premiered it a week later.\nIn 1823, Weber composed his first (and only) full-length, through-composed opera \"Euryanthe\" to a libretto by Helmina von Ch\u00e9zy, several passages of which (notably the music for the villainous couple Lysiart and Eglantine) anticipate the early, romantic operas of Richard Wagner. In 1824, Weber received an invitation from The Royal Opera, London, to compose and produce \"Oberon\", based on Christoph Martin Wieland's poem of the same name. Weber accepted the invitation, and in 1826 he travelled to England, to finish the work and conduct the premiere on 12 April.\nWeber was already suffering from tuberculosis when he visited London. He conducted the premiere and twelve sold-out performances of \"Oberon\" in London during April and in May, and despite his rapidly worsening health, he continued to fulfil commitments for private concerts and benefits.\nHe died in his sleep during the night on 5 June 1826 at the home of his good friend and host Sir George Smart; he was 39 years old. He was buried in London in the vaults beneath the Catholic Chapel at Moorfields, on 21 June 1826. Amongst the chief mourners were many notable musicians and theatre actors of the day including: Anton Furstenau who had accompanied Weber to London, Ignaz Moscheles, Christian Kramer, Charles Kemble, John Duruset, Johann Stumpff and James Planch\u00e9.\nEighteen years later, in December 1844, his remains were transferred to the family burial plot in the Old Catholic Cemetery in Dresden at the side of his youngest son Alexander, who at the age of 19 had died of measles seven weeks before. The simple gravestone, designed by Gottfried Semper, lies against the northern boundary wall. Wagner composed a eulogy \"An Weber's Grabe\" WWV 72 for the reburial. The piece for male choir a cappella was premiered on 16 December 1844 in Dresden. For this occasion Wagner also composed Funeral Music for Winds after Themes from \"Euryanthe\" of Weber, WWV 73.\nWeber's unfinished comic opera \"Die drei Pintos\" (\"The Three Pintos\") was originally given by his widow to Meyerbeer for completion; it was eventually completed by Gustav Mahler, who conducted the first performance in Leipzig on 20 January 1888.\nLegacy.\nWeber's operas \"Der Freisch\u00fctz\", \"Euryanthe\", and \"Oberon\" greatly influenced the development of the \"Romantische Oper\" (Romantic opera) in Germany. \"Der Freisch\u00fctz\" came to be regarded as the first German opera, \"Euryanthe\" developed the \"leitmotif\" technique to an unprecedented degree, while \"Oberon\" may have influenced Mendelssohn's music for \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" and, at the same time, revealed Weber's lifelong interest in the music of non-Western cultures. This interest was first manifested in Weber's incidental music for Schiller's translation of Gozzi's \"Turandot\", for which he used a Chinese melody, making him the first Western composer to use an Asian tune that was not of the pseudo-Turkish kind popularized by Mozart and others.\nWeber's compositions for clarinet, bassoon, and horn occupy an important place in the musical repertoire. His compositions for the clarinet, which include two concertos, a concertino, a quintet, a duo concertante, and variations on a theme from his opera \"Silvana\", are regularly performed today. His Concertino for Horn and Orchestra requires the performer to simultaneously produce two notes by humming while playing\u2014a technique known as \"multiphonics\". His bassoon concerto and the \"Andante e Rondo ungarese\" (a reworking of a piece originally for viola and orchestra) are also popular with bassoonists.\nWeber's contribution to vocal and choral music is also significant. His body of Catholic religious music was highly popular in 19th-century Germany, and he composed one of the earliest song cycles, \"Die Temperamente beim Verluste der Geliebten\" (\"[Four] Temperaments on the Loss of a Lover\"). Weber was also notable as one of the first conductors to conduct without a piano or violin.\nWeber's orchestration has also been highly praised and emulated by later generations of composers\u2014Berlioz referred to him several times in his \"Treatise on Instrumentation\" while Debussy remarked that the sound of the Weber orchestra was obtained through the scrutiny of the soul of each instrument.\nHis operas influenced the work of later opera composers, especially in Germany, such as Marschner, Meyerbeer, and Wagner, as well as several nationalist 19th-century composers such as Glinka. Homage has been paid to Weber by many 20th-century composers, such as Debussy and Stravinsky. Mahler completed Weber's unfinished comic opera \"Die drei Pintos\" and made revisions of \"Euryanthe\" and \"Oberon\" while Hindemith composed the popular \"Symphonic Metamorphosis of Themes by Carl Maria von Weber\", based on Weber's lesser-known keyboard works and the incidental music to \"Turandot\".\nWeber also wrote music journalism and was interested in folksong, and learned lithography to engrave his own works.\nA virtuoso pianist himself, Weber composed four sonatas, two concertos, and the \"Konzertst\u00fcck in F minor\" (\"Concert Piece\"), which inspired composers such as Chopin, Liszt, and Mendelssohn. The \"\" provided a new model for the one-movement concerto in several contrasting sections (such as Liszt's, who often played the work), and was acknowledged by Stravinsky as the model for his \"Capriccio for Piano and Orchestra\". Weber's shorter piano pieces, such as the \"Invitation to the Dance\", were later orchestrated by Berlioz, while his \"Polacca Brillante\" was later set for piano and orchestra by Liszt. However, Weber's piano music all but disappeared from the repertoire. There are several recordings of the major works for the solo piano, including complete recordings of the piano sonatas and the shorter piano pieces, and there are recordings of the individual sonatas by Claudio Arrau (1st sonata), Alfred Cortot and Emil Gilels (2nd sonata), Sviatoslav Richter (3rd sonata), and Leon Fleisher (4th sonata). The \"Invitation to the Dance\", although better known in Berlioz's orchestration (as part of the ballet music for a Paris production of \"Der Freisch\u00fctz\"), has long been played and recorded by pianists (e.g., by Benno Moiseiwitsch [in Carl Tausig's arrangement]). \"Invitation to the Dance\" also served as the thematic basis for Benny Goodman's swing theme song for the radio program \"Let's Dance\".\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArticles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWeb.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nScores\nRecordings"}
{"id": "45192", "revid": "560483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45192", "title": "Schumann (disambiguation)", "text": "Robert Schumann (1810\u20131856) was a German composer, music director and publisher of a trade paper. \nSchumann or Schuman may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45194", "revid": "1313644379", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45194", "title": "Lp space", "text": "Function spaces generalizing finite-dimensional p norm spaces\nIn mathematics, the \"L\"\"p\" spaces are function spaces defined using a natural generalization of the \"p\"-norm for finite-dimensional vector spaces. They are sometimes called Lebesgue spaces, named after Henri Lebesgue , although according to the Bourbaki group they were first introduced by Frigyes Riesz . \n\"L\"\"p\" spaces form an important class of Banach spaces in functional analysis, and of topological vector spaces. Because of their key role in the mathematical analysis of measure and probability spaces, Lebesgue spaces are used also in the theoretical discussion of problems in physics, statistics, economics, finance, engineering, and other disciplines.\nPreliminaries.\nThe \"p\"-norm in finite dimensions.\nThe Euclidean length of a vector formula_1 in the formula_2-dimensional real vector space formula_3 is given by the Euclidean norm:\nformula_4\nThe Euclidean distance between two points formula_5 and formula_6 is the length formula_7 of the straight line between the two points. In many situations, the Euclidean distance is appropriate for capturing the actual distances in a given space. In contrast, consider taxi drivers in a grid street plan who should measure distance not in terms of the length of the straight line to their destination, but in terms of the rectilinear distance, which takes into account that streets are either orthogonal or parallel to each other. The class of formula_8-norms generalizes these two examples and has an abundance of applications in many parts of mathematics, physics, and computer science.\nFor a real number formula_9 the formula_8-norm or formula_11-norm of formula_5 is defined by\nformula_13\nThe absolute value bars can be dropped when formula_8 is a rational number with an even numerator in its reduced form, and formula_5 is drawn from the set of real numbers, or one of its subsets.\nThe Euclidean norm from above falls into this class and is the formula_16-norm, and the formula_17-norm is the norm that corresponds to the rectilinear distance.\nThe formula_18-norm or maximum norm (or uniform norm) is the limit of the formula_11-norms for formula_20, given by:\nformula_21 \nThe formula_22-normed space is studied in functional analysis, probability theory, and harmonic analysis.\nAnother function was called the formula_22 \"norm\" by David Donoho\u2014whose quotation marks warn that this function is not a proper norm\u2014is the number of non-zero entries of the vector formula_24 Many authors abuse terminology by omitting the quotation marks. Defining formula_25 the zero \"norm\" of formula_5 is equal to\nformula_27\nThis is not a norm because it is not homogeneous. For example, scaling the vector formula_5 by a positive constant does not change the \"norm\". Despite these defects as a mathematical norm, the non-zero counting \"norm\" has uses in scientific computing, information theory, and statistics\u2013notably in compressed sensing in signal processing and computational harmonic analysis. Despite not being a norm, the associated metric, known as Hamming distance, is a valid distance, since homogeneity is not required for distances.\n\"\u2113\"\"p\" spaces and sequence spaces.\nThe formula_8-norm can be extended to vectors that have an infinite number of components (sequences), which yields the space formula_30 This contains as special cases:\nThe space of sequences has a natural vector space structure by applying scalar addition and multiplication. Explicitly, the vector sum and the scalar action for infinite sequences of real (or complex) numbers are given by:\nformula_34\nDefine the formula_8-norm:\nformula_36\nHere, a complication arises, namely that the series on the right is not always convergent, so for example, the sequence made up of only ones, formula_37 will have an infinite formula_8-norm for formula_39 The space formula_40 is then defined as the set of all infinite sequences of real (or complex) numbers such that the formula_8-norm is finite.\nOne can check that as formula_8 increases, the set formula_40 grows larger. For example, the sequence\nformula_44\nis not in formula_31 but it is in formula_40 for formula_47 as the series\nformula_48\ndiverges for formula_49 (the harmonic series), but is convergent for formula_50\nOne also defines the formula_51-norm using the supremum:\nformula_52\nand the corresponding space formula_53 of all bounded sequences. It turns out that\nformula_54\nif the right-hand side is finite, or the left-hand side is infinite. Thus, we will consider formula_40 spaces for formula_56\nThe formula_8-norm thus defined on formula_40 is indeed a norm, and formula_40 together with this norm is a Banach space.\nGeneral \u2113\"p\"-space.\nIn complete analogy to the preceding definition one can define the space formula_60 over a general index set formula_61 (and formula_62) as\nformula_63\nwhere convergence on the right requires that only countably many summands are nonzero (see also Absolute convergence over sets).\nWith the norm\nformula_64\nthe space formula_60 becomes a Banach space.\nIn the case where formula_61 is finite with formula_67 elements, this construction yields formula_3 with the formula_8-norm defined above.\nIf formula_61 is countably infinite, this is exactly the sequence space formula_40 defined above.\nFor uncountable sets formula_61 this is a non-separable Banach space which can be seen as the locally convex direct limit of formula_40-sequence spaces.\nFor formula_74 the formula_75-norm is even induced by a canonical inner product formula_76 called the \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Euclidean inner product\", which means that formula_77 holds for all vectors formula_78 This inner product can be expressed in terms of the norm by using the polarization identity. \nOn formula_32 it can be defined by\nformula_80\nNow consider the case formula_81 Define\nformula_82\nwhere for all formula_5\nformula_84\nThe index set formula_61 can be turned into a measure space by giving it the discrete \u03c3-algebra and the counting measure. Then the space formula_60 is just a special case of the more general formula_11-space (defined below).\n\"Lp\" spaces and Lebesgue integrals.\nAn formula_11 space may be defined as a space of measurable functions for which the formula_8-th power of the absolute value is Lebesgue integrable, where functions which agree almost everywhere are identified. More generally, let formula_90 be a measure space and formula_56 \nWhen formula_92, consider the set formula_93 of all measurable functions formula_94 from formula_95 to formula_96 or formula_97 whose absolute value raised to the formula_8-th power has a finite integral, or in symbols:\nformula_99\nTo define the set for formula_100 recall that two functions formula_94 and formula_102 defined on formula_95 are said to be equal almost everywhere, written , if the set formula_104 is measurable and has measure zero. \nSimilarly, a measurable function formula_94 (and its absolute value) is bounded (or dominated) almost everywhere by a real number formula_106 written formula_107 has measure zero. \nThe space formula_108 is the set of all measurable functions formula_94 that are bounded almost everywhere (by some real formula_110) and formula_111 is defined as the infimum of these bounds:\nformula_112 \nWhen formula_113 then this is the same as the essential supremum of the absolute value of formula_94:\nformula_115 \nFor example, if formula_94 is a measurable function that is equal to formula_117 almost everywhere then formula_118 for every formula_8 and thus formula_120 for all formula_121 \nFor every positive formula_122 the value under formula_123 of a measurable function formula_94 and its absolute value formula_125 are always the same (that is, formula_126 for all formula_8) and so a measurable function belongs to formula_93 if and only if its absolute value does. Because of this, many formulas involving formula_8-norms are stated only for non-negative real-valued functions. Consider for example the identity formula_130 which holds whenever formula_131 is measurable, formula_132 is real, and formula_133 (here formula_134 when formula_135). The non-negativity requirement formula_131 can be removed by substituting formula_137 in for formula_138 which gives formula_139 \nNote in particular that when formula_140 is finite then the formula formula_141 relates the formula_8-norm to the formula_17-norm.\nSeminormed space of formula_8-th power integrable functions\nEach set of functions formula_93 forms a vector space when addition and scalar multiplication are defined pointwise. \nThat the sum of two formula_8-th power integrable functions formula_94 and formula_102 is again formula_8-th power integrable follows from formula_150 \nalthough it is also a consequence of \"Minkowski's inequality\" \nformula_151 \nwhich establishes that formula_152 satisfies the triangle inequality for formula_153 (the triangle inequality does not hold for formula_154). \nThat formula_93 is closed under scalar multiplication is due to formula_152 being absolutely homogeneous, which means that formula_157 for every scalar formula_158 and every function formula_159 \nAbsolute homogeneity, the triangle inequality, and non-negativity are the defining properties of a seminorm. \nThus formula_152 is a seminorm and the set formula_93 of formula_8-th power integrable functions together with the function formula_152 defines a seminormed vector space. In general, the seminorm formula_152 is not a norm because there might exist measurable functions formula_94 that satisfy formula_118 but are not identically equal to formula_117 (formula_152 is a norm if and only if no such formula_94 exists). \nZero sets of formula_8-seminorms\nIf formula_94 is measurable and equals formula_117 a.e. then formula_118 for all positive formula_174\nOn the other hand, if formula_94 is a measurable function for which there exists some formula_133 such that formula_118 then formula_178 almost everywhere. When formula_8 is finite then this follows from the formula_49 case and the formula formula_141 mentioned above. \nThus if formula_182 is positive and formula_94 is any measurable function, then formula_118 if and only if formula_178 almost everywhere. Since the right hand side (formula_178 a.e.) does not mention formula_122 it follows that all formula_152 have the same zero set (it does not depend on formula_8). So denote this common set by\nformula_190\nThis set is a vector subspace of formula_93 for every positive formula_174 \nQuotient vector space\nLike every seminorm, the seminorm formula_152 induces a norm (defined shortly) on the canonical quotient vector space of formula_93 by its vector subspace \nformula_195\nThis normed quotient space is called Lebesgue space and it is the subject of this article. We begin by defining the quotient vector space.\nGiven any formula_196 the coset formula_197 consists of all measurable functions formula_102 that are equal to formula_94 almost everywhere. \nThe set of all cosets, typically denoted by \nformula_200\nforms a vector space with origin formula_201 when vector addition and scalar multiplication are defined by formula_202 and formula_203 \nThis particular quotient vector space will be denoted by\nformula_204\nTwo cosets are equal formula_205 if and only if formula_206 (or equivalently, formula_207), which happens if and only if formula_208 almost everywhere; if this is the case then formula_94 and formula_102 are identified in the quotient space. Hence, strictly speaking formula_211 consists of equivalence classes of functions.\nThe formula_8-norm on the quotient vector space\nGiven any formula_196 the value of the seminorm formula_152 on the coset formula_215 is constant and equal to formula_216 denote this unique value by formula_217 so that:\nformula_218 \nThis assignment formula_219 defines a map, which will also be denoted by formula_220 on the quotient vector space \nformula_221\nThis map is a norm on formula_222 called the . \nThe value formula_223 of a coset formula_224 is independent of the particular function formula_94 that was chosen to represent the coset, meaning that if formula_226 is any coset then formula_227 for every formula_228 (since formula_229 for every formula_228). \nThe Lebesgue formula_11 space\nThe normed vector space formula_232 is called formula_11 space or the Lebesgue space of formula_8-th power integrable functions and it is a Banach space for every formula_153 (meaning that it is a complete metric space, a result that is sometimes called the Riesz\u2013Fischer theorem). \nWhen the underlying measure space formula_95 is understood then formula_222 is often abbreviated formula_238 or even just formula_239 \nDepending on the author, the subscript notation formula_240 might denote either formula_222 or formula_242 \nIf the seminorm formula_152 on formula_93 happens to be a norm (which happens if and only if formula_245) then the normed space formula_246 will be linearly isometrically isomorphic to the normed quotient space formula_232 via the canonical map formula_248 (since formula_249); in other words, they will be, up to a linear isometry, the same normed space and so they may both be called \"formula_11 space\".\nThe above definitions generalize to Bochner spaces. \nIn general, this process cannot be reversed: there is no consistent way to define a \"canonical\" representative of each coset of formula_251 in formula_239 For formula_253 however, there is a theory of lifts enabling such recovery.\nSpecial cases.\nFor formula_153 the formula_40 spaces are a special case of formula_11 spaces; when formula_95 are the natural numbers formula_258 and formula_259 is the counting measure. More generally, if one considers any set formula_95 with the counting measure, the resulting formula_11 space is denoted formula_262 For example, formula_263 is the space of all sequences indexed by the integers, and when defining the formula_8-norm on such a space, one sums over all the integers. The space formula_265 where formula_2 is the set with formula_2 elements, is formula_3 with its formula_8-norm as defined above. \nSimilar to formula_270 spaces, formula_271 is the only Hilbert space among formula_11 spaces. In the complex case, the inner product on formula_271 is defined by\nformula_274\nFunctions in formula_271 are sometimes called square-integrable functions, quadratically integrable functions or square-summable functions, but sometimes these terms are reserved for functions that are square-integrable in some other sense, such as in the sense of a Riemann integral .\nAs any Hilbert space, every space formula_271 is linearly isometric to a suitable formula_277 where the cardinality of the set formula_61 is the cardinality of an arbitrary basis for this particular formula_279 \nIf we use complex-valued functions, the space formula_18 is a commutative C*-algebra with pointwise multiplication and conjugation. For many measure spaces, including all sigma-finite ones, it is in fact a commutative von Neumann algebra. An element of formula_18 defines a bounded operator on any formula_11 space by multiplication.\nWhen (0 &lt; \"p\" &lt; 1).\nIf formula_283 then formula_284 can be defined as above, that is:\nformula_285\nIn this case, however, the formula_8-norm formula_287 does not satisfy the triangle inequality and defines only a quasi-norm. The inequality formula_288 valid for formula_289 implies that\nformula_290\nand so the function\nformula_291\nis a metric on formula_292 The resulting metric space is complete.\nIn this setting formula_11 satisfies a \"reverse Minkowski inequality\", that is for formula_294\nformula_295\nThis result may be used to prove Clarkson's inequalities, which are in turn used to establish the uniform convexity of the spaces formula_11 for formula_297 .\nThe space formula_11 for formula_154 is an F-space: it admits a complete translation-invariant metric with respect to which the vector space operations are continuous. It is the prototypical example of an F-space that, for most reasonable measure spaces, is not locally convex: in formula_40 or formula_301 every open convex set containing the formula_117 function is unbounded for the formula_8-quasi-norm; therefore, the formula_117 vector does not possess a fundamental system of convex neighborhoods. Specifically, this is true if the measure space formula_95 contains an infinite family of disjoint measurable sets of finite positive measure.\nThe only nonempty convex open set in formula_306 is the entire space. Consequently, there are no nonzero continuous linear functionals on formula_307 the continuous dual space is the zero space. In the case of the counting measure on the natural numbers (i.e. formula_308), the bounded linear functionals on formula_40 are exactly those that are bounded on formula_310, i.e., those given by sequences in formula_311 Although formula_40 does contain non-trivial convex open sets, it fails to have enough of them to give a base for the topology.\nHaving no linear functionals is highly undesirable for the purposes of doing analysis. In case of the Lebesgue measure on formula_313 rather than work with formula_11 for formula_283 it is common to work with the Hardy space \"Hp\" whenever possible, as this has quite a few linear functionals: enough to distinguish points from one another. However, the Hahn\u2013Banach theorem still fails in \"Hp\" for formula_316 .\nProperties.\nH\u00f6lder's inequality.\nSuppose formula_317 satisfy formula_318. If formula_319 and formula_320 then formula_321 and \nformula_322\nThis inequality, called H\u00f6lder's inequality, is in some sense optimal since if formula_323 and formula_94 is a measurable function such that\nformula_325 \nwhere the supremum is taken over the closed unit ball of formula_326 then formula_319 and\nformula_328\nGeneralized Minkowski inequality.\nMinkowski inequality, which states that formula_152 satisfies the triangle inequality, can be generalized: \nIf the measurable function formula_330 is non-negative (where formula_331 and formula_332 are measure spaces) then for all formula_333\nformula_334\nAtomic decomposition.\nIf formula_62 then every non-negative formula_336 has an atomic decomposition, meaning that there exist a sequence formula_337 of non-negative real numbers and a sequence of non-negative functions formula_338 called the atoms, whose supports formula_339 are pairwise disjoint sets of measure formula_340 such that\nformula_341\nand for every integer formula_342 \nformula_343 \nand\nformula_344\nand where moreover, the sequence of functions formula_345 depends only on formula_94 (it is independent of formula_8). \nThese inequalities guarantee that formula_348 for all integers formula_2 while the supports of formula_350 being pairwise disjoint implies \nformula_351\nAn atomic decomposition can be explicitly given by first defining for every integer formula_342 \nformula_353\nand then letting\nformula_354\nwhere formula_355 denotes the measure of the set formula_356 and formula_357 denotes the indicator function of the set formula_358 \nThe sequence formula_359 is decreasing and converges to formula_117 as formula_361 Consequently, if formula_362 then formula_363 and formula_364 so that formula_365 is identically equal to formula_117 (in particular, the division formula_367 by formula_368 causes no issues). \nThe complementary cumulative distribution function formula_369 of formula_370 that was used to define the formula_371 also appears in the definition of the weak formula_11-norm (given below) and can be used to express the formula_8-norm formula_152 (for formula_62) of formula_319 as the integral\nformula_377\nwhere the integration is with respect to the usual Lebesgue measure on formula_378\nDual spaces.\nThe dual space of formula_284 for formula_297 has a natural isomorphism with formula_381 where formula_382 is such that formula_383. This isomorphism associates formula_384 with the functional formula_385 defined by\nformula_386 \nfor every formula_387\nformula_388 is a well defined continuous linear mapping which is an isometry by the extremal case of H\u00f6lder's inequality. If formula_389 is a formula_390-finite measure space one can use the Radon\u2013Nikodym theorem to show that any formula_391 can be expressed this way, i.e., formula_392 is an isometric isomorphism of Banach spaces. Hence, it is usual to say simply that formula_393 is the continuous dual space of formula_292\nFor formula_395 the space formula_284 is reflexive. Let formula_392 be as above and let formula_398 be the corresponding linear isometry. Consider the map from formula_284 to formula_400 obtained by composing formula_401 with the transpose (or adjoint) of the inverse of formula_402\nformula_403\nThis map coincides with the canonical embedding formula_404 of formula_284 into its bidual. Moreover, the map formula_406 is onto, as composition of two onto isometries, and this proves reflexivity.\nIf the measure formula_259 on formula_95 is sigma-finite, then the dual of formula_409 is isometrically isomorphic to formula_410 (more precisely, the map formula_411 corresponding to formula_49 is an isometry from formula_410 onto formula_414\nThe dual of formula_410 is subtler. Elements of formula_416 can be identified with bounded signed \"finitely\" additive measures on formula_95 that are absolutely continuous with respect to formula_418 See ba space for more details. If we assume the axiom of choice, this space is much bigger than formula_409 except in some trivial cases. However, Saharon Shelah proved that there are relatively consistent extensions of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory (ZF + DC + \"Every subset of the real numbers has the Baire property\") in which the dual of formula_53 is formula_421\nEmbeddings.\nColloquially, if formula_422 then formula_222 contains functions that are more locally singular, while elements of formula_424 can be more spread out. Consider the Lebesgue measure on the half line formula_378 A continuous function in formula_426 might blow up near formula_117 but must decay sufficiently fast toward infinity. On the other hand, continuous functions in formula_18 need not decay at all but no blow-up is allowed. More formally:\nNeither condition holds for the Lebesgue measure on the real line while both conditions holds for the counting measure on any finite set. As a consequence of the closed graph theorem, the embedding is continuous, i.e., the identity operator is a bounded linear map from formula_433 to formula_11 in the first case and formula_11 to formula_433 in the second. Indeed, if the domain formula_95 has finite measure, one can make the following explicit calculation using H\u00f6lder's inequality\nformula_438\nleading to\nformula_439\nThe constant appearing in the above inequality is optimal, in the sense that the operator norm of the identity formula_440 is precisely\nformula_441\nthe case of equality being achieved exactly when formula_442 formula_259-almost-everywhere.\nDense subspaces.\nLet formula_62 and formula_90 be a measure space and consider an integrable simple function formula_94 on formula_95 given by\nformula_448\nwhere formula_449 are scalars, formula_450 has finite measure and formula_451 is the indicator function of the set formula_452 for formula_453 By construction of the integral, the vector space of integrable simple functions is dense in formula_454\nMore can be said when formula_95 is a normal topological space and formula_456 its Borel \ud835\udf0e\u2013algebra. \nSuppose formula_457 is an open set with formula_458 Then for every Borel set formula_459 contained in formula_460 there exist a closed set formula_461 and an open set formula_462 such that\nformula_463\nfor every formula_464. Subsequently, there exists a Urysohn function formula_465 on formula_95 that is formula_17 on formula_461 and formula_117 on formula_470 with\nformula_471\nIf formula_95 can be covered by an increasing sequence formula_473 of open sets that have finite measure, then the space of formula_8\u2013integrable continuous functions is dense in formula_454 More precisely, one can use bounded continuous functions that vanish outside one of the open sets formula_476 \nThis applies in particular when formula_477 and when formula_259 is the Lebesgue measure. For example, the space of continuous and compactly supported functions as well as the space of integrable step functions are dense in formula_479.\nClosed subspaces.\nIf formula_480 is any positive real number, formula_259 is a probability measure on a measurable space formula_482 (so that formula_483), and formula_484 is a vector subspace, then formula_460 is a closed subspace of formula_284 if and only if formula_460 is finite-dimensional (formula_460 was chosen independent of formula_8). \nIn this theorem, which is due to Alexander Grothendieck, it is crucial that the vector space formula_460 be a subset of formula_18 since it is possible to construct an infinite-dimensional closed vector subspace of formula_492 (which is even a subset of formula_493), where formula_494 is Lebesgue measure on the unit circle formula_495 and formula_496 is the probability measure that results from dividing it by its mass formula_497\nApplications.\nStatistics.\nIn statistics, measures of central tendency and statistical dispersion, such as the mean, median, and standard deviation, can be defined in terms of formula_11 metrics, and measures of central tendency can be characterized as solutions to variational problems.\nIn penalized regression, \"L1 penalty\" and \"L2 penalty\" refer to penalizing either the formula_426 norm of a solution's vector of parameter values (i.e. the sum of its absolute values), or its squared formula_271 norm (its Euclidean length). Techniques which use an L1 penalty, like LASSO, encourage sparse solutions (where the many parameters are zero). Elastic net regularization uses a penalty term that is a combination of the formula_426 norm and the squared formula_271 norm of the parameter vector.\nHausdorff\u2013Young inequality.\nThe Fourier transform for the real line (or, for periodic functions, see Fourier series), maps formula_503 to formula_504 (or formula_505 to formula_506) respectively, where formula_507 and formula_508 This is a consequence of the Riesz\u2013Thorin interpolation theorem, and is made precise with the Hausdorff\u2013Young inequality.\nBy contrast, if formula_509 the Fourier transform does not map into formula_510\nHilbert spaces.\nHilbert spaces are central to many applications, from quantum mechanics to stochastic calculus. The spaces formula_271 and formula_270 are both Hilbert spaces. In fact, by choosing a Hilbert basis formula_513 i.e., a maximal orthonormal subset of formula_271 or any Hilbert space, one sees that every Hilbert space is isometrically isomorphic to formula_515 (same formula_516 as above), i.e., a Hilbert space of type formula_517\nGeneralizations and extensions.\nWeak \"Lp\".\nLet formula_90 be a measure space, and formula_94 a measurable function with real or complex values on formula_520 The distribution function of formula_94 is defined for formula_522 by\nformula_523\nIf formula_94 is in formula_222 for some formula_8 with formula_527 then by Markov's inequality,\nformula_528\nA function formula_94 is said to be in the space weak formula_222, or formula_531 if there is a constant formula_532 such that, for all formula_533\nformula_534\nThe best constant formula_110 for this inequality is the formula_536-norm of formula_138 and is denoted by\nformula_538\nThe weak formula_11 coincide with the Lorentz spaces formula_540 so this notation is also used to denote them.\nThe formula_536-norm is not a true norm, since the triangle inequality fails to hold. Nevertheless, for formula_94 in formula_543\nformula_544\nand in particular formula_545 \nIn fact, one has\nformula_546\nand raising to power formula_547 and taking the supremum in formula_548 one has\nformula_549\nUnder the convention that two functions are equal if they are equal formula_259 almost everywhere, then the spaces formula_536 are complete .\nFor any formula_552 the expression\nformula_553\nis comparable to the formula_536-norm. Further in the case formula_47 this expression defines a norm if formula_556 Hence for formula_557 the weak formula_11 spaces are Banach spaces .\nA major result that uses the formula_536-spaces is the Marcinkiewicz interpolation theorem, which has broad applications to harmonic analysis and the study of singular integrals.\nWeighted \"Lp\" spaces.\nAs before, consider a measure space formula_560 Let formula_561 be a measurable function. The formula_562-weighted formula_11 space is defined as formula_564 where formula_565 means the measure formula_566 defined by\nformula_567\nor, in terms of the Radon\u2013Nikodym derivative, formula_568 the norm for formula_569 is explicitly\nformula_570\nAs formula_11-spaces, the weighted spaces have nothing special, since formula_569 is equal to formula_573 But they are the natural framework for several results in harmonic analysis ; they appear for example in the Muckenhoupt theorem: for formula_395 the classical Hilbert transform is defined on formula_575 where formula_576 denotes the unit circle and formula_494 the Lebesgue measure; the (nonlinear) Hardy\u2013Littlewood maximal operator is bounded on formula_578 Muckenhoupt's theorem describes weights formula_562 such that the Hilbert transform remains bounded on formula_580 and the maximal operator on formula_581 \n\"Lp\" spaces on manifolds.\nOne may also define spaces formula_582 on a manifold, called the intrinsic formula_11 spaces of the manifold, using densities.\nVector-valued \"Lp\" spaces.\nGiven a measure space formula_584 and a locally convex space formula_516 (here assumed to be complete), it is possible to define spaces of formula_8-integrable formula_516-valued functions on formula_588 in a number of ways. One way is to define the spaces of Bochner integrable and Pettis integrable functions, and then endow them with locally convex TVS-topologies that are (each in their own way) a natural generalization of the usual formula_11 topology. Another way involves topological tensor products of formula_590 with formula_591 Element of the vector space formula_592 are finite sums of simple tensors formula_593 where each simple tensor formula_594 may be identified with the function formula_595 that sends formula_596 This tensor product formula_592 is then endowed with a locally convex topology that turns it into a topological tensor product, the most common of which are the projective tensor product, denoted by formula_598 and the injective tensor product, denoted by formula_599 In general, neither of these space are complete so their completions are constructed, which are respectively denoted by formula_600 and formula_601 (this is analogous to how the space of scalar-valued simple functions on formula_602 when seminormed by any formula_220 is not complete so a completion is constructed which, after being quotiented by formula_604 is isometrically isomorphic to the Banach space formula_605). Alexander Grothendieck showed that when formula_516 is a nuclear space (a concept he introduced), then these two constructions are, respectively, canonically TVS-isomorphic with the spaces of Bochner and Pettis integral functions mentioned earlier; in short, they are indistinguishable.\n\"L\"0 space of measurable functions.\nThe vector space of (equivalence classes of) measurable functions on formula_90 is denoted formula_608 . By definition, it contains all the formula_609 and is equipped with the topology of \"convergence in measure\". When formula_259 is a probability measure (i.e., formula_611), this mode of convergence is named \"convergence in probability\". The space formula_612 is always a topological abelian group but is only a topological vector space if formula_613 This is because scalar multiplication is continuous if and only if formula_613 If formula_389 is formula_390-finite then the weaker topology of local convergence in measure is an F-space, i.e. a completely metrizable topological vector space. Moreover, this topology is isometric to global convergence in measure formula_617 for a suitable choice of probability measure formula_618\nThe description is easier when formula_259 is finite. If formula_259 is a finite measure on formula_621 the formula_117 function admits for the convergence in measure the following fundamental system of neighborhoods\nformula_623\nThe topology can be defined by any metric formula_624 of the form\nformula_625\nwhere formula_626 is bounded continuous concave and non-decreasing on formula_627 with formula_628 and formula_629 when formula_630 (for example, formula_631 Such a metric is called L\u00e9vy-metric for formula_632 Under this metric the space formula_612 is complete. However, as mentioned above, scalar multiplication is continuous with respect to this metric only if formula_634. To see this, consider the Lebesgue measurable function formula_635 defined by formula_636. Then clearly formula_637. The space formula_612 is in general not locally bounded, and not locally convex.\nFor the infinite Lebesgue measure formula_494 on formula_313 the definition of the fundamental system of neighborhoods could be modified as follows\nformula_641\nThe resulting space formula_642, with the topology of local convergence in measure, is isomorphic to the space formula_643 for any positive formula_494\u2013integrable density formula_645\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45195", "revid": "9385", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45195", "title": "Vizcaya", "text": "Vizcaya (Spanish, 'Biscay') may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45196", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45196", "title": "Injective function", "text": "Function that preserves distinctness\nIn mathematics, an injective function (also known as injection, or one-to-one function) is a function \"f\" that maps distinct elements of its domain to distinct elements of its codomain; that is, \"x\"1 \u2260 \"x\"2 implies \"f\"(\"x\"1) \u2260 \"f\"(\"x\"2) (equivalently by contraposition, \"f\"(\"x\"1) \n \"f\"(\"x\"2) implies \"x\"1 = \"x\"2). In other words, every element of the function's codomain is the image of at most one element of its domain. The term one-to-one function must not be confused with one-to-one correspondence that refers to bijective functions, which are functions such that each element in the codomain is an image of \"exactly one\" element in the domain. \nA homomorphism between algebraic structures is a function that is compatible with the operations of the structures. For all common algebraic structures, and, in particular for vector spaces, an injective homomorphism is also called a monomorphism. However, in the more general context of category theory, the definition of a monomorphism differs from that of an injective homomorphism. This is thus a theorem that they are equivalent for algebraic structures; see for more details.\nA function formula_1 that is not injective is sometimes called many-to-one.\nDefinition.\nLet formula_1 be a function whose domain is a set formula_3 The function formula_1 is said to be injective provided that for all formula_5 and formula_6 in formula_7 if formula_8 then formula_9; that is, formula_10 implies formula_11 Equivalently, if formula_12 then formula_13 in the contrapositive statement.\nSymbolically,formula_14\nwhich is logically equivalent to the contrapositive,formula_15An injective function (or, more generally, a monomorphism) is often denoted by using the specialized arrows \u21a3 or \u21aa (for example, formula_16 or formula_17), although some authors specifically reserve \u21aa for an inclusion map. \nExamples.\n\"For visual examples, readers are directed to the gallery section.\"\nMore generally, when formula_18 and formula_38 are both the real line formula_39 then an injective function formula_23 is one whose graph is never intersected by any horizontal line more than once. This principle is referred to as the horizontal line test.\nInjections can be undone.\nFunctions with left inverses are always injections. That is, given formula_41 if there is a function formula_42 such that for every formula_43, formula_44, then formula_1 is injective. The proof is that\nformula_46\nIn this case, formula_28 is called a retraction of formula_48 Conversely, formula_1 is called a section of formula_50\nFor example: formula_51 is retracted by formula_52.\nConversely, every injection formula_1 with a non-empty domain has a left inverse formula_28. It can be defined by choosing an element formula_5 in the domain of formula_1 and setting formula_57 to the unique element of the pre-image formula_58 (if it is non-empty) or to formula_5 (otherwise).\nThe left inverse formula_28 is not necessarily an inverse of formula_61 because the composition in the other order, formula_62 may differ from the identity on formula_63 In other words, an injective function can be \"reversed\" by a left inverse, but is not necessarily invertible, which requires that the function is bijective.\nInjections may be made invertible.\nIn fact, to turn an injective function formula_64 into a bijective (hence invertible) function, it suffices to replace its codomain formula_38 by its actual image formula_66 That is, let formula_67 such that formula_68 for all formula_43; then formula_28 is bijective. Indeed, formula_1 can be factored as formula_72 where formula_73 is the inclusion function from formula_74 into formula_63\nMore generally, injective partial functions are called partial bijections.\nProving that functions are injective.\nA proof that a function formula_1 is injective depends on how the function is presented and what properties the function holds.\nFor functions that are given by some formula there is a basic idea. We use the definition of injectivity, namely that if formula_122 then formula_123\nHere is an example: \nformula_124\nProof: Let formula_125 Suppose formula_126 So formula_127 implies formula_128 which implies formula_123 Therefore, it follows from the definition that formula_1 is injective.\nThere are multiple other methods of proving that a function is injective. For example, in calculus if formula_1 is a differentiable function defined on some interval, then it is sufficient to show that the derivative is always positive or always negative on that interval. In linear algebra, if formula_1 is a linear transformation it is sufficient to show that the kernel of formula_1 contains only the zero vector. If formula_1 is a function with finite domain it is sufficient to look through the list of images of each domain element and check that no image occurs twice on the list.\nA graphical approach for a real-valued function formula_1 of a real variable formula_136 is the horizontal line test. If every horizontal line intersects the curve of formula_137 in at most one point, then formula_1 is injective or one-to-one.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45198", "revid": "6289403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45198", "title": "Jazz music", "text": ""}
{"id": "45199", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45199", "title": "Inverse element", "text": "Generalization of additive and multiplicative inverses\nIn mathematics, the concept of an inverse element generalises the concepts of opposite (\u2212\"x\") and reciprocal (1/\"x\") of numbers. \nGiven an operation denoted here \u2217, and an identity element denoted e, if \"x\" \u2217 \"y\" = \"e\", one says that x is a left inverse of y, and that y is a right inverse of x. (An identity element is an element such that \"x\" * \"e\" = \"x\" and \"e\" * \"y\" = \"y\" for all x and y for which the left-hand sides are defined.)\nWhen the operation \u2217 is associative, if an element x has both a left inverse and a right inverse, then these two inverses are equal and unique; they are called the \"inverse element\" or simply the \"inverse\". Often an adjective is added for specifying the operation, such as in additive inverse, multiplicative inverse, and functional inverse. In this case (associative operation), an invertible element is an element that has an inverse. In a ring, an \"invertible element\", also called a unit, is an element that is invertible under multiplication (this is not ambiguous, as every element is invertible under addition).\nInverses are commonly used in groups\u2014where every element is invertible, and rings\u2014where invertible elements are also called units. They are also commonly used for operations that are not defined for all possible operands, such as inverse matrices and inverse functions. This has been generalized to category theory, where, by definition, an isomorphism is an invertible morphism.\nThe word 'inverse' is derived from that means 'turned upside down', 'overturned'. This may take its origin from the case of fractions, where the (multiplicative) inverse is obtained by exchanging the numerator and the denominator (the inverse of formula_1 is formula_2).\nDefinitions and basic properties.\nThe concepts of \"inverse element\" and \"invertible element\" are commonly defined for binary operations that are everywhere defined (that is, the operation is defined for any two elements of its domain). However, these concepts are also commonly used with partial operations, that is operations that are not defined everywhere. Common examples are matrix multiplication, function composition and composition of morphisms in a category. It follows that the common definitions of associativity and identity element must be extended to partial operations; this is the object of the first subsections.\nIn this section, X is a set (possibly a proper class) on which a partial operation (possibly total) is defined, which is denoted with formula_3 \nAssociativity.\nA partial operation is associative if \nformula_4\nfor every \"x\", \"y\", \"z\" in X for which one of the members of the equality is defined; the equality means that the other member of the equality must also be defined.\nExamples of non-total associative operations are multiplication of matrices of arbitrary size, and function composition.\nIdentity elements.\nLet formula_5 be a possibly partial associative operation on a set X.\nAn \"identity element\", or simply an \"identity\" is an element e such that \nformula_6\nfor every x and y for which the left-hand sides of the equalities are defined.\nIf e and f are two identity elements such that formula_7 is defined, then formula_8 (This results immediately from the definition, by formula_9)\nIt follows that a total operation has at most one identity element, and if e and f are different identities, then formula_7 is not defined. \nFor example, in the case of matrix multiplication, there is one \"n\"\u00d7\"n\" identity matrix for every positive integer n, and two identity matrices of different size cannot be multiplied together.\nSimilarly, identity functions are identity elements for function composition, and the composition of the identity functions of two different sets are not defined.\nLeft and right inverses.\nIf formula_11\nwhere e is an identity element, one says that x is a \"left inverse\" of y, and y is a \"right inverse\" of x.\nLeft and right inverses do not always exist, even when the operation is total and associative. For example, addition is a total associative operation on nonnegative integers, which has 0 as additive identity, and 0 is the only element that has an additive inverse. This lack of inverses is the main motivation for extending the natural numbers into the integers.\nAn element can have several left inverses and several right inverses, even when the operation is total and associative. For example, consider the functions from the integers to the integers. The \"doubling function\" formula_12 has infinitely many left inverses under function composition, which are the functions that divide by two the even numbers, and give any value to odd numbers. Similarly, every function that maps n to either formula_13 or formula_14 is a right inverse of the function formula_15 the floor function that maps n to formula_16 or formula_17 depending whether n is even or odd.\nMore generally, a function has a left inverse for function composition if and only if it is injective, and it has a right inverse if and only if it is surjective. \nIn category theory, right inverses are also called sections, and left inverses are called retractions.\nInverses.\nAn element is \"invertible\" under an operation if it has a left inverse and a right inverse.\nIn the common case where the operation is associative, the left and right inverse of an element are equal and unique. Indeed, if l and r are respectively a left inverse and a right inverse of x, then \nformula_18\n\"The inverse\" of an invertible element is its unique left or right inverse.\nIf the operation is denoted as an addition, the inverse, or additive inverse, of an element x is denoted formula_19 Otherwise, the inverse of x is generally denoted formula_20 or, in the case of a commutative multiplication formula_21 When there may be a confusion between several operations, the symbol of the operation may be added before the exponent, such as in formula_22 The notation formula_23 is not commonly used for function composition, since formula_24 can be used for the multiplicative inverse.\nIf x and y are invertible, and formula_25 is defined, then formula_25 is invertible, and its inverse is formula_27 \nAn invertible homomorphism is called an isomorphism. In \ncategory theory, an invertible morphism is also called an isomorphism.\nIn groups.\nA group is a set with an associative operation that has an identity element, and for which every element has an inverse. \nThus, the inverse is a function from the group to itself that may also be considered as an operation of arity one. It is also an involution, since the inverse of the inverse of an element is the element itself.\nA group may act on a set as transformations of this set. In this case, the inverse formula_28 of a group element formula_29 defines a transformation that is the inverse of the transformation defined by formula_30 that is, the transformation that \"undoes\" the transformation defined by formula_31\nFor example, the Rubik's Cube group represents the finite sequences of elementary moves. The inverse of such a sequence is obtained by applying the inverse of each move in the reverse order.\nIn monoids.\nA monoid is a set with an associative operation that has an identity element.\nThe \"invertible elements\" in a monoid form a group under monoid operation.\nA ring is a monoid for ring multiplication. In this case, the invertible elements are also called units and form the group of units of the ring.\nIf a monoid is not commutative, there may exist non-invertible elements that have a left inverse or a right inverse (not both, as, otherwise, the element would be invertible). \nFor example, the set of the functions from a set to itself is a monoid under function composition. In this monoid, the invertible elements are the bijective functions; the elements that have left inverses are the injective functions, and those that have right inverses are the surjective functions.\nGiven a monoid, one may want extend it by adding inverse to some elements. This is generally impossible for non-commutative monoids, but, in a commutative monoid, it is possible to add inverses to the elements that have the cancellation property (an element x has the cancellation property if formula_32 implies formula_33 and formula_34 implies formula_35). This extension of a monoid is allowed by Grothendieck group construction. This is the method that is commonly used for constructing integers from natural numbers, rational numbers from integers and, more generally, the field of fractions of an integral domain, and localizations of commutative rings.\nIn rings.\nA ring is an algebraic structure with two operations, \"addition\" and \"multiplication\", which are denoted as the usual operations on numbers. \nUnder addition, a ring is an abelian group, which means that addition is commutative and associative; it has an identity, called the additive identity, and denoted 0; and every element x has an inverse, called its additive inverse and denoted \u2212\"x\". Because of commutativity, the concepts of left and right inverses are meaningless since they do not differ from inverses.\nUnder multiplication, a ring is a monoid; this means that multiplication is associative and has an identity called the multiplicative identity and denoted 1. An \"invertible element \" for multiplication is called a unit. The inverse or multiplicative inverse (for avoiding confusion with additive inverses) of a unit x is denoted formula_20 or, when the multiplication is commutative, formula_37\nThe additive identity 0 is never a unit, except when the ring is the zero ring, which has 0 as its unique element.\nIf 0 is the only non-unit, the ring is a field if the multiplication is commutative, or a division ring otherwise.\nIn a noncommutative ring (that is, a ring whose multiplication is not commutative), a non-invertible element may have one or several left or right inverses. This is, for example, the case of the linear functions from an infinite-dimensional vector space to itself.\nA commutative ring (that is, a ring whose multiplication is commutative) may be extended by adding inverses to elements that are not zero divisors (that is, their product with a nonzero element cannot be 0). This is the process of localization, which produces, in particular, the field of rational numbers from the ring of integers, and, more generally, the field of fractions of an integral domain. Localization is also used with zero divisors, but, in this case the original ring is not a subring of the localisation; instead, it is mapped non-injectively to the localization.\nMatrices.\nMatrix multiplication is commonly defined for matrices over a field, and straightforwardly extended to matrices over rings, rngs and semirings. However, \"in this section, only matrices over a commutative ring are considered\", because of the use of the concept of rank and determinant.\nIf A is a \"m\"\u00d7\"n\" matrix (that is, a matrix with m rows and n columns), and B is a \"p\"\u00d7\"q\" matrix, the product AB is defined if \"n\" = \"p\", and only in this case. An identity matrix, that is, an identity element for matrix multiplication is a square matrix (same number for rows and columns) whose entries of the main diagonal are all equal to 1, and all other entries are 0.\nAn invertible matrix is an invertible element under matrix multiplication. A matrix over a commutative ring R is invertible if and only if its determinant is a unit in R (that is, is invertible in R. In this case, its inverse matrix can be computed with Cramer's rule. \nIf R is a field, the determinant is invertible if and only if it is not zero. As the case of fields is more common, one see often invertible matrices defined as matrices with a nonzero determinant, but this is incorrect over rings.\nIn the case of integer matrices (that is, matrices with integer entries), an invertible matrix is a matrix that has an inverse that is also an integer matrix. Such a matrix is called a unimodular matrix for distinguishing it from matrices that are invertible over the real numbers. A square integer matrix is unimodular if and only if its determinant is 1 or \u22121, since these two numbers are the only units in the ring of integers.\nA matrix has a left inverse if and only if its rank equals its number of columns. This left inverse is not unique except for square matrices where the left inverse equal the inverse matrix. Similarly, a right inverse exists if and only if the rank equals the number of rows; it is not unique in the case of a rectangular matrix, and equals the inverse matrix in the case of a square matrix.\nFunctions, homomorphisms and morphisms.\nComposition is a partial operation that generalizes to homomorphisms of algebraic structures and morphisms of categories into operations that are also called \"composition\", and share many properties with function composition. \nIn all the case, composition is associative.\nIf formula_38 and formula_39 the composition formula_40 is defined if and only if formula_41 or, in the function and homomorphism cases, formula_42 In the function and homomorphism cases, this means that the codomain of formula_43 equals or is included in the domain of g. In the morphism case, this means that the codomain of formula_43 equals the domain of g.\nThere is an \"identity\" formula_45 for every object X (set, algebraic structure or object), which is called also an identity function in the function case.\nA function is invertible if and only if it is a bijection. An invertible homomorphism or morphism is called an isomorphism. An homomorphism of algebraic structures is an isomorphism if and only if it is a bijection. The inverse of a bijection is called an inverse function. In the other cases, one talks of \"inverse isomorphisms\".\nA function has a left inverse or a right inverse if and only it is injective or surjective, respectively. An homomorphism of algebraic structures that has a left inverse or a right inverse is respectively injective or surjective, but the converse is not true in some algebraic structures. For example, the converse is true for vector spaces but not for modules over a ring: a homomorphism of modules that has a left inverse of a right inverse is called respectively a split epimorphism or a split monomorphism. This terminology is also used for morphisms in any category.\nGeneralizations.\nIn a unital magma.\nLet formula_46 be a unital magma, that is, a set with a binary operation formula_5 and an identity element formula_48. If, for formula_49, we have formula_50, then formula_51 is called a left inverse of formula_52 and formula_52 is called a right inverse of formula_51. If an element formula_55 is both a left inverse and a right inverse of formula_56, then formula_55 is called a two-sided inverse, or simply an inverse, of formula_56. An element with a two-sided inverse in formula_46 is called invertible in formula_46. An element with an inverse element only on one side is left invertible or right invertible.\nElements of a unital magma formula_61 may have multiple left, right or two-sided inverses. For example, in the magma given by the Cayley table\nthe elements 2 and 3 each have two two-sided inverses.\nA unital magma in which all elements are invertible need not be a loop. For example, in the magma formula_61 given by the Cayley table\nevery element has a unique two-sided inverse (namely itself), but formula_61 is not a loop because the Cayley table is not a Latin square.\nSimilarly, a loop need not have two-sided inverses. For example, in the loop given by the Cayley table\nthe only element with a two-sided inverse is the identity element 1.\nIf the operation formula_5 is associative then if an element has both a left inverse and a right inverse, they are equal. In other words, in a monoid (an associative unital magma) every element has at most one inverse (as defined in this section). In a monoid, the set of invertible elements is a group, called the group of units of formula_46, and denoted by formula_66 or \"H\"1.\nIn a semigroup.\nThe definition in the previous section generalizes the notion of inverse in group relative to the notion of identity. It's also possible, albeit less obvious, to generalize the notion of an inverse by dropping the identity element but keeping associativity; that is, in a semigroup.\nIn a semigroup \"S\" an element \"x\" is called (von Neumann) regular if there exists some element \"z\" in \"S\" such that \"xzx\" = \"x\"; \"z\" is sometimes called a \"pseudoinverse\". An element \"y\" is called (simply) an inverse of \"x\" if \"xyx\" = \"x\" and \"y\" = \"yxy\". Every regular element has at least one inverse: if \"x\" = \"xzx\" then it is easy to verify that \"y\" = \"zxz\" is an inverse of \"x\" as defined in this section. Another easy to prove fact: if \"y\" is an inverse of \"x\" then \"e\" = \"xy\" and \"f\" = \"yx\" are idempotents, that is \"ee\" = \"e\" and \"ff\" = \"f\". Thus, every pair of (mutually) inverse elements gives rise to two idempotents, and \"ex\" = \"xf\" = \"x\", \"ye\" = \"fy\" = \"y\", and \"e\" acts as a left identity on \"x\", while \"f\" acts a right identity, and the left/right roles are reversed for \"y\". This simple observation can be generalized using Green's relations: every idempotent \"e\" in an arbitrary semigroup is a left identity for \"Re\" and right identity for \"Le\". An intuitive description of this fact is that every pair of mutually inverse elements produces a local left identity, and respectively, a local right identity.\nIn a monoid, the notion of inverse as defined in the previous section is strictly narrower than the definition given in this section. Only elements in the Green class \"H\"1 have an inverse from the unital magma perspective, whereas for any idempotent \"e\", the elements of \"H\"e have an inverse as defined in this section. Under this more general definition, inverses need not be unique (or exist) in an arbitrary semigroup or monoid. If all elements are regular, then the semigroup (or monoid) is called regular, and every element has at least one inverse. If every element has exactly one inverse as defined in this section, then the semigroup is called an inverse semigroup. Finally, an inverse semigroup with only one idempotent is a group. An inverse semigroup may have an absorbing element 0 because 000 = 0, whereas a group may not.\nOutside semigroup theory, a unique inverse as defined in this section is sometimes called a quasi-inverse. This is generally justified because in most applications (for example, all examples in this article) associativity holds, which makes this notion a generalization of the left/right inverse relative to an identity (see Generalized inverse).\n\"U\"-semigroups.\nA natural generalization of the inverse semigroup is to define an (arbitrary) unary operation \u00b0 such that (\"a\"\u00b0)\u00b0 = \"a\" for all \"a\" in \"S\"; this endows \"S\" with a type \u27e82,1\u27e9 algebra. A semigroup endowed with such an operation is called a \"U\"-semigroup. Although it may seem that \"a\"\u00b0 will be the inverse of \"a\", this is not necessarily the case. In order to obtain interesting notion(s), the unary operation must somehow interact with the semigroup operation. Two classes of \"U\"-semigroups have been studied:\nClearly a group is both an \"I\"-semigroup and a *-semigroup. A class of semigroups important in semigroup theory are completely regular semigroups; these are \"I\"-semigroups in which one additionally has \"aa\"\u00b0 = \"a\"\u00b0\"a\"; in other words every element has commuting pseudoinverse \"a\"\u00b0. There are few concrete examples of such semigroups however; most are completely simple semigroups. In contrast, a subclass of *-semigroups, the *-regular semigroups (in the sense of Drazin), yield one of best known examples of a (unique) pseudoinverse, the Moore\u2013Penrose inverse. In this case however the involution \"a\"* is not the pseudoinverse. Rather, the pseudoinverse of \"x\" is the unique element \"y\" such that \"xyx\" = \"x\", \"yxy\" = \"y\", (\"xy\")* = \"xy\", (\"yx\")* = \"yx\". Since *-regular semigroups generalize inverse semigroups, the unique element defined this way in a *-regular semigroup is called the \"generalized inverse\" or \"Moore\u2013Penrose inverse\".\nExamples.\nAll examples in this section involve associative operators.\nGalois connections.\nThe lower and upper adjoints in a (monotone) Galois connection, \"L\" and \"G\" are quasi-inverses of each other; that is, \"LGL\" = \"L\" and \"GLG\" = \"G\" and one uniquely determines the other. They are not left or right inverses of each other however.\nGeneralized inverses of matrices.\nA square matrix formula_67 with entries in a field formula_68 is invertible (in the set of all square matrices of the same size, under matrix multiplication) if and only if its determinant is different from zero. If the determinant of formula_67 is zero, it is impossible for it to have a one-sided inverse; therefore a left inverse or right inverse implies the existence of the other one. See invertible matrix for more.\nMore generally, a square matrix over a commutative ring formula_70 is invertible if and only if its determinant is invertible in formula_70.\nNon-square matrices of full rank have several one-sided inverses:\nThe left inverse can be used to determine the least norm solution of formula_76, which is also the least squares formula for regression and is given by formula_77\nNo rank deficient matrix has any (even one-sided) inverse. However, the Moore\u2013Penrose inverse exists for all matrices, and coincides with the left or right (or true) inverse when it exists.\nAs an example of matrix inverses, consider:\n formula_78\nSo, as \"m\" &lt; \"n\", we have a right inverse, formula_79 By components it is computed as\n formula_80\nThe left inverse doesn't exist, because\n formula_81\nwhich is a singular matrix, and cannot be inverted.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45200", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45200", "title": "Universal algebra", "text": "Theory of algebraic structures in general\nUniversal algebra (sometimes called general algebra) is the field of mathematics that studies algebraic structures in general, not specific types of algebraic structures.\nFor instance, rather than considering groups or rings as the object of study\u2014this is the subject of group theory and ring theory\u2014 in universal algebra, the object of study is the possible types of algebraic structures and their relationships.\nBasic idea.\nIn universal algebra, an &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;algebra (or algebraic structure) is a set \"A\" together with a collection of operations on \"A\". \nArity.\nAn \"n\"-ary operation on \"A\" is a function that takes \"n\" elements of \"A\" and returns a single element of \"A\". Thus, a 0-ary operation (or \"nullary operation\") can be represented simply as an element of \"A\", or a \"constant\", often denoted by a letter like \"a\". A 1-ary operation (or \"unary operation\") is simply a function from \"A\" to \"A\", often denoted by a symbol placed in front of its argument, like ~\"x\". A 2-ary operation (or \"binary operation\") is often denoted by a symbol placed between its arguments (also called infix notation), like \"x\"\u00a0\u2217\u00a0\"y\". Operations of higher or unspecified \"arity\" are usually denoted by function symbols, with the arguments placed in parentheses and separated by commas, like \"f\"(\"x\",\"y\",\"z\") or \"f\"(\"x\"1...,\"x\"\"n\"). One way of talking about an algebra, then, is by referring to it as an algebra of a certain type formula_1, where formula_1 is an ordered sequence of natural numbers representing the arity of the operations of the algebra. However, some researchers also allow infinitary operations, such as formula_3 where \"J\" is an infinite index set, which is an operation in the algebraic theory of complete lattices. \nEquations.\nAfter the operations have been specified, the nature of the algebra is further defined by axioms, which in universal algebra often take the form of identities, or equational laws. An example is the associative axiom for a binary operation, which is given by the equation \"x\"\u00a0\u2217\u00a0(\"y\"\u00a0\u2217\u00a0\"z\")\u00a0= (\"x\"\u00a0\u2217\u00a0\"y\")\u00a0\u2217\u00a0\"z\". The axiom is intended to hold for all elements \"x\", \"y\", and \"z\" of the set \"A\".\nVarieties.\nA collection of algebraic structures defined by identities is called a variety or equational class.\nRestricting one's study to varieties rules out:\nThe study of equational classes can be seen as a special branch of model theory, typically dealing with structures having operations only (i.e. the type can have symbols for functions but not for relations other than equality), and in which the language used to talk about these structures uses equations only.\nNot all algebraic structures in a wider sense fall into this scope. For example, ordered groups involve an ordering relation, so would not fall within this scope.\nThe class of fields is not an equational class because there is no type (or \"signature\") in which all field laws can be written as equations (inverses of elements are defined for all \"non-zero\" elements in a field, so inversion cannot be added to the type).\nOne advantage of this restriction is that the structures studied in universal algebra can be defined in any category that has \"finite products\". For example, a topological group is just a group in the category of topological spaces.\nExamples.\nMost of the usual algebraic systems of mathematics are examples of varieties, but not always in an obvious way, since the usual definitions often involve quantification or inequalities.\nGroups.\nAs an example, consider the definition of a group. Usually a group is defined in terms of a single binary operation \u2217, subject to the axioms:\nThis definition of a group does not immediately fit the point of view of universal algebra, because the axioms of the identity element and inversion are not stated purely in terms of equational laws which hold universally \"for all\u00a0...\" elements, but also involve the existential quantifier \"there exists\u00a0...\". The group axioms can be phrased as universally quantified equations by specifying, in addition to the binary operation \u2217, a nullary operation \"e\" and a unary operation ~, with ~\"x\" usually written as \"x\"\u22121. The axioms become:\nTo summarize, the usual definition has:\nwhile the universal algebra definition has:\nA key point is that the extra operations do not add information, but follow uniquely from the usual definition of a group. Although the usual definition did not uniquely specify the identity element \"e\", an easy exercise shows that it is unique, as is the inverse of each element.\nThe universal algebra point of view is well adapted to category theory. For example, when defining a group object in category theory, where the object in question may not be a set, one must use equational laws (which make sense in general categories), rather than quantified laws (which refer to individual elements). Further, the inverse and identity are specified as morphisms in the category. For example, in a topological group, the inverse must not only exist element-wise, but must give a continuous mapping (a morphism). Some authors also require the identity map to be a closed inclusion (a cofibration).\nOther examples.\nMost algebraic structures are examples of universal algebras.\nExamples of relational algebras include semilattices, lattices, and Boolean algebras.\nBasic constructions.\nWe assume that the type, formula_1, has been fixed. Then there are three basic constructions in universal algebra: homomorphic image, subalgebra, and product.\nA homomorphism between two algebras \"A\" and \"B\" is a function \"h\" : \"A\" \u2192 \"B\" from the set \"A\" to the set \"B\" such that, for every operation \"f\"\"A\" of \"A\" and corresponding \"f\"\"B\" of \"B\" (of arity, say, \"n\"), \"h\"(\"f\"\"A\"(\"x\"1, ..., \"x\"\"n\"))\u00a0= \"f\"\"B\"(\"h\"(\"x\"1), ..., \"h\"(\"x\"\"n\")). (Sometimes the subscripts on \"f\" are taken off when it is clear from context which algebra the function is from.) For example, if \"e\" is a constant (nullary operation), then \"h\"(\"e\"\"A\")\u00a0=\u00a0\"e\"\"B\". If ~ is a unary operation, then \"h\"(~\"x\")\u00a0= ~\"h\"(\"x\"). If \u2217 is a binary operation, then \"h\"(\"x\"\u00a0\u2217\u00a0\"y\")\u00a0= \"h\"(\"x\")\u00a0\u2217\u00a0\"h\"(\"y\"). And so on. A few of the things that can be done with homomorphisms, as well as definitions of certain special kinds of homomorphisms, are listed under \"Homomorphism\". In particular, we can take the homomorphic image of an algebra, \"h\"(\"A\").\nA subalgebra of \"A\" is a subset of \"A\" that is closed under all the operations of \"A\". A product of some set of algebraic structures is the cartesian product of the sets with the operations defined coordinatewise.\nMotivations and applications.\nIn addition to its unifying approach, universal algebra also gives deep theorems and important examples and counterexamples. It provides a useful framework for those who intend to start the study of new classes of algebras.\nIt can enable the use of methods invented for some particular classes of algebras to other classes of algebras, by recasting the methods in terms of universal algebra (if possible), and then interpreting these as applied to other classes. It has also provided conceptual clarification; as J.D.H. Smith puts it, \"What looks messy and complicated in a particular framework may turn out to be simple and obvious in the proper general one.\"\nIn particular, universal algebra can be applied to the study of monoids, rings, and lattices. Before universal algebra came along, many theorems (most notably the isomorphism theorems) were proved separately in all of these classes, but with universal algebra, they can be proven once and for all for every kind of algebraic system.\nThe 1956 paper by Higgins referenced below has been well followed up for its framework for a range of particular algebraic systems, while his 1963 paper is notable for its discussion of algebras with operations which are only partially defined, typical examples for this being categories and groupoids. This leads on to the subject of higher-dimensional algebra which can be defined as the study of algebraic theories with partial operations whose domains are defined under geometric conditions. Notable examples of these are various forms of higher-dimensional categories and groupoids.\nConstraint satisfaction problem.\nUniversal algebra provides a natural language for the constraint satisfaction problem (CSP). CSP refers to an important class of computational problems where, given a relational algebra \"A\" and an existential sentence formula_5 over this algebra, the question is to find out whether formula_5 can be satisfied in \"A\". The algebra \"A\" is often fixed, so that CSP\"A\" refers to the problem whose instance is only the existential sentence formula_5.\nIt is proved that every computational problem can be formulated as CSP\"A\" for some algebra \"A\".\nFor example, the \"n\"-coloring problem can be stated as CSP of the algebra ({0, 1, ..., \"n\"\u22121}, \u2260), i.e. an algebra with \"n\" elements and a single relation, inequality.\nGeneralizations.\nUniversal algebra has also been studied using the techniques of category theory. In this approach, instead of writing a list of operations and equations obeyed by those operations, one can describe an algebraic structure using categories of a special sort, known as Lawvere theories or more generally algebraic theories. Alternatively, one can describe algebraic structures using monads. The two approaches are closely related, with each having their own advantages.\nIn particular, every Lawvere theory gives a monad on the category of sets, while any \"finitary\" monad on the category of sets arises from a Lawvere theory. However, a monad describes algebraic structures within one particular category (for example the category of sets), while algebraic theories describe structure within any of a large class of categories (namely those having finite products).\nA more recent development in category theory is operad theory\u00a0\u2013 an operad is a set of operations, similar to a universal algebra, but restricted in that equations are only allowed between expressions with the variables, with no duplication or omission of variables allowed. Thus, rings can be described as the so-called \"algebras\" of some operad, but not groups, since the law \"gg\"\u22121 = 1 duplicates the variable \"g\" on the left side and omits it on the right side. At first this may seem to be a troublesome restriction, but the payoff is that operads have certain advantages: for example, one can hybridize the concepts of ring and vector space to obtain the concept of associative algebra, but one cannot form a similar hybrid of the concepts of group and vector space.\nAnother development is partial algebra where the operators can be partial functions. Certain partial functions can also be handled by a generalization of Lawvere theories known as \"essentially algebraic theories\".\nAnother generalization of universal algebra is model theory, which is sometimes described as \"universal algebra + logic\".\nHistory.\nIn Alfred North Whitehead's book \"A Treatise on Universal Algebra,\" published in 1898, the term \"universal algebra\" had essentially the same meaning that it has today. Whitehead credits William Rowan Hamilton and Augustus De Morgan as originators of the subject matter, and James Joseph Sylvester with coining the term itself.\nAt the time structures such as Lie algebras and hyperbolic quaternions drew attention to the need to expand algebraic structures beyond the associatively multiplicative class. In a review Alexander Macfarlane wrote: \"The main idea of the work is not unification of the several methods, nor generalization of ordinary algebra so as to include them, but rather the comparative study of their several structures.\" At the time George Boole's algebra of logic made a strong counterpoint to ordinary number algebra, so the term \"universal\" served to calm strained sensibilities.\nWhitehead's early work sought to unify quaternions (due to Hamilton), Grassmann's Ausdehnungslehre, and Boole's algebra of logic. Whitehead wrote in his book:\n\"Such algebras have an intrinsic value for separate detailed study; also they are worthy of comparative study, for the sake of the light thereby thrown on the general theory of symbolic reasoning, and on algebraic symbolism in particular. The comparative study necessarily presupposes some previous separate study, comparison being impossible without knowledge.\"\nWhitehead, however, had no results of a general nature. Work on the subject was minimal until the early 1930s, when Garrett Birkhoff and \u00d8ystein Ore began publishing on universal algebras. Developments in metamathematics and category theory in the 1940s and 1950s furthered the field, particularly the work of Abraham Robinson, Alfred Tarski, Andrzej Mostowski, and their students.\nIn the period between 1935 and 1950, most papers were written along the lines suggested by Birkhoff's papers, dealing with free algebras, congruence and subalgebra lattices, and homomorphism theorems. Although the development of mathematical logic had made applications to algebra possible, they came about slowly; results published by Anatoly Maltsev in the 1940s went unnoticed because of the war. Tarski's lecture at the 1950 International Congress of Mathematicians in Cambridge ushered in a new period in which model-theoretic aspects were developed, mainly by Tarski himself, as well as Chen Chung Chang, Leon Henkin, Bjarni J\u00f3nsson, Roger Lyndon, and others.\nIn the late 1950s, Edward Marczewski emphasized the importance of free algebras, leading to the publication of more than 50 papers on the algebraic theory of free algebras by Marczewski himself, together with Jan Mycielski, W\u0142adys\u0142aw Narkiewicz, Witold Nitka, J. P\u0142onka, S. \u015awierczkowski, K. Urbanik, and others.\nStarting with William Lawvere's thesis in 1963, techniques from category theory have become important in universal algebra.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45201", "revid": "2952402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45201", "title": "Absolute scale of temperature", "text": ""}
{"id": "45202", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45202", "title": "Underwater telegraph cable", "text": ""}
{"id": "45203", "revid": "12277875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45203", "title": "371", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 371 (CCCLXXI) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Petronius (or, less frequently, year 1124 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 371 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45204", "revid": "12277875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45204", "title": "372", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 372 (CCCLXXII) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Modestus and Arintheus (or, less frequently, year 1125 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 372 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45206", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45206", "title": "Submarine communications cable", "text": "Transoceanic communication line placed on the seabed\nA submarine communications cable is a cable laid on the seabed between land-based stations to carry telecommunication signals across stretches of ocean and sea. The first submarine communications cables were laid beginning in the 1850s and carried telegraphy traffic, establishing the first instant telecommunications links between continents, such as the first transatlantic telegraph cable which became operational on 16 August 1858.\nSubmarine cables first connected all the world's continents (except Antarctica) when Java was connected to Darwin, Northern Territory, Australia, in 1871 in anticipation of the completion of the Australian Overland Telegraph Line in 1872 connecting to Adelaide, South Australia and thence to the rest of Australia.\nSubsequent generations of cables carried telephone traffic, then data communications traffic. These early cables used copper wires in their cores, but modern cables use optical fiber technology to carry digital data, which includes telephone, internet and private data traffic. Modern cables are typically about in diameter and weigh around for the deep-sea sections which comprise the majority of the run, although larger and heavier cables are used for shallow-water sections near shore.\nEarly history: telegraph and coaxial cables.\nFirst successful trials.\nAfter William Cooke and Charles Wheatstone had introduced their working telegraph in 1839, the idea of a submarine line across the Atlantic Ocean began to be thought of as a possible triumph of the future. Samuel Morse proclaimed his faith in it as early as 1840, and in 1842 he submerged a wire, insulated with tarred hemp and India rubber, in the water of New York Harbor, and telegraphed through it. The following autumn, Wheatstone performed a similar experiment in Swansea Bay. A good insulator to cover the wire and prevent the electric current from leaking into the water was necessary for the success of a long submarine line. India rubber had been tried by Moritz von Jacobi, the Prussian electrical engineer, as far back as the early 19th century.\nAnother insulating gum which could be melted by heat and readily applied to wire made its appearance in 1842. Gutta-percha, the adhesive juice of the \"Palaquium gutta\" tree, was introduced to Europe by William Montgomerie, a Scottish surgeon in the service of the British East India Company. Twenty years earlier, Montgomerie had seen whips made of gutta-percha in Singapore, and he believed that it would be useful in the fabrication of surgical apparatus. Michael Faraday and Wheatstone soon discovered the merits of gutta-percha as an insulator, and in 1845 the latter suggested that it should be employed to cover the wire which was proposed to be laid from Dover to Calais. In 1847 William Siemens, then an officer in the army of Prussia, laid the first successful underwater cable using gutta-percha insulation across the Rhine between Deutz and Cologne. In 1849 Charles Vincent Walker, electrician to the South Eastern Railway, submerged of wire coated with gutta-percha off the coast from Folkestone, which was tested successfully.\nFirst commercial cables.\nIn August 1850, having earlier obtained a concession from the French government, John Watkins Brett's English Channel Submarine Telegraph Company laid the first line across the English Channel using the converted tugboat \"Goliath\". It was simply a copper wire coated with gutta-percha, without any other protection, and was not successful. However, the experiment served to secure renewal of the concession, and in September 1851 a protected core, or true, cable was laid by the reconstituted Submarine Telegraph Company from a government hulk, \"Blazer\", which was towed across the Channel.\nIn 1853 more successful cables were laid, linking Great Britain with Ireland, Belgium, and the Netherlands, and crossing The Belts in Denmark. The British &amp; Irish Magnetic Telegraph Company completed the first successful Irish link on May 23 between Portpatrick and Donaghadee using the collier \"William Hutt\". The same ship was used for the link from Dover to Ostend in Belgium by the Submarine Telegraph Company. Meanwhile the Electric &amp; International Telegraph Company completed two cables across the North Sea from Orford Ness to Scheveningen, the Netherlands. These cables were laid by the \"Monarch\", a paddle steamer which later became the first vessel with permanent cable-laying equipment.\nIn 1858 the steamship \"Elba\" was used to lay a telegraph cable from Jersey to Guernsey, on to Alderney, and then to Weymouth, the cable being completed successfully in September of that year. Problems soon developed with eleven breaks occurring by 1860 due to storms, tidal and sand movements, and wear on rocks. A report to the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1860 set out the problems to assist in future cable-laying operations.\nCrimean War (1853\u20131856).\nIn the Crimean War various forms of telegraphy played a major role; this was a first. At the start of the campaign there was a telegraph link at Bucharest connected to London. In the winter of 1854 the French extended the telegraph link to the Black Sea coast. In April 1855 the British laid an underwater cable from Varna to the Crimean peninsula so that news of the Crimean War could reach London in a handful of hours.\nTransatlantic telegraph cable.\nThe first attempt at laying a transatlantic telegraph cable was promoted by Cyrus West Field, who persuaded British industrialists to fund and lay one in 1858. However, the technology of the day was not capable of supporting the project; it was plagued with problems from the outset and was in operation for only a month. Subsequent attempts in 1865 and 1866 with the world's largest steamship, the SS \"Great Eastern\", used a more advanced technology and produced the first successful transatlantic cable. \"Great Eastern\" later went on to lay the first cable to reach India from Aden, Yemen, in 1870.\nBritish dominance of early cable.\nFrom the 1850s until 1911, British submarine cable systems dominated the most important market, the North Atlantic Ocean. The British had both supply-side and demand-side advantages. In terms of supply, Britain had entrepreneurs willing to put forth enormous amounts of capital necessary to build, lay, and maintain these cables. In terms of demand, Britain's vast colonial empire led to business for the cable companies from news agencies, trading and shipping companies, and the British government. Many of Britain's colonies had significant populations of European settlers, making their news of interest to the general public in the home country.\nBritish officials believed that dependence on telegraph lines passing through non-British territory posed a security risk, as lines could be cut and messages interrupted during wartime. They sought the creation of a worldwide network within the empire, which became known as the All Red Line, and conversely prepared strategies for quickly interrupting enemy communications. Britain's very first action after declaring war on Germany in World War I was to have the cable ship \"Alert\" (not the CS \"Telconia\" as frequently reported) cut the five cables linking Germany with France, Spain, and the Azores, and through them, North America. Thereafter, the only way Germany could communicate was by wireless, and that meant that Room 40 could listen in.\nThe submarine cables were an economic benefit to trading companies because owners of ships could communicate with captains upon reaching their destinations and give directions as to where to pick up cargo next based on reported pricing and supply information. The British government had obvious uses for the cables in maintaining administrative communications with governors throughout its empire, as well as in engaging other nations diplomatically and communicating with its military units in wartime. The geographic location of British territory was also an advantage, as it included both Ireland on the east side of the Atlantic Ocean and Newfoundland in North America on the west side, making for the shortest route across the ocean and reducing costs significantly.\nA few facts put this dominance of the industry in perspective. In 1896 there were 30 cable-laying ships in the world, 24 of which were owned by British companies. In 1892 British companies owned and operated two-thirds of the world's cables, and by 1923 their share was still 42.7 percent. During World War I, Britain's telegraph communications were almost completely uninterrupted, while it was able to quickly cut Germany's cables worldwide.\nCable to India, Singapore, East Asia and Australia.\nThroughout the 1860s and 1870s, British cable expanded eastward into the Mediterranean Sea and the Indian Ocean. An 1863 cable to Bombay (now Mumbai), India, provided a crucial link to Saudi Arabia. At the behest of the British Government in 1870, Bombay was linked to London via submarine cable in a combined operation by four cable companies. In 1872 these four companies were combined to form the mammoth, globe-spanning Eastern Telegraph Company, owned by John Pender. A spin-off sister company became the Eastern Extension, China and Australasia Telegraph Company, commonly known simply as \"the Extension\". That same year, Australia was linked by cable to Bombay via Singapore and China, and by 1876 the cable linked the British Empire from London to New Zealand.\nSubmarine cables across the Pacific, 1902\u20131991.\nThe first trans-Pacific cables providing telegraph service were completed in 1902 and 1903, linking the US mainland to Hawaii in 1902 and Guam to the Philippines in 1903. Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Fiji were also linked in 1902 with the trans-Pacific segment of the All Red Line. Japan was connected into the system in 1906. Service beyond Midway Atoll was abandoned in 1941 due to World War II, but the remainder stayed in operation until 1951 when the FCC gave permission to cease operations.\nThe first trans-Pacific telephone cable was laid from Hawaii to Japan in 1964, with an extension from Guam to The Philippines. Also in 1964, the Commonwealth Pacific Cable System (COMPAC), with 80 telephone channel capacity, opened for traffic from Sydney to Vancouver, and in 1967, the South East Asia Commonwealth (SEACOM) system, with 160 telephone channel capacity, opened for traffic. This system used microwave radio from Sydney to Cairns (Queensland), cable running from Cairns to Madang (Papua New Guinea), Guam, Hong Kong, Kota Kinabalu (capital of Sabah, Malaysia), Singapore, then overland by microwave radio to Kuala Lumpur. In 1991, the North Pacific Cable system was the first regenerative system (i.e., with repeaters) to completely cross the Pacific from the US mainland to Japan. The US portion of NPC was manufactured in Portland, Oregon, from 1989 to 1991 at STC Submarine Systems, and later Alcatel Submarine Networks. The system was laid by Cable &amp; Wireless Marine on the \"CS Cable Venture\".\nConstruction, 19\u201320th century.\nTransatlantic cables of the 19th century consisted of an outer layer of iron and later steel wire, wrapping India rubber, wrapping gutta-percha, which surrounded a multi-stranded copper wire at the core. The portions closest to each shore landing had additional protective armour wires. Gutta-percha, a natural polymer similar to rubber, had nearly ideal properties for insulating submarine cables, with the exception of a rather high dielectric constant which made cable capacitance high. William Thomas Henley had developed a machine in 1837 for covering wires with silk or cotton thread that he developed into a wire wrapping capability for submarine cable with a factory in 1857 that became W.T. Henley's Telegraph Works Co., Ltd. The India Rubber, Gutta Percha and Telegraph Works Company, established by the Silver family and giving that name to a section of London, furnished cores to Henley's as well as eventually making and laying finished cable. In 1870 William Hooper established Hooper's Telegraph Works to manufacture his patented vulcanized rubber core, at first to furnish other makers of finished cable, that began to compete with the gutta-percha cores. The company later expanded into complete cable manufacture and cable laying, including the building of the first cable ship specifically designed to lay transatlantic cables.\nGutta-percha and rubber were not replaced as a cable insulation until polyethylene was introduced in the 1930s. Even then, the material was only available to the military and the first submarine cable using it was not laid until 1945 during World War II across the English Channel. In the 1920s, the American military experimented with rubber-insulated cables as an alternative to gutta-percha, since American interests controlled significant supplies of rubber but did not have easy access to gutta-percha manufacturers. The 1926 development by John T. Blake of deproteinized rubber improved the impermeability of cables to water.\nMany early cables suffered from attack by sea life. The insulation could be eaten, for instance, by species of \"Teredo\" (shipworm) and \"Xylophaga\". Hemp laid between the steel wire armouring gave pests a route to eat their way in. Damaged armouring, which was not uncommon, also provided an entrance. Cases of sharks biting cables and attacks by sawfish have been recorded. In one case in 1873, a whale damaged the Persian Gulf Cable between Karachi and Gwadar. The whale was apparently attempting to use the cable to clean off barnacles at a point where the cable descended over a steep drop. The unfortunate whale got its tail entangled in loops of cable and drowned. The cable repair ship \"Amber Witch\" was only able to winch up the cable with difficulty, weighed down as it was with the dead whale's body.\nBandwidth problems.\nEarly long-distance submarine telegraph cables exhibited formidable electrical problems. Unlike modern cables, the technology of the 19th century did not allow for in-line repeater amplifiers in the cable. Large voltages were used to attempt to overcome the electrical resistance of their tremendous length but the cables' distributed capacitance and inductance combined to distort the telegraph pulses in the line, reducing the cable's bandwidth, severely limiting the data rate for telegraph operation to 10\u201312 words per minute.\nAs early as 1816, Francis Ronalds had observed that electric signals were slowed in passing through an insulated wire or core laid underground, and outlined the cause to be induction, using the analogy of a long Leyden jar. The same effect was noticed by Latimer Clark (1853) on cores immersed in water, and particularly on the lengthy cable between England and The Hague. Michael Faraday showed that the effect was caused by capacitance between the wire and the earth (or water) surrounding it. Faraday had noticed that when a wire is charged from a battery (for example when pressing a telegraph key), the electric charge in the wire induces an opposite charge in the water as it travels along. In 1831, Faraday described this effect in what is now referred to as Faraday's law of induction. As the two charges attract each other, the exciting charge is retarded. The core acts as a capacitor distributed along the length of the cable which, coupled with the resistance and inductance of the cable, limits the speed at which a signal travels through the conductor of the cable.\nEarly cable designs failed to analyse these effects correctly. Famously, E.O.W. Whitehouse had dismissed the problems and insisted that a transatlantic cable was feasible. When he subsequently became chief electrician of the Atlantic Telegraph Company, he became involved in a public dispute with William Thomson. Whitehouse believed that, with enough voltage, any cable could be driven. Thomson believed that his law of squares showed that retardation could not be overcome by a higher voltage. His recommendation was a larger cable. Because of the excessive voltages recommended by Whitehouse, Cyrus West Field's first transatlantic cable never worked reliably, and eventually short circuited to the ocean when Whitehouse increased the voltage beyond the cable design limit.\nThomson designed a complex electric-field generator that minimized current by resonating the cable, and a sensitive light-beam mirror galvanometer for detecting the faint telegraph signals. Thomson became wealthy on the royalties of these, and several related inventions. Thomson was elevated to Lord Kelvin for his contributions in this area, chiefly an accurate mathematical model of the cable, which permitted design of the equipment for accurate telegraphy. The effects of atmospheric electricity and the geomagnetic field on submarine cables also motivated many of the early polar expeditions.\nThomson had produced a mathematical analysis of propagation of electrical signals into telegraph cables based on their capacitance and resistance, but since long submarine cables operated at slow rates, he did not include the effects of inductance. By the 1890s, Oliver Heaviside had produced the modern general form of the telegrapher's equations, which included the effects of inductance and which were essential to extending the theory of transmission lines to the higher frequencies required for high-speed data and voice.\nTransatlantic telephony.\nWhile laying a transatlantic telephone cable was seriously considered from the 1920s, the technology required for economically feasible telecommunications was not developed until the 1940s. A first attempt to lay a \"pupinized\" telephone cable\u2014one with loading coils added at regular intervals\u2014failed in the early 1930s due to the Great Depression.\nTAT-1 (Transatlantic No. 1) was the first transatlantic telephone cable system. Between 1955 and 1956, cable was laid between Gallanach Bay, near Oban, Scotland and Clarenville, Newfoundland and Labrador, in Canada. It was inaugurated on September 25, 1956, initially carrying 36 telephone channels.\nIn the 1960s, transoceanic cables were coaxial cables that transmitted frequency-multiplexed voiceband signals. A high-voltage direct current on the inner conductor powered repeaters (two-way amplifiers placed at intervals along the cable). The first-generation repeaters remain among the most reliable vacuum tube amplifiers ever designed. Later ones were transistorized. Many of these cables are still usable, but have been abandoned because their capacity is too small to be commercially viable. Some have been used as scientific instruments to measure earthquake waves and other geomagnetic events.\nOther uses.\nIn 1942, Siemens Brothers of New Charlton, London, in conjunction with the United Kingdom National Physical Laboratory, adapted submarine communications cable technology to create the world's first submarine oil pipeline in Operation Pluto during World War II.\nActive fiber-optic cables may be useful in detecting seismic events which alter cable polarization.\nModern history.\nOptical telecommunications cables.\nIn the 1980s, fiber-optic cables were developed. The first transatlantic telephone cable to use optical fiber was TAT-8, which went into operation in 1988. A fiber-optic cable comprises multiple pairs of fibers. Each pair has one fiber in each direction. TAT-8 had two operational pairs and one backup pair. Except for very short lines, fiber-optic submarine cables include repeaters at regular intervals.\nModern optical fiber repeaters use a solid-state optical amplifier, usually an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA). Each repeater contains separate equipment for each fiber. These comprise signal reforming, error measurement and controls. A solid-state laser dispatches the signal into the next length of fiber. The solid-state laser excites a short length of doped fiber that itself acts as a laser amplifier. As the light passes through the fiber, it is amplified. This system also permits wavelength-division multiplexing, which dramatically increases the capacity of the fiber. EDFA amplifiers were first used in submarine cables in 1995.\nRepeaters are powered by a constant direct current passed down the conductor near the centre of the cable, so all repeaters in a cable are in series. Power feed equipment (PFE) is installed at the terminal stations. Typically both ends share the current generation with one end providing a positive voltage and the other a negative voltage. A virtual earth point exists roughly halfway along the cable under normal operation. The amplifiers or repeaters derive their power from the potential difference across them. The voltage passed down the cable is often anywhere from 3000 to 15,000VDC at a current of up to 1,100mA, with the current increasing with decreasing voltage; the current at 10,000VDC is up to 1,650mA. Hence the total amount of power sent into the cable is often up to 16.5\u00a0kW.\nThe optic fiber used in undersea cables is chosen for its exceptional clarity, permitting runs of more than between repeaters to minimize the number of amplifiers and the distortion they cause. Unrepeated cables are cheaper than repeated cables, and their maximum transmission distance is limited. This transmission distance has increased over the years; in 2014 unrepeated cables of up to in length were in service; however these require unpowered repeaters to be positioned every 100\u00a0km.\nThe rising demand for these fiber-optic cables outpaced the capacity of providers such as AT&amp;T. Having to shift traffic to satellites resulted in lower-quality signals. To address this issue, AT&amp;T had to improve its cable-laying abilities. It invested $100\u00a0million in producing two specialized fiber-optic cable laying vessels. These included laboratories in the ships for splicing cable and testing its electrical properties. Such field monitoring is important because the glass of fiber-optic cable is less malleable than the copper cable that had been formerly used. The ships are equipped with thrusters that increase maneuverability. This capability is important because fiber-optic cable must be laid straight from the stern, which was another factor that copper-cable-laying ships did not have to contend with.\nOriginally, submarine cables were simple point-to-point connections. With the development of submarine branching units (SBUs), more than one destination could be served by a single cable system. Modern cable systems now usually have their fibers arranged in a self-healing ring to increase their redundancy, with the submarine sections following different paths on the ocean floor. One reason for this development was that the capacity of cable systems had become so large that it was not possible to completely back up a cable system with satellite capacity, so it became necessary to provide sufficient terrestrial backup capability. Not all telecommunications organizations wish to take advantage of this capability, so modern cable systems may have dual landing points in some countries (where back-up capability is required) and only single landing points in other countries where back-up capability is either not required, the capacity to the country is small enough to be backed up by other means, or having backup is regarded as too expensive.\nA further redundant-path development over and above the self-healing rings approach is the mesh network whereby fast switching equipment is used to transfer services between network paths with little to no effect on higher-level protocols if a path becomes inoperable. As more paths become available to use between two points, it is less likely that one or two simultaneous failures will prevent end-to-end service.\nAs of 2012, operators had \"successfully demonstrated long-term, error-free transmission at 100\u00a0Gbps across Atlantic Ocean\" routes of up to , meaning a typical cable can move tens of terabits per second overseas. Speeds improved rapidly in the previous few years, with 40\u00a0Gbit/s having been offered on that route only three years earlier in August 2009.\nSwitching and all-by-sea routing commonly increases the distance and thus the round trip latency by more than 50%. For example, the round trip delay (RTD) or latency of the fastest transatlantic connections is under 60\u00a0ms, close to the theoretical optimum for an all-sea route. While in theory, a great circle route (GCP) between London and New York City is only , this requires several land masses (Ireland, Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island and the isthmus connecting New Brunswick to Nova Scotia) to be traversed, as well as the extremely tidal Bay of Fundy and a land route along Massachusetts' north shore from Gloucester to Boston and through fairly built up areas to Manhattan itself. In theory, using this partial land route could result in round trip times below 40\u00a0ms (which is the speed of light minimum time), and not counting switching. Along routes with less land in the way, round trip times can approach speed of light minimums in the long term.\nThe type of optical fiber used in unrepeated and very long cables is often PCSF (pure silica core) due to its low loss of 0.172dB per kilometer when carrying a 1550\u00a0nm wavelength laser light. The large chromatic dispersion of PCSF means that its use requires transmission and receiving equipment designed with this in mind; this property can also be used to reduce interference when transmitting multiple channels through a single fiber using wavelength division multiplexing (WDM), which allows for multiple optical carrier channels to be transmitted through a single fiber, each carrying its own information. WDM is limited by the optical bandwidth of the amplifiers used to transmit data through the cable and by the spacing between the frequencies of the optical carriers; however this minimum spacing is also limited, with the minimum spacing often being 50\u00a0GHz (0.4\u00a0nm). The use of WDM can reduce the maximum length of the cable although this can be overcome by designing equipment with this in mind.\nOptical post amplifiers, used to increase the strength of the signal generated by the optical transmitter often use a diode-pumped erbium-doped fiber laser. The diode is often a high power 980 or 1480\u00a0nm laser diode. This setup allows for an amplification of up to +24dBm in an affordable manner. Using an erbium-ytterbium doped fiber instead allows for a gain of +33dBm, however again the amount of power that can be fed into the fiber is limited. In single carrier configurations the dominating limitation is self phase modulation induced by the Kerr effect which limits the amplification to +18 dBm per fiber. In WDM configurations the limitation due to crossphase modulation becomes predominant instead. Optical pre-amplifiers are often used to negate the thermal noise of the receiver. Pumping the pre-amplifier with a 980\u00a0nm laser leads to a noise of at most 3.5\u00a0dB, with a noise of 5\u00a0dB usually obtained with a 1480\u00a0nm laser. The noise has to be filtered using optical filters.\nRaman amplification can be used to extend the reach or the capacity of an unrepeatered cable, by launching 2 frequencies into a single fiber; one carrying data signals at 1550\u00a0nm, and the other pumping them at 1450\u00a0nm. Launching a pump frequency (pump laser light) at a power of just one watt leads to an increase in reach of 45\u00a0km or a 6-fold increase in capacity.\nAnother way to increase the reach of a cable is by using unpowered repeaters called remote optical pre-amplifiers (ROPAs); these still make a cable count as unrepeatered since the repeaters do not require electrical power but they do require a pump laser light to be transmitted alongside the data carried by the cable; the pump light and the data are often transmitted in physically separate fibers. The ROPA contains a doped fiber that uses the pump light (often a 1480\u00a0nm laser light) to amplify the data signals carried on the rest of the fibers.\nWDM or wavelength division multiplexing was first implemented in submarine fiber optic cables from the 1990s to the 2000s, followed by DWDM or dense wavelength division mulltiplexing around 2007. Each fiber can carry 30 wavelengths at a time. SDM or spatial division multiplexing submarine cables have at least 12 fiber pairs which is an increase from the maximum of 8 pairs found in conventional submarine cables, and submarine cables with up to 24 fiber pairs have been deployed. The type of modulation employed in a submarine cable can have a major impact in its capacity. SDM is combined with DWDM to improve capacity.\nTransponders are used to send data through the cable. The open cable concept allows for the design of a submarine cable independently of the transponders that will be used to transmit data through the cable. SLTE (Submarine Line Terminal Equipment) has transponders and a ROADM (Reconfigurable optical add-drop multiplexer) used for handling the signals in the cable via software control. The ROADM is used to improve the reliability of the cable by allowing it to operate even if it has faults. This equipment is located inside a cable landing station (CLS). C-OTDR (Coherent Optical Time Domain Reflectometry) is used in submarine cables to detect the location of cable faults. The wet plant of a submarine cable comprises the cable itself, branching units, repeaters and possibly OADMs (Optical add-drop multiplexers). The SLTE is usually installed in a data center and it may be possible to purchase capacity in a cable for connecting to other points of the cable, connecting the internet, for example at the NAP of the Americas which connects many Latin American ISPs with networks in the US.\nInvestment and finances.\nA typical multi-terabit, transoceanic submarine cable system costs several hundred million dollars to construct. Almost all fiber-optic cables from TAT-8 in 1988 until approximately 1997 were constructed by consortia of operators. For example, TAT-8 counted 35 participants including most major international carriers at the time such as AT&amp;T Corporation. Two privately financed, non-consortium cables were constructed in the late 1990s, which preceded a massive, speculative rush to construct privately financed cables that peaked in more than $22\u00a0billion worth of investment between 1999 and 2001. This was followed by the bankruptcy and reorganization of cable operators such as Global Crossing, 360networks, FLAG, Worldcom, and Asia Global Crossing. Tata Communications' Global Network (TGN) is the only wholly owned fiber network circling the planet.\nSome governments have invested in cables. For example, Tonga-Fiji Submarine Cable System is owned and operated by Tonga Cable Limited, which developed and manages the cable with financing support from the Asian Development Bank and World Bank. Tonga Cable Limited is a public enterprise 80% owned by the government. In China, three state-owned companies in China\u2014China Mobile, China Telecom, and China Unicom\u2014invested in undersea cables. In the United States, the U.S. Navy owns over 40,000 nautical miles of various subsea cables.\nMost cables in the 20th century crossed the Atlantic Ocean, to connect the United States and Europe. However, capacity in the Pacific Ocean was much expanded starting in the 1990s. For example, between 1998 and 2003, approximately 70% of undersea fiber-optic cable was laid in the Pacific. This is in part a response to the emerging significance of Asian markets in the global economy.\nAfter decades of heavy investment in already developed markets such as the transatlantic and transpacific routes, efforts increased in the 21st century to expand the submarine cable network to serve the Developing World. For instance, in July 2009, an underwater fiber-optic cable line plugged East Africa into the broader Internet. The company that provided this new cable was SEACOM, which is 75% owned by East African and South African investors. The project was delayed by a month due to increased piracy along the coast.\nInvestments in cables present a commercial risk because cables cover 6,200 km of ocean floor, cross submarine mountain ranges and rifts. Because of this most companies only purchase capacity after the cable is finished.\nAntarctica.\nAntarctica is the only continent not yet reached by a submarine telecommunications cable. Phone, video, and e-mail traffic must be relayed to the rest of the world via satellite links that have limited availability and capacity. Bases on the continent itself are able to communicate with one another via radio, but this is only a local network. To be a viable alternative, a fiber-optic cable would have to be able to withstand temperatures of as well as massive strain from ice flowing up to per year. Thus, plugging into the larger Internet backbone with the high bandwidth afforded by fiber-optic cable is still an as-yet infeasible economic and technical challenge in the Antarctic.\nArctic.\nThe climate change induced melting of Arctic ice has provided the opportunity to lay new cable networks, linking continents and remote regions. Several projects are underway in the Arctic including 12,650 km \"Polar Express\" and 14,500 km Far North Fiber. However, scholars have raised environmental concerns about the laying of submarine cables in the region and the general lack of a nuanced regulatory framework. Environmental concerns pertain both to ice-related hazards damaging the cables, and cable installation disturbing the seabed or electromagnetic fields and thermal radiation of the cables impacting sensitive organisms.\nImportance of submarine cables.\nSubmarine cables, while often perceived as \u2018insignificant\u2019 parts of communication infrastructure as they lay \"hidden\" in the seabed, are an essential infrastructure in the digital era, carrying 99% of the data traffic across the oceans. This data includes all internet traffic, military transmissions, and financial transactions.\nThe total carrying capacity of a submarine cable is in the terabits per second, while a satellite typically offers only 1 gigabit per second, a ratio of more than 1000 to 1. Satellites handle less than 5% \u2013 to an estimate of even 0.5% \u2013 of global data transmission, and are less efficient, slower, and more expensive. Therefore, satellites are often exclusively considered for remote areas with challenging conditions for laying submarine cables. Submarine cables are thus the essential technical infrastructure for all internet communication.\nNational security.\nAs a result of these cables' cost and usefulness, they are highly valued not only by the corporations building and operating them for profit, but also by national governments. For instance, the Australian government considers its submarine cable systems to be \"vital to the national economy\". Accordingly, the Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) has created protection zones that restrict activities that could potentially damage cables linking Australia to the rest of the world. The ACMA also regulates all projects to install new submarine cables.\nDue to their critical role, disruptions to these cables can lead to communication blackouts and, thus, extensive economic losses. The impact of such disruptions is often exemplified by the 2022 Tonga volcanic eruption that severed the island's only submarine cable and thus connectivity to the rest of the world for several days. The cable break was declared a \u201cnational crisis,\u201d and repairs took several weeks, leaving Tonga largely isolated during a crucial period for disaster response.\nSubmarine cable infrastructure may even have additional technical advantages, such as carrying SMART environmental sensors supporting national disaster early warning systems. Furthermore, the cables are predicted to become even more critical with growing demands from 5G networks, the \u2018Internet of things\u2019 (IoT), and artificial intelligence on large data transfers.\nInternational security.\nSubmarine communication cables are a critical infrastructure within the context of international security. Transmitting massive amounts of sensitive data every day, they are essential for both state operations and private enterprises. One of the catalysts for the amount and sensitivity of data flowing through these cables has been the global rise of cloud computing.\nThe\u202fU.S military, for example, uses the submarine cable network for data transfer from conflict zones to command staff in the United States (U.S.). Interruption of the cable network during intense operations could have direct consequences for the military on the ground.\nThe criticality of cable services makes their geopolitical influence profound. Scholars argue that state dominance in cable networks can exert political pressure, or shape global internet governance.\nAn example of such state dominance in the global cable infrastructure is China's \u2018Digital Silk Road\u2019 strategy funding the expansion of Chinese cable networks, with the Chinese company HMN Technologies often criticised for providing networks for other states, holding up to 10% of the global market share. Some critiques argue that Chinese investments in critical cable infrastructure, being involvement in approximately 25% of global submarine cables, such as the\u00a0PEACE Cable linking Eastafrica and Europe, may enable China to reroute data traffic through its own networks, and thus apply political pressure. The strategy is countered by the U.S., supporting alternative projects.\nVulnerabilities of submarine cables.\nSubmarine cables are exposed to a variety of potential threats. Many of these threats are accidental, such as by fishing trawlers, ship anchors, earthquakes,\u202fturbidity currents, and even shark bites.\nBased on surveying breaks in the Atlantic Ocean and the Caribbean Sea, it was found that between 1959 and 1996, fewer than 9% were due to natural events. In response to this threat to the communications network, the practice of cable burial has developed. The average incidence of cable faults was 3.7 per per year from 1959 to 1979. That rate was reduced to 0.44 faults per 1,000 km per year after 1985, due to widespread burial of cable starting in 1980.\nStill, cable breaks are by no means a thing of the past, with more than 50 repairs a year in the Atlantic Ocean alone, and significant breaks in 2006, 2008, 2009 and 2011.\nSeveral vulnerabilities of submarine communication cables make them attractive targets for organized crime. The following section explores these vulnerabilities and currently proposed counter measures to organized crime from different perspectives.\nTechnical perspective.\nTechnical vulnerabilities.\nThe remoteness of these cables in international waters, poses significant challenges for continuous monitoring and increases their attractiveness as targets of physical tampering, data theft, and service disruptions.\nThe cables' vulnerability is further compounded by technological advancements, such as the development of unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs), which enable covert cable damage while avoiding detection. However, even low-tech attacks can impact the cable's security significantly, as demonstrated in 2013, when three divers were arrested for severing the main cable linking Egypt with Europe, drastically lowering Egypt's internet speed. \nEven in shallow waters, cables remain exposed to risks, as illustrated in the context of the Korea Strait. Such sea passages are often marked as \u2018maritime choke points\u2019 where several nations have conflicting interests, increasing the risk of harm from shipping activities and disputes.\nFurther, most cable locations are publicly available, making them an easy target for criminal acts such as disrupting services or stealing cable materials, which potentially lead to substantial communication blackouts. The stealing of submarine cable has been reported in Vietnam, where more than 11 km of cables went missing in 2007 and were later presumed to be found on fishing boats, attributed to their incentives to sell them, according to media reports.\nTechnical countermeasures.\nTypically, cables are buried in waters with a depth of less than 2,000 meters, but increasingly, they are buried in deeper seabed as a means of protection against high seas fishing and bottom trawling. However, this may also be advantageous against physical attacks from organized crime.\nFurther technical solutions are advanced protective casings, and monitoring them with, e.g., UUVs. Such technical solutions, however, can be challenging to implement and are limited in the remote areas of the high sea. Other proposed solutions include spatial modelling through protective or safety zones and penalties, increasing resources for surveillance, and a more collaborative approach between states and the private sector. However, how to implement and enforce these solutions remains to be determined. The cables' remoteness thus complicates both physical attacks and their protection.\nCable repair.\nShore stations can locate a break in a cable by electrical measurements, such as through spread-spectrum time-domain reflectometry (SSTDR), a type of time-domain reflectometry that can be used in live environments very quickly. Presently, SSTDR can collect a complete data set in 20ms. Spread spectrum signals are sent down the wire and then the reflected signal is observed. It is then correlated with the copy of the sent signal and algorithms are applied to the shape and timing of the signals to locate the break.\nA cable repair ship will be sent to the location to drop a marker buoy near the break. Several types of grapples are used depending on the situation. If the sea bed in question is sandy, a grapple with rigid prongs is used to plough under the surface and catch the cable. If the cable is on a rocky sea surface, the grapple is more flexible, with hooks along its length so that it can adjust to the changing surface. In especially deep water, the cable may not be strong enough to lift as a single unit, so a special grapple that cuts the cable soon after it has been hooked is used and only one length of cable is brought to the surface at a time, whereupon a new section is spliced in. The repaired cable is longer than the original, so the excess is deliberately laid in a \"U\" shape on the seabed. A submersible can be used to repair cables that lie in shallower waters.\nA number of ports near important cable routes became homes to specialized cable repair ships. Halifax, Nova Scotia, was home to a half dozen such vessels for most of the 20th century including long-lived vessels such as the CS \"Cyrus West Field\", CS \"Minia\" and \"CS Mackay-Bennett\". The latter two were contracted to recover victims from the sinking of the RMS \"Titanic\". The crews of these vessels developed many new techniques and devices to repair and improve cable laying, such as the \"plough\".\nCybersecurity perspective.\nCyber vulnerabilities.\nIncreasingly, sophisticated cyber-attacks threaten the data traffic on the cables, with incentives ranging from financial gain, espionage, or extortion by either state actors or non-state actors. Further, hybrid warfare tactics can interfere with or even weaponize the data transferred by the cables. For example, low-intensity cyber-attacks can be employed for ransomware, data manipulation and theft, opening up new a new opportunity for the use of cybercrime and grey-zone tactics in interstate disputes.\nThe lack of binding international cybersecurity standards may create a gap in dealing with cyber-enabled sabotage, that can be used by organized crime. However, attributing an incident to a specific actor or motivation of such actor can be challenging, specifically in cyberspace.\nCyber espionage and Intelligence-gathering.\nThe rising sophistication of cyberattacks underscores the vulnerability of submarine cables to cyberespionage, ultimately complicating their security. Techniques like cable tapping, hacking into network management systems, and targeting cable landing stations enable covert data access by intelligence agencies, with Russia, the U.S., and the United Kingdom (U.K.) noted as primary players.\nThese activities are driven by both strategic and economic motives, with advancements in technology making interception and data manipulation more effective and difficult to detect. Recent technological advancements increasing the vulnerability include the use of remote access portals and remote network management systems centralizing control over components, enabling attackers to monitor traffic and potentially disrupt data flows.\nIntelligence-gathering techniques have been deployed since the late 19th century. Frequently at the beginning of wars, nations have cut the cables of the other sides to redirect the information flow into cables that were being monitored. The most ambitious efforts occurred in\u202fWorld War I, when British and German forces systematically attempted to destroy the others' worldwide communications systems by cutting their cables with surface ships or submarines.\nDuring the\u202fCold War, the\u202fUnited States Navy\u202fand\u202fNational Security Agency\u202f(NSA) succeeded in placing wire taps on Soviet underwater communication lines in\u202fOperation Ivy Bells.\nThese historical intelligence-gathering techniques were eventually countered with technological advancements like the widespread use of\u202fend-to-end encryption minimizing the threat of wire tapping.\nCybersecurity countermeasures.\nCybersecurity strategies for submarine cables, such as encryption, access controls, and continuous monitoring, primarily focus on preventing unauthorized data access but do not adequately address the physical protection of cables in vulnerable, remote, high-sea areas as stated above. \nAs a result, while cybersecurity protocols are effective near coastal landing points, their enforcement across vast stretches of the open ocean becomes a challenge. To address these limitations, experts suggest a broader, multi-layered approach that integrates physical security measures with international cooperation and legal frameworks, especially given the jurisdictional ambiguities in international waters. \nMultilateral agreements to establish cybersecurity standards specific to submarine cables are highlighted as critical. These agreements can help bridge the jurisdictional ambiguities and often resulting enforcement gaps in international waters, which ultimately hinder effective protection and are frequently exploited by organized crime.\nSome scholars advocate for heightened European Union (E.U.) coordination, recommending improvements in surveillance and response capabilities across various agencies, such as the Coast guard and specific telecommunication regulators. Given the central role of private companies in cable ownership, some experts also underscore the need for stronger collaboration between governments and tech firms to pool resources and develop more innovative security measures tailored to this critical infrastructure.\nGeopolitical perspective.\nGeopolitical vulnerabilities.\nFishing vessels are the leading cause of accidental damage to submarine communication cables. However, some of the academic discussions and recent incidents point to geopolitical tactics influencing the cable's security more than previously expected. These tactics include the ease and potential with which fishing vessels can blend into regular maritime traffic and implement their attacks.\nThe propensity for fishing trawler nets to cause cable faults may well have been exploited during the\u202fCold War. For example, in February 1959, a series of 12 breaks occurred in five American trans-Atlantic communications cables. In response, a U.S. naval vessel, the\u202fUSS\u202f\"Roy O. Hale\", detained and investigated the Soviet trawler\u202f\"Novorosiysk\". A review of the ship's log indicated it had been in the region of each of the cables when they broke. Broken sections of cable were also found on the deck of the\u202f\"Novorosiysk\". It appeared that the cables had been dragged along by the ship's nets, and then cut once they were pulled up onto the deck to release the nets. The Soviet Union's stance on the investigation was that it was unjustified, but the U.S. cited the\u202fConvention for the Protection of Submarine Telegraph Cables\u202fof 1884 to which Russia had signed (prior to the formation of the Soviet Union) as evidence of violation of international protocol.\nSeveral media outlets and organizations indicate that Russian fishing vessels, particularly in 2022, passed over a damaged submarine cable up to 20 times, suggesting potential political motives and the possibility of hybrid warfare tactics used from Russia's side. Russian naval activities near submarine cables are often linked to increased hybrid warfare strategies targeting submarine cables, where sabotage is argued to serve as a tool to disrupt communication networks during conflict and destabilise adversaries. \nThese tactics elevate cable security to a significant geopolitical issue. Criminal actors may further target cables as a means of economic warfare, aiming to destabilize economies or convey political messages. The disruption of submarine communication cables in highly politicised maritime areas thus has a significant political component that is receiving increased attention.\nAfter two cable breaks in the Baltic Sea in November 2024, one between Lithuania and Sweden and the other between Finland and Germany, Defence Minister Boris Pistorius argued: \n\"\u201cNo one believes that these cables were cut accidentally. I also don't want to believe in versions that these were ship anchors that accidentally caused the damage. Therefore, we have to state, without knowing specifically who it came from, that it is a 'hybrid' action. And we also have to assume, without knowing it yet, that it is sabotage.\"\" \u00a0\nThis statement underlines the current discourse to recognize cable disruptions as threats to national security, which ultimately leads to their securitization in the international context.\nGeopolitical risks and countermeasures.\nSubmarine cables are inherently vulnerable to transnational threats like organized crime. International collaboration to address these threats tends to fall to existing organizations with a cable specific focus \u2013 such as the International Cable Protection Committee (ICPC) \u2013 which represent key submarine stakeholders, and play a vital role in promoting cooperation and information sharing among stakeholders. Such organizations are argued to be crucial to develop and implement a comprehensive and coordinated global strategy for cable security.\nAs of 2025, a tense U.S.-China relationship complicates this task especially in the South China Sea where there are territorial disputes. China has increasing control and influence over global cables networks, while both it and the USA financially supports allied-owned cable projects and exerts diplomatic pressure and regulatory action, e.g. against Vietnam. \nIn light of Nord Stream pipelines sabotage in the Baltic Sea, where subsea infrastructure vital to Germany and Russia was physically destroyed, and other incidents there, NATO has increased patrols and monitoring operations.\nLegal perspective.\nLegal vulnerabilities.\nSubmarine cables are internationally regulated within the framework of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), in particular through the provisions of Articles 112 and 97, 112 and 115, which mandate operational freedom to lay cables in international waters and beyond the continental shelf and reward measures to protect against shipping accidents.\nHowever, submarine cables face significant legal challenges and lack specific legal protection in UNCLOS and enforcement mechanisms against emerging threats, particular in international waters. This is further complicated by the non-ratification of the treaty by key states such as the U.S. and Turkey. Many countries lack explicit legal provisions to criminalize the destruction or theft of undersea cables, creating jurisdictional ambiguities that organized crime can exploit. Other legal frameworks, such as the 1884 Convention for the Protection of Submarine Telegraph Cables are outdated and fail to address modern threats like cyberattacks and hybrid warfare tactics. The unclear jurisdiction and weak enforcement mechanisms, demonstrate the difficulty to protect submarine cables from organized crime.\nThe Arctic Ocean in particular exemplifies the challenges associated with surveillance and enforcement in vast and remote areas, leaving a legal vacuum that criminals may exploit. In the Arctic, the absence of a central international authority to oversee submarine cable protection and the reliance on military organizations like NATO hinders general coordinated global responses.\nOrganizations such as the ICPC thus highlight the need for updated and more comprehensive legal frameworks to ensure the security of submarine cables.\nLegal countermeasures.\nThe legal challenges of protecting submarine cables from organized crime have resulted in recommendations ranging from treaty amendments to domestic law reforms and multi-level governance models.\nSome scholars argue that UNCLOS should be updated to protect cables extensively, including cooperative monitoring and enforcement protocols. Additionally, principles from the law of the sea, state responsibility, and the laws on the use of force could be creatively applied to strengthen protections for cables. Enforcement issues could be tackled by aligning domestic laws with UNCLOS, implementing national response protocols, and creating streamlined points of contact for cable incidents. Given the increased involvement of organizations like NATO, others recommend to clarify the roles of military and non-military actors in cable security and enhanced multi-level governance models.\nWhile these proposed legal solutions seem promising, their practical implementation still remains a challenge due to the complexity of international treaties, the need for international cooperation, the lack of domestic criminalization of cable damage, and the evolving nature of technological threats. Additionally, while UNCLOS's ambiguous jurisdiction in international waters hinders effective enforcement, limited political interests seems to hamper treaty development.\nEnvironmental impact.\nThe presence of cables in the oceans can be a danger to marine life. With the proliferation of cable installations and the increasing demand for inter-connectivity that today's society demands, the environmental impact is increasing.\nSubmarine cables can impact marine life in a number of ways.\nAlteration of the seabed.\nSeabed ecosystems can be disturbed by the installation and maintenance of cables. The effects of cable installation are generally limited to specific areas. The intensity of disturbance depends on the installation method.\nCables are often laid in the so-called benthic zone of the seabed. The benthic zone is the ecological region at the bottom of the sea where benthos, clams and crabs live, and where the surface sediments, which are deposits of matter and particles in the water that provide a habitat for marine species, are located.\nSediment can be damaged by cable installation by trenching with water jets or ploughing. This can lead to reworking of the sediments, altering the substrate of which they are composed.\nAccording to several studies, the biota of the benthic zone is only slightly affected by the presence of cables. However, the presence of cables can trigger behavioral disturbances in living organisms. The main observation is that the presence of cables provides a hard substrate for anemones attachment. These organisms are found in large number around cables that run through soft sediments, which are not normally suitable for these organisms. This is also the case for flatfish. Although little observed, the presence of cables can also change the water temperature and therefore disturb the surrounding natural habitat.\nHowever, these disturbances are not very persistent over time, and can stabilize within a few days. Cable operators are trying to implement measures to route cables in such a way as to avoid areas with sensitive and vulnerable ecosystems.\nEntanglement.\nEntanglement of marine animals in cables is one of the main causes of cable damage. Whales and sperm whales are the main animals that entangle themselves in cables and damage them. The encounter between these animals and cables can cause injury and sometimes death. Studies carried out between 1877 and 1955 reported 16 cable ruptures caused by whale entanglement, 13 of them by sperm whales. Between 1907 and 2006, 39 such events were recorded. Cable burial techniques are gradually being introduced to prevent such incidents.\nThe risk of fishing.\nAlthough submarine cables are located on the seabed, fishing activity can damage the cables. Fishermen using fishing techniques that involve scraping the seabed, or dragging equipment such as trawls or cages, can damage the cables, resulting in the loss of liquids and the chemical and toxic materials that make up the cables.\nAreas with a high density of submarine cables have the advantage of being safer from fishing. At the expense of benthic and sedimentary zones, marine fauna is better protected in these maritime regions, thanks to limitations and bans. Studies have shown a positive effect on the fauna surrounding cable installation zones.\nPollution.\nSubmarine cables are made of copper or optical fibers, surrounded by several protective layers of plastic, wire or synthetic materials. Cables can also be composed of dielectric fluids or hydrocarbon fluids, which act as electrical insulators. These substances can be harmful to marine life.\nFishing, aging cables and marine species that collide with or become entangled in cables can damage cables and spread toxic and harmful substances into the sea. However, the impact of submarine cables is limited compared with other sources of ocean pollution.\nThere is also a risk of releasing pollutants buried in sediments. When sediments are re-suspended due to the installation of cables, toxic substances such as hydrocarbons may be released.\nPreliminary analyses can assess the level of sediment toxicity and select a cable route that avoids the remobilization and dispersion of sediment pollutants. And new, more modern techniques will make it possible to use less polluting materials for cable construction.\nSound waves and electromagnetic waves.\nThe installation and maintenance of cables requires the use of machinery and equipment that can trigger sound waves or electromagnetic waves that can disturb animals that use waves to find their bearings in space or to communicate. Underwater sound waves depend on the equipment used, the characteristics of the seabed area where the cables are located, and the relief of the area.\nUnderwater noise and waves can modify the behavior of certain underwater species, such as migratory behavior, disrupting communication or reproduction. Available information is that underwater noise generated by submarine cable engineering operations has limited acoustic footprint and limited duration.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45207", "revid": "589223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45207", "title": "Communications satellite", "text": "Artificial satellite that relays radio signals\nA communications satellite is an artificial satellite that relays and amplifies radio telecommunication signals via a transponder; it creates a communication channel between a source transmitter and a receiver at different locations on Earth. Communications satellites are used for television, telephone, radio, internet, and military applications. Some communications satellites are in geostationary orbit above the equator, so that the satellite appears stationary at the same point in the sky; therefore the satellite dish antennas of ground stations can be aimed permanently at that spot and do not have to move to track the satellite. But most form satellite constellations in low Earth orbit, where antennas on the ground have to follow the position of the satellites and switch between satellites frequently.\nThe radio waves used for telecommunications links travel by line of sight and so are obstructed by the curve of the Earth. The purpose of communications satellites is to relay the signal around the curve of the Earth allowing communication between widely separated geographical points. Communications satellites use a wide range of radio and microwave frequencies. To avoid signal interference, international organizations have regulations for which frequency ranges or \"bands\" certain organizations are allowed to use. This allocation of bands minimizes the risk of signal interference.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nIn October 1945, Arthur C. Clarke published an article titled \"Extraterrestrial Relays\" in the British magazine \"Wireless World\". The article described the fundamentals behind the deployment of artificial satellites in geostationary orbits to relay radio signals. Because of this, Arthur C. Clarke is often quoted as being the inventor of the concept of the communications satellite, and the term 'Clarke Belt' is employed as a description of the orbit.\nThe first artificial Earth satellite was Sputnik 1, which was put into orbit by the Soviet Union on 4 October 1957. It was developed by Mikhail Tikhonravov and Sergey Korolev, building on work by Konstantin Tsiolkovsky. Sputnik 1 was equipped with an on-board radio transmitter that worked on two frequencies of 20.005 and 40.002\u00a0MHz, or 7 and 15 meters wavelength. The satellite was not placed in orbit to send data from one point on Earth to another, but the radio transmitter was meant to study the properties of radio wave distribution throughout the ionosphere. The launch of Sputnik 1 was a major step in the exploration of space and rocket development, and marks the beginning of the Space Age.\nEarly active and passive satellite experiments.\nThere are two major classes of communications satellites, \"passive\" and \"active\". Passive satellites only reflect the signal coming from the source, toward the direction of the receiver. With passive satellites, the reflected signal is not amplified at the satellite, and only a small amount of the transmitted energy actually reaches the receiver. Since the satellite is so far above Earth, the radio signal is attenuated due to free-space path loss, so the signal received on Earth is very weak. Active satellites, on the other hand, amplify the received signal before retransmitting it to the receiver on the ground. Passive satellites were the first communications satellites, but are little used now.\nWork that was begun in the field of electrical intelligence gathering at the United States Naval Research Laboratory in 1951 led to a project named Communication Moon Relay. Military planners had long shown considerable interest in secure and reliable communications lines as a tactical necessity, and the ultimate goal of this project was the creation of the longest communications circuit in human history, with the Moon, Earth's natural satellite, acting as a passive relay. After achieving the first transoceanic communication between Washington, D.C., and Hawaii on 23 January 1956, this system was publicly inaugurated and put into formal production in January 1960.\nThe first satellite purpose-built to actively relay communications was Project SCORE, led by Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) and launched on 18 December 1958, which used a tape recorder to carry a stored voice message, as well as to receive, store, and retransmit messages. It was used to send a Christmas greeting to the world from U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower. The satellite also executed several realtime transmissions before the non-rechargeable batteries failed on 30 December 1958 after eight hours of actual operation.\nThe direct successor to SCORE was another ARPA-led project called Courier. Courier 1B was launched on 4 October 1960 to explore whether it would be possible to establish a global military communications network by using \"delayed repeater\" satellites, which receive and store information until commanded to rebroadcast them. After 17 days, a command system failure ended communications from the satellite.\nNASA's satellite applications program launched the first artificial satellite used for passive relay communications in Echo 1 on 12 August 1960. Echo 1 was an aluminized balloon satellite acting as a passive reflector of microwave signals. Communication signals were bounced off the satellite from one point on Earth to another. This experiment sought to establish the feasibility of worldwide broadcasts of telephone, radio, and television signals.\nMore firsts and further experiments.\nTelstar was the first active, direct relay communications commercial satellite and marked the first transatlantic transmission of television signals. Belonging to AT&amp;T as part of a multi-national agreement between AT&amp;T, Bell Telephone Laboratories, NASA, the British General Post Office, and the French National PTT (Post Office) to develop satellite communications, it was launched by NASA from Cape Canaveral on 10 July 1962, in the first privately sponsored space launch.\nAnother passive relay experiment primarily intended for military communications purposes was Project West Ford, which was led by Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Lincoln Laboratory. After an initial failure in 1961, a launch on 9 May 1963 dispersed 350 million copper needle dipoles to create a passive reflecting belt. Even though only about half of the dipoles properly separated from each other, the project was able to successfully experiment and communicate using frequencies in the SHF X band spectrum.\nAn immediate antecedent of the geostationary satellites was the Hughes Aircraft Company's Syncom 2, launched on 26 July 1963. Syncom 2 was the first communications satellite in a geosynchronous orbit. It revolved around the Earth once per day at constant speed, but because it still had north\u2013south motion, special equipment was needed to track it. Its successor, Syncom 3, launched on 19 July 1964, was the first geostationary communications satellite. Syncom 3 obtained a geosynchronous orbit, without a north\u2013south motion, making it appear from the ground as a stationary object in the sky.\nA direct extension of the passive experiments of Project West Ford was the Lincoln Experimental Satellite program, also conducted by the Lincoln Laboratory on behalf of the United States Department of Defense. The LES-1 active communications satellite was launched on 11 February 1965 to explore the feasibility of active solid-state X band long-range military communications. A total of nine satellites were launched between 1965 and 1976 as part of this series.\nInternational commercial satellite projects.\nIn the United States, 1962 saw the creation of the Communications Satellite Corporation (COMSAT) private corporation, which was subject to instruction by the US Government on matters of national policy. Over the next two years, international negotiations led to the Intelsat Agreements, which in turn led to the launch of Intelsat 1, also known as Early Bird, on 6 April 1965, and which was the first commercial communications satellite to be placed in geosynchronous orbit. Subsequent Intelsat launches in the 1960s provided multi-destination service and video, audio, and data service to ships at sea (Intelsat 2 in 1966\u201367), and the completion of a fully global network with Intelsat 3 in 1969\u201370. By the 1980s, with significant expansions in commercial satellite capacity, Intelsat was on its way to become part of the competitive private telecommunications industry, and had started to get competition from the likes of PanAmSat in the United States, which, ironically, was then bought by its archrival in 2005.\nWhen Intelsat was launched, the United States was the only launch source outside of the Soviet Union, who did not participate in the Intelsat agreements. The Soviet Union launched its first communications satellite on 23 April 1965 as part of the Molniya program. This program was also unique at the time for its use of what then became known as the Molniya orbit, which describes a highly elliptical orbit, with two high apogees daily over the northern hemisphere. This orbit provides a long dwell time over Russian territory as well as over Canada at higher latitudes than geostationary orbits over the equator.\nIn the 2020s, the popularity of low Earth orbit satellite internet constellations providing relatively low-cost internet services led to reducing demand for new geostationary orbit communications satellites.\nSatellite orbits.\nCommunications satellites usually have one of three primary types of orbit, while other orbital classifications are used to further specify orbital details. MEO and LEO are non-geostationary orbit (NGSO).\nAs satellites in MEO and LEO orbit the Earth faster, they do not remain visible in the sky to a fixed point on Earth continually like a geostationary satellite, but appear to a ground observer to cross the sky and \"set\" when they go behind the Earth beyond the visible horizon. Therefore, to provide continuous communications capability with these lower orbits requires a larger number of satellites, so that one of these satellites will always be visible in the sky for transmission of communication signals. However, due to their closer distance to the Earth, LEO or MEO satellites can communicate to ground with reduced latency and at lower power than would be required from a geosynchronous orbit.\nLow Earth orbit (LEO).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Low Earth orbit\nA low Earth orbit (LEO) typically is a circular orbit about above the Earth's surface and, correspondingly, a period (time to revolve around the Earth) of about 90 minutes.\nBecause of their low altitude, these satellites are only visible from within a radius of roughly from the sub-satellite point. In addition, satellites in low Earth orbit change their position relative to the ground position quickly. So even for local applications, many satellites are needed if the mission requires uninterrupted connectivity.\nLow-Earth-orbiting satellites are less expensive to launch into orbit than geostationary satellites and, due to proximity to the ground, do not require as high signal strength (signal strength falls off as the square of the distance from the source, so the effect is considerable). Thus there is a trade off between the number of satellites and their cost.\nIn addition, there are important differences in the onboard and ground equipment needed to support the two types of missions.\nSatellite constellation.\nA group of satellites working in concert is known as a satellite constellation. Two such constellations, intended to provide satellite phone and low-speed data services, primarily to remote areas, are the Iridium and Globalstar systems. The Iridium system has 66 satellites, which orbital inclination of 86.4\u00b0 and inter-satellite links provide service availability over the entire surface of Earth. Starlink is a satellite internet constellation operated by SpaceX, that aims for global satellite Internet access coverage.\nIt is also possible to offer discontinuous coverage using a low-Earth-orbit satellite capable of storing data received while passing over one part of Earth and transmitting it later while passing over another part. This will be the case with the CASCADE system of Canada's CASSIOPE communications satellite. Another system using this store and forward method is Orbcomm.\nMedium Earth orbit (MEO).\nA medium Earth orbit is a satellite in orbit somewhere between above the Earth's surface. MEO satellites are similar to LEO satellites in functionality. MEO satellites are visible for much longer periods of time than LEO satellites, usually between 2 and 8 hours. MEO satellites have a larger coverage area than LEO satellites. A MEO satellite's longer duration of visibility and wider footprint means fewer satellites are needed in a MEO network than a LEO network. One disadvantage is that a MEO satellite's distance gives it a longer time delay and weaker signal than a LEO satellite, although these limitations are not as severe as those of a GEO satellite.\nLike LEOs, these satellites do not maintain a stationary distance from the Earth. This is in contrast to the geostationary orbit, where satellites are always from Earth.\nTypically the orbit of a medium Earth orbit satellite is about above Earth. In various patterns, these satellites make the trip around Earth in anywhere from 2 to 8 hours.\nGeostationary orbit (GEO).\nTo an observer on Earth, a satellite in a geostationary orbit appears motionless, in a fixed position in the sky. This is because it revolves around the Earth at Earth's own angular velocity (one revolution per sidereal day, in an equatorial orbit).\nA geostationary orbit is useful for communications because ground antennas can be aimed at the satellite without their having to track the satellite's motion. This is relatively inexpensive.\nIn applications that require many ground antennas, such as DirecTV distribution, the savings in ground equipment can more than outweigh the cost and complexity of placing a satellite into orbit.\nExamples of GEO.\nBy 2000, Hughes Space and Communications (now Boeing Satellite Development Center) had built nearly 40 percent of the more than one hundred satellites in service worldwide. Other major satellite manufacturers include Space Systems/Loral, Orbital Sciences Corporation with the Star Bus series, Indian Space Research Organisation, Lockheed Martin (owns the former RCA Astro Electronics/GE Astro Space business), Northrop Grumman, Alcatel Space, now Thales Alenia Space, with the Spacebus series, and Astrium.\nMolniya orbit.\nGeostationary satellites must operate above the equator and therefore appear lower on the horizon as the receiver gets farther from the equator. This will cause problems for extreme northerly latitudes, affecting connectivity and causing multipath interference (caused by signals reflecting off the ground and into the ground antenna).\nThus, for areas close to the North (and South) Pole, a geostationary satellite may appear below the horizon. Therefore, Molniya orbit satellites have been launched, mainly in Russia, to alleviate this problem.\nMolniya orbits can be an appealing alternative in such cases. The Molniya orbit is highly inclined, guaranteeing good elevation over selected positions during the northern portion of the orbit. (Elevation is the extent of the satellite's position above the horizon. Thus, a satellite at the horizon has zero elevation and a satellite directly overhead has elevation of 90 degrees.)\nThe Molniya orbit is designed so that the satellite spends the great majority of its time over the far northern latitudes, during which its ground footprint moves only slightly. Its period is one half day, so that the satellite is available for operation over the targeted region for six to nine hours every second revolution. In this way a constellation of three Molniya satellites (plus in-orbit spares) can provide uninterrupted coverage.\nThe first satellite of the Molniya series was launched on 23 April 1965 and was used for experimental transmission of TV signals from a Moscow uplink station to downlink stations located in Siberia and the Russian Far East, in Norilsk, Khabarovsk, Magadan and Vladivostok. In November 1967 Soviet engineers created a unique system of national TV network of satellite television, called Orbita, that was based on Molniya satellites.\nPolar orbit.\nIn the United States, the National Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) was established in 1994 to consolidate the polar satellite operations of\nNASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration)\nNOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration). NPOESS manages a number of satellites for various purposes; for example, METSAT for meteorological satellite, EUMETSAT for the European branch of the program, and METOP for meteorological operations.\nThese orbits are Sun synchronous, meaning that they cross the equator at the same local time each day. For example, the satellites in the NPOESS (civilian) orbit will cross the equator, going from south to north, at times 1:30 P.M., 5:30 P.M., and 9:30 P.M.\nBeyond geostationary orbit.\nThere are plans and initiatives to bring dedicated communications satellite beyond geostationary orbits.\nNASA proposed LunaNet as a data network aiming to provide a \"Lunar Internet\" for cis-lunar spacecraft and Installations.\nThe Moonlight Initiative is an equivalent ESA project that is stated to be compatible and providing navigational services for the lunar surface. Both programmes are satellite constellations of several satellites in various orbits around the Moon.\nOther orbits are also planned to be used. Positions in the Earth-Moon-Libration points are also proposed for communication satellites covering the Moon alike communication satellites in geosynchronous orbit cover the Earth. Also, dedicated communication satellites in orbits around Mars supporting different missions on surface and other orbits are considered, such as the Mars Telecommunications Orbiter.\nStructure.\nCommunications Satellites are usually composed of the following subsystems:\nThe bandwidth available from a satellite depends upon the number of transponders provided by the satellite. Each service (TV, Voice, Internet, radio) requires a different amount of bandwidth for transmission. This is typically known as link budgeting and a network simulator can be used to arrive at the exact value.\nFrequency allocation for satellite systems.\nAllocating frequencies to satellite services is a complicated process which requires international coordination and planning. This is carried out under the auspices of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU).\nTo facilitate frequency planning, the world is divided into three regions:\nWithin these regions, frequency bands are allocated to various satellite services, although a given service may be allocated different frequency bands in different regions. Some of the services provided by satellites are:\nApplications.\nTelephony.\nThe first and historically most important application for communication satellites was in intercontinental long distance telephony. The fixed Public Switched Telephone Network relays telephone calls from land line telephones to an Earth station, where they are then transmitted to a geostationary satellite. The downlink follows an analogous path. Improvements in submarine communications cables through the use of fiber-optics caused some decline in the use of satellites for fixed telephony in the late 20th century.\nSatellite communications are still used in many applications today. Remote islands such as Ascension Island, Saint Helena, Diego Garcia, and Easter Island, where no submarine cables are in service, need satellite telephones. There are also regions of some continents and countries where landline telecommunications are rare to non existent, for example large regions of South America, Africa, Canada, China, Russia, and Australia. Satellite communications also provide connection to the edges of Antarctica and Greenland. Other land use for satellite phones are rigs at sea, a backup for hospitals, military, and recreation. Ships at sea, as well as planes, often use satellite phones.\nSatellite phone systems can be accomplished by a number of means. On a large scale, often there will be a local telephone system in an isolated area with a link to the telephone system in a main land area. There are also services that will patch a radio signal to a telephone system. In this example, almost any type of satellite can be used. Satellite phones connect directly to a constellation of either geostationary or low-Earth-orbit satellites. Calls are then forwarded to a satellite teleport connected to the Public Switched Telephone Network .\nTelevision.\nAs television became the main market, its demand for simultaneous delivery of relatively few signals of large bandwidth to many receivers being a more precise match for the capabilities of geosynchronous comsats. Two satellite types are used for North American television and radio: Direct broadcast satellite (DBS), and Fixed Service Satellite (FSS).\nThe definitions of FSS and DBS satellites outside of North America, especially in Europe, are a bit more ambiguous. Most satellites used for direct-to-home television in Europe have the same high power output as DBS-class satellites in North America, but use the same linear polarization as FSS-class satellites. Examples of these are the Astra, Eutelsat, and Hotbird spacecraft in orbit over the European continent. Because of this, the terms FSS and DBS are more so used throughout the North American continent, and are uncommon in Europe.\nFixed Service Satellites use the C band, and the lower portions of the Ku band. They are normally used for broadcast feeds to and from television networks and local affiliate stations (such as program feeds for network and syndicated programming, live shots, and backhauls), as well as being used for distance learning by schools and universities, business television (BTV), Videoconferencing, and general commercial telecommunications. FSS satellites are also used to distribute national cable channels to cable television headends.\nFree-to-air satellite TV channels are also usually distributed on FSS satellites in the Ku band. The Intelsat Americas 5, Galaxy 10R and AMC 3 satellites over North America provide a quite large amount of FTA channels on their Ku band transponders.\nThe American Dish Network DBS service has also recently used FSS technology as well for their programming packages requiring their SuperDish antenna, due to Dish Network needing more capacity to carry local television stations per the FCC's \"must-carry\" regulations, and for more bandwidth to carry HDTV channels.\nA direct broadcast satellite is a communications satellite that transmits to small DBS satellite dishes (usually 18 to 24 inches or 45 to 60\u00a0cm in diameter). Direct broadcast satellites generally operate in the upper portion of the microwave Ku band. DBS technology is used for DTH-oriented (Direct-To-Home) satellite TV services, such as DirecTV, DISH Network and Orby TV in the United States, Bell Satellite TV and Shaw Direct in Canada, Freesat and Sky in the UK, Ireland, and New Zealand and DSTV in South Africa.\nOperating at lower frequency and lower power than DBS, FSS satellites require a much larger dish for reception (3 to 8 feet (1 to 2.5 m) in diameter for Ku band, and 12 feet (3.6 m) or larger for C band). They use linear polarization for each of the transponders' RF input and output (as opposed to circular polarization used by DBS satellites), but this is a minor technical difference that users do not notice. FSS satellite technology was also originally used for DTH satellite TV from the late 1970s to the early 1990s in the United States in the form of TVRO (Television Receive Only) receivers and dishes. It was also used in its Ku band form for the now-defunct Primestar satellite TV service.\nSome satellites have been launched that have transponders in the Ka band, such as DirecTV's SPACEWAY-1 satellite, and Anik F2. NASA and ISRO have also launched experimental satellites carrying Ka band beacons recently.\nSome manufacturers have also introduced special antennas for mobile reception of DBS television. Using Global Positioning System (GPS) technology as a reference, these antennas automatically re-aim to the satellite no matter where or how the vehicle (on which the antenna is mounted) is situated. These mobile satellite antennas are popular with some recreational vehicle owners. Such mobile DBS antennas are also used by JetBlue Airways for DirecTV (supplied by LiveTV, a subsidiary of JetBlue), which passengers can view on-board on LCD screens mounted in the seats.\nRadio broadcasting.\nSatellite radio offers audio broadcast services in some countries, notably the United States. Mobile services allow listeners to roam a continent, listening to the same audio programming anywhere.\nA satellite radio or subscription radio (SR) is a digital radio signal that is broadcast by a communications satellite, which covers a much wider geographical range than terrestrial radio signals.\nAmateur radio.\nAmateur radio operators have access to amateur satellites, which have been designed specifically to carry amateur radio traffic. Most such satellites operate as spaceborne repeaters, and are generally accessed by amateurs equipped with UHF or VHF radio equipment and highly directional antennas such as Yagis or dish antennas. Due to launch costs, most current amateur satellites are launched into fairly low Earth orbits, and are designed to deal with only a limited number of brief contacts at any given time. Some satellites also provide data-forwarding services using the X.25 or similar protocols.\nInternet access.\nAfter the 1990s, satellite communication technology has been used as a means to connect to the Internet via broadband data connections. This can be very useful for users who are located in remote areas, and cannot access a broadband connection, or require high availability of services.\nMilitary.\nCommunications satellites are used for military communications applications, such as Global Command and Control Systems. Examples of military systems that use communication satellites are the MILSTAR, the DSCS, and the FLTSATCOM of the United States, NATO satellites, United Kingdom satellites (for instance Skynet), and satellites of the former Soviet Union. India has launched its first Military Communication satellite GSAT-7, its transponders operate in UHF, F, C and Ku band bands. Typically military satellites operate in the UHF, SHF (also known as X-band) or EHF (also known as Ka band) frequency bands.\nData collection.\nNear-ground \"in situ\" environmental monitoring equipment (such as tide gauges, weather stations, weather buoys, and radiosondes), may use satellites for one-way data transmission or two-way telemetry and telecontrol. It may be based on a secondary payload of a weather satellite (as in the case of GOES and METEOSAT and others in the Argos system) or in dedicated satellites (such as SCD). The data rate is typically much lower than in satellite Internet access.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45208", "revid": "15940493", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45208", "title": "Submarine communication cables", "text": ""}
{"id": "45210", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45210", "title": "Cripple Creek, Colorado", "text": "City in Colorado, US\nCripple Creek is the statutory city that is the county seat of Teller County, Colorado, United States. The city population was 1,155 at the 2020 United States census. Cripple Creek is a former gold mining camp located southwest of Colorado Springs near the base of Pikes Peak. The Cripple Creek Historic District, which received National Historic Landmark status in 1961, includes all of the city and the surrounding area. The city is now a part of the Colorado Springs, CO Metropolitan Statistical Area and the Front Range Urban Corridor.\nHistory.\nFor many years, Cripple Creek's high valley, at an elevation of , was considered no more important than a cattle pasture. Many prospectors avoided the area after the \"Mount Pisgah hoax\", a mini gold rush caused by salting (adding gold to worthless rock).\nOn October 20, 1890, Robert Miller \"Bob\" Womack discovered a rich ore and the last great Colorado gold rush began. By July 1891, a post office was established. By November, hundreds of prospectors were camping in the area. Rather than investing in mines, Denver realtors Horace Bennett and Julius Myers sought wealth by platting 80 acres of land for a townsite which they named Fremont. The town consisted of 30 platted blocks containing 766 lots. Each lot sold for $25 and $50 for corner lots. Within a year, the lots value increased and sold for at least $250 each. Months later, investors from Colorado Springs platted 140 acres near Fremont and called their town Hayden Placer. Bennett and Myers filed another plat near the Broken Box Ranch and named it Cripple Creek. The towns\u2019 combined population totalled 600-800 people by the end of 1891. In 1892, the Cripple Creek Mining District was created. The Town of Cripple Creek was incorporated on June 9, 1892, and the Cripple Creek, Colorado, post office opened on June 20, 1892. From 1892, Bennett and Myers oversaw the Fremont Electric Light and Power Company. The district\u2019s first telephone was established in 1893. Thousands of prospectors flocked to the district, and before long Winfield Scott Stratton located the famous Independence lode, one of the largest gold strikes in history. In three years, the population increased from five hundred to ten thousand. The Palace Hotel and the Windsor Hotel were so full that chairs were rented out to be slept on for $1 a night. Although $500 million worth of gold ore was dug from Cripple Creek and more than 30 millionaires were produced since its mining heyday, Womack was not among them. Having sold his claim for $500 and a case of whiskey, he died penniless on August 10, 1909. By 1892, Cripple Creek was home to 5,000 people with another 5,000 in the nearby towns of Victor, Elton, Goldfield, Independence, Alton, and Strong. As people arrived, the marshal greeted them and confiscated their firearms, which were then sold in Denver to pay for the salary of the teachers of Cripple Creek.\nIn 1896, Cripple Creek suffered two disastrous fires. The first occurred on April 25 with flames resulting from a dispute between a bartender, Otto Floto, and his dancehall girlfriend, Jennie LaRue, on the second floor of the Central Dance Hall on Myers Avenue. Their struggle resulted in an oil lamp being thrown setting fire to the curtains. The fire incinerated most buildings on Myers Avenue before it was put out. Four days later, another fire destroyed much of the remaining half. A cook at the Portland Hotel spilled a kettle of grease on a hot stove, which caused fire to travel from Myers to Bennet Avenue and burned 1/3 of Cripple Creek. The town was rebuilt using brick and better construction methods in a period of a few months; most historic buildings today date back to 1896.\nOn March 23, 1899, Teller County was created from portions of El Paso and Fremont counties with Cripple Creek as the county seat. By 1900, the Cripple Creek mining district was home to 500 mines. By 1910, it had produced 22.4 million ounces of gold. Between 1894 and 1902, around 50,000 people lived in the mining district with 35,000 in the town of Cripple Creek alone making it the fourth most populous town in Colorado at the time. The seven adjoining boom towns includes Victor, Gillette, Alban, Independence, Goldfield, Elton, and Cameron\u2014all of which were connected by rail. During the boom, there were 150 saloons, 49 grocery stores, 25 restaurants, four department stores, 12 casinos, 34 churches, a business college, a county school district with 19 schools and 118 teachers educating almost 4,000 students, 90 doctors, 40 stockbrokers, 15 newspapers, 9 assay offices, 10 barber shops, 72 lawyers, 20 houses of ill-repute, over 300 prostitutes, 26 one room cribs, and several opium dens. Prostitution flourished until the 1920s and was taxed at a rate of $6 a month per prostitute and $16 a month per madame. Pearl De Vere, a famous madame who owned The Old Homestead, a high class brothel that serviced wealthy mine owners and entrepreneurs of the area, was known to have charged clients in the upwards of $250 a night. Over 8,000 miners worked in the district making $3 per day. Most miners and foremen supplemented their incomes by as much as 1/3 through high grading. It was estimated that an average of $1\u20132 million dollars per year were stolen from the early mines through high grading.\nWhile $3 a day was typical for a miner, some miners had to work 8 hours a day while others had to work 9 or 10 hours. The average miners paid $1.75 per week for an unfurnished house or $2.50 per week to boarding houses that included a room, bath, and meals. During the 1890s, many of the miners in the Cripple Creek area joined a miners' union, the Western Federation of Miners (WFM). A significant strike took place in 1894, marking one of the few times in history that a sitting governor called out the national guard to protect miners from anti-union violence by forces under the control of the mine owners. By 1903, the allegiance of the state government had shifted, and Governor James Peabody sent the Colorado National Guard into Cripple Creek with the goal of destroying union power in the gold camps. The WFM strike of 1903 and the governor's response precipitated the Colorado Labor Wars, a struggle that took many lives.\nThe 1904 silent film short, \"Tracked by Bloodhounds; or, A Lynching at Cripple Creek\", directed by Harry Buckwalter, was filmed in the area.\nThrough 2005, the Cripple Creek district produced about 23.5 million troy ounces (979 1/6 troy tons; 731 metric tons) of gold. The underground mines are mostly idle, except for a few small operations. There are significant underground deposits remaining which may become feasible to mine in the future. Large scale open pit mining and cyanide heap leach extraction of near-surface ore material, left behind by the old time miners as low grade, has taken place since 1994 east of Cripple Creek, near its sister city of Victor, Colorado. The district\u2019s population began declining starting in 1905 as mines began closing. By 1920, only 40 mines were in business, and by 1945 the number dwindled to just 20 mines.\nThe current mining operation is conducted by Cripple Creek &amp; Victor Gold Mining Company (CC&amp;V), run currently by Newmont Mining. The mine operates 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. Mine operations, maintenance, and processing departments work a rotating day/night schedule in 12-hour shifts.\nWith many empty storefronts and picturesque homes, Cripple Creek once drew interest as a ghost town. At one point, the population dropped to a few hundred, although Cripple Creek was never entirely deserted. In the 1970s and 1980s, travelers on photo safari might find themselves in a beautiful decaying historic town. A few restaurants and bars catered to tourists, who could pass weathered empty homes with lace curtains hanging in broken windows.\nColorado voters allowed Cripple Creek to establish legalized gambling in 1991. Cripple Creek is currently more of a gambling and tourist town than a ghost town. Casinos now occupy many historic buildings. Casino gambling has been successful in bringing revenue and vitality back into the area. It also provides funding for the \"State Historical Fund\", administered by the Colorado Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation. In 2012, Colorado casinos produced over $104 million in tax revenue for these programs.\nGeography.\nThe gold-bearing area of the Cripple Creek district was the core of an ancient volcano within the central Colorado volcanic field, last active over 30 million years ago during the Oligocene. Free or native gold was found near the surface but at depth unoxidized gold tellurides and sulfides were found.\nAt the 2020 United States census, the town had a total area of , all of it land.\nThe community takes its name from nearby Cripple Creek.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the early years, miners arrived without their families to seek their fortunes. Once settled, their families joined them leading the district\u2019s population to balloon. Over 1/3 of the district\u2019s citizens were White and Catholic. Swedes were a large enough ethnic group to have established their own newspaper, \"Svenska Posten.\" Hundreds of French people lived in the district and owned many businesses. A small population of Chinese and African Americans secured employment in the laundry business and as porters in saloons. The Chinese were not allowed to work on mines and only a handful of African Americans were hired as miners. A good mix of Irish, French, German, African Americans and Chinese women worked as prostitutes.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 1,115 people, 494 households, and 282 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 737 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 92.29% White, 0.90% African American, 2.15% Native American, 0.81% Asian, 1.43% from other races, and 2.42% from two or more races. 6.01% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 494 households, out of which 23.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.7% were married couples living together, 7.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 42.9% were non-families. 30.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.26 and the average family size was 2.82.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 22.2% under the age of 18, 10.4% from 18 to 24, 29.2% from 25 to 44, 30.2% from 45 to 64, and 8.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 104.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 100.0 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $39,261, and the median income for a family was $41,685. Males had a median income of $27,600 versus $25,000 for females. The per capita income for the city was $19,607. About 4.7% of families and 6.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.8% of those under age 18 and 6.1% of those age 65 or over.\nArts and culture.\nThe Cripple Creek and Victor Narrow Gauge Railroad, a narrow gauge train ride from Cripple Creek passes several small ghost towns, goldmines, and glory holes. The Mollie Kathleen Gold Mine provides tours into a real gold mine led by a real gold miner.\nIn 2006 Cripple Creek broke ground on the new Pikes Peak Heritage Center. Constructed at a cost over $2.5\u00a0million, the building is over of educational displays. State of the art electronics are used throughout the building and there is also a theatre showing historical films about the area. Newly named the Cripple Creek Heritage Center, admission is free.\nCripple Creek is also home to the Butte Opera House, a theatre first managed by the Mackin family (previous owners of the Imperial Hotel and producers of a long-running, much-loved melodrama theatre company). The Butte is currently the home of the Mountain Rep Theatre Company that produces plays, musicals, and classic melodramas year-round, including such shows as \"Forever Plaid, Hot Night in the Old Town, A Cripple Creek Christmas Carol\", \"The Rocky Horror Show,\" and \"The Christmas Donkey\"\".\"\nCripple Creek features many events throughout the year like the Cripple Creek Ice Festival, Donkey Derby Days, the July 4 Celebration, the annual Ice Castles and a Gold Camp Christmas.\nEducation.\nCripple Creek is served by the Cripple Creek-Victor School District RE-1. The district has one elementary school and one junior/senior high school, including Cresson Elementary School and Cripple Creek-Victor Junior/Senior High School. Principal of the Jr/Sr High School is Daniel Cummings and Miriam Mondragon is the Superintendent of Schools.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45212", "revid": "49423046", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45212", "title": "Timberline", "text": "Timberline is an alternate term for the tree line.\nIt may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45213", "revid": "48986655", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45213", "title": "Belarusian language", "text": "East Slavic language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nBelarusian (, ) is an East Slavic language. It is one of the two official languages in Belarus, the other being Russian. It is also spoken in parts of Russia, Lithuania, Latvia, Poland (where it is the official language in 5 bilingual municipalities), Ukraine, and the United States by the Belarusian diaspora.\nBefore Belarus gained independence in 1991, the language was known in English as \"Byelorussian\" or \"Belorussian\", or alternatively as \"White Russian\". Following independence, it became known as \"Belarusian\", or alternatively as \"Belarusan\".\nAs one of the East Slavic languages, Belarusian shares many grammatical and lexical features with other members of the group. To some extent, Russian, Ukrainian, and Belarusian retain a degree of mutual intelligibility. Belarusian descends from a language generally referred to as Ruthenian (13th to 18th centuries), which had, in turn, descended from what is referred to as Old East Slavic (10th to 13th centuries).\nIn the first Belarusian census in 1999, the Belarusian language was declared as a \"language spoken at home\" by about 3,686,000 Belarusian citizens (36.7% of the population). About 6,984,000 (85.6%) of Belarusians declared it their \"mother tongue\". Other sources, such as \"Ethnologue\", put the figure at approximately million active speakers in Belarus. In Russia, the Belarusian language is declared as a \"familiar language\" by about 316,000 inhabitants, among them about 248,000 Belarusians, comprising about 30.7% of Belarusians living in Russia. In Ukraine, the Belarusian language is declared as a \"native language\" by about 55,000 Belarusians, which comprise about 19.7% of Belarusians living in Ukraine. In Poland, the Belarusian language is declared as a \"language spoken at home\" by about 40,000 inhabitants. According to a study done by the Belarusian government in 2009, 72% of Belarusians speak Russian at home, while Belarusian is actively used by only 11.9% of Belarusians (others speak a mixture of Russian and Belarusian, known as Trasianka). Approximately 29.4% of Belarusians can write, speak, and read Belarusian, while 52.5% can only read and speak it. Nevertheless, there are no Belarusian-language universities in Belarus.\nClassification and relationship to other languages.\nThere is a high degree of mutual intelligibility among the Belarusian, Russian, and Ukrainian languages.\nWithin East Slavic, the Belarusian language is most closely related to Ukrainian.\nDialects.\nBesides the standardized lect, there are two main dialects of the Belarusian language, the North-Eastern and the South-Western. In addition, there is a transitional Middle Belarusian dialect group and the separate West Polesian dialect group.\nThe North-Eastern and the South-Western dialects are separated by a hypothetical line Ashmyany\u2013Minsk\u2013Babruysk\u2013Gomel, with the area of the Middle Belarusian dialect group placed on and along this line.\nThe North-Eastern dialect is chiefly characterized by the \"soft sounding R\" () and \"strong akanye\" (), and the South-Western dialect is chiefly characterized by the \"hard sounding R\" () and \"moderate akanye\" ().\nThe West Polesian dialect group is separated from the rest of the country by the conventional line Pruzhany\u2013Ivatsevichy\u2013Tsyelyakhany\u2013Luninyets\u2013Stolin.\nHistory.\nThe modern Belarusian language was redeveloped on the base of the vernacular spoken remnants of the Ruthenian language, surviving in the ethnic Belarusian territories in the 19th century. The end of the 18th century (the times of the Divisions of Commonwealth) is the usual conventional borderline between the Ruthenian and Modern Belarusian stages of development.\nBy the end of the 18th century, (Old) Belarusian was still common among the minor nobility in the eastern part, in the territory of present-day Belarus, of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania (hereafter Lithuania). Jan Czeczot in the 1840s had mentioned that even his generation's grandfathers preferred speaking (Old) Belarusian. According to A. N. Pypin, the Belarusian language was spoken in some areas among the minor nobility during the 19th century. In its vernacular form, it was the language of the smaller town dwellers and of the peasantry and it had been the language of oral folklore. Teaching in Belarusian was conducted mainly in schools run by the Basilian order.\nThe development of Belarusian in the 19th century was strongly influenced by the political conflict in the territories of the former Lithuania, between the Russian Imperial authorities, trying to consolidate their rule over the \"joined provinces\", and the Polish and Polonized nobility, trying to bring back its pre-Partitions rule (see also Polonization in times of Partitions).\n One of the important manifestations of this conflict was the struggle for ideological control over the educational system. The Polish and Russian languages were being introduced and re-introduced, while the general state of the people's education remained poor until the very end of the Russian Empire.\nIn summary, the first two decades of the 19th century had seen the unprecedented prosperity of Polish culture and language in the former Lithuanian lands, and had prepared the era of such famous Polish writers as Adam Mickiewicz and W\u0142adys\u0142aw Syrokomla. The era had seen the effective completion of the Polonization of the lowest level of the nobility, the further reduction of the area of use of contemporary Belarusian, and the effective folklorization of Belarusian culture. Nevertheless, at the beginning of the 19th century \"there began a revival of national pride within the country ... and a growth in interest [in Belarusian] from outside\".\nDue both to the state of the people's education and to the strong positions of Polish and Polonized nobility, it was only after the 1880s\u20131890s that the educated Belarusian element, still shunned because of \"peasant origin\", began to appear in state offices.\nIn 1846, ethnographer Pavel Shpilevskiy prepared a Belarusian grammar (using the Cyrillic alphabet) on the basis of the folk dialects of the Minsk region. However, the Russian Academy of Sciences refused to print his submission, on the basis that it had not been prepared in a sufficiently scientific manner.\nFrom the mid-1830s ethnographic works began to appear, and tentative attempts to study the language were instigated (e.g. Shpilevskiy's grammar). The Belarusian literary tradition began to re-form, based on the folk language, initiated by the works of Vintsent Dunin-Martsinkyevich. \"See also\": Jan Czeczot, Jan Barszczewski.\nAt the beginning of the 1860s, both the Russian and Polish parties in Belarusian lands had begun to realise that the decisive role in the upcoming conflicts was shifting to the peasantry, overwhelmingly Belarusian. So a large amount of propaganda appeared, targeted at the peasantry and written in Belarusian; notably, the anti-Russian, anti-Tsarist, anti-Eastern Orthodox \"Manifesto\" and the first newspaper \"Mu\u017eyckaja prauda\" (\"Peasants' Truth\") (1862\u20131863) by Konstanty Kalinowski, and anti-Polish, anti-Revolutionary, pro-Orthodox booklets and poems (1862).\nThe advent of the all-Russian \"narodniki\" and Belarusian national movements (late 1870s\u2013early 1880s) renewed interest in the Belarusian language (See also: Homan (1884), Bahushevich, Yefim Karskiy, Dovnar-Zapol'skiy, Bessonov, Pypin, Sheyn, Nasovi\u010d). The Belarusian literary tradition was also renewed (\"see also\": F. Bahushevich). It was in these times that F. Bahushevich made his famous appeal to Belarusians: \"Do not forsake our language, lest you pass away\" ().\nThe first dictionary of the modern Belarusian language authored by Nasovi\u010d was published in 1870. In the editorial introduction to the dictionary, it is noted that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Belarusian local tongue, which dominates a vast area from the Nioman and the Narew to the Upper Volga and from the Western Dvina to the Prypiac and the Ipuc and which is spoken by inhabitants of the North-Western and certain adjacent provinces, or those lands that were in the past settled by the Kryvic tribe, has long attracted the attention of our philologists because of those precious remains of the ancient Ruthenian language that survived in that tongue.\nIn 1891, in the preface to the \"Belarusian Flute\", Franci\u0161ak Bahu\u0161evi\u010d wrote, \"There have been many peoples, which first lost their language... and then they perished entirely. So do not abandon our Belarusian language, lest we perish!\"\nAccording to the 1897 Russian Empire census, about 5.89\u00a0million people declared themselves speakers of Belarusian (then known as White Russian).\nThe end of the 19th century, however, still showed that the urban language of Belarusian towns remained either Polish or Russian. The same census showed that towns with a population greater than 50,000 had fewer than a tenth Belarusian speakers. This state of affairs greatly contributed to a perception that Belarusian was a \"rural\" and \"uneducated\" language.\nHowever, the census was a major breakthrough for the first steps of the Belarusian national self-awareness and identity, since it clearly showed to the Imperial authorities and the still-strong Polish minority that the population and the language were neither Polish nor Russian.\n1900s\u20131910s.\nThe rising influence of Socialist ideas advanced the emancipation of the Belarusian language even further (\"see also:\" Belarusian Socialist Assembly, Circle of Belarusian People's Education and Belarusian Culture, Belarusian Socialist Lot, Socialist Party \"White Russia\", Alaiza Pashkevich, Nasha Dolya). The fundamental works of Yefim Karsky marked a turning point in the scientific perception of Belarusian. The ban on publishing books and papers in Belarusian was officially removed (25 December 1904). The unprecedented surge of national feeling in the 20th century, especially among the workers and peasants, particularly after the events of 1905, gave momentum to the intensive development of Belarusian literature and press (See also: Nasha Niva, Yanka Kupala, Yakub Kolas).\nGrammar.\nDuring the 19th and early 20th century, there was no normative Belarusian grammar. The Russian academician Shakhmatov, chair of the Russian language and literature department of St. Petersburg University, approached the board of the Belarusian newspaper \"Nasha Niva\" with a proposal that a Belarusian linguist be trained under his supervision in order to be able to create documentation of the grammar. Initially, the famous Belarusian poet Maksim Bahdanovich was to be entrusted with this work. However, Bahdanovich's poor health (tuberculosis) precluded his living in the climate of St. Petersburg, so Branislaw Tarashkyevich, a fresh graduate of the Vilnya Liceum No. 2, was selected for the task.\nBy the summer of 1918, it became obvious that there were insurmountable problems with the printing of Tarashkyevich's grammar in Petrograd: a lack of paper, type and qualified personnel. Meanwhile, his grammar had apparently been planned to be adopted in the workers' and peasants' schools of Belarus that were to be set up, so Tarashkyevich was permitted to print his book abroad. In June 1918, he arrived in Vilnius, via Finland. The Belarusian Committee petitioned the administration to allow the book to be printed. Finally, the first edition of the \"Belarusian grammar for schools\" was printed (Vilnya, 1918).\nThere existed at least two other contemporary attempts at codifying the Belarusian grammar. In 1915, Rev. Balyaslaw Pachopka had prepared a Belarusian grammar using the Latin script. Another grammar was supposedly jointly prepared by A. Lutskyevich and Ya. Stankyevich.\n1914\u20131917.\nOn 22 December 1915, Paul von Hindenburg issued an order on schooling in German Army-occupied territories in the Russian Empire (Ober Ost), banning schooling in Russian and including the Belarusian language in an exclusive list of four languages made mandatory in the respective native schooling systems (Belarusian, Lithuanian, Polish, Yiddish). School attendance was not made mandatory, though. Passports at this time were bilingual, in German and in one of the \"native languages\". Also at this time, Belarusian preparatory schools, printing houses, press organs were opened (\"see also:\" Homan (1916)).\n1917\u20131920.\nIn the Belarusian Democratic Republic, Belarusian was used as the only official language (decreed by Belarusian People's Secretariat on 28 April 1918). In the Byelorussian SSR, Belarusian was decreed to be one of the four (Belarusian, Polish, Russian, and Yiddish) official languages (decreed by Central Executive Committee of BSSR in February 1921).\n1920\u20131930.\nSoviet Belarus.\nA decree of 15 July 1924 confirmed that the Belarusian, Russian, Yiddish and Polish languages had equal status in Soviet Belarus.\nIn the BSSR, Tarashkyevich's grammar had been officially accepted for use in state schooling after its re-publication in unchanged form, first in 1922 by Yazep Lyosik under his own name as \"Practical grammar. Part I\", then in 1923 by the Belarusian State Publishing House under the title \"Belarusian language. Grammar. Ed. I. 1923\", also by \"Ya. Lyosik\".\nIn 1925, Lyosik added two new chapters, addressing the orthography of compound words and partly modifying the orthography of assimilated words. From this point on, Belarusian grammar had been popularized and taught in the educational system in that form. The ambiguous and insufficient development of several components of Tarashkyevich's grammar was perceived to be the cause of some problems in practical usage, and this led to discontent with the grammar.\nIn 1924\u201325, Lyosik and his brother Anton Lyosik prepared and published their project of orthographic reform, proposing a number of radical changes. A fully phonetic orthography was introduced. One of the most distinctive changes brought in was the principle of akanye (), wherein unstressed \"o\", pronounced in both Russian and Belarusian as , is written as \"\u0430\".\nThe Belarusian Academic Conference on Reform of the Orthography and Alphabet was convened in 1926. After discussions on the project, the Conference made resolutions on some of the problems. However, the Lyosik brothers' project had not addressed all the problematic issues, so the Conference was not able to address all of those.\nAs the outcome of the conference, the Orthographic Commission was created to prepare the project of the actual reform. This was instigated on 1 October 1927, headed by S. Nyekrashevich, with the following principal guidelines of its work adopted:\nDuring its work in 1927\u20131929, the commission had actually prepared the project for spelling reform. The resulting project had included both completely new rules and existing rules in unchanged and changed forms, some of the changes being the work of the commission itself, and others resulting from the resolutions of the Belarusian Academic Conference (1926), re-approved by the commission.\nNotably, the use of the \"\u042c\" (soft sign) before the combinations \"consonant+iotated vowel\" (\"softened consonants\"), which had been previously denounced as highly redundant (e.g., in the proceedings of the Belarusian Academic Conference (1926)), was cancelled. However, the complete resolution of the highly important issue of the orthography of unstressed \"\u0415\" (\"IE\") was not achieved.\nBoth the resolutions of the Belarusian Academic Conference (1926) and the project of the Orthographic Commission (1930) caused much disagreement in the Belarusian academic environment. Several elements of the project were to be put under appeal in the \"higher (political) bodies of power\".\nWest Belarus.\nIn West Belarus, under Polish rule, the Belarusian language was at a disadvantage. Schooling in the Belarusian language was obstructed, and the printing in Belarusian experienced political oppression.\nAuthors who later emigrated treated homeland as inseparable from the Belarusian language.\nTarashkyevich's grammar was re-published five times in Western Belarus. However, the 5th edition (1929) (reprinted verbatim in Belarus in 1991 and often referred to) was the version diverging from the previously published one, which Tarashkyevich had prepared disregarding the Belarusian Academic Conference (1926) resolutions. \n1930s.\nSoviet Belarus.\nIn 1929\u201330, the Communist authorities of Soviet Belarus made a series of drastic crackdowns against the supposed \"national-democratic counter-revolution\" (informally \"nats-dems\" ()). Effectively, entire generations of Socialist Belarusian national activists in the first quarter of the 20th century were wiped out of political, scientific and social existence. Only the most famous cult figures (e.g. Yanka Kupala) were spared.\nHowever, a new power group in Belarusian science quickly formed during these power shifts, under the virtual leadership of the Head of the Philosophy Institute of the Belarusian Academy of Sciences, academician Semyon Volfson. The book published under his editorship, \"Science in Service of Nats-Dems' Counter-Revolution\" (1931), represented the new spirit of political life in Soviet Belarus.\n1933 reform of Belarusian grammar.\nThe Reform of Belarusian Grammar (1933) had been brought out quite unexpectedly, supposedly [Stank 1936], with the project published in the central newspaper of the Belarusian Communist Party (\"Zviazda)\" on 1933-06-28 and the decree of the Council of People's Commissars (Council of Ministers) of BSSR issued on 1933-08-28, to gain the status of law on 1933-09-16.\nThere had been some post-facto speculations, too, that the 1930 project of the reform (as prepared by people who were no longer seen as politically \"clean\"), had been given for the \"purification\" to the \"nats-dems\" competition in the Academy of Sciences, which would explain the \"block\" nature of the differences between the 1930 and 1933 versions. Peculiarly, Jan Stankievi\u010d in his notable critique of the reform [Stank 1936] failed to mention the 1930 project, dating the reform project to 1932.\nThe reform resulted in the grammar officially used, with further amendments, in Byelorussian SSR and modern Belarus. Sometimes this grammar is called the \"official\" grammar of the Belarusian language, to distinguish it from the \"pre-reform\" grammar, known as the \"classic\" grammar or Tara\u0161kievica. It is also known as \"narkama\u016dka\", after the word \"narkamat\", a Belarusian abbreviation for People's Commissariat (ministry). The latter term bears a derogatory connotation.\nThe officially announced causes for the reform were:\nThe reform had been accompanied by a fervent press campaign directed against the \"nats-dems not yet giving up.\"\nThe decree had been named \"On Changing and Simplifying Belarusian Spelling\" (), but the bulk of the changes had been introduced into the grammar. Jan Stankievi\u010d, in his critique of the reform talked about 25 changes, with one of them being strictly orthographical and 24 relating to both orthography and grammar. [Stank 1936]\nMany of the changes in the orthography proper (\"stronger principle of AH-ing\", \"no redundant soft sign\", \"uniform \"nye\" and \"byez\"\") were, in fact, simply implementations of earlier proposals made by people who had subsequently suffered political suppression (e.g., Yazep Lyosik, Lastowski, Nyekrashevich, 1930 project). [Padluzhny 2004]\nThe morphological principle in the orthography had been strengthened, which also had been proposed in 1920s.\nThe \"removal of the influences of the Polonisation\" had been represented, effectively, by the:\nThe \"removing of the artificial barriers between the Russian and Belarusian languages\" (virtually the often-quoted \"Russification of the Belarusian language\", which may well happen to be a term coined by Yan Stankyevich) had, according to Stankyevich, moved the normative Belarusian morphology and syntax closer to their Russian counterparts, often removing from use the indigenous features of the Belarusian language. [Stank 1936]\nStankyevich also observed that some components of the reform had moved the Belarusian grammar closer to the grammars of other Slavonic languages, which would hardly be its goal. [Stank 1936]\nWest Belarus.\nIn West Belarus, there had been some voices raised against the reform, chiefly by the non-Communist/non-socialist wing of the Belarusian national scene. Yan Stankyevich was named to the Belarusian Scientific Society, Belarusian National Committee and Society of the Friends of Belarusian Linguistics at Wilno University. Certain political and scientific groups and figures went on using the pre-reform orthography and grammar, however, thus multiplying and differing versions.\nHowever, the reformed grammar and orthography had been used, too, for example during the process of Sergey Pritytsky in 1936.\nSecond World War.\nDuring the Occupation of Belarus by Nazi Germany (1941\u20131944), the Belarusian collaborationists influenced newspapers and schools to use the Belarusian language. This variant did not use any of the post-1933 changes in vocabulary, orthography and grammar. Much publishing in Belarusian Latin script was done. In general, in the publications of the Soviet partisan movement in Belarus, the normative 1934 grammar was used.\nPost Second World War.\nAfter the Second World War, several major factors influenced the development of the Belarusian language. The most important was the implementation of the \"rapprochement and unification of Soviet people\" policy, which resulted by the 1980s in the Russian language effectively and officially assuming the role of the principal means of communication, with Belarusian relegated to a secondary role. The post-war growth in the number of publications in the Belarusian language in BSSR drastically lagged behind those in Russian. The use of Belarusian as the main language of education was gradually limited to rural schools and humanitarian faculties. The BSSR counterpart of the USSR law \"On strengthening of ties between school and real life and on the further development of popular education in the USSR\" (1958), adopted in 1959, along with introduction of a mandatory 8-year school education, made it possible for the parents of pupils to opt for non-mandatory studying of the \"second language of instruction\", which would be Belarusian in a Russian language school and vice versa. However, for example in the 1955/56 school year, there were 95% of schools with Russian as the primary language of instruction, and 5% with Belarusian as the primary language of instruction. The Belarusian was mostly used as a language of instruction in Belarusian rural schools or humanities faculties and was popularly regarded as an \"uncultured, rural language of rural people\". Consequently, Belarusian cities became Russian-speaking in the 1960s due to the lack of education in the Belarusian language in schools and universities.\nThat was the source of concern for the nationally minded and caused, for example, the series of publications by Barys Sachanka in 1957\u201361 and the text named \"Letter to a Russian Friend\" by Alyaksyey Kawka (1979). The BSSR Communist party leader Kirill Mazurov made some tentative moves to strengthen the role of the Belarusian language in the second half of the 1950s.\nAfter the beginning of Perestroika and the relaxing of political control in the late 1980s, a new campaign in support of the Belarusian language was mounted in BSSR, expressed in the \"Letter of 58\" and other publications, producing a certain level of popular support and resulting in the BSSR Supreme Soviet ratifying the \"Law on Languages\" (\"\"; 26 January 1990) requiring the strengthening of the role of Belarusian in state and civic structures.\n1959 reform of grammar.\nA discussion on problems in Belarusian orthography and on the further development of the language was held from 1935 to 1941. From 1949 to 1957 this continued, although it was deemed there was a need to amend some unwarranted changes to the 1933 reform. The Orthography Commission, headed by Yakub Kolas, set up the project in about 1951, but it was approved only in 1957, and the normative rules were published in 1959. These rules had been accepted as normative for the Belarusian language since then, receiving minor practical changes in the 1985 edition.\nA project to correct parts of the 1959 rules was conducted from 2006 to 2007.\nPost-1991.\nThe process of government support for \"Belarusization\" began even before the breakup of the Soviet Union, with the Supreme Soviet of the BSSR passing a law on languages in 1990 that aimed for the gradual increase in prestige and general use of the Belarusian language over the next 10 years, followed by the creation that same year of a National Language Program to support this endeavor. After Belarus became independent in 1991, support for the cause of the Belarusian language gained prestige and popular interest, with the post-Soviet Belarusian government the continued creation of policies to actively promote the use of the Belarusian language, especially in education. The creation of the 1994 Constitution declared Belarusian to be the sole official language, though Russian was given the status as \"language of inter-ethnic communication\". However, the implementation of the 1992\u201394 \"Law on Languages\" took place in such a way that it provoked public protests and was dubbed \"Landslide Belarusization\" and \"undemocratic\" by those opposing it in 1992\u201394.\nAfter the election of Alexander Lukashenko as the President of Belarus in the 1994 elections, the positions of the Belarusian language in the Belarusian education system worsened as the number of first graders who were taught in Belarusian significantly decreased (e.g. in capital Minsk from 58.6% in 1994 to just 4.8% in 1998) and by 2001 most of the major Belarusian cities had no schools where its pupils were instructed in Belarusian, however Minsk still had 20 Belarusian-language schools. In 1996, Russian language was given equal status to Belarusian following changes in the Constitution of Belarus and subsequently became Belarus's language of administration, business and education. In 1999, only 17% of pupils attended Belarusian-language elementary schools in Belarus. Moreover, a complete minority (~10.5%) of single-circulation newspapers were printed in Belarusian and the amounts decreases each year.\nIn a referendum held on 14 May 1995 the Belarusian language lost its exclusive status as the only state language. State support for the Belarusian language and culture in general has dwindled since then, and Russian is dominant in everyday life in today's Belarus. In a 2006 article, Roy Medvedev compared the position of the Belarusian language in Belarus with that of the Irish language in the Republic of Ireland. Adam Maldzis considers that one of typological similarities is the official bilinguism both in Belarus and Ireland, and the low real status of the mother-tongue.\nA spelling reform of the official Belarusian language, making the spelling of some words more similar to Tara\u0161kievi\u010d's system, was decided on 23 July 2008, and went into effect on 1 September 2010.\nDiscrimination against Belarusian speakers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"People who speak Belarusian cannot do anything, because nothing great can be expressed in Belarusian. The Belarusian language is a poor language. There are only two great languages in the world: Russian and English.\"\n \u2014 Alexander Lukashenko in 2006.\nUnder president Alexander Lukashenko, Belarusian speaking people in Belarus have complained about the discrimination against the Belarusian language in Belarus. Despite a formally equal status of Russian and Belarusian, Russian is primarily used by the Belarusian government, and cases of discrimination against the Belarusian language are not rare, even though the discrimination is not institutionalized. Authorities occasionally make minor concessions to demands for a widening of the usage of the Belarusian language.\nOrganisations promoting the Belarusian language such as the Franci\u0161ak Skaryna Belarusian Language Society were reported as being the object of attacks by Belarus-based Russian neo-Nazi groups in the 1990s and 2000s.\nThe Frantsishak Skaryna Society has reported about the following categories of violations against the rights of Belarusian speakers in Belarus:\nBelarusian speakers are facing numerous obstacles when trying to arrange Belarusian language education for their children. As of 2016[ [update]] there are no Belarusian-language universities in the country.\nIn its 2016 report on human rights in Belarus, the US State Department also stated that there was \"discrimination against ... those who sought to use the Belarusian language.\" \"Because the government viewed many proponents of the Belarusian language as political opponents, authorities continued to harass and intimidate academic and cultural groups that sought to promote Belarusian and routinely rejected proposals to widen use of the language\".\n2010s\u20132020s.\nIn the 2010s, the situation of Belarusian has started to change slightly due to the efforts of language-advocacy institutions, of individual representatives of such educational, cultural, scientific and linguistic organizations as the Franci\u0161ak Skaryna Belarusian Language Society, the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus, the Union of Belarusian Writers, and in response to the endeavours of pro-Belarusian public figures from the media and communication field, musicians, philosophers, entrepreneurs and benefactors.\nDespite the language losing its exclusive position in the wake of the 1995 Belarusian referendum, new signs of the spread of Belarusian have appeared, trickling down into Belarusian society\u2014with advertising campaigns supporting the cause (outdoor billboards promoting and acquainting people with the Belarusian language, branding campaigns for the leading telecommunication providers like Velcom, etc.), the simplified version of the Belarusian Latin alphabet on the metro map being introduced into the messages of the transport network, dedicated advertising festivals like AD!NAK upholding marketing communication in Belarusian, and informal language-courses (such as Mova Nanova, Mova ci kava, Movavedy) having sprung up in Minsk and around Belarus and spurring further interest of people, especially of young people, in developing good Belarusian communication skills in everyday life.\nPresident Lukashenko, in his 2014 State of the Nation address, emphasized that losing the ability to speak Belarusian will be losing a part of the country's history.\nThe 2019 Belarusian census demonstrated that the Belarusian language is perceived as a native language of Belarus by ~60% of its population, however only ~25% use it in their everyday life. The Belarusian language has marginalized status in terms of usage in Belarus, despite being officially recognized as its state language (along with Russian language). The usage of Belarusian in major Belarusian cities is rare. Approximately 95% of Belarusian state operates in the Russian language and the Belarusian language is mostly absent in Belarusian education, state media and government affairs where the main information is provided in Russian. For example, in 2011 Russian-language broadcasts on the Belarusian \"state package\" TV channels accounted for 35,302 hours of air time and highly overshadowed 626 hours of air time in Belarusian-language (only 1.7% of all air time). None of the universities in Belarus are providing a Belarusian-language education and Belarusian language lessons in schools are declining. In 2016, only 13% of pupils in Belarus attended elementary schools where the language of instruction was Belarusian. The Belarusian language is still partly used in some cultural, traditional and folklore activities. According to Belarusian poet Valzhyna Mort, who grew up in Belarus, the Belarusian language is mocked for its \"rural sound\" and is considered \"useless\" in Belarus. According to Belarusian poet Julija Cimafiejeva, the majority of the books sold in Belarus were imported from Russia in 2019 and in comparison to Russian books the Belarusian language books are not common and mostly are related with educational purposes. The annual circulation of Belarusian language literature significantly decreased from 1990 to 2020: magazines (from 312 mil to 39.6 mil), books and brochures (from 9.3 mil to 3.1 mil).\nBelarusian speakers in Belarus are viewed as those who are against the Lukashenko's government and politically motivated charges were applied to them. In 2020, following the beginning of the 2020\u20132021 Belarusian protests, many Belarusian writers and artists were repressed in Belarus. In August 2021, Belarusian PEN Centre, Union of Belarusian Writers and the Belarusian Association of Journalists were liquidated and the Ministry of Justice of Belarus applied for liquidation of the Franci\u0161ak Skaryna Belarusian Language Society in the Supreme Court of Belarus.\nor (Classical orthography).\nThere exists an alternative literary norm of the Belarusian language, named (). Its promoters and users prevalently refer to it as (\"Classic orthography\"). Generally Tara\u0161kievica favors Polish-inspired pronunciations (, ) while regular Belarusian follows Russian-inspired pronunciations (, ). Tara\u0161kievica also features a more phonetic spelling system, particularly using a separate letter for the [\u0261] sound, which is argued to be an allophone of [\u0263] rather than a phoneme.\nPhonology.\nAlthough closely related to other East Slavic languages, especially Ukrainian, Belarusian phonology is distinct in a number of ways. The phoneme inventory of the modern Belarusian language consists of 45 to 54 phonemes: 6 vowels and 39 to 48 consonants, depending on how they are counted. When the nine geminate consonants are excluded as mere variations, there are 39 consonants, and excluding rare consonants further decreases the count. The number 48 includes \"all\" consonant sounds, including variations and rare sounds, which may be phonetically distinct in the modern Belarusian language.\nAlphabet.\nThe Belarusian alphabet is a variant of the Cyrillic script, which was first used as an alphabet for the Old Church Slavonic language. The modern Belarusian form was defined in 1918, and consists of thirty-two letters. Before that, Belarusian had also been written in the Belarusian Latin alphabet (\u0141acinka / \u041b\u0430\u0446\u0456\u043d\u043a\u0430), the Belarusian Arabic alphabet (by Lipka Tatars) and the Hebrew alphabet (by Belarusian Jews). The Glagolitic script was used, sporadically, until the 11th or 12th century.\nThere are several systems of romanization of Belarusian written texts. The Belarusian Latin alphabet is rarely used.\nGrammar.\nStandardized Belarusian grammar in its modern form was adopted in 1959, with minor amendments in 1985 and 2008. It was developed from the initial form set down by Branislaw Tarashkyevich (first printed in Vilnius, 1918), and it is mainly based on the Belarusian folk dialects of Minsk-Vilnius region. Historically, there have been several other alternative standardized forms of Belarusian grammar.\nBelarusian grammar is mostly synthetic and partly analytic, and overall quite similar to Russian grammar. Belarusian orthography, however, differs significantly from Russian orthography in some respects, due to the fact that it is a phonemic orthography that closely represents the surface phonology, whereas Russian orthography represents the underlying morphophonology.\nThe most significant instance of this is found in the representation of vowel reduction, and in particular \"akanje\", the merger of unstressed /a/ and /o/, which exists in both Russian and Belarusian. Belarusian always spells this merged sound as \u27e8a\u27e9, whereas Russian uses either \u27e8a\u27e9 or \u27e8o\u27e9, according to what the \"underlying\" phoneme is (determined by identifying the related words where the vowel is being stressed or, if no such words exist, by written tradition, mostly but not always conforming to etymology). This means that Belarusian noun and verb paradigms, in their written form, have numerous instances of alternations between written \u27e8a\u27e9 and \u27e8o\u27e9, whereas no such alternations exist in the corresponding written paradigms in Russian. This can significantly complicate the foreign speakers' task of learning these paradigms; on the other hand, though, it makes spelling easier for native speakers.\nAn example illustrating the contrast between the treatment of \"akanje\" in Russian and Belarusian orthography is the spelling of the word for \"products; food\":\nComputer representation.\nBelarusian is represented by the ISO 639 code \"be\" or \"bel\", or more specifically by IETF language tags \"be-1959acad\" (so-called \"Academic\" [\"governmental\"] variant of Belarusian as codified in 1959) or \"be-tarask\" (Belarusian in Taraskievica orthography).\nSample text.\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in Belarusian (be-1959acad):&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u0423\u0441\u0435 \u043b\u044e\u0434\u0437\u0456 \u043d\u0430\u0440\u0430\u0434\u0436\u0430\u044e\u0446\u0446\u0430 \u0441\u0432\u0430\u0431\u043e\u0434\u043d\u044b\u043c\u0456 \u0456 \u0440\u043e\u045e\u043d\u044b\u043c\u0456 \u045e \u0441\u0432\u0430\u0451\u0439 \u0433\u043e\u0434\u043d\u0430\u0441\u0446\u0456 \u0456 \u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u0430\u0445. \u042f\u043d\u044b \u043d\u0430\u0434\u0437\u0435\u043b\u0435\u043d\u044b \u0440\u043e\u0437\u0443\u043c\u0430\u043c \u0456 \u0441\u0443\u043c\u043b\u0435\u043d\u043d\u0435\u043c \u0456 \u043f\u0430\u0432\u0456\u043d\u043d\u044b \u0441\u0442\u0430\u0432\u0456\u0446\u0446\u0430 \u0430\u0434\u0437\u0456\u043d \u0434\u0430 \u0430\u0434\u043d\u0430\u0433\u043e \u045e \u0434\u0443\u0445\u0443 \u0431\u0440\u0430\u0446\u0442\u0432\u0430.\nThe same text using the Tara\u0161kievica orthography (be-tarask):&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u0423\u0441\u0435 \u043b\u044e\u0434\u0437\u0456 \u043d\u0430\u0440\u0430\u0434\u0436\u0430\u044e\u0446\u0446\u0430 \u0441\u0432\u0430\u0431\u043e\u0434\u043d\u044b\u043c\u0456 \u0439 \u0440\u043e\u045e\u043d\u044b\u043c\u0456 \u045e \u0441\u0432\u0430\u0451\u0439 \u0433\u043e\u0434\u043d\u0430\u0441\u044c\u0446\u0456 \u0439 \u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u043e\u0445. \u042f\u043d\u044b \u043d\u0430\u0434\u0437\u0435\u043b\u0435\u043d\u044b\u044f \u0440\u043e\u0437\u0443\u043c\u0430\u043c \u0456 \u0441\u0443\u043c\u043b\u0435\u043d\u044c\u043d\u0435\u043c \u0456 \u043f\u0430\u0432\u0456\u043d\u043d\u044b \u0441\u0442\u0430\u0432\u0456\u0446\u0446\u0430 \u0430\u0434\u0437\u0456\u043d \u0434\u0430 \u0430\u0434\u043d\u0430\u0433\u043e \u045e \u0434\u0443\u0445\u0443 \u0431\u0440\u0430\u0446\u0442\u0432\u0430.\nThe romanization of the text into Latin alphabet:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Usie ludzi narad\u017eajucca svabodnymi j ro\u016dnymi \u016d svajoj hodna\u015bci j pravoch. Jany nadzielenyja rozumam i sumle\u0144niem i pavinny stavicca adzin da adnaho \u016d duchu bractva.\"\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in English:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nExamples of Belarusian-language media.\nThe following are examples of independent Belarusian-language print and television news media for students interested in learning Belarusian language by reading current news articles and watching television news programs in Belarusian in order to practice reading and listening comprehension. (The following two examples are independent Belarusian-language news organizations that happen to be based in Poland; currently as of 2021[ [update]] news organizations based in Belarus are tightly controlled by the State and have limited journalistic independence.)"}
{"id": "45214", "revid": "50834012", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45214", "title": "Ali G", "text": "Fictional character created by Sacha Baron Cohen\nAlistair Leslie Graham, better known as Ali G, is a satirical fictional character created and performed by English comedian Sacha Baron Cohen. A faux-streetwise poseur from Staines, England, Ali G speaks in rude boy\u2013style Multicultural London English. He conducts interviews with unsuspecting subjects who do not realise they have been set up.\nAli G first appeared as the \"voice of da yoof\" on Channel 4's \"The 11 O'Clock Show\" in 1998. Subsequently, he became the title character of \"Da Ali G Show\" in the early 2000s; he was also the title character of the film \"Ali G Indahouse\". In a 2001 poll by Channel 4, Ali G was ranked eighth on their list of the 100 Greatest TV Characters.\nIn a 2007 interview with \"The Daily Telegraph\", Baron Cohen announced that Ali G, along with Borat (another fictional character made by Baron Cohen), had been retired. However, Ali G returned at the 2012 British Comedy Awards to accept Baron Cohen's Outstanding Achievement Award, causing controversy by making jokes about Kate Middleton and Jimmy Savile. Ali G returned to television with \"Ali G Rezurection\" in 2014. \"Rezurection\" features new footage of Ali G introducing old highlights of \"Da Ali G Show\", while Borat reappeared for \"Borat Subsequent Moviefilm\" in 2020.\nDevelopment.\nAli G is a fictional stereotype of a British suburban male \"chav\" also known as Alex or Alistair; who imitates inner-city urban British hip hop culture and British Jamaican culture, particularly through hip hop, reggae, drum and bass, and jungle music, as well as speaking in rude boy\u2013style Multicultural London English from Jamaican Patois. Ali G was part of a group called the \"West Staines Massiv\", and grew up near Staines in Langley. He also lived part of his life in Staines.\nBaron Cohen has stated that BBC Radio 1 DJ Tim Westwood was an influence on the development of his character. Westwood used to host Radio 1's \"Rap Show\" and became known for speaking in a Multicultural London English dialect. Ali G's middle-class credentials mirror Westwood's, as the latter was brought up in Lowestoft as a bishop's son. Prior to his character's first appearance on \"The 11 O'Clock Show\", Baron Cohen had portrayed an early incarnation of him named MC Jocelyn Cheadle-Hume on a show he presented called \"F2F\", which ran on the satellite channel Granada Talk TV. While in character, Baron Cohen chatted to a group of skateboarders and realised that people could be led to believe his character was real; he then filmed a number of segments which were ordered off-air by London Weekend Television.\nHistory and appearances.\nAli G, a faux-streetwise poseur with a deeply stereotypical view of the world, first came to prominence on Channel 4's \"The 11 O'Clock Show\" as the \"voice of da yoof\" in 1998. He interviewed various public figures in the United Kingdom, always either embarrassing his interviewee by displaying a mixture of uninformed political incorrectness, or getting the interviewee to agree to some shocking inaccuracy or insult.\nOther examples of his bold interviewing style include getting Lindsay Urwin, the Bishop of Horsham, to admit that God created the universe and then asking him, \"And since then, [God]'s just chilled?\" Ali G asked the Bishop about God's appearance, to which the Bishop replied, \"Well, he's sort of Jesus-shaped.\" During an interview with James Ferman, former director of the British Board of Film Classification, Ali G asks whether his made-up vulgarities would restrict a film to an over-18 audience, and suggests that film censorship be performed by younger persons who understand contemporary slang. In an interview with the chairman of the Arts Council of England, Gerry Robinson, Ali G's first question was, \"Why is the arts so \u2013 excuse me French, but \u2013 crap?\"\nAli G appeared in the 2003 short film \"Spyz\", directed by James Bobin. It showcases Ali G as James Bond in a series of inexplicably occurring action and sex scenes. In 2004, Ali G gave the class day speech at Harvard.\nAli G was in a series of ads for the 2005\u201306 NBA season, in which he used his brand of off-kilter journalism to interview various NBA stars. The spots were directed by Spike Lee.\nAli G was also featured in the music video \"Music\" by Madonna as her limo driver. He complains that her \"babylons\" are not as big as they appear to be on TV and calls her \"Maradona\" when asking to be in her next video.\nBaron Cohen received the Outstanding Achievement Award at the 2012 British Comedy Awards and appeared in character as Ali G to accept the trophy.\nIn 2015 Ali G appeared at the 88th Academy Awards. Baron Cohen did not tell the ceremony's producers beforehand that he would appear on stage as his Ali G character instead of himself. He and his then-wife, actress Isla Fisher, locked themselves in the bathroom for 40 minutes to secretly put on his costume, after telling people he had food poisoning.\nBackground.\nAli G is the leader of a fictional gang called \"Da West Staines Massif\", who currently lives in his grandmother's garage in a semi-detached house at 36 Cherry Blossom Close, in the heart of the \"Staines Ghetto\". He was educated at what he calls \"da Matthew Arnold Skool\", which is a real school in Staines.\nStaines, a commuter town to the west of London, is different from the inner city ghetto that Ali G claims. In the same comic vein, he also makes reference to stockbroker belt towns in the area, such as Egham, Langley and Englefield Green with which he contrasts Staines. Despite the incongruous nature of his hometown, he purports to exemplify inner city culture. Ali's full name is later revealed to be Alistair Leslie Graham (revealed in the eponymous film, much to his embarrassment).\nAli G speaks a comical patois in keeping with his delusions of being black with Jamaican ancestry and peppered with such catchphrases as \"aight\" or \"aiii\" (alright), \"booyakasha\", \"big up yaself\", \"wagwaan\", \"west side\", \"batty boy\", \"respek\", \"for real\", \"punani\", \"check it\", \"wicked\" and \"keep it real\". His trademark hand gesture closely resembles the \"dip snap\".\nCriticisms.\nAlthough Baron Cohen has repeatedly stated that Ali G is a parody of suburban, privileged youth acting in a way that they think is typical of black people, some commentators have opined that the force of the humour is derived from stereotypes of blacks, not poseur whites. According to this view of the character, the suburban background written into Ali G's character serves as a false alibi. The sociologist Tara Alturi observed that, by presenting as racially ambiguous, Ali G both exploits minstrel show racial stereotypes for humour and ridicules white minstrel expropriation.\nThe comedian Felix Dexter has said that he appreciated the humour of an innocent ignoramus confronting an expert with neither understanding the other, but felt that \"a lot of the humour is laughing at black street culture and it is being celebrated because it allows the liberal middle classes to laugh at that culture in a safe context where they can retain their sense of political correctness\". Fellow comedian Victoria Wood criticised Baron Cohen's style of comedy, saying that his \"endless setting up of victims\" was \"tiresome\" and akin to \"laughing at lunatics\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45215", "revid": "883826946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45215", "title": "Satirical", "text": ""}
{"id": "45216", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45216", "title": "Meliaceae", "text": "Family of plants commonly known as the Mahogany family\nMeliaceae, the mahogany family, is a flowering plant family of mostly trees and shrubs (and a few herbaceous plants, mangroves) in the order Sapindales.\nThey are characterised by alternate, usually pinnate leaves without stipules, and by syncarpous, apparently bisexual (but actually mostly cryptically unisexual) flowers borne in panicles, cymes, spikes or clusters. Most species are evergreen, but some are deciduous, either in the dry season or in winter.\nThe family includes about 53 genera and about 600 known species, with a pantropical distribution; one genus (\"Toona\") extends north into temperate China and south into southeast Australia, another (\"Synoum\") into southeast Australia, and another (\"Melia\") nearly as far north. They most commonly grow as understory trees in rainforests, but are also found in mangroves and arid regions.\nThe fossil record of the family extends back into the Late Cretaceous.\nUses.\nVarious species are used for vegetable oil, soap-making, insecticides, and highly prized wood (mahogany).\nSome economically important genera and species belong to this family:\nGenera.\n58 genera are currently accepted.\nThe family is divided into two subfamilies, Cedreloideae and Melioideae, which are supported by phylogenetic evidence.\nSubfamily Cedreloideae.\nThis is also known as subfamily Swietenioideae.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45218", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45218", "title": "Sacha Baron Cohen", "text": "English actor and comedian (born 1971)\nSacha Noam Baron Cohen ( ; born 13 October 1971) is an English actor and comedian. Known for his creation and portrayal of the fictional satirical characters Ali G, Borat Sagdiyev, Br\u00fcno Gehard and Admiral General Haffaz Aladeen, he has received various accolades throughout his career, including two BAFTA TV Awards, three Golden Globe Awards and a SAG Award, in addition to nominations for three Academy Awards and six Primetime Emmy Awards.\nBaron Cohen began his career in television late-night series \"The 11\u00a0O'Clock Show\" (1998\u20131999), winning the British Comedy Award for Best Male Newcomer, before creating and starring as his character Ali G in the satirical sketch comedy show \"Da Ali G Show\" (2000\u20132004), for which he received two British Academy Television Awards. He created and starred in the Showtime satirical mockumentary series \"Who Is America?\" (2018), for which he earned a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor \u2013 Television Series Musical or Comedy. He portrayed Eli Cohen in the Netflix limited series \"The Spy\" (2019), earning a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor \u2013 Miniseries or Television Film nomination, and acted in the Apple TV+ limited series \"Disclaimer\" (2024). He starred as Mephisto in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, beginning with the miniseries \"Ironheart\" (2025).\nBaron Cohen wrote and starred in \"Borat\" (2006) and \"Borat Subsequent Moviefilm\" (2020), which earned him the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture \u2013 Musical or Comedy as well as a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay. For his portrayal of Abbie Hoffman in the legal drama \"The Trial of the Chicago 7\" (2020) he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. He also wrote, produced and starred in the comedy films \"Ali G Indahouse\" (2002), \"Br\u00fcno\" (2009), \"The Dictator\" (2012) and \"Grimsby\" (2016) and has acted in drama films such as \"\" (2007), \"Hugo\" (2011) and \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" (2012).\nHe voiced King Julien XIII in the \"Madagascar\" film series (2005\u20132012) and Uncle Ugo in \"Luca\" (2021). He has been a member of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in the Actors Branch since 2008.\nEarly life and education.\nSacha Noam Baron Cohen was born into an English Ashkenazi Jewish family in the Hammersmith area of London on 13 October 1971. His mother, photographer Daniella (n\u00e9e Weiser), was born in British Mandatory Palestine in 1939 to German Jewish parents. His father, editor-turned-clothing-store owner Gerald \"Jerry\" Baron Cohen (1932\u20132016), was born into a Belarusian Jewish family in London and grew up in the Welsh town of Pontypridd. Baron Cohen's paternal grandfather, Morris Moses Cohen, added \"Baron\" to his surname. His maternal grandmother, Liesel (n\u00e9e Levi), lived in Haifa and trained as a ballet dancer in Germany before fleeing the Nazis in 1936. He has two older brothers: Erran, a composer with whom he often collaborates, and Amnon. His cousins include autism researcher Sir Simon Baron-Cohen, playwright Dan Baron Cohen, and filmmaker Ash Baron-Cohen.\nBaron Cohen was educated at the independent Catholic St Columba's College in St Albans, before moving to the independent Haberdashers' Aske's Boys' School in Elstree. He then studied history with a focus on antisemitism at Christ's College, Cambridge, graduating in 1993 with upper-second-class honours. As an undergraduate he wrote his thesis on the role of Jewish activists in the American civil rights movement. He was a member of the Cambridge University Amateur Dramatic Club, where he performed in shows such as \"Fiddler on the Roof\" and \"Cyrano de Bergerac\", and acted in shows with the Labour youth movement Habonim Dror. He played the cello while growing up and made his television debut as a cellist on \"Fanfare for Young Musicians\".\nCareer.\nEarly roles.\nBaron Cohen grew up as a fan of Monty Python and Peter Cook, but his greatest comedic influence was Peter Sellers, whom he saw as \"this incredibly realistic actor, who was also hilarious and who managed to bridge the gap between comedy and satire\". Known for portraying a wide range of comic characters using different accents and guises, Sellers was referred to by Baron Cohen as \"the most seminal force in shaping [his] early ideas on comedy\". After leaving university, Baron Cohen worked for a time as a fashion model. By the early 1990s, he was hosting a weekly programme on Windsor cable television's local broadcasts with Carol Kirkwood, who later became a BBC weather forecaster. In 1995, Channel 4 was planning a replacement for its series \"The Word\", and disseminated an open call for new television presenters. Baron Cohen sent in a tape of himself, which caught the attention of a producer. Baron Cohen hosted \"Pump TV\" from 1995 to 1996.\nIn 1996, Baron Cohen began presenting the youth chat programme \"F2F\" for Granada Talk TV and had a small role in an advertisement for McCain Microchips, as a chef in a commercial entitled \"Ping Pong\". He took clown training in Paris, at the \u00c9cole Philippe Gaulier, studying under master-clown Philippe Gaulier. Of his former pupil, Gaulier says: \"He was a good clown, full of spirit\" while Baron Cohen remarks of Gaulier, \"Without him, I really do doubt whether I would have had any success in my field\". He left TV journalist Rob Burley a note reading \"Dear Rob, good luck baby, have fun and things, see you soon, Sacha.\", when Burley left the programme. Baron Cohen made his first feature film appearance in the British comedy \"The Jolly Boys' Last Stand\" (2000). Also in 2000, he played the part of Super Greg for a series of TV advertisements for Lee Jeans; the advertisements never aired, but the website for Super Greg created an internet sensation.\nCharacters.\nAli G.\nBaron Cohen appeared during two-minute sketches as his fashion reporter Br\u00fcno on the Paramount Comedy Channel during 1998. He shot to fame with his comic character Ali G, a fictional stereotype of a white British suburban male \"chav\" who imitates urban black British hip hop culture and British Jamaican culture, as well as speaking in rude boy-style English with borrowed expressions from Jamaican Patois. Hailing from Staines (a suburban town in Surrey, to the west of London), Ali G started appearing on the British television show \"The 11\u00a0O'Clock Show\" on Channel 4, which first aired on 8 September 1998. A year after the premi\u00e8re of the show, \"GQ\" named Baron Cohen comedian of the year. He won Best Newcomer at the 1999 British Comedy Awards, and at the British Academy Television Awards he was nominated for Best British Entertainment Performance.\n\"Da Ali G Show\" began in 2000, and won the BAFTA for Best Comedy in the following year. Also in 2000, Baron Cohen as Ali G appeared as the limousine driver in Madonna's 2000 video \"Music\", directed by Jonas \u00c5kerlund, who was also responsible for directing the titles for \"Da Ali G Show\". Baron Cohen is a supporter of the UK charity telethon Comic Relief, which is broadcast on the BBC, and as Ali G interviewed David Beckham and wife Victoria in 2001.\nIn a 2001 Channel 4 poll Ali G was ranked eighth on their list of the 100 Greatest TV Characters. In 2002, Ali G was the central character in the feature film \"Ali G Indahouse\", in which he is elected to the British Parliament and foils a plot to bulldoze a community centre in his home town, Staines. His television show was exported to the United States in 2003, with new episodes set there, for HBO.\nAt the 2012 British Comedy Awards, 13 years after winning Best Newcomer at the 1999 Comedy Awards, Baron Cohen accepted the Outstanding Achievement Award from Sir Ben Kingsley in the guise of Ali G, and stated: \"I is grown up now. I ain't living in my nan's house any more. I is living in her garage.\" In 2013, he received the BAFTA Charlie Chaplin Britannia Award for Excellence in Comedy.\nAli G's interviews with notable figures (especially politicians) gained notoriety partly because the subjects were not aware that Ali G, rather than being a real interviewer, was a comedic character. According to \"Rolling Stone\" magazine, Baron Cohen would always enter the interview area dressed as Ali G, carrying equipment while acting like an inconspicuous crew member. The crew would be accompanied by a man in a suit and tie, leading the subject to believe that this was the person who would interview them. Baron Cohen, as Ali G, would sit down to ask the interviewee some preliminary questions to give them the impression that this was a test run before the well-dressed man conducted the real interview; this continued until a few moments before the cameras started filming, revealing the suited man as the director and Ali G as the interviewer, granting Baron Cohen the element of surprise as the interviewee would be less likely to opt out of the interview so close to its start.\nBorat Sagdiyev.\nThe Kazakh journalist Borat Sagdiyev was first developed for short skits on \"F2F\" on Granada Talk TV in the UK that Baron Cohen presented in 1996\u20131997, with the character at this time being known as Alexi Krickler. The character remained dormant while Baron Cohen concentrated on his Ali G persona, but with the subsequent success of Ali G, Baron Cohen revisited his Borat character. The character was featured in segments of \"Da Ali G Show\". Borat's sense of humour derives from his mocking of society through outrageous sociocultural viewpoints, his deadpan violation of social taboos and use of vulgar language and behaviour.\n\"\", a feature film with Borat Sagdiyev at the centre, was screened at the 2006 Toronto International Film Festival and released in the United Kingdom on 2 November 2006, in the United States on 3 November 2006 and Australia 23 November 2006. The film follows Sagdiyev as he and his colleague Azamat Bagatov travel the US to produce a documentary about life in the country, as all the while Sagdiyev attempts to enter into marriage with celebrity Pamela Anderson. The film is a mockumentary which includes interviews with various Americans that poke fun at American culture, as well as sexism, racism, homophobia, antisemitism and jingoism. It debuted at the No. 1 spot in the US, taking in an estimated $26.4\u00a0million in just 837 theatres averaging $31,600 per theatre.\nBaron Cohen won the 2007 Golden Globe for Best Actor \u2013 Musical or Comedy, his sixth such award. Although Borat was up for \"Best Motion Picture\u00a0\u2013 Musical or Comedy\", the film lost to \"Dreamgirls\". On 23 January 2007, he was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay. He shared his nomination with the film's co-writers, Ant Hines, Peter Baynham, Dan Mazer and Todd Phillips.\nAside from the comic elements of his characters, Baron Cohen's performances are interpreted by some as reflecting uncomfortable truths about his audience. He juxtaposes his own Jewish heritage with the anti-Semitism of his character Borat.\nIn 2007, Baron Cohen published a travel guide as Borat, with dual titles: \"Borat: Touristic Guidings To Minor Nation of U.S. and A.\" and \"Borat: Touristic Guidings To Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan\". On 21 December 2007, Baron Cohen announced he was retiring the character of Borat. After the release of \"Borat\", Baron Cohen said he would retire Borat and Ali G because the public had become too familiar with the characters. After the release of \"Br\u00fcno\", he said he would retire that character.\nThe character was brought back on a 2018 appearance on \"Jimmy Kimmel Live\" and appears in the 2020 sequel \"Borat Subsequent Moviefilm\", for which he won another Golden Globe Award, as well as the 2022 Kennedy Center Honors where he did a standup routine as Borat for the induction of U2.\nBr\u00fcno Gehard.\nAnother alter ego Sacha Baron Cohen performed as is \"Br\u00fcno\", a flamboyantly gay Austrian fashion show presenter who often lures his unwitting subjects into making provocative statements and engaging in embarrassing behaviour, as well as leading them to contradict themselves, often in the same interview. Br\u00fcno's main comedic satire pertains to the vacuity and inanity of the fashion and clubbing world. Br\u00fcno asks the subjects to answer \"yes or no\" questions with either \"Vassup\" (What's up) or \"Ich don't think so\" (I don't think so); these are occasionally substituted with \"Ach, ja!\" (Ah yes!) or \"Nicht, nicht\" (\"Nicht\" means \"not\" in German). In one segment on \"Da Ali\u00a0G Show\", he encouraged his guest to answer questions with either \"Keep them in the ghetto\" or \"Train to Auschwitz\".\nIn May 2009, at the MTV Movie Awards, Baron Cohen appeared as Br\u00fcno wearing a white angel costume, a white jockstrap, white go-go boots and white wings and did an aerial stunt where he dropped from a height (using wires) onto Eminem. Baron Cohen landed with his face on Eminem's crotch and with his crotch in Eminem's face, prompting Eminem to leave the venue with fellow rappers D12. Eminem later admitted to staging the stunt with Baron Cohen.\nAfter an intense bidding war that included such Hollywood powerhouses as DreamWorks, Sony, and 20th Century Fox, Universal Pictures won and paid a reported $42.5\u00a0million for the film rights to a collection of interviews Baron Cohen performed as the character Br\u00fcno. To create these interviews a number of shill companies and websites were created to draw potential interviewees by creating an illusion of legitimacy. The film was released in July 2009.\nAdmiral General Aladeen.\nBaron Cohen's 2012 film, \"The Dictator\", was described by its press as \"the heroic story of a dictator who risked his life to ensure that democracy would never come to the country he so lovingly oppressed\". Baron Cohen played Admiral General Aladeen, a dictator from a fictional country called the Republic of Wadiya. \"Borat\" and \"Br\u00fcno\" film director Larry Charles directed the film. The main target of the film's satire was Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi, who was still alive when the film was written. The producers of the film were concerned it would anger Gaddafi, possibly even resulting in a terrorist attack, so they released deliberate misinformation saying that the film was loosely based on a romance novel written by former Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein.\nOn 26 February 2012, Baron Cohen claimed he was banned from attending the 84th Academy Awards in his role as Admiral General Aladeen but the rumour was denied by the Academy, saying \"we haven't banned him, he is lying\" but made it clear that \"Cohen is not welcome to use the red carpet as a platform for a promotional stunt\". Baron Cohen eventually appeared at the awards' red carpet with a pair of uniformed female bodyguards, holding an urn which he claimed was filled with the ashes of Kim Jong-il. The \"ashes\", which Baron Cohen admitted to Howard Stern on the Tuesday, 8 May 2012 episode of \"The Howard Stern Show\" were flour, were \"accidentally\" spilt onto Ryan Seacrest.\n\"Who Is America?\".\nBaron Cohen portrays various characters in \"Who Is America?\", including Erran Morad, an Israeli anti-terrorism expert. The character is referred to as a colonel (and later captain, general, major, sergeant, brigadier, sergeant corporal and lieutenant) in the Israeli military and a former agent of Mossad (or \"not in the Mossad\", as he often interjects). Before \"Who Is America?\" aired on Showtime, some conservative public figures made statements saying that Baron Cohen had deceived them while in character. Hours before the premiere, Showtime uploaded the \"Kinderguardians\" segment on their YouTube channel, in which Morad explains to Philip Van Cleave, the president of the Virginia Citizens Defense League, of the proposal of a new program where children ages 3 to 16 are armed with guns. He also interviews other conservatives, such as Dana Rohrabacher, Joe Wilson, and Joe Walsh, who are openly supportive. Only Matt Gaetz expresses skepticism of Morad's proposal and declines to be in his video.\nIn the second episode, Morad teaches Jason Spencer, a Republican state representative from Georgia, how to detect and repel terrorists by taking pictures up a woman's burqa with a selfie stick, walking backwards while baring his buttocks, and yelling racial epithets. After the airing of the episode, Spencer initially refused to step down, stating that he was exploited by the producers. In May 2018, Spencer lost his primary to a political novice, Steven Sainz, but was expected to serve the rest of his term until November. He eventually did step down on 31 July 2018, leaving the seat vacant.\nBaron Cohen has denied \"Who is America?\" will return for a second season, noting the publicity surrounding the show and his interviews would make it harder for him to dupe guests.\nOther work.\nBaron Cohen guest-starred in the fifth season of \"Curb Your Enthusiasm\", with Dustin Hoffman, as a guide to Heaven. He also provided the voice of the ring-tailed lemur king, King Julien, in DreamWorks Animation's film series, \"Madagascar\", and appeared as Will Ferrell's arch rival, the French Formula One speed demon Jean Girard, in the hit ' (2006). He also appeared alongside Johnny Depp in the film ' (2007) as Signor Adolfo Pirelli, co-starred in Martin Scorsese's adventure film \"Hugo\" (2011), and portrayed Th\u00e9nardier in the 2012 film version of the musical \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\". He appeared as a BBC News Anchor in \"\" (2013).\nBaron Cohen has twice presented the MTV Europe Music Awards, first as Ali G on 8 November 2001, in Frankfurt, Germany, and then as Borat on 3 November 2005 in Lisbon, Portugal. Baron Cohen appeared out of character to accept an award at the British Comedy Awards in December 2006. He said at the time that Borat could not make it to the awards as \"he's guest of honour at the Holocaust denial conference in Tehran\", referring to the International Conference to Review the Global Vision of the Holocaust.\nIn September 2010, representatives for Baron Cohen confirmed that he was set to play Freddie Mercury in the \"Bohemian Rhapsody\" biopic about the rock singer. He dropped out of the project in July 2013, citing \"creative differences\" between him and the surviving members of Queen. Queen guitarist Brian May later said that even though the band and Baron Cohen were on good terms, they felt that his presence would be \"distracting\". The role was later played by Rami Malek. Baron Cohen shot a spread with model Alessandra Ambrosio for \"Marie Claire\" magazine to promote the film \"Br\u00fcno\". In 2010, Baron Cohen guest-starred in \"The Simpsons\" episode, \"The Greatest Story Ever D'ohed\", as Jakob, a quick-tempered Israeli tour guide.\nIn 2012, Baron Cohen and his production company Four By Two Films signed a first-look deal with Paramount Pictures, and the deal was renewed in 2014 for three years and a two-film commitment. In Baron Cohen's \"Grimsby\" (2016; \"The Brothers Grimsby\" in the US), he plays the football hooligan brother of a British MI6 spy. The film received mixed reviews from critics and was a failure at the box office.\nBaron Cohen portrayed political activist/anarchist Abbie Hoffman in the drama \"The Trial of the Chicago 7\", with Aaron Sorkin writing and directing. The film was released in September 2020 to positive reviews. For the 93rd Academy Awards, he received an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor, marking his first Oscar nomination for acting.\nBaron Cohen appeared in the Apple TV+ miniseries \"Disclaimer\", which was created, written, and directed by Alfonso Cuar\u00f3n. The miniseries ran from October to November 2024, where he portrayed the husband of the lead character played by Cate Blanchett. In July 2025, he made a guest appearance in the Disney+ miniseries \"Ironheart\", which is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, where he portrayed demonic villain Mephisto. While his appearance was previously announced, his character was kept secret until the series' finale.\nHe is set to star opposite Keke Palmer in the David O. Russell film \"Super Toys\".\nActivism.\nPhilanthropy.\nHe has made donations to numerous causes and children's charities in countries including Syria, Lebanon, Sudan, Yemen and Somalia. He is a founding member of Stop Hate For Profit, a vocal critic of social media companies, and has spoken publicly against racism, antisemitism, and online hate speech.\nOn 28 December 2015, Baron Cohen and his then wife, Australian actress Isla Fisher, gave \u00a3335,000 ($500,000) to Save the Children as part of a programme to vaccinate children in northern Syria against measles; they gave the same amount to the International Rescue Committee, also aimed at helping Syrian refugees. Baron Cohen has also made donations to support children and families in Somalia during a severe hunger crisis, and funded the building of a maternity hospital in Hodeidah, Yemen.\nIn 2019 Baron Cohen was awarded the Anti-Defamation League's International Leadership Award for opposing bigotry and prejudice. In accepting the award, Baron Cohen gave an impassioned speech directing criticism at internet companies, singling out Facebook, Google, YouTube and Twitter as part of \"the biggest propaganda machine in history\" and claiming that their rules on hate speech meant \"they would have let Hitler buy ads\".\nIn 2020, at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, Baron Cohen and Isla Fisher partnered with Marc Benioff to send a planeload of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to National Health Service workers in the UK.\nIn August 2023 Baron Cohen spoke alongside Martin Luther King III and Al Sharpton at the 60th anniversary of the March on Washington.\nIn October 2024, Baron Cohen gave $500,000 to Save the Children and the International Rescue Committee to help support their work tackling a displacement crisis and famine in Sudan, and called for more aid to support the cause.\nGaza War.\nIn 2023, he was one of the actors to sign an open letter to President Biden calling for the release of all hostages taken by Hamas.\nIn October 2023, Baron Cohen was among the members of the Writers Guild of America that called out its guild leaders for not speaking in support of Israel during the war in Gaza.\nIn November 2023, Baron Cohen was among more than a dozen creators and celebrities who challenged TikTok executives on the subject of content moderation and the safety of Jewish users amidst the early stages of the Gaza war.\nImage and reputation.\nPublic persona.\nFor much of the early part of his career, Baron Cohen avoided doing interviews out of character. However, in 2004, he did the talk show circuit appearing as himself on \"Late Show with David Letterman\", \"The Opie and Anthony Show\", \"The Howard Stern Show\", and others to promote the forthcoming season of his show on HBO. He was also interviewed on NPR's \"All Things Considered\" and did an interview with \"Rolling Stone\", published in November 2006, that the magazine labelled as \"his only interview as himself\". He also appeared in an interview out of character with Terry Gross on NPR's \"Fresh Air\" on 4 January 2007.\n\"Borat\" director Larry Charles explains that Baron Cohen generally appears in character partly to \"protect his weakness\", by focusing public interest on his characters rather than himself. His other reason, \"Newsweek\" claims, is that Baron Cohen is fiercely private: \"...according to the UK press, his publicists denied that he attended a party for the London premiere of \"Borat\" and that a party even occurred\".\nBaron Cohen was featured in the \"Time\" 100 list for 2007.\n\"Sports Illustrated\"'s 6 November 2006 issue contains a column called \"Skater vs. Instigator\", which illustrates various amusing \"parallels\" between Baron Cohen and figure skater Sasha Cohen, ranging from their mutually held personal significance of the number 4 to their shared romantic interests in redheads.\nIn 2018, \"The Times\" named him among the 30 best living comedians.\nControversies, criticisms and lawsuits.\nBaron Cohen has been criticised for the racist or prejudiced comments his characters have made. HBO spokesman Quentin Schaffer replied to the criticism and said, \"Through his alter-egos, [Baron Cohen] delivers an obvious satire that exposes people's ignorance and prejudice in much the same way \"All in the Family\" did years ago.\" Regarding his portrayal as the anti-Semitic Borat, Baron Cohen says the segments are a \"dramatic demonstration of how racism feeds on dumb conformity, as much as rabid bigotry\" rather than a display of racism by Baron Cohen himself. He said, \"Borat essentially works as a tool. By himself being anti-Semitic, he lets people lower their guard and expose their own prejudice.\" Addressing the same topic in an NPR interview with Robert Siegel, he said, \"People really let down their guard with [Borat] because they're in a room with somebody who seems to have these outrageous opinions. They sometimes feel much more relaxed about letting their own outrageous, politically incorrect, prejudiced opinions come out.\" Baron Cohen said he also wishes in particular to expose the role of indifference in the Holocaust: \"When I was in university, there was this major historian of the Third Reich, Ian Kershaw, who said, 'The path to Auschwitz was paved with indifference.' I know it's not very funny being a comedian talking about the Holocaust, but it's an interesting idea that not everyone in Germany had to be a raving anti-Semite. They just had to be apathetic.\" Regarding the enthusiastic response to his song \"In My Country There Is Problem\" (also known as \"Throw the Jew Down the Well\"), he said, \"Did it reveal that [the cheering audience] were anti-Semitic? Perhaps. But maybe it just revealed that they were indifferent to anti-Semitism.\"\nIn an interview with former Tory MP politician Neil Hamilton in 2000, Ali G offered Hamilton what was allegedly cannabis, which Hamilton accepted and smoked, creating some minor controversy in the British media.\nThe government of Kazakhstan threatened Baron Cohen with legal action following the 2005 MTV Europe Music Awards ceremony in Lisbon, and the authority in charge of the country's country-code top-level domain name removed the website that he had created for his character Borat (previously: http://www.borat.kz) for alleged violation of the law\u2014specifically, registering for the domain under a false name. \"The New York Times\", among others, has reported that Baron Cohen (in character as Borat) replied: \"I'd like to state that I have no connection with Mr. Cohen and fully support my government decision to sue this Jew\". He was, however, defended by Dariga Nazarbayeva, a politician and the daughter of Kazakhstan's then-President Nursultan Nazarbayev, who stated, \"We should not be afraid of humour and we shouldn't try to control everything...\". The deputy foreign minister of Kazakhstan later invited Baron Cohen to visit the country, stating that he could learn that \"women drive cars, wine is made of grapes, and Jews are free to go to synagogues\". After the success of the \"Borat\" film, the Kazakh government, including the president, altered their stance on Baron Cohen's parody, tacitly recognising the valuable press coverage the controversy created for their country.\nAt the 2006 MTV Movie Awards, Borat introduced Gnarls Barkley's performance of \"Crazy\", where he made a comment about Jessica Simpson, saying that he liked her mouth and that he could see it clearly through her denim pants.\nAt the 2006 UK premiere of \"Borat\" at Leicester Square he arrived in a cart pulled by a mule and a number of \"Kazakh women\", announcing: \"Good evening, gentleman and prostitutes. After this, I stay in a hotel in King's Cross. We will all drink, wrestle with no clothes on and shoot dogs from the window\".\nTwo of the three University of South Carolina students who appear in \"Borat\" sued the filmmakers, alleging that they were duped into signing release forms while drunk and that false promises were made that the footage was for a documentary that would never be screened in the US. On 11 December 2006 a Los Angeles judge denied the pair a restraining order to remove them from the film. The lawsuit was dismissed in February 2007.\nOn 26 September 2008 Baron Cohen walked onto the catwalk during the \u00c1gatha Ruiz de la Prada fashion show in Milan. In-character as Br\u00fcno, he was wearing a costume made of velcro. He appeared on the stage with a blanket and items of clothing stuck to his velcro suit. Lights were turned off while security intervened and escorted him off the stage and the fashion show resumed normally shortly thereafter. Baron Cohen and his team had allegedly accessed the fashion show using fake IDs.\nDuring the filming of \"Br\u00fcno\", Baron Cohen was chased through Jerusalem by an angry, rock-throwing Jewish mob. He had outraged Hasidic Jews in the city by dressing in a camp version of their traditional clothing. He escaped the incident by hiding in a shop. The scene was cut from the film.\nOn 22 May 2009 a charity worker at a seniors' bingo game sued Baron Cohen, claiming an incident shot for \"Br\u00fcno\" at a charity bingo tournament left her disabled. However, the worker later retracted her statement, saying the \"actor never struck her\", but that he \"beat her down emotionally to the point she's now confined to a wheelchair\". The scene did not make the final cut for the film. The case was dismissed in late November 2009 on anti-SLAPP grounds, with all lawyers' fees to be paid by the charity worker. The dismissal was appealed and upheld on 12 September 2011.\nOn 30 April 2010 Palestinian Christian grocer Ayman Abu Aita filed a lawsuit against Baron Cohen. In the film \"Br\u00fcno\", Abu Aita was described as a member of Al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades. Abu Aita's lawsuit stated that he had been defamed by false accusations that he was a \"terrorist\" in the movie \"Br\u00fcno\", adding that, though he had been a member of Fatah, he had never been a member of Al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigade and was a non-violent activist and a board member of Holy Land Trust, a non-profit. He had agreed to the interview under the impression it was a documentary about the daily life of Palestinians. Aita included David Letterman in the suit based on comments made during a 7 July 2009 appearance by Baron Cohen on the \"Late Show with David Letterman\" in which he claimed that Abu Aita was a \"terrorist\". Unlike others who sued Baron Cohen, Aita did not sign a release form, and his case centred on whether Baron Cohen's portrayal of Aita was false, not whether he was defrauded. The case was initially dismissed, as Abu Aita was not an American citizen. In September 2012, the defamation claim was settled out of court for an undisclosed amount.\nIn 2018, former Senate candidate Roy Moore of Alabama sued Baron Cohen for $95\u00a0million relating to a mock interview in \"Who Is America?\" and allegations of paedophilia. On 13 July 2021, the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York dismissed the lawsuit after finding that Moore had signed a consent agreement barring his claims. Moore has filed notice of his intent to appeal the decision. On 8 July 2022, Baron Cohen defeated the lawsuit.\nIn June 2020, Baron Cohen crashed the right-wing \"March for Our Rights 3\" protest in Olympia, Washington, a counter-protest to the March for Our Lives demonstration as a result of the Stoneman Douglas High School shooting. Disguised under heavy make-up, Baron Cohen sang a song telling listeners to attack liberals, CNN, the World Health Organization, Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, Anthony Fauci, Bill Gates and \"mask-wearers\". The crowd, which initially sang along, realized they were being pranked when counter-protestors recognized Baron Cohen and began laughing. Baron Cohen's security stopped the organizers from taking him off stage and turning off the power, and Baron Cohen was forced to flee in a private ambulance from the crowd. The incident was later revealed to have been organized as part of filming for \"Borat Subsequent Moviefilm\", with Baron Cohen in-character as Borat in disguise.\nPersonal life.\nBaron Cohen met Australian actress Isla Fisher at a party in Sydney in 2001 and they became engaged in 2004. She later converted to Judaism, and they were married in a Jewish ceremony on 15 March 2010 in Milan and Paris. They have two daughters (born 2007 and 2010) and a son (born 2015). They divided their time between the Marylebone district of London and the Laurel Canyon neighbourhood of Los Angeles, before settling in Sydney. On 5 April 2024, they jointly revealed that they had filed for divorce at the end of 2023. On 13 June 2025, both Baron Cohen and Fisher announced that they had finalised their divorce, while stating that they remain friends.\nBaron Cohen has said of his Jewish identity, \"I wouldn't say I am a religious Jew. I am proud of my Jewish identity and there are certain things I do and customs I keep.\" He tries to keep kosher, attends synagogue about twice a year, and is fluent in Hebrew. He first acted in theatrical productions with the Labour youth movement Habonim Dror. He spent a year in Israel as a kibbutz volunteer at Rosh HaNikra and Beit HaEmek as part of the Shnat Habonim Dror, also taking part in the programme Machon L'Madrichei Chutz La'Aretz for Jewish youth movement leaders.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45220", "revid": "50874010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45220", "title": "Staines-upon-Thames", "text": "Town in Surrey, England\nStaines-upon-Thames, commonly known simply as Staines, is a market town in northwest Surrey, England, around west of central London. It is in the Borough of Spelthorne, at the confluence of the River Thames and Colne. Historically part of Middlesex, the town was transferred to Surrey in 1965. Staines is close to Heathrow Airport and is linked to the national motorway network by the M25 and M3. The town is part of the Greater London Built-up Area.\nThe earliest evidence of human activity in the area is from the Paleolithic and, during the Neolithic, there was a causewayed enclosure on Staines Moor. The first bridge across the Thames at Staines is thought to have been built by the Romans and there was a settlement in the area around the modern High Street by the end of the 1st century CE. Throughout the Middle Ages, Staines was primarily an agricultural settlement and was held by Westminster Abbey. The first surviving record of a market is from 1218, but one may have taken place near St Mary's Church in the Anglo-Saxon period.\nThe industrialisation of Staines began in the mid-17th century when Thomas Ashby established a brewery in the town. Improvements to the local transport network in the mid-19th century also stimulated an expansion of the local population. The current Staines Bridge, designed by George Rennie, was opened in 1832 by William IV and the first railway line through Staines opened in 1848. The town became a centre for linoleum manufacture in 1864, when Frederick Walton established a factory on the site of the 13th-century Hale Mill.\nAt the end of the 20th century, Staines became infamous as the home town of the fictional film and television character, Ali G. Although many local residents felt that the town's reputation was suffering through its association with the character, Sacha Baron Cohen, the creator of Ali G, praised Staines for being a \"lovely, leafy, middle-class suburb... where swans swim under the beautiful bridge\". Partly in response to the reaction to the character, Spelthorne Borough Council voted in 2011 to add the suffix \"upon-Thames\" to the official name of the town.\nToponymy.\nThe earliest document to refer to Staines is the Antonine Itinerary, thought to have been written in the early 3rd century AD, in which the location appears as \"Pontibus\", meaning \"at the bridges\". The first surviving records of Staines from the post-Roman period are from 1066, when the settlement appears in two separate charters as \"Stana\" and \"Stane\". In Domesday Book of 1086, the settlement is referred to as \"Stanes\". It later appears as \"Stanis\" (1167), \"Stanys\" (1428), \"Steynys\" and \"Staynys\" (1535), before the modern spelling \"Staines\" is first used in 1578. The name derives from the Old English \"\", meaning \"stone\", and may refer to a Roman milestone on the London to Silchester road that survived into the early Anglo-Saxon period.\nIn order to promote the town's \"riverside image\" and to distance it from its association with the fictional character, Ali G, Spelthorne Borough Council voted in December 2011 to change its name from \"Staines\" to \"Staines-upon-Thames\". The formal renaming ceremony, conducted by the Lord Lieutenant of Surrey, Dame Sarah Goad, took place on 20 May 2012. The Royal Mail adopted the new name in mid-2013.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nStaines-upon-Thames is in northwest Surrey, around from Charing Cross, central London. It is close to the borders of Berkshire and Greater London. The town is linked to junction 13 of the M25 by the A30 and to the M3 by the A308. The area surrounding the borough council offices and the magistrates' courts, to the southeast of the town centre, is known as Knowle Green. Egham Hythe, also in Surrey, is on the south side of the Thames and is linked to Staines by Staines Bridge.\nStaines town centre is close to the confluence of the rivers Colne and Thames. A former millstream, known as Sweeps Ditch, ran to the east of the High Street, but much of its course was diverted underground in the 20th century. Severe flooding events have taken place in Staines in 1894, 1947, and 2014.\nTopography and geology.\nMuch of the town is built on gravel \"islands\" that rise above the low-lying floodplains of the Thames and Colne. These gravel deposits have a typical maximum elevation of above ordnance datum (AOD) and are as little as above the surrounding floodplain. Staines High Street, oriented northeast to southwest, runs across one of these islands to the site of the medieval bridge and was the nucleus of the Roman town. St Mary's Church, on \"Binbury island\" to the northwest of the centre, is thought to have been the focus of settlement activity in the late-Saxon period. Elevations below AOD were liable to flooding until the early 19th century and many areas of gravel are covered by muddy silts and sands. There are brickearth deposits to the east of the town, along the A30, and outcrops of alluvium to the north and south.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe earliest evidence of human activity in Staines is from the Paleolithic. Flint blades, along with reindeer and horse bone fragments, have been found during excavations at Church Lammas, to the west of the town centre. During the Mesolithic, the area around Staines is thought to have been covered with a dense pine and birch forest. A Neolithic causewayed enclosure, about west of St Mary's Church, was identified by aerial photography in 1959. The site, on a gravel island in the Colne river delta, AOD, consisted of two concentric, subcircular ditches, with a probable main entrance at the southeastern side. Pottery sherds and worked flints were found on the site, as well as fragments of human bone. Other Neolithic artefacts from the local area include fragments of a jadeite axe, discovered on Staines Moor in the early 1980s, tentatively dated to c.\u20093500\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091700 BCE.\nDeverel\u2013Rimbury pottery from the Church Lammas lands indicates that the Staines area was settled in the Bronze Age and a roundhouse from the same period has been identified at Laleham. Two round barrow ring ditches, one of which had a cremation burial at the centre, were found at Knowle Green in 2021. A further ring ditch, around in diameter, was found during excavations of the Majestic House site, close to the eastern end of the High Street. A Bronze Age field system at Hengrove Farm was also cultivated during the Iron Age, but fell out of use around the start of the Roman period. There is also evidence of an early Iron Age enclosure on Staines Moor and finds from the site include pottery sherds, flints and animal bones, with evidence of burning having taken place there. Since Staines is located on the low-lying floodplain of the Thames, it is likely that historical flooding events have destroyed much of the archaeological evidence of pre-Roman human activity in the town centre.\nRoman and Saxon.\nThe Roman road from London to Silchester crossed the Thames in the Staines area. Both the Thames and Colne are thought to have had multiple channels during this period, which may have necessitated the building of more than one bridge. There was a settlement in the area surrounding the modern High Street and, although the date of its foundation is uncertain, the earliest archaeological evidence is from 54\u201396 AD, corresponding to the reign of Nero and the period of the Flavian Dynasty.\nBy the mid-2nd century, Staines had increased in size and prosperity and the early Romano-British roundhouses had been replaced by stone buildings with flint and rag-stone foundations. Fragments of painted, plastered wall and floors of \"opus signinum\" have been uncovered, and the presence of \"tesserae\" indicates that at least one building had a mosaic floor. A collyrium stamp, found during an excavation of 73\u201375 High Street, suggests that there was a healer living in the town, who could have administered to the wider local population. Staines declined towards the end of the 2nd century, possibly as a result of an increased incidence of winter flooding. Nevertheless, Romano-British settlement activity continued until the early 4th century, although the town appears to have been smaller and less important than it had been in the first half of the Roman period.\nFollowing the end of Roman rule in Britain, the main settlement at Staines appears to have shifted from the High Street area to the Binbury area surrounding St Mary's Church. Archaeological evidence, including pits, ditches and pottery sherds suggests that there was a permanent settlement in this area by the mid-Saxon period and there may have been a marketplace at the northern end of Church Street. Staines may have been a fortified \"burh\" and the location of a minster church. A late-Saxon execution cemetery on London Road, containing the incomplete remains of up to thirty skeletons, suggests that the town was also an important local centre for the administration of justice.\nFor much of the early Saxon period, the Thames through Staines marked the border between Middlesex (to the north) and Surrey (to the south). In the 9th century, the river was used by Danish Viking raiders to travel into the heart of England. In 993, the Norwegian King, Olaf Tryggvason, sailed up the Thames to Staines with a fleet of 93 ships. In 1009, a large army of Vikings attacked Oxford and retreated back along the banks of the Thames, crossing the river at Staines.\nGovernance.\nBetween 1042 and 1052, Edward the Confessor rebuilt Westminster Abbey as a royal burial church and endowed it with around 60 estates in the south east of England. Staines was one of the properties granted to the Abbey and remained in its possession until the Reformation. In 1086, the manor appears in the Middlesex section of Domesday Book as \"Stanes\". In 1086, the manor had land for 24 ploughs, six mills and woodland for 30 pigs. It provided an annual income of \u00a335 for the Abbey. Since it was relatively close to Westminster, Staines acted as a home farm, providing for the abbot's personal household. 13th-century abbey records indicate that a market was taking place by 1218 and, in 1225, there were 46 burgesses living in the settlement, suggesting that Staines had become an important local centre.\nWestminster Abbey was dissolved in 1540 and Staines then became a possession of the Crown, allowing Henry VIII to extend his Windsor hunting grounds further to the east. In 1613, James I granted the manor to Thomas Knyvet, who had arrested Guy Fawkes at the Palace of Westminster eight years earlier. Following Knyvet's death, Staines passed to Sir Francis Leigh and, following the Restoration of the Monarchy, it was held briefly by Sir William Drake. The manor was then purchased by Richard Taylor, whose descendants lived at Knowle Green until the 19th century.\nReforms during the Tudor period reduced the importance of manorial courts and the day-to-day administration of towns such as Staines became the responsibility of the vestry of the parish church. The vestry appointed a constable, distributed funds to the poor and took charge of the repair of local roads. From the 17th century, the roles of Justices of the Peace were expanded to take greater responsibility for law and order in Staines.\nThe modern system of local government began to emerge during the 19th century. The Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 transferred responsibility for poor relief to the Poor Law Commission, whose local powers were delegated to the newly formed poor law union in 1836. In 1885 a local school board was established and three years later, the Local Government Act 1888 created the Middlesex County Council. An Urban District Council (UDC) and a Rural District Council (RDC) for the area were established in 1895 under the Local Government Act 1894, but the RDC was merged into the UDC in 1930.\nFurther reorganisation of the local authorities took place in the second half of the 20th century. Under the London Government Act 1963, Middlesex County Council was disbanded and the Staines UDC area was moved into Surrey. The Local Government Act 1972, which came into force on 1 April 1974, merged the Staines and Sunbury-on-Thames UDCs to form the Borough of Spelthorne.\nStaines Bridge.\nThe first surviving mention of a bridge from the medieval period is a document from 1222, that authorises repairs using wood cut from Windsor Forest. In around 1250, a causeway was constructed at Egham Hythe to improve the southern approach to the crossing. Also during the 13th century, there were renewals of the grant of pontage and, in 1376, tolls were levied on boat traffic to provide additional funds for maintenance. Local people left bequests for not only the repair of the bridge, but also the upkeep of the roads leading to it on each side of the river.\nThe bridge was destroyed in the Civil War and was not rebuilt until the 1680s. In 1734, an Act of Parliament noted that the structure was \"in a ruinous and dangerous condition\" and that the money raised from tolls and local taxes was insufficient to fund adequate maintenance. In the late 18th and early 19th centuries, there were four attempts to construct a new bridge. The first, designed by Thomas Sandby, was opened in 1796, but was closed two years later after cracks started to form in the stonework. A cast-iron replacement, designed by James Wilson in consultation with George Rennie was opened in 1803, but cracked within two months. A third bridge was authorised by Act of Parliament in 1804. It was designed by Rennie and was constructed of timber, strengthened with cast iron plates. Although it did not suffer from the problems of the previous two bridges, it was costly to maintain (\u00a311,000 in 1827) and restricted the width of boats passing beneath it.\nA further Act of Parliament in 1828, authorised the borrowing of up to \u00a360,000 for the construction of a fourth bridge. The granite structure was designed by George Rennie and was based on Waterloo Bridge. Rennie insisted that the site of the crossing be moved upstream, where deeper foundations could be constructed. The repositioning required new approach roads to be constructed and the necessary land was subject to compulsory purchase. The foundation stones were laid on each side of the river in September 1829 and William IV opened the bridge in April 1832. Tolls for crossing the bridge were abolished in 1871.\nTransport and communications.\nThe earliest locks on the upper Thames were built in the 17th century, following the establishment of the Oxford-Burcot Commission. However, efforts to improve the stretch of the river through Staines did not start until the 19th century. The pound lock at Penton Hook, a tight meander downstream of Staines, was constructed in 1815, but the weirs were not added until 1846. Bell Weir Lock, upstream of the town, opened in 1818, but was rebuilt in 1867-8 after the chamber walls had collapsed the previous year. The construction of the locks regulated the flow of the river and increased its depth to facilitate navigation, whilst maintaining an adequate head of water to power mills.\nWith the exception of the construction of the causeway at Egham Hythe in the mid-13th century, there were few improvements in the local road network in the millennium following the end of the Roman period. In 1727, the turnpike road from Hounslow to Bagshot, which crossed the river via Staines Bridge, was opened. A second turnpike, from Staines to Kingston opened in 1773. The re-siting of the bridge by George Rennie in the early 1830s necessitated changes in the road network at the western end of the High Street: The Market Square became a no through road and Clarence Street was constructed to direct traffic to the new crossing.\nThe railway line through Staines between Richmond and Datchet was opened by the Windsor, Staines and South Western Railway on 22 August 1848. In 1856, Staines became a junction when the line across the Thames to Ascot was opened. A curve linking the Ascot and Datchet lines was opened in April 1877 and remained in use until March 1965. A second station in the town, Staines High Street station, to the northwest of the junction of this curve and the Datchet line, was open between 1884 and 1916. The railway line through Staines to Windsor was electrified in June 1930 and to Virginia Water in 1937. Staines signal box closed in September 1974.\nA third station in the town was opened on 2 November 1885. Staines West was the terminus of a single-track branch from the Great Western Main Line, constructed by the Staines and West Drayton Railway Company. Originally the intention had been to create a junction with the line from Datchet and for trains to serve the main Staines station, but inter-company rivalry meant that a separate facility was built instead. The freight yard closed in the 1950s and passenger services ceased in March 1965. Trains continued to run to the Staines fuel yard, at Staines West, until the early 1990s.\nDuring the second half of the 20th century, there were large-scale improvements to the road network around Staines. The A30 bypass was constructed in the early 1960s and included the building of Runnymede Bridge over the Thames. A second bridge, alongside the first, was required for the construction of the M25. The route of the motorway north of Staines was constrained by the Wraysbury Reservoir to the west and Staines Moor to the west. The Chertsey to Staines stretch of the M25 was opened in November 1981 with three lanes in each direction, but with a wide central reservation, allowing the road to be widened easily later. Four lanes in each direction were provided from outset between the A30 and the M4.\nThe Staines air disaster occurred on 18 June 1972, when a Hawker Siddeley Trident, operated by British European Airways, crashed shortly after takeoff from Heathrow Airport. All 118 people aboard the aircraft, including the six crew members, were killed. Two memorials to all the victims were dedicated on 18 June 2004 in Staines. The first is a stained-glass window in St Mary's Church where an annual memorial service is held on 18 June. The second is a garden near the end of Waters Drive in the Moormede Estate, close to the accident site.\nCommerce and industry.\nThe first record of a market at Staines is from 1218, when the Sheriff of Middlesex was ordered to change the day on which it was held from Sunday to Friday. It had been discontinued by 1862, but re-established ten years later when the Town Hall was built. In 2022, the market is held in the High Street on Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays. An annual fair to be held in the settlement was granted to Westminster Abbey by Henry III in 1228. Initially it took place over four days at Ascensiontide, but the dates were changed to 7\u201310 September in 1241. By 1792, there were two one-day fairs each year, the first on 11 May for horses and cattle and the second on 19 September, known as the Onion Fair, for produce and trinkets. The fairs were abolished in 1896 by the Home Secretary at the request of the Staines UDC.\nDomesday Book records six mills in Staines in 1086, one of which is thought to have been at Yeoveney on Staines Moor. The site, close to the Wraysbury River, an anabranch of the River Colne, is thought to have been the location of a late-medieval dye works and part of the mill was used for fulling in the 14th century. First recorded in 1682, Pound Mill was also on the Wraysbury River. It was bought by John Finch in 1747 and was a flour mill until the early 19th century, when it was used to grind mustard. The mill is immortalised in the road name, \"Mustard Mill Road\".\nHale Mill, on the main channel of the Colne, is thought to have its origins in the 13th century, but it was rebuilt in 1388 and became a fulling mill in the 15th century. Many of the mills in the local area were purchased in the second half of the 18th century by Thomas Ashby, a miller originally from Maidenhead. Ashby founded a brewery, subsequently taken over by his sons, which became a major employer in the town. Brewing ceased in Staines in the 1950s, but bottling continued at the plant until the 1970s.\nStaines became a centre for linoleum manufacture in 1864, when Frederick Walton, the inventor, opened the first factory to produce the floor covering on the Hale Mill site, to the north of the town centre. At its height in the 1920s, the Staines plant covered and was one of twenty producers in Great Britain. Following the end of the Second World War, there was a decline in lino sales as vinyl floor coverings became more popular. The Staines lino factory closed in 1973.\nThe Elmsleigh Shopping Centre was opened by Elizabeth II on 22 February 1980, providing of retail space. Much of the High Street was pedestrianised in 2002 and the Two Rivers Shopping Centre, on the site of the old linoleum works, was opened in 2002.\nIn the 21st century, proximity to London, Heathrow Airport and the M25 motorway has attracted large company branch offices, including: Bupa (healthcare) and Wood plc (oil &amp; gas). Siemens Building Automation Division and British Gas (part of Centrica) have their national headquarters here. Samsung R&amp;D Institute UK (SRUK), Samsung's UK R&amp;D division, is based in the town.\nResidential development.\nThe modern settlement of Staines appears to have originated in the late 12th century, when the area around the High Street was developed as a planned town, possibly in response to rebuilding the bridge over the Thames. The medieval street plan was not altered until the re-siting of the bridge in the 1830s, at which point the urban area began to spread beyond the confines of the gravel islands.\nThe population of Staines grew from 1,750 in 1801 to 2,487 in 1841 and 4,638 in 1881. The increase in the second half of the 19th century was stimulated in part by the arrival of the railway in 1848. Cottages for artisans and semi-skilled workers began to spread along the London and Kingston Roads from the mid-19th century onwards. The residential roads to the south and southeast of the town centre were created in the early 1930s. Following the Second World War, there were new housing developments on Commercial Road and between Kingston Road and Elizabeth Avenue, primarily to provide accommodation for workers at the rapidly expanding Heathrow Airport.\nStaines in the Second World War.\nDespite its proximity to London and the fact that Staines Bridge and the local factories presented obvious enemy targets, the town sustained relatively little bomb damage during the Second World War. There was a severe bombing raid on Staines on the night of 24\u201325 August 1940 and a V-1 flying bomb landed at the junction of Stanish Crescent and Kingston Road on 19 June 1944, killing four people and injuring a further 17. Within the Staines Urban District, a total 71 civilians died as result of enemy action. The Lagonda works at Egham Hythe were converted to the manufacture of munitions and the linoleum factory was dedicated to making military supplies.\nMuch of the civil defence effort was focused on the defence of Staines Bridge and tank traps were installed at each end. At the start of the war, a Bailey bridge was constructed across the Thames, in case the main bridge was damaged by bombing. The Bailey bridge remained in use for pedestrians until 1959, when it was dismantled.\nNational and local government.\nUK parliament.\nThe town is in the parliamentary constituency of Spelthorne, and has been represented by Conservative Party MP Lincoln Jopp since 2024. From 2010 until the 2024 general election, Staines was represented at Westminster by Conservative Kwasi Kwarteng. Kwarteng was Chancellor of the Exchequer for 38 days during the 49 day premiership of Liz Truss.\nCounty council.\nCouncillors are elected to Surrey County Council every four years. The majority of the town is in the Staines electoral division, but areas to the southeast of the centre are in the Staines South and Ashford West electoral division.\nBorough council.\nStaines is divided between three wards, each of which elects three councillors to Spelthorne Borough Council. The wards are Staines, Staines South, and Riverside and Laleham. The Borough of Spelthorne has been twinned with Melun, France since 1990 and with Grand Port, Mauritius since 2009.\nDemography and housing.\nAcross the South East Region, 28% of homes were detached houses and 22.6% were apartments.\nPublic services.\nUtilities.\nThe first drinking water supply to Staines was provided by the West Surrey Water Company, whose works at Egham were built in 1889. Between 1960 and 1973, the company merged with its neighbours serving Woking and south west London, to form the North Surrey Water Company. Today, Affinity Water is responsible for supplying the town with drinking water.\nUntil the start of the 20th century, wastewater from Staines was discharged directly into the River Thames. Construction of the sewerage system began in 1899. The works closed in 1936, when the town sewers were connected to Mogden Sewage Works in Isleworth.\nThe Staines and Egham Gas Light and Coke Company was formed in 1834. It began to supply gas from its works in Bedfont Lane in Egham Hythe to the streetlamps on Staines Bridge in February of that year and the gas main to Staines was laid in 1835. At the start of the First World War, the Staines and Egham company was acquired by the Brentford Gas Company, which in 1949, following further mergers and acquisitions, became the North Thames Gas Company. A gasometer was constructed in Staines in 1927 and was demolished in 1986.\nThe first electricity generating station serving Staines opened in Egham High Street in 1905. It operated until 1912, when it was replaced by at new facility on The Causeway in Egham Hythe. The new works opened with an installed capacity of 188\u00a0kW and, by the time of its closure in 1924, it was capable of generating 688\u00a0kW.\nEmergency services and justice.\nThe earliest record of a permanent fire-fighting force in Staines is from 1738, when a hand-operated fire pump was purchased for the brigade. Reforms in 1774 transferred responsibility for fire services to the local authority and, in 1800, a new manual fire engine was purchased by the Staines force. The Staines UDC purchased the first diesel engine for the brigade in 1926, which was replaced by a Leyland terrier pump escape engine in 1935. Middlesex County Council took over responsibility for local fire services on 1 April 1948, building a new fire station at Stanwell and closing the Staines station in 1962. Surrey County Council became the fire authority for the local area in 1965.\nThe first surviving record of a town gaol in Staines is from 1274 and the erection of a new pillory and ducking stool is described in 1335. There were stocks in the Market Square through the 16th century until at least 1790. The vestry appointed the town Constable from the early 15th century until 1840, when responsibility for law enforcement was passed to the Metropolitan Police. In 1865, the police station moved to Kingston Road, later the site of the candle factory. The force relocated to a second station on Kingston Road in 1876 and moved again to new premises on the same street in 1998. In 2022, the local police force is Surrey Police.\nThe magistrates' courts at Knowle Green, opposite the Spelthorne Borough Council offices, were opened in 1976.\nHealthcare.\nStaines Cottage Hospital was opened on 19 May 1914 on the corner of Kingston Road and Worple Road. It was renamed Staines Hospital in 1933, but its importance decreased following the opening of Ashford Hospital in 1939. During the 1960s, the men's wards were shut and it became a hospital for female patients only. It closed in the early 1980s and the buildings were demolished in 1986. The Kingscroft respite service for adults with learning difficulties opened on the site in 1987.\nThe nearest hospital with an A&amp;E is St Peter's Hospital, from Staines-upon-Thames. As of 2022, the town has GP practices at Burgess Way, Knowle Green and on Rochester Road.\nTransport.\nBus.\nStaines is linked by a number of bus routes to surrounding towns and villages in north Surrey, south west London (including Heathrow Airport) and east Berkshire. Operators serving the town include London United, First Berkshire &amp; The Thames Valley and White Bus Services. The bus station is to the south of the Elmsleigh Centre.\nTrain.\nStaines railway station is to the east of the town centre. It is managed by South Western Railway, which operates all services. Trains run to London Waterloo via Clapham Junction, to Reading via Ascot and to Windsor and Eton Riverside via Datchet.\nRiver navigation.\nThe non-tidal section of the River Thames is navigable between Lechlade in Gloucestershire and Teddington Lock. The navigation authority is the Environment Agency.\nLong-distance cycle route and footpath.\nNational Cycle Route 4, which links London to Fishguard, passes through Staines. The Thames Path crosses Staines Bridge.\nEducation.\nEarly schools.\nThe surviving first record of a schoolmaster in Staines is from 1353 and there are mentions of later postholders in documents dating from 1580 to 1673. However, by the 18th century, it appears that there was no dedicated teacher living in the town and, in 1795, the parish clerk was in receipt of a modest salary to teach four children. The British Boys' School in Staines was founded in 1808 and the girls' school was in existence by 1832. By 1852, the boys' school was in Hale Street and was educating around 35 pupils. An infants' school was founded in 1833, which moved with the girls school to Thames Street in 1867. The two schools moved again to larger premises in the same road, but the 1867 schoolhouse still survives behind the shop fronts. National Schools for boys and girls were established in 1818 and in the mid-1820s respectively, but both closed for around a decade before reopening in the mid-1840s. The girls' school moved to new premises in Bridge Street in 1850 and the boys' school relocated to London Road in 1863.\nMaintained schools.\nRiverbridge Primary School was formed from the merger of three predecessor schools in September 2011. The oldest was Shortwood Infant School, which opened in 1905 as the Stanwell Road School. Knowle Park School opened in 1974, but had its origins in the Wyatt Road School which was formed in 1896. Kingscroft Junior School opened in 1992 and replaced Kingston Road School, which had opened in 1903. Riverbridge Primary School operated across three sites, until September 2014, when the former Shortwood Infant School premises were closed. The school became part of the Lumen Learning Trust in Autumn 2016.\nOur Lady of the Rosary Catholic Primary School was founded in 1893.\nThe construction of the Matthew Arnold School started in 1939, but work was suspended at the outbreak of the Second World War. However, parts of the building were sufficiently close to completion to allow pupils aged 11 to 14 from Kingston Road School to transfer to the site, after their classrooms were damaged by bombing. The school formally opened in 1954.\nIndependent school.\nStaines Preparatory School was founded by Cyril Travers Burges and opened on 8 May 1935. The original premises were at 1 Gresham Road, but the school moved to number 3 in 1938 and expanded to number 5 in 1951. The Burges Wing was constructed in 1991; the Jubilee Wing was built in 2002, and was extended in 2008. Today, Staines Prep School educates boys and girls between the ages of 3 and 11.\nPlaces of worship.\nSt Mary's Church.\nSt Mary's Church is first recorded in 1179, but it is thought to have been in existence for at least 100 years before that. There is no mention of a church in Domesday Book, but there may have been a place of worship on the site since the 9th century. By the end of the medieval period, St Mary's had a chancel, nave and an aisle on the north side. It was primarily built of brick in the Gothic style and the tower at the west end was added in 1631.\nThe condition of the church deteriorated in the late 17th and 18th century, due in part to the sale of the lead from the roof of the aisle to fund the Parliamentarian cause in the Civil War. The north side of the building collapsed in 1827 and a new church was built in 1828\u20139, incorporating the 17th-century tower. Among the stained glass panels in the church is a window behind the altar, given by the Crown Prince and Crown Princess of Prussia. In 2005, a window was dedicated to those who died in the 1972 Staines air disaster.\nSt Peter's Church.\nSt Peter's Church was founded as a chapel of ease to St Mary's in 1874. A brick building was constructed at the corner of Wyatt and Langley Roads and was used until 1885, when the congregation moved to an iron church on the corner of Edgell and Budebury Roads.\nThe foundation stone for the current St Peter's Church was laid on 22 July 1893 and the building was consecrated on 28 July the following year. It was designed by George Fellowes Prynne in the free Perpendicular style and the cost of construction was paid by the Solicitor General, Edward Clarke MP. The crenellated tower is topped with a set-back spire, and contains a ring of eight bells.\nChrist Church.\nThe first Christ Church, in Kenilworth Gardens, was constructed in 1935 to serve the new area of housing along Kingston Road to the southeast of the town centre. The brick building was able to accommodate 280 worshippers, and a sliding partition at the west end of the chancel allowed the nave to be used as a church hall. The parish of Christ Church was created in 1951 and a decade later construction of a new church began on the same site as the old. The new Christ Church, consecrated in October 1962, has a centrally placed altar positioned beneath a square lantern. The lantern allows natural light into the interior of the building and is topped with a narrow spire. The font, which dates from 1750, was given to the congregation in 1935, and was previously installed in St Mary's Church.\nStaines Methodist Church.\nJohn Wesley made his first visit to Staines in 1771 and, by the early 19th century, there was a small congregation of Methodists in the town. The first chapel, opened c.\u20091845 on Kingston Road, was replaced by a larger building on the same street in 1865. The congregation moved to the current church, on Thames Street, in 1987.\nOur Lady of the Rosary.\nThe first Roman Catholic Mass to be celebrated at Staines since the Reformation, took place in 1862 at the workhouse, on the site of the present Ashford Hospital. A chapel was opened in 1890 on Gresham Road and was initially known as \"Our Lady, Help of Christians\". The current name, \"Our Lady of the Rosary\" was granted in 1893. The building was extended eastwards to form the present church in 1931, with the addition of a chancel and narrow south aisle. Renovation work in 1990, added additional side aisles and created a new church hall at the west end.\nStaines Congregational Church.\nThere has been a substantial population of Dissenters living in Staines since the mid-17th century and, by 1690, there was a permanent meeting house in the town. The numbers of Congregationalists declined in the mid-18th century, but a regular meeting was re-established in the High Street in 1785. A chapel was constructed in Thames Street in 1802 and was replaced by a classical-style church on the same site in 1837. The present Congregational Church, on Kingston Road, opened in May 1956.\nCulture.\nArt.\nSeveral artists have been inspired to paint Staines Bridge, including William Bernard Cooke (1778\u20131855) and Arthur Melville (1855\u20131904). An engraving of the bridge by William Woolnoth (1780\u20131837), inspired by a painting by John Preston Neale (1780\u20131847), is held by the Victoria and Albert Museum.\nAmong the works of public art on display are mosaics by Gary Drostle and sculptures by Terence Clarke that pay homage to the town's history as a former Roman settlement. The Two Rivers shopping centre has two bronze sculptures by David Backhouse: The first, \"Time Continuum\", celebrates the life of Staines through two millennia and the second, \"Water Sprites\", references the life of the waterways that converge nearby. \"The Swanmaster\", by Diana Thomson, commissioned by Spelthorne Borough Council in 1983, was moved to the Memorial Gardens in 2014.\nFilm and television.\nStaines is the hometown of the fictional Ali G, created by the actor and comedian Sacha Baron Cohen. The character, who first appeared on \"The 11 O'Clock Show\" on Channel 4 in 1998, has been described as a \"disaffected wannabe homeboy of the suburbs\" by the television producer, Harry Thompson. Baron Cohen has said that Ali G \"believes that he is a black hip-hop artist from Staines. He believes his neighbourhood is a rough ghetto, when in fact it's this lovely, leafy, middle-class suburb outside Windsor, where swans swim under the beautiful bridge.\" Following the successful spin-off television series \"Da Ali G Show\", the character appeared in the 2002 feature film \"Ali G Indahouse\". In the film, Ali G is a member of a fictional gang, the West Staines Massive, when his hometown is threatened by the expansion of Heathrow Airport. The film concludes with the saving of Staines and the decision to demolish Slough instead.\nLiterature.\nWilliam Shakespeare mentions Staines in Act II Scene 3 of \"Henry V\", when the Hostess asks her husband, who is travelling to Southampton, if she can accompany him as far as the town. Much of chapters 9\u201311 of \"Three Men in a Boat\" (1889) by Jerome K. Jerome is set in the Staines area, as the main characters travel upriver from Kingston-upon-Thames to Oxford. In Chapter 15 of H. G. Wells' novel \"The War of the Worlds\" (1897), an artillery unit engages a Martian close to Staines. In John Wyndham's novel \"The Kraken Wakes\" (1953), the main characters are stopped in their attempt to reach Cornwall on a dinghy through a flooded England in the \"Staines-Weybridge area\".\nMusic.\nThe indie rock band Hard-Fi was formed in Staines in 2003. Many of the songs from their first album, \"Stars of CCTV\", describe their small-town suburban origins. In 2011, lead singer Richard Archer attracted criticism after describing Staines as a \"ghost town\".\nSport.\nLeisure Centre.\nSpelthorne Leisure Centre, at Knowle Green, opened in 1990 on the site of the former indoor swimming pool which was constructed in 1967. A new leisure centre, which will provide a 25 m pool, a fitness suite and three artificial football pitches on its roof, is expected to open in 2024.\nAssociation football.\nStaines Town F.C. (STFC) traces its origins to a football team from St Peter's Institute, which took part in the 1878\u201379 FA Cup. STFC itself was founded in 1892 and initially played its home games at Hammond's Farm, now beneath the King George VI reservoir. It later merged with the St Peter's team, but the combined club closed in 1935. STFC was reformed towards the end of the Second World War and played its home games at Wheatsheaf Park. The ground was refurbished in 2004, but in March 2022 the club announced that it was in dispute with its landlord and would be suspending football operations with immediate effect.\nStaines Lammas F.C. was founded in 1926 and initially played its home games at the Lammas Recreation Ground. The club moved to Laleham Recreation Ground in the 1980s and, in 2001, opened a new pavilion.\nCricket.\nCricket has been played on Staines Moor since at least 1759 and the nearby Laleham Burway was the site of the first recorded 11-a-side match in Surrey in 1778. Laleham Cricket Club was founded over 200 years ago. It changed its name to the Staines and Laleham Cricket Club in the early 1970s, when it moved from Ashford Road to its current ground, \"The Faulkners\", on Worple Road.\nHockey.\nStaines Hockey Club was formed in 1890 and is one of the oldest hockey clubs in the world. During its early years, the club had several international players among its members, who won gold medals at the 1908 Olympic Games. The club has been based at Worple Road since 1972 and the ground has four full-size hockey pitches. The first ladies' team was formed in 1979 and the first artificial turf pitch was laid in 2001.\nRugby.\nStaines Rugby Football Club was founded in summer 1926 and played its first game against a team from Windsor at the Lammas Recreation Ground that October. In 1947, the club began to rent pitches at the Laleham Cricket Club ground in Ashford Road. It acquired the land for its current premises, a former gravel pit in Hanworth, in 1962. The ground, known as \"The Reeves\", opened in September 1964.\nRowing.\nStaines Boat Club was formed in 1851 and, in 1909, was one of the founder members of the Remenham Club. The current boathouse, at Egham Hythe, is a temporary structure, built in 1950 after the previous building was destroyed by fire.\nStaines Stadium.\nStaines Stadium, on Wraysbury Road, was opened in 1928 and was primarily used for greyhound racing. In 1936, a dozen Cheetahs were imported from Kenya and, having served a six-month quarantine, were trained to follow the mechanical hare and to race with the dogs. Stock car racing took place at the venue in the late 1950s. The stadium closed in 1960, when the A30 Staines bypass was constructed through part of the site, and was demolished in 1965.\nNotable buildings and landmarks.\nBlue Anchor.\nThere is thought to have been an inn on the site of the Blue Anchor since the 16th century. The present building dates from the early- to mid-18th century and is constructed in brick. Much of the interior is thought to be original, including the wooden panelling, several fireplaces and at least one of the staircases. Within a few decades of completion, five of the upstairs windows had been bricked up to reduce window tax liability. During renovation work in 1957, one of the oak beams in the building was dated using dendrochronology and was found to be 650 years old.\nCoal Tax posts.\nThere are three surviving coal-tax posts in the Staines area. These posts marked the limits of the tax jurisdiction of the Corporation of the City of London and were erected under the provisions of the London Coal and Wine Duties Continuance Act 1861. The two posts currently on Wraysbury Road were relocated to their present positions in the second half of the 20th century. The third, a cast-iron obelisk, is in Thames Street close to the Thames Lodge Hotel.\nLondon Stone.\nThe London Stone is a carved stone pillar, positioned beside the River Thames next to the Lammas Recreation Ground. The first stone was erected by the Corporation of the City of London in 1280 or 1285, following its purchase of the river rights from Richard I. Originally positioned close to the Market Square, it marked the western boundary of the corporation's jurisdiction and is thought to have indicated the tidal limit of the Thames in medieval times. It was moved to its current position in the 17th or 18th century and was replaced by a replica in 1986. The original stone is now held by the Spelthorne Museum at Staines Library.\nReservoirs.\nThe twin Staines Reservoirs, to the northeast of the town, were completed in 1902 and have a combined capacity of . They are filled from the Staines Reservoirs Aqueduct, which runs from the Thames at Bell Weir Lock, Hythe End. The two reservoirs are separated by a embankment and, under normal operating conditions, the water level of the northern reservoir is higher than that of the south. During the Second World War, Staines Reservoirs were used by No. 617 Squadron RAF to practise aiming bouncing bombs in preparation for Operation Chastise.\nThe King George VI Reservoir was completed in 1939, but was left unfilled for the duration of the Second World War. In 1942, it was used by the Royal Air Force for Fog Investigation and Dispersal Operation experiments. It was finally opened by King George VI in November 1947 and holds .\nTown Hall.\nThe Town Hall, in the Market Square, was designed by John Johnson in the Renaissance style and was completed in 1880. It replaced a medieval market hall, which was closed in 1862. The building is constructed in white brick with stone dressing with a fish-scale slate roof and the clock was manufactured by Gillett &amp; Bland.\nThe Town Hall was used as the council headquarters until 1976, when Spelthorne Borough council relocated to Knowle Green. In the early 1990s, it was used as an arts centre and, in 2004, it became a wine bar. In January 2018, the building was converted into thirteen residential apartments.\nWar memorial.\nStaines War Memorial was designed by E. J. Barrett and was installed in the Memorial Gardens in 1920. It takes the form of a statue of the winged figure of Victory and is constructed in Portland stone. The names of 196 men who died in the First World War are inscribed on the plinth, beneath which is an inclined stone tablet listing those who died in the Second World War. The memorial was moved to the Market Square in 2002.\nParks and open spaces.\nChurch Lammas.\nThe Church Lammas is an area of common land to the northeast of the town centre, adjacent to the Lammas Recreation Ground. Between 1988 and 1996, it was the site of a quarry and, after gravel and sand extraction had ceased, the area was landscaped to create a recreational area with three lakes. In 2005, the former quarry operator was awarded the Cooper-Heyman Cup in recognition of its work to ensure that the park is fully accessible to disabled visitors.\nLammas Recreation Ground.\nThe Lammas lands were granted to the town by John Ashby in 1922. The area opened to the public as a recreation ground in September of the same year. Since it had previously been common land, residents received compensation for the removal of their grazing rights.\nMarket Square and Memorial Gardens.\nThe Memorial Gardens, alongside the River Thames, were first opened in 1897 as the \"Town Gardens\". They acquired their current name after the First World War when the town war memorial was erected beside the river. In 2002, the Market Square was refurbished and new gateways, known as the \"Swan Arches\", were installed at the main access points to the Memorial Gardens.\nStaines Moor.\nThe Staines Moor, north of the town and east of the M25 motorway, is the largest area of common land in Staines. Until the Commons Registration Act 1965 came into force, any homeowner, whose chimney smoke could be seen from St Mary's Church, was entitled to graze their animals on the moor between April and December each year.\nStaines Moor is the largest area of alluvial meadow in Surrey and was designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest in 1984. Several rare plants are found on the moor such as brown sedge, small water pepper and upright chickweed. The area also provides a habitat for invertebrates including bees, butterflies and moths. Some 217 species of mollusc and 190 species of bird have also been recorded.\nStaines Park.\nStaines Park at Knowle Green, to the east of the town centre, is a recreation ground with tennis courts, a bowling green and a children's playground. Since 2019, the park has been legally protected by the charity, Fields in Trust.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45221", "revid": "16773085", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45221", "title": "Slough", "text": "Town in Berkshire, England\nSlough () is a town in Berkshire, England, in the Thames Valley, west of central London and north-east of Reading, at the intersection of the M4, M40 and M25 motorways. It is part of the historic county of Buckinghamshire. In 2021, the population of the town was 143,184. The wider Borough of Slough had a population of 158,500.\nSlough's population is one of the most ethnically diverse in the United Kingdom, attracting people from across the country and the world for labour since the 1920s, which has helped shape it into a major trading centre. As of the 2021 UK census, 46.9% of the population was Asian, 35.9% White, 7.5% Black, 4% Mixed, 1.2% Arab and 4.5% of other ethnic heritage.\nSlough has the highest concentration of UK HQs of global companies outside London. Slough Trading Estate is the largest industrial estate in single private ownership in Europe, with over 17,000 jobs in 400 businesses. Blackberry, McAfee, Burger King, DHL, Telefonica and Lego have head offices in the town.\nHistory.\nThe name was first recorded in 1195 as \"Slo\". It first seems to have applied to a hamlet between Upton to the east and Chalvey to the west, roughly around the \"Crown Crossroads\" where the road to Windsor (now the A332) met the Great West Road. The Domesday Survey of 1086 refers to Upton, and a wood for 200 pigs, worth \u00a315. During the 13th century, King Henry III had a palace at Cippenham. Parts of Upton Court were built in 1325, while St Mary the Virgin Church in Langley was probably built in the late 11th or early 12th century, though it has been rebuilt and enlarged several times.\nFrom the mid-17th century, stagecoaches began to pass through Slough and Salt Hill (later absorbed into Slough), which became locations for the second stage to change horses on the journey out from London. By 1838 and the opening of the Great Western Railway, Upton-cum-Chalvey's parish population had reached 1,502. In 1849, a branch line was completed from Slough to Windsor &amp; Eton Central, opposite Windsor Castle, for Queen Victoria's convenience.\nSlough has 96 listed buildings. There are\n1918 saw a large area of agricultural land to the west of Slough developed as an army motor repair depot, used to store and repair huge numbers of motor vehicles coming back from the battlefields of the First World War in Flanders. In April 1920, the Government sold the site and its contents to the Slough Trading Co. Ltd. Repair of ex-army vehicles continued until 1925, when the Slough Trading Company Act was passed allowing the company (renamed Slough Estates Ltd) to establish an industrial estate. Spectacular growth and employment ensued, with Slough attracting workers from many parts of the UK and abroad. Slough Town Hall, which was designed by Charles Holloway James and Stephen Rowland Pierce, was completed in 1937.\nDuring the Second World War, Slough experienced a series of air raids, mostly in October 1940 (the largest number of people, five, dying as a result of a raid on the 13th), and an emergency hospital treating casualties from London was set up in Slough. Local air raid deaths and deaths at the hospital account for the 23 civilian lives recorded lost in the borough area.\nAfter the war, several further large housing developments arose to take large numbers of people migrating from war-damaged London. Between 1955 and 1957 the town was the site of the Slough experiment, a large-scale road safety trial.\nThe old Slough library was opened on 28 November 1974. It was officially called the Robert Taylor Library, named after Alderman Taylor in recognition of his contribution to the library service. The library was officially opened by the Mayor, Councillor DR Peters, on 15 May 1975. It was demolished in May 2017 as part of the programme of redevelopment in the town centre.\nRedevelopment.\nIn the 21st century, Slough has seen major redevelopment of the town centre. Old buildings are being replaced with new offices and shopping complexes. Tesco has replaced an existing superstore with a larger Tesco Extra. The Heart of Slough Project is plan for the large-scale redevelopment of the town centre as a focus and cultural quarter for the creative media, information and communications industries created a mixed-use complex, multi-functional buildings, visual landmarks and a public space in the Thames Valley. Approval was given for the \u00a3400 million project by Slough Borough Council's planning committee on 9 July 2009, and work began in 2010 for completion in 2018.\nIn December 2009, two key components of the project were signed: the Homes and Communities Agency (HCA) signed its agreement to provide \u00a311m of funding for infrastructure and Thames Valley University (TVU) courses which were due to remain in the town found a new home at the Centre in Farnham Road, Slough. In parallel to the town centre redevelopment plan, Segro (owner of the Slough Trading Estate) planned to spend \u00a3600 million over the following 20 years on the estate. This was intended to create environmentally sustainable buildings, open green spaces, two hotels, a conference centre, caf\u00e9s, restaurants and better transport facilities to improve links to Slough town centre and the surrounding residential areas. It was claimed that the plan would create more than 4,100 new jobs and contribute around \u00a3100m a year to Slough's economy. If both plans went ahead, nearly \u00a31 billion would be spent on redeveloping Slough over the next 20 years.\nIn 2009, Herschel Park (known as Upton Park until 1949), named for astronomer William Herschel, was relandscaped in a multimillion-pound effort to bring it back to its former Victorian era glory. The park was featured in an episode of the documentary programme \"Who Do You Think You Are?\" focusing on the TV presenter Davina McCall.\nIn 2010, \u00a32 million was set aside to improve disabled access to Slough railway station in preparation for an expected increase in use during the 2012 London Olympics. Preparations were under way for the regeneration of the Britwell suburb of Slough, involving tearing down a dilapidated block of flats and the closing of the public house the Jolly Londoner in Wentworth Avenue and replacing them with new homes, as well as relocating the shopping parade in the street to nearby Kennedy Park.\nAs part of the Heart of Slough project, construction work on a new bus station began in March 2010, following weeks of demolition work to half of the existing bus station and the removal of Compair House near the railway station. It was opened in May 2011.\nRedevelopment on this scale has been strongly criticised by conservation groups. The Twentieth Century Society has stated that\n[A] tragically high quantity of good buildings have been demolished in Slough in recent years, including grand Art-Deco-styled factories by the likes of Wallis Gilbert and high-quality post-war offices. More are to come down as the town tries to erase its past and reinvent itself from scratch. Despite famously heckling Slough, John Betjeman's praise for the town hall's architecture as 'a striving for unity out of chaos' in 1948 has never been so relevant as today. C20 believes that the redevelopment of the town hall would be an act of vandalism to the civic centre and is supporting the Campaign to Save Slough's Heritage in their request for a review of the decision.\nDuring November 2016, the Slough Queensmere and Observatory shopping centres were sold to Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (ADIA) in a deal worth \u00a3130 million.\nIn February 2025, it was reported that the council was considering a number of options to merge with larger local authorities, including joining a London borough or becoming part of the Greater London Authority.\nGeography.\nSlough is west of Charing Cross, central London, north of Windsor, east of Maidenhead, south-east of High Wycombe and north-east of the county town of Reading. Slough is within the Greater London Urban Area and on the border with London Borough of Hillingdon and London Borough of Hounslow. Heathrow Airport is 5 miles away. Nearby towns are Uxbridge to the northeast and Beaconsfield to the north.\nMost of the area that now makes up Slough was anciently part of Buckinghamshire, however, Poyle was historically in Middlesex. The town developed by the expansion and amalgamation of villages along the Great West Road. Over the years Slough has expanded greatly, incorporating a number of different villages. Original villages that are now suburbs of Slough include Chalvey, Cippenham, Colnbrook, Langley, Poyle, Upton, and Wexham.\nNamed neighbourhoods include Brands Hill, Britwell, Huntercombe, Manor Park, Salt Hill, Upton Lea and Windsor Meadows. The urban area merges into the neighbouring parishes of Burnham, a small area of Taplow near Cippenham, Farnham Royal and Stoke Poges which remain in the county of Buckinghamshire and Datchet which is in Berkshire. Eton is narrowly buffered by the Jubilee River and by green space (mainly the college playing fields) from part of Slough, and the two areas formerly formed the Eton birth, marriages and deaths registration district.\nClimate.\nThe nearest Met Office weather observing station to Slough is Heathrow Airport, about east of Slough town centre. This part of the Thames Valley is notable for generally having the warmest daytime summer temperatures on average in the British Isles. Typically, according to 1981\u20132010 normals, the average high temperature in July is 23.5\u00a0\u00b0C (74.3\u00a0\u00b0F.)\nRainfall is low compared to most of the British Isles, with under annually, and 105 days reporting over 1\u00a0mm of rain.\nDemography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2021 census, Slough is a large town with a population of 158,400 of which 46.9% of the population was Asian, 35.9% White, 7.5% Black, 4% Mixed, 1.2% Arab and 4.5% of other ethnic heritage. This makes the town one of the most ethnically diverse local authorities in the country outside of London. \nDespite its diverse population, English is the most spoken language in 2021, with over 110,212 citing English as their first language. Those stating other languages is significantly lower due to the large shares of the British Asian and Black population speaking English as their first language. Aside from English, the most commonly spoken languages are Punjabi, Polish, and Urdu.\nFigures from the 2021 UK census showed that 32% of Slough's population identified as Christian, 29.4% as Muslim, 11.4% as Sikh, 7.8% as Hindu, 0.5% as Buddhist, 0.1% as Jewish, 0.5% as having other religions, 13% as having no religion and 5.4% did not answer the question. \nCompared with the 2011 UK census, the percentage of Slough residents identifying as Muslim increased by 6.1%, the largest increase of any religious group in Slough, while those identifying as Christian fell from 41.2% to 32.0%, with those identifying as having no religion rising slightly from 12.1% to 13.1%.\nGovernance.\nThere is one main tier of local government covering Slough, at unitary authority level: Slough Borough Council, which is based at Observatory House in the town centre. Most of the urban area is unparished, although some of the suburbs are included in civil parishes, including Britwell and Wexham Court.\nAdministrative history.\nSlough was historically a hamlet in the parish of Upton, also known as Upton-cum-Chalvey, in Buckinghamshire. Until 1863 it was administered by the parish vestry and manorial courts, in the same way as most rural areas. As Slough began developing into a town, the need for more urban forms of local government grew. In 1863 a local government district was established for Slough, covering part of the parish of Upton-cum-Chalvey (including the old village of Upton) and a smaller part of the neighbouring parish of Stoke Poges. The town was then governed by an elected local board.\nSuch local government districts were converted into urban districts under the Local Government Act 1894. In 1900 the Slough urban district was enlarged to absorb most of the residual parts of the old Upton-cum-Chalvey parish that had been outside the urban district, including Chalvey. The urban district was further enlarged in 1930, when it was significantly expanded to take in most of the neighbouring parish of Langley (including the village), the Salt Hill area from the parish of Farnham Royal, and the Cippenham area from the parish of Burnham. In 1938 the urban district was incorporated to become a municipal borough. \nIn 1974, the Municipal Borough of Slough was replaced by a larger non-metropolitan district with borough status called Slough. The enlarged district gained the Britwell and Wexham Court areas, and was transferred from Buckinghamshire to Berkshire. The borough was enlarged in 1995 to take in Colnbrook with Poyle.\nIn 1998 Slough Borough Council became a unitary authority when Berkshire County Council was abolished and the borough council took on the former county council's functions in the borough.\nSince 2015, Slough has had a Youth Parliament to represent the views of younger people.\nTown twinning.\nSlough is twinned with:\nEconomy.\nBefore the 19th century, the main businesses of Slough were brickfields and agriculture. The bricks for the building of Eton College were made in Slough. Later, as the Great West Road traffic increased, inns and pubs sprang up along the road to service the passing trade. Until the town developed as an industrial area, nurseries were prominent in the local economy; the Cox's Orange Pippin apple was first raised in Colnbrook (not then within Slough) around 1825, and the dianthus \"Mrs Sinkins Pink\" was first raised at some point between 1868 and 1883 by John Sinkins, the master of the Eton Union Workhouse, which lay in Slough.\nIn the mid-19th century, the only major employer apart from the brickfields was James Elliman, who started as a draper in Chandos Street. In 1847, he changed business and manufactured his Elliman's Embrocation and Royal Embrocation horse liniment at factories in Wellington Street and Chandos Street. Elliman became a major benefactor to the town, and is remembered today in the names of local roads and schools.\nIn September 1851, William Thomas Buckland, an auctioneer and surveyor from nearby Wraysbury, began livestock sales in a field near the Great Western Road Railway Station belonging to the North Star Inn. Originally held on the first Tuesday of every month, the Cattle Market's popularity soon saw this increased to every Tuesday. A move to Wexham Street was necessitated by the postwar redevelopment of the town. The Slough Cattle Market was run by Messrs Buckland and Sons until its final closure in 1988.\nIn 1906, James Horlick, one of the founders of the eponymous malted milk company, opened a purpose-built red-brick factory near Slough Railway Station to manufacture his malted milk product. In 2015, the business was sold by Glaxo Smith Kline and in 2017, manufacturing at the site ceased altogether. The site is currently proposed to become residential making use of the original buildings as much as possible.\nStarting in the 1920s, Slough Estates Ltd, the operator of the original Slough Trading Estate, created and operated many more estates in the UK and abroad. The Slough Trading Estate meant that the town was largely insulated from many of the effects of recession. For many years, Slough's economy was mainly manufacturing-based. The company Zwicky Limited, a manufacturer of liquid pumps, filters, compression valves and aircraft refuelling units, runway sweepers were based in Slough.\nIn the last 20 or so years, there has been a major shift from a manufacturing to an information-based economy, with the closure of many factories (some of which had been in Slough for many decades). The factories are rapidly being replaced by office buildings. Hundreds of major companies have sited in Slough Trading Estate over the years, with its proximity to London Heathrow Airport and good motorway connections being attractive. In the 1960s, Gerry Anderson's film company was based in Slough, and his Supermarionation series, including \"Thunderbirds\", were filmed there.\nThe UK headquarters of Mars, Incorporated is in Slough, the main factory having been established in 1932 by Forrest Mars Sr. and Frank C. Mars. It produced the Mars Bar in Slough over 70 years ago. One of the Mars factories has been demolished and some production has moved to the Czech Republic. The European head offices of major IT companies such as BlackBerry, McAfee, Computer Associates, PictureTel and Compusys (among others) are all in the town. O2 is headquartered in the town across four buildings. The town is also home to the business support organisation Thames Valley Chamber of Commerce Group and National Foundation for Educational Research, which is housed in the Mere.\nRecent new offices include those of Nintendo, Black and Decker and Abbey business centres. The registered office of Furniture Village lies in the town.\nThe motor trade has long been represented in Slough. Until 1966, Citro\u00ebn assembled cars in a Liverpool Road factory (later used by Mars Confectionery), and it retains its UK headquarters in the town. Ford built D Series and Cargo lorries at its factory in Langley (a former Hawker Aircraft site) from 1936 to the 1950s until the site was redeveloped for housing in the 1990s. Ferrari, Mercedes, Fiat and Maserati now have offices in the town.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nLocated roughly west of Central London, Slough is a commuter town near Heathrow Airport ( south-east), Uxbridge ( north-east), Maidenhead ( west) and Staines ( south-east). Slough residents also commute to Windsor, Reading and Bracknell as well as Central London. There are large passenger movements in the morning and evening rush hours. Road transport in Slough includes:\nRail.\nSlough is served by Great Western Railway stations at Burnham, Slough and Langley.\nSlough station is a junction between the Great Western Main Line and the Slough to Windsor &amp; Eton Line to allow passengers to connect for Windsor &amp; Eton Central.\nReading: Great Western Railway operate fast services to Reading every half an hour which take about 15 minutes, as well as slow services every fifteen minutes which take 30 minutes.\nLondon Paddington: Great Western Railway operate express services to London every half an hour which take 14 minutes, as well as slow services every fifteen minutes taking 26 minutes.\nSlough has services on the Elizabeth line, a new railway line across central London opened in 2022.\nThe Western Rail Approach to Heathrow is a \u00a3500m rail project announced by the Department for Transport; Network Rail announced the route in 2014. It will directly serve Slough with four trains every hour, reducing travel times to Heathrow to six minutes. It is expected to be operational in the early 2020s.\nCycling.\nNational Cycle Route 61 runs through central Slough. A Smoove bike sharing system was launched in October 2013, targeting commuters travelling between the trading estate and nearby railway stations.\nCanal.\nSlough is connected by the Slough Arm to the main line of the Grand Union Canal which runs between the Thames at Brentford and Birmingham. It travels from the terminus basin at Stoke Road to the junction with the main line at Cowley Peachey; it was restored to navigability in 1975 having been disused since 1960.\nMuseum.\nSlough Museum was established in 1986.\nSports.\nSlough has a senior non-League football team, Slough Town F.C., who currently play in the National League South.\nSlough Cricket Club play at the Upton Park ground. \nSlough RFC is a rugby club that also plays at Upton Park.\nSlough Hockey Club is a field hockey club that also plays at Upton Park and competes in the Women's England Hockey League and the South Central Hockey League.\nSlough Jets is an ice hockey team that plays in the NIHL South Division 1. \nReading F.C. Womens and Republic of Ireland Womens goalkeeper Grace Moloney was born and lives in the town.\nEducation.\nThere are numerous primary and secondary schools serving Slough. Of the latter there are four state grammar schools. In addition, East Berkshire College has a campus in the area. Slough schools are in the top 10 best performers in the country at GCSE level. In 2011, 68.1% of pupils left school with a minimum of 5 A*-C grades (with English and maths). The national average is 58.9%.\nThames Valley University (Slough Campus) is currently closed due to the Heart of Slough project. The new campus was scheduled to be opened in 2013 as part of the University of West London, but as of March 2022 there had been no progress, as the former site of the university had been sold for housing.\n\"There was an old person of Slough,\"\n\"Who danced at the end of a bough;\"\n\"But they said, 'If you sneeze,\"\n\"You might damage the trees,\"\n\"You imprudent old person of Slough.\"'\n\"Come, friendly bombs and fall on Slough\"\n\"It isn't fit for humans now\"\n\"There isn't grass to graze a cow.\"\n\"Swarm over, death!\"\nThe poem was published two years before the outbreak of the Second World War, in which Britain (including Slough itself) experienced bombing from enemy air raids. On the centenary of his birth, his daughter said her father \"regretted having ever written it\", presenting the Mayor David MacIsaac with a book of his poems in which she had written: \"We love Slough\".\n\"Drop a bomb on Slough, Drop a bomb on Slough\"\n\"Drop a bomb on Slough, Drop a bomb on Slough\"\n\"Oh oh oh Slough (echo: Slough)\"\n\"My kind of town\"\n\"I don't know how\"\n\"Anyone could put you down\"\nCrime.\nSlough has a relatively high crime rate; figures for all crime categories are annually above the English average and figures for a few categories are at more than double the frequency. According to British Crime Survey statistics, as of September 2013, Slough had the second worst rate of crime among local authority areas in the Thames Valley Police counties (87 recorded crimes per 1,000 population vs Oxford's 104). However the borough's crime rate reduced by 29% in the ten years to 2013. In the year ending September 2017, the crime rate in Slough was the third highest in the Thames Valley force area, behind Reading (96.42 police recorded crimes per 1000 population) and Oxford (100.71 for the same metric).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45222", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45222", "title": "Jean-Michel Jarre", "text": "French musician (born 1948)\nJean-Michel Andr\u00e9 Jarre (; born 24 August 1948) is a French composer, performer and record producer. He is a pioneer in the electronic, ambient and new-age genres, and is known for organising outdoor spectacles featuring his music, accompanied by vast laser displays, large projections and fireworks.\nJarre was raised in Lyon by his mother and grandparents and trained on the piano. From an early age, he was introduced to a variety of art forms, including street performers, jazz musicians and the artist Pierre Soulages. His musical style was perhaps most heavily influenced by Pierre Schaeffer, a pioneer of musique concr\u00e8te at the Groupe de Recherches Musicales.\nHis first mainstream success was the 1976 album \"Oxyg\u00e8ne\". Recorded in a makeshift studio at his home, the album sold an estimated 18\u00a0million copies. \"Oxyg\u00e8ne\" was followed in 1978 by \"Equinoxe\", and in 1979, Jarre performed to a record-breaking audience of more than a million people at the Place de la Concorde, a record he has since broken three times. More albums followed, but his 1979 concert served as a blueprint for his future performances around the world. Several of his albums have been released to coincide with large-scale outdoor events.\nAs of 2004, Jarre had sold an estimated 80\u00a0million albums and singles. He was the first Western musician officially invited to perform in the People's Republic of China and held the world record for the largest-ever audience at an outdoor event for his Moscow concert on 6 September 1997, which was reputed to have been attended by about 3.5 million people.\nBiography.\nEarly life, influences, and education.\nJean-Michel Jarre was born in Lyon on 24 August 1948, to Francette Pejot, a French Resistance member and concentration camp survivor, and composer Maurice Jarre. His grandmother was Jewish. When Jarre was five, his parents separated and his father moved to the United States, leaving him with his mother. He did not see his father again until reaching the age of 18.\nFor the first eight years of his life, Jarre spent six months each year at his maternal grandparents' flat on the Cours de Verdun, in the Perrache district of Lyon. Jarre's grandfather was an oboe player, engineer and inventor, designing an early audio mixer used at Radio Lyon. He also gave Jean-Michel his first tape recorder. From his vantage point high above the pavement, the young Jarre was able to observe street performers at work, an experience he later cited as proving influential on his art.\nJarre struggled with classical piano studies, although he later changed teachers and worked on his scales. A more general interest in musical instruments was sparked by his discovery at the Saint-Ouen flea market, where his mother sold antiques, of a Boris Vian trumpet violin. He often accompanied his mother to Le Chat Qui P\u00eache (The Fishing Cat), a Paris jazz club run by one of her friends from her resistance years, where saxophonists Archie Shepp and John Coltrane, and trumpet players Don Cherry and Chet Baker were regular performers. These early jazz experiences suggested to him that music may be \"descriptive, without lyrics\".\nHe was also influenced by the work of French artist Pierre Soulages, whose exhibition at the Mus\u00e9e d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris he attended. Soulages' paintings used multiple textured layers, and Jarre realised that \"for the first time in music, you could act as a painter with frequencies and sounds.\" He was also influenced by classical, modernist music. In a 2004 interview for \"The Guardian\", he spoke of the effect that a performance of Stravinsky's \"The Rite of Spring\" had upon him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is where Stravinsky created it in 1913, and it was a huge shock. I also saw the last concert by the great Arabic singer Om Khalsoum. She is the goddess, the Maria Callas of the Orient. Then I heard \"Georgia on My Mind\" by Ray Charles, and I realised that music can talk to your tummy. I was so impressed by the organic sensuality coming from Ray Charles's music \u2013 there was no intellectual process and it was great.\nAs a young man Jarre earned money by selling his paintings, exhibiting some of his works at the Lyon Gallery\u00a0\u2013 \"L'\u0152il \u00e9coute\", and by playing in a band called Myst\u00e8re IV. While he studied at the Lyc\u00e9e Michelet, his mother arranged for him to take lessons in harmony, counterpoint and fugue with Jeannine Rueff of the Conservatoire de Paris. In 1967 he played guitar in a band called \"The Dustbins\", who appear in the film \"Des gar\u00e7ons et des filles\". He mixed instruments including the electric guitar and the flute with tape effects and other sounds.\nMore experimentation followed in 1968, when he began to use tape loops, radios and other electronic devices. In 1969, he joined the Groupe de Recherches Musicales (GRM), founded and led by Pierre Schaeffer, inventor of musique concrete. Jarre was introduced to the Moog modular synthesizer and spent time working at the studio of influential German composer Karlheinz Stockhausen in Cologne.\nIn the kitchen of his apartment in Rue de la Tr\u00e9moille, Jarre set up a small makeshift recording studio. It included his first synthesiser, an EMS VCS 3, and an EMS Synthi AKS, each linked to Revox tape machines. For a 1969 exposition at the Maison de la Culture (Cultural House) in Reims, Jarre wrote the five-minute experimental instrumental \"Happiness Is a Sad Song\". That same year he composed and recorded \"La Cage/Erosmachine\", a mixture of harmony, tape effects and synthesisers, which was released in 1971.\n1970s.\nIn 1971 Jarre was commissioned by choreographer Norbert Schmucki to perform a ballet called \"AOR\" (in Hebrew, \"the light\"), at the Palais Garnier. He also composed background music for ballet, theatre, television programs, department stores, and advertising jingles for Pepsi-Cola, Nestl\u00e9 and RTL. The music for airports, and North America libraries was composed with the VCS 3 and a Farfisa professional organ. From 1972 to 1975, Jean-Michel wrote music and lyrics for artists like Fran\u00e7oise Hardy, G\u00e9rard Lenorman, Christophe and Patrick Juvet. In 1972 he collaborated in an Olympia show, and wrote music for the International Festival of Magic. In 1972 he also released his first solo album, \"Deserted Palace\", and composed the soundtrack for \"Les Granges Br\u00fbl\u00e9es\" (English: \"The Burned Barns\").\nJarre's 1976 low-budget solo album \"Oxyg\u00e8ne\", recorded at his home studio, made him famous internationally. The music was made with analog synthesizers like the EMS VCS 3 and the EMS Synthi AKS, and recorded with a Scully 8-track recorder. Jarre initially was turned down by several record companies, until Jean-Michel decided to meet with Francis Dreyfus, the head of the Disques Motors label, to see if he could release the album, to which he accepted. The first pressing of 50,000\u00a0copies was promoted through hi-fi shops, clubs and discos, and by April 1977 had sold 70,000\u00a0copies in France. When interviewed in \"Billboard\" magazine, Motors's director Stanislas Witold said, \"In a sense we're putting most of our bets on Jean-Michel Jarre. He is quite exceptional and we're sure that by 1980 he will be recognised worldwide.\"\nJarre's follow-up album, \"Equinoxe\", was released in 1978. Though its sales were still healthy, it had less of an impact than \"Oxyg\u00e8ne\". but in 1979 Jarre held a large open-air concert on Bastille Day, at the Place de la Concorde. The free outdoor event set a world record for the largest number of spectators ever at an open-air concert, drawing more than 1\u00a0million spectators. Although it was not the first time he had performed in concert (Jarre had already played at the Paris Opera Ballet), the 40\u00a0minute-long event, which used projections of light, images and fireworks, served as a blueprint for Jarre's future concerts. Its popularity helped create a surge in sales\u2014a further 800,000 records were sold between 14 July and 31 August 1979\u2014and the Frenchman Francis Rimbert featured at the event.\n1980s.\nBy the time \"Les Chants Magn\u00e9tiques\" was released on 20 May 1981, \"Oxyg\u00e8ne\" and \"Equinoxe\" had achieved global sales of about 6\u00a0million units. In its first two months the new album sold 200,000\u00a0units in France alone. The album uses sounds from the Fairlight CMI, a new instrument of which Jarre was a pioneer. Its digital technology allowed him to continue his earlier sonic experimentation in new ways.\nIn that same year, the British Embassy gave Radio Beijing copies of \"Oxyg\u00e8ne\", \"Equinoxe\", and \"Les Chants Magn\u00e9tiques\", which became the first pieces of foreign music to be played on Chinese national radio in decades. The Republic invited Jarre to become the first western musician to play in post-Mao Zedong China. The performances were scheduled to run from 18 October to 5 November 1981. 5 concerts were performed, two in Beijing and three in Shanghai. The first, in Beijing, was initially attended mostly by officials, but before the concert began, technicians realised that not enough power was available to supply the stage and auditorium. Chinese officials solved the problem by temporarily cutting power to the surrounding districts.\nThe stadium was almost full when the concert began, but as Beijing's buses stopped running at about 10 o'clock, about half the audience left before it finished. To boost the audience attendance for the second night, Jarre and his production team purchased some of the concert tickets and gave them to children on the streets. Jarre originally wanted the concerts to be free, but the Chinese authorities decided to charge between \u00a30.20 and \u00a30.50 per ticket. In 1982, recordings of the concerts, which featured one of Jarre's signature electronic instruments, the laser harp, were released as a double-disc LP.\nBetween February and May 1983, Jarre recorded a single LP copy of an album entitled \"Musique pour Supermarch\u00e9\" (English: \"Music for Supermarkets\") whose objective was to be the soundtrack of a show called Orrimbe, to later be auctioned with the master tapes and plates destroyed. The album was later broadcast exclusively on Radio Luxembourg with Jarre encouraging listeners to record the broadcast.\nIn 1984, he released seventh studio album \"Zoolook\". In this album he expanded the sample-based approach which had been initiated on \"Les Chants Magn\u00e9tiques\" and continued on \"Music for Supermarkets\". The album was based around multiple fragments of human voices pronouncing words and speeches in different languages from all over the world, recorded digitally by Jarre and then played back and edited on the Fairlight CMI.\nIn 1985, Jarre was invited by the musical director of the Houston Grand Opera to perform a concert celebrating Texas's 150th anniversary on 5 April 1986. Although he was busy with other projects and was at first unimpressed by the proposal, on a later visit to the city, he was immediately impressed by the visual grandeur of the city's skyline and agreed to perform. Also, 1985 marked the 25th anniversary of the foundation of the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center; and NASA asked Jarre to integrate the anniversary into the concert.\nJarre worked with several Houston-based astronauts, including Bruce McCandless II and Ronald McNair, an accomplished musician who was to have played the saxophone on \"Rendez-Vous VI\", recorded in the weightless environment of space. The live performance was curtailed by McNair's death in the Space Shuttle \"Challenger\" disaster on 28 January 1986. Consideration was given to the cancellation of the concert; but McCandless contacted Jarre and urged him to proceed, in memory of the shuttle's crew. McNair's saxophone piece was recorded by French saxophonist Pierre Gossez and retitled \"Ron's Piece\". At Jarre's giant concerts in Houston and Lyon, the part was performed by McNair's friend, American saxophonist Kirk Whalum:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I remember just before take-off, Ron calling me in Paris saying \"Everything's ready, see you in a week's time, watch me on television for the take-off\"\u00a0... I will really, keep always, the bit of Ron's smile and Ron's face in my heart.\nAbout 2,000\u00a0projectors shone images onto buildings and giant screens up to high, transforming the city's skyscrapers into spectacular backdrops for an elaborate display of fireworks and lasers. Rendez-vous Houston entered the \"Guinness Book of Records\" for its audience of over 1.5\u00a0million, beating his earlier record, set in 1979. The display was so impressive that a nearby freeway was blocked by passing vehicles, forcing the authorities to close it for the duration of the concert. Several months later he performed to an audience of about a million at his home city of Lyon, in celebration of a visit by Pope John Paul II. Watching from Lyon Cathedral, the Pope began the concert with a good-night blessing, a recording of which appears on \"Cities in Concert \u2013 Houston/Lyon\".\nIn 1988, Jarre released his ninth studio album \"Revolutions\", and in same year, a concert called Destination Docklands was planned for September, to be held at the Royal Victoria Dock in east London. Close to the heart of London, the location was chosen in part for its desolate environment, but also because Jarre thought the architecture was ideally suited for his music. Early in 1988 Jarre met with local officials and members of the community, but Newham Borough Council delayed their decision until 12 September, the month in which the show was due to take place. The local fire service were also concerned about access in the event of a fire. Site work continued as Jarre's team searched for alternative locations in which to stage the concert, but following improvements to both on and off-site safety Jarre eventually won conditional approval on 28 September to stage two separate performances, on 8 and 9 October.\nThe floating stage on which Jarre and his musicians performed was built on top of four large barges. Large purpose-built display screens were built, and one of the buildings to be used as a backdrop was painted white. One large mirror ball being transported to the event fell onto the roadside, causing a degree of confusion as some people mistook it for a fallen satellite. World War II searchlights were installed, to illuminate the sky and surrounding architecture.\nAlong with thousands in the surrounding streets and parks, 200,000\u00a0people watched Jarre and guests such as guitarist Hank Marvin perform in less than ideal conditions. Inclement weather had threatened to break the stage from its moorings, putting paid to the original plan to float the stage across the Royal Victoria Dock. Wind speeds were so high that television cameras were blown over. On the second evening the audience, which included Diana, Princess of Wales, was soaked by rain and wind.\n1990s.\nIn 1990, Jarre released \"En Attendant Cousteau\" (\"Waiting for Cousteau\"), a tribute to the French oceanographer Jacques-Yves Cousteau. On Bastille Day he performed a concert at La D\u00e9fense in Paris, attended by a record-breaking audience of about two million people, again beating his earlier world record. He later promoted a concert near the Pyramids of Teotihuacan in Mexico, to be held during the solar eclipse of 11 July 1991. However, with only weeks to go, important equipment had not arrived and the sinking in the Atlantic Ocean of a cargo ship containing the purpose-built pyramidal stage and other technical and financial problems made staging the concert impossible. Jarre's disappointment was such that he \"could not cope with Mexican food for two years\".\nAbout two years later he released \"Chronologie\", an album that features Jarre's traditional collection of instruments like the ARP 2600 and Minimoog, as well as newer synthesisers such as the Roland JD-800 and the Kurzweil K2000.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the state of mind I did \"Chronologie\", it's quite close to what I did for \"Oxyg\u00e8ne\", using a lot of the old synthesizers of the '70s, like the Moog synthesizer\u00a0\u2014 which I consider to be the Stradivarius of electronic music\u00a0\u2014 mixed with the digital sound and the beat of the dance scene of the '90s. In a sense, \"Chronologie\" is a kind of mixture between the sounds of the '70s and the sounds of the '90s.\nJarre was invited to the inaugural celebrations of the Palace of the Lost City, a hotel located within the Sun City in South Africa. Three concerts were held on 1, 2 and 3 December 1992, in which more than 45,000 people attended.\n\"Chronologie\" was performed at a series of 16\u00a0performances across Europe called \"Europe in Concert\". These were on a smaller scale than his previous concerts, featuring a miniature skyline, laser imaging and fireworks. Locations included Lausanne, Mont St Michel, London, Manchester, Barcelona, Seville and the Versailles Palace near Paris. In March 1994, a concert was held in Hong Kong, to mark the opening of the city's new stadium.\nJarre performed many of his most well-known hits at the \"Concert for Tolerance\" on Bastille Day in 1995, celebrating the 50th anniversary of the United Nations. The Eiffel Tower was specially lit for the occasion, prompting the installation of a more permanent display. The following December, he created the website \"A Space for Tolerance\", which featured music from \"En Attendant Cousteau\", played while the user browsed a variety of \"visual worlds\".\nIn 1997, Jarre returned to the analogue synthesisers of the 1970s with \"Oxyg\u00e8ne 7\u201313\", dedicated to his mentor at the GRM, Pierre Schaeffer, who had died two years before. In September that year he set his fourth record for the largest-ever outdoor-concert audience with a performance at the Moscow State University, celebrating the 850th anniversary of Moscow. The event was viewed by an audience of about 3.5\u00a0million.\nOn September 18, 1998, during the 15th Paris Apple Expo's \"iMac Night\", Jarre, Apple brand ambassador and friend of Steve Jobs' created the first 3D concert, \"Electronic Odyssee\", to mark the 50th anniversary of electronic music and the launch of the Apple iMac computer. It was enjoyed by 6000 spectators wearing special 3D glasses.\nAnother large-scale concert followed on 31 December 1999, in the Egyptian desert near Giza. The Twelve Dreams of the Sun celebrated the new millennium and offered a preview of his next album, \"M\u00e9tamorphoses\", released in 2000. The show featured performances from more than 1,000\u00a0local artists and musicians, and was based on ancient Egyptian mythology about the journey of the Sun and its effect upon humanity. In 1998, British commercial broadcaster ITV used a remixed version of \"Fourth Rendez-Vous\" (called Rendez-Vous 98) for their television coverage of the 1998 FIFA World Cup in France. British group Apollo 440 were credited alongside Jarre for the remix.\n2000s.\nIn 2001, he released \"Interior Music\", an album of 1,000 copies created for use by the Danish audio-visual company Bang &amp; Olufsen stores. The album consists of two long-form pieces: \"Bonjour Hello\", is a 25-minute audio collage of sounds with voices saying short sentences in French, English and Danish. The second piece, \"Whispers of Life\", is an instrumental version of the first, with the voices removed.\nIn 2001 he composed, with Francis Rimbert arrangements, the music for the short-lived French channel Match TV. On 7 September 2002, Jarre held a very wet and muddy concert at the Gammel Vr\u00e5 Enge near the city of Aalborg in Denmark, with 40,000 spectators (including 5,000 VIPs). Danish band Safri Duo featured on the track \"Aero\", which in fact was Bourges 2 from the performance earlier that year, and Rendez-Vous 4. The concert was broadcast live on various TV stations around the world and a shortened one-hour version was made available for rebroadcast.\nBy no fault of Jarre, due to 22 millimeters of rain and lack of proper preparation for and execution of the event, it took several hours for all people to be able to leave the area, and many cars were stuck until the next day. The problems became a big issue in Danish media, since, had there been an accident, it would be extremely difficult for help to get to the location. Two years previously, nine people were killed at Roskilde Festival, which had brought focus on security at large concerts. Preparations for AERO were later proven to have been lacking, and the police investigation concluded, in part, that permission for the concert should not have been granted. Reactions from spectators were mixed, some claiming it was unsafe, and others saying it was a case of overreacting.\nA concert in September of that same year at a wind farm near Aalborg in Denmark proved problematic when 22\u00a0mm of rain fell on the venue, causing long delays for spectators. It also marked a change in direction in Jarre's live concerts; from Rendez-vous Houston onwards he had been accompanied by a full complement of live musicians, but at Aalborg he was accompanied only by Francis Rimbert, and having guests like the Klarup Girls Choir, Safri Duo and the Aalborg Symphonic Orchestra.\nIn 2003 he released \"Geometry of Love\" on Warner Music label, it was commissioned by Jean-Roch as soundtrack for his 'V.I.P. Room' nightclub in France. The physical CD was a long time out of print, but in 2018 remastered reissue was released on CD again. The album cover is a pixelated and turned counter-clockwise photo of Jarre's girlfriend at the time, Isabelle Adjani.\nIn October 2004 he returned to China to open its \"Year of France\" cultural exchange. Jarre gave two performances, the first at the Meridian Gate of the Forbidden City, and the second in Tiananmen Square. More than 15,000\u00a0spectators watched the concert at the Meridian Gate, and each concert was transmitted nationwide on live television. Jarre collaborated with musician Chen Lin. Accompanying his traditional musical repertoire, 600\u00a0projectors shone coloured light and images across various screens and objects.\nIn September 2004, Jarre released both a DVD and a CD in one package \"AERO\". A compilation album made in 5.1 surround sound, it contains re-recorded versions of some of his most famous tracks, including tracks from \"Oxyg\u00e8ne\" and \"Equinoxe\". Accompanying the audio, the DVD features a visual image of Anne Parillaud's eyes, recorded in real time as she listened to the album. Jarre used the minimalist imagery to reinforce the audio content of the DVD.\nIn his role of UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador, Jarre performed a concert named Water for Life in Morocco, on 16 December 2006, to celebrate the United Nations Year of Desertification in the world. The performance was in front of the Erg Chebbi Dunes of Merzouga, in the Sahara. A free event, it was attended by about 25,000 people. Images of water and the environment were projected onto nine vertical screens, held in place by sand which was watered to keep it hard. Several permanent drinking fountains were built on the site, along with a permanent electricity installation. Jarre was accompanied by over 60\u00a0Moroccan artists. Jarre released \"T\u00e9o &amp; T\u00e9a\" in 2007, a studio album that described the different stages of a loving relationship.\nIn that same year released on EMI label a new recording of his 1976 album named \"\". Jarre performed 10 concerts (\"Oxyg\u00e8ne Live\") in December 2007, held in the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Marigny, located in the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es, Paris. Later in 2008 Jarre performed several concerts to celebrate the 30th anniversary of \"Oxyg\u00e8ne\", in theaters in Europe. Following one such performance at the Royal Albert Hall Jarre met Queen guitarist Brian May, who proposed he create a concert in Tenerife for the International Year of Astronomy, but a lack of sponsorship meant that the concert did not take place. In 2009 he was selected as the artistic director of the World Sky Race, and also accepted a role as Goodwill Ambassador for the International Year of Astronomy. In 2009 he started an indoor tour in arenas throughout Europe.\n2010s.\nOn 1 March 2010, Jean-Michel Jarre started the second leg of his 2009\u20132010 Indoors tour; on 10 June, he was presented with a Lifetime Achievement Award by \"Mojo\" magazine. On 1 July 2011, Jarre performed a large-scale concert in Monaco to celebrate the marriage of Prince Albert and his bride Charlene. A later concert was held at Carthage during the city's 12 August 2013 musical festival.\nIn June 2013, Jarre was elected as president of the (CISAC). In Spring 2015, Jarre released the first music from a new studio album, released in October 2015, following around four years of work. The album, \"\" (working title: \"E-Project\"), comprises a number of collaborations with other artists. The first of these to be released was the collaboration with Gesaffelstein entitled \"Conquistador\", followed by \"Glory\", with M83. The track was also featured as part of the soundtrack of a short film entitled \"EMIC\".\nOther collaborations on the album include Tangerine Dream for \"Zero Gravity\"; Armin van Buuren for \"Stardust\", John Carpenter for \"A Question of Blood\", Little Boots for \"If..!\" and Pete Townshend for \"Travelator, Pt. 2\". The album became Jarre's first album in over 25 years to make the UK Top 10 at No. 8. In December 2016, the album was nominated for the Grammys 2017 Awards in the \"Best Dance/Electronic Album\" category. In June 2015, in collaboration with Jean-Michel Jarre, the transmedia project \"Soundhunters\" was released on the platform of the Franco-German channel ARTE. The transmedia conceptualized by the Blies brothers (St\u00e9phane Hueber-Blies and Nicolas Blies), Fran\u00e7ois Le Gall and Marion Guth of the Luxembourg production company a_BAHN, is openly inspired by the album \"Zoolook\" to which it pays tribute.\nOn 5 October 2016, Democracy in Europe Movement 2025 announced that Jarre would be a member of its advisory panel. The transmedia is composed of a web documentary using \"Zoolook\"'s creative process involving 4 international artists (Simonne Jones, Mikael Seifu, Daedelus and Luke Vibert); a 52' documentary film directed by Beryl Koltz broadcast in September 2015 on ARTE (with the participation of Chassol, Matthew Herbert, Blixa Bargeld, Jean-Michel Jarre, Matmos, Kiz, Joseph Bertolozzi); and finally a participatory tribute music album whose tracks were chosen by Jean-Michel Jarre, entitled \"Zoolook Revisited\". \"Soundhunters\" won the Fipa d'Or 2015 in Biarritz. \"Soundhunters\" was also presented in conference at SXSW and Convergence NYFF 2016.\nIn 2016, \"\" was released with 15 more collaborators, including Pet Shop Boys, Hans Zimmer, Yello and Gary Numan. One track (8 \"Exit\") includes speech by Edward Snowden. \"Electronica 2\" has been nominated in the \"Album de musiques \u00e9lectroniques ou dance\" category for the Grammy 2017 in USA &amp; Victoires de la Musique 2017 awards in France. On 11 April 2016, it was revealed that Jarre worked in collaboration with British virtual band Gorillaz on their fifth studio album \"Humanz\". He also composed during 2016 the soundtrack for the French news network France Info. This soundtrack was released as \"Radiophonie Vol. 9\" on 13 January 2017.\nIn 2017, he performed a concert near the fortress of Masada, for the purpose of saving the Dead Sea and to highlight \"the anti-environmental policies of Donald Trump.\" He also performed a special concert for the opening of the \"A\u00f1o Jubilar\" (Jubilee year) at the Monasterio de Santo Toribio de Li\u00e9bana, in Spain. Both concerts were heavily based in the Electronica Tour concept. During May 2017, Jarre toured in Canada and USA for the first time in his career, and in July 2017 another leg of the tour was held in Europe.\nIn March 2018, Jarre performed in South America for the first time as part of his Electronica Tour in Buenos Aires and Santiago de Chile. These concerts were originally scheduled for November 2017, but problems with the production company caused the rescheduling. The 2018 leg of the tour continued in Canada and the United States during April, including the presentation of the Electronica show with a reduced track list in the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, ending with a one-off concert at Riyadh to celebrate the 88th Saudi National Day (23 September). This concert was called \"The Green Concert\", and involved laser projections on the skyscrapers of the financial center of Riyadh. In September 2018, a studio compilation album entitled \"Planet Jarre \u2013 50 Years of Music\", consisting of forty-one songs in \"four quite different styles of composition\", was released.\nOn 26 November 2018, Jarre and Scott Kirkland of The Crystal Method announced that they would be collaborating on a track on Jarre's next \"Electronica\" album. In January 2019, HSBC revealed their new musical identity, composed by Jarre. On 3 October 2019, French editor Robert Laffont published Melancolique Rodeo, Jarre's autobiography. Jarre started a promotional tour for his book. On 7 November 2019, Jarre announced the release of an application for the iOS operating system named E\u014dN. This application contains morphing graphics created by an algorithm developed by Alexis Andr\u00e9 of Sony Computer Science Laboratories, and music generated from 7 hours of recorded material by Jarre. This music is always different on every device. The AI algorithm which composes on the fly based on the rules set by Jarre was developed by BLEASS. A limited deluxe box set was later released with excerpts from the application.\nSince 2020.\nOn 31 December 2020, Jarre held a virtual New Year's Eve concert online. He performed from a studio in Paris, but it appeared virtually from a Notre Dame setting. The show has had over 75 million viewers as of 5 January 2021. The show was done in support of his new album \"Welcome to the other side,\" which features 12 tracks from his previously released music. The recording of the concert was released on CD, LP and Blu-ray in September 2021. VR Concert created by VRROOM received 2 Webby Award Honoree, Crystal Owl Award for the Best Live Entertainment, and Social Music Award.\nOn 21 June 2021, Jarre was awarded Commander to the Legion of Honour by French president Emmanuel Macron at the Elys\u00e9e presidential palace in Paris. After the ceremony he performed at the same venue as part of the F\u00eate de la Musique. In March 2022 Jarre presented a live project, \"Oxymore\", at Radio France's Hyper Weekend Festival located at Paris.\nHis twenty-second studio album \"Oxymore\" was released on 21 October 2022 by Sony Music and Menart Records as a tribute to Pierre Henry. Some songs were accompanied by a remix created by different artists such as Brian Eno, Nina Kraviz, Armin van Buuren, the first single from the album, \"Brutalism\", was released along with a remix made by Depeche Mode member Martin Gore.\nOXYMORE was created as multiformat concert in VR by VRROOM Team and received Webby People's Voice Award in 2023 and Webby Nomination and Honoree in 2022, Crystal Owl Award for Best Production Design, Raindance Immersive Honourable Jury Mentioning, as well as nomination for the Producers Guild of America's Innovation Award. In July 2022, his music publishing catalog was acquired by BMG Rights Management.\nOn 25 December 2023, Jarre held a concert in the Hall of Mirrors of Versailles to celebrate the 400 years of the palace. This was released in October 2024 as a limited edition \"phydigital\" (hybrid physical and digital release) in either vinyl or CD (with a limited edition of 2000 for each format, the vinyl being numbered on the sleeve), which as well as the physical medium which provided the owner with \"a truly unique digital experience,\" accessible by phone through a custom NFC sticker embedded inside the CD or vinyl sleeve. The digital content featured a special greeting from Jarre's avatar, exclusive behind-the-scenes photos of the event's visuals created by Jarre and his team, custom AI animations of the Hall of Mirrors, and an in-depth interview with Jarre discussing the event and its unique setup. It also included a lossless audio streaming version with an electro rendition of JB Lully's \"Walk to the Turcs Ceremony,\" the recent single \"Epica Oxygene,\" and fresh versions of existing tracks. In the greeting from Jarre's avatar, Jarre said that they would be updating the content twice.\nIn 2023 Jarre joined forces with Renault, along with Ircam and the Group's sound design teams, to https://: VSPs (Vehicle Sounds for Pedestrians) and the Welcome sound sequence (which plays when you sit in the car).\nOn 8 September 2024, Jarre performed at the closing ceremony of the 2024 Summer Paralympics.\nFlying aircar mission.\nIn April 2024, Jean-Michel Jarre became the world's first passenger to take off in Klein Vision's flying AirCar.\nPersonal life.\nJarre was married to Flore Guillard from 1975 until 1977.\nHe met his second wife, actress Charlotte Rampling, at a dinner party in Saint-Tropez in 1976. The two married. Jarre and Rampling separated in 1996 and divorced in 2002. Jarre gained custody of his daughter \u00c9milie Charlotte. Rampling gained custody of her son Barnaby. Together Jarre and Rampling had a son, David.\nHe had a brief relationship with Isabelle Adjani, and married French actress Anne Parillaud in May 2005. In November 2010 the couple announced their divorce.\nJarre started dating Chinese actress Gong Li in 2016. They married in 2019, and have kept the relationship private.\nJarre has a half-sister, St\u00e9phanie Jarre, from one of Maurice Jarre's other marriages. His stepbrother, Kevin Jarre, died in 2011. Although Maurice and Jean-Michel remained estranged, following Maurice's death in 2009, Jarre paid tribute to his legacy.\nJarre said about his father: \"My father and I never really achieved a real relationship. We probably saw each other 20\u00a0or 25\u00a0times in our lifetime. When you are able, at my age, to count the times you have seen your father, it says something. (...) I think it's better to have conflict, or, if you have a parent who dies, you grieve, but the feeling of absence is very difficult to fill, and it took me a while to absorb that\".\nHonours.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45224", "revid": "10808929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45224", "title": "Animal Crackers (1930 film)", "text": "1930 film starring the Marx Brothers\nAnimal Crackers is a 1930 American pre-Code comedy film starring the Marx Brothers and directed by Victor Heerman. It is based on the Brothers' 1928 eponymous musical by George S. Kaufman and Morrie Ryskind, with songs by Bert Kalmar and Harry Ruby. The film features Groucho, Harpo, Chico, and Zeppo Marx alongside Margaret Dumont and Lillian Roth. Set at a Long Island society party honoring eccentric African explorer Captain Jeffrey T. Spaulding (Groucho), the film serves primarily as a vehicle for the Marx Brothers' comedy and absurdist routines, with a minimal plot loosely structured around the theft of a valuable painting.\nProduced by Paramount Pictures at their Astoria Studios in Queens, \"Animal Crackers\" was the Marx Brothers' second feature film, following \"The Cocoanuts\" (1929). The production faced significant challenges in adapting the stage musical to the emerging sound film format, as musical films were still in their infancy. The studio made extensive cuts to musical numbers and restructured the original material. Director Victor Heerman was specifically hired to manage the disruptive behavior of the Marx Brothers on set.\nThe film was both a critical and commercial success upon its August 1930 release, earning $3.1 million in U.S. and Canada rentals. It established several of the Marx Brothers' most famous comedic routines. Following the film's release, Groucho's songs \"Hooray for Captain Spaulding\" and \"Hello, I Must Be Going\" became signature pieces, with the former serving as the theme for his television quiz show, \"You Bet Your Life\". The film's humor and surrealist elements influenced later comedy filmmaking and earned recognition from avant-garde critics like Antonin Artaud, as well as filmmakers like Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut and Jim Jarmusch.\nLegal issues over literary and distribution rights caused \"Animal Crackers\" to be withdrawn from circulation in the late 1950s. Following a fan campaign initiated by UCLA students and supported by Groucho, Universal Pictures, which by then owned the rights, settled the legal problems in 1974. \"Animal Crackers\" was subsequently re-released to theaters and television. The film was restored in 2016 based on a print found in the British Film Institute, which included some previously censored material. \"Animal Crackers\" will enter the public domain in 2026.\nPlot.\nSociety matron Mrs. Rittenhouse hosts a weekend party at her Long Island mansion to honor African explorer Captain Jeffrey T. Spaulding, who has recently returned from his expeditions. The entertainment includes the unveiling of art patron Roscoe W. Chandler's newly acquired painting, \"After The Hunt\", by the artist Beaugard. Musicians Signor Emanuel Ravelli and his silent partner, known only as the Professor, are among the guests. Captain Spaulding arrives in a sedan chair to cheers (\"Hooray for Captain Spaulding\") and announces his immediate departure (\"Hello, I Must Be Going\").\nMrs. Rittenhouse's daughter, Arabella, plans to advance her fianc\u00e9 John Parker's artistic career. John painted a nearly perfect copy of the Beaugard work during his studies, and the couple intends to swap his version for the original. They hope the deception, when revealed, will impress Chandler with John's talent. Arabella enlists Ravelli's assistance in executing the switch.\nTwo other guests\u2014Grace Carpenter and Mrs. Whitehead\u2014have a similar plan, though their motivation is to embarrass Mrs. Rittenhouse. Grace has also created a copy of the painting, but it is a poor imitation. They persuade Hives, the Rittenhouse butler and Mrs. Whitehead's former employee, to make their substitution. In their ignorance of the first plot, they inadvertently remove John's superior copy rather than the original.\nRavelli and the Professor encounter Chandler and recognize him as \"Abie,\" a fish peddler from Czechoslovakia operating under an assumed identity. During a nighttime thunderstorm that plunges the mansion into darkness, Ravelli and the Professor attempt their own painting switch, only to be interrupted by Captain Spaulding and Mrs. Rittenhouse.\nThe guests assemble for a lecture on Africa by Captain Spaulding, followed by music from Ravelli and the Professor (\"I'm Daffy Over You\", \"Silver Threads Among the Gold\"). At the end of the evening, they unveil the painting; Chandler immediately spots the poor craftsmanship of Grace's copy and realizes his valuable artwork has been stolen. John, observing the revealed painting, mistakenly believes his own work is still in place and is crestfallen by Chandler's negative reaction. A second power outage occurs during the commotion, and when the lights return, the substitute painting has vanished, leaving the assembled guests confused. John and Arabella reflect on how romantic it was to be there when the theft took place (\"Why Am I So Romantic?\").\nPolice arrive the following day to investigate the theft. John discovers Grace's inferior copy and realizes that multiple parties attempted the same deception. After retrieving another version from the Professor, John and Arabella present their findings to Captain Spaulding. The Professor is apprehended, and all three paintings are recovered and sorted out. When Chandler briefly mistakes John's skillful copy for the genuine Beaugard, he recognizes the young man's artistic ability and commissions him for a series of portrait paintings.\nThe Professor escapes custody and employs a Flit gun to spray the assembled guests with a sedative substance, rendering everyone unconscious. After successfully incapacitating all present, the Professor knocks himself out as well, leaving all characters sprawled unconscious on the floor.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nIn February 1930, following the commercial success of \"The Cocoanuts\", Paramount Pictures signed the Marx Brothers for a follow-up film. Paramount had not yet secured the rights to the Brothers' then-current Broadway musical \"Animal Crackers\" from producer Sam H. Harris. The studio instead planned to commission an original screenplay from Ben Hecht. However, Paramount obtained the film rights in March and began pre-production with the goal of commencing filming in May.\nThe stage-to-screen adaptation presented unique challenges during the early sound era. \"The Cocoanuts\" was filmed in its entirety, then extensively cut to achieve a shorter runtime. To avoid this expense, Paramount enlisted co-author Morrie Ryskind to accompany the Marx Brothers on tour and observe performances to identify material suitable for elimination. The resulting film adaptation changed the original structure of the stage version, leading to numerous revisions. Some characters and scenes were removed, and roles were consolidated. The female love interest was merged with the Arabella Rittenhouse character, while wealthy financier Roscoe Chandler was combined with art dealer Monsieur Doucet.\nParamount enlisted Victor Heerman as director partly due to his reputation for maintaining discipline with performers, as both the Marx Brothers and Roth were known for unprofessional behavior on set. Heerman also contributed to cuts, insisting on the removal of most of the musical numbers, including the play's grand finale, which featured the brothers as 18th-century French courtiers romancing Madame du Barry. When the Marx Brothers, Ryskind, and composers Bert Kalmar and Harry Ruby objected to removing the musical elements, Heerman held a test screening with early footage. The test audience's enthusiastic response convinced the creative team to support Heerman's vision, though he agreed to retain \"Hooray for Captain Spaulding\" at Ryskind's urging.\nMuch of the cast, including the Marx Brothers, Robert Greig, Margaret Dumont, Louis Sorin, and Margaret Irving, reprised their roles from the Broadway production. The love interests from the play\u2014Alice Wood as Arabella Rittenhouse and Milton Watson as John Parker\u2014were replaced by Lillian Roth and Hal Thompson. In her autobiography \"I'll Cry Tomorrow\", Roth recalled that B. P. Schulberg, Paramount's head of West Coast production, told her she was being sent to New York \"to be kicked in the rear by the Marx Brothers\" as punishment for what he perceived as difficult behavior on set.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography began at Astoria Studios in Queens on April 28, 1930. Art director William Saulter constructed the elaborate Rittenhouse manor set with a detailed lawn and interior. At the time, it was the largest set ever built in the Astoria building.\nLike other studios, Paramount faced significant challenges in capturing quality audio recordings during the early sound era. The earlier production of \"The Cocoanuts\" had been notably hampered by primitive sound recording technology, which forced directors to use cumbersome workarounds to reduce background noise; these included minimizing camera movement and soaking paper props in water to prevent audible crinkling. While recording technology had advanced by 1930, eliminating most of these constraints, music still required on-set recording rather than post-production dubbing, a constraint that complicated the editing process. Because the middle of a scene could not be cut without an abrupt musical break, Director Victor Heerman recalled that the music department ultimately chose which take was used, once preferring a take where Groucho had moved out of shot because \"the clarinet sounded much better.\"\nDuring screen tests, some shots were filmed using Multicolor. This footage, which is the earliest known color film of the Marx Brothers, features Harpo without his usual costume and wig. It was later incorporated into a short film entitled \"Wonderland of California\". Although shooting the film entirely in color would have been prohibitively expensive, this Multicolor sequence was later used to help persuade Howard Hughes to invest in the process. Approximately 15 seconds of this test footage resurfaced in the 1990s and aired as part of the 1998 Turner Classic Movies documentary \"Glorious Technicolor\".\nWhile Heerman maintained control of the filming schedule, Lillian Roth remembered the filming as being \"one step removed from a circus,\" with the Marx Brothers regularly arriving late, taking long lunches, and leaving early. Heerman assigned an assistant director to track each of them. Rumors persisted that Heerman constructed an actual jail cell to confine the Brothers, but he denied this, stating, \"These were adult men [...] and they didn't have to be locked in.\" Contemporary reports describe a makeup trailer decorated to resemble a jail cell. The trailer, complete with \"Animal Crackers Hoosegow\" painted on its exterior, was never locked, but served as a relaxation space for the performers.\nPrincipal photography for \"Animal Crackers\" was complete by mid-June, although Harpo, who had developed glandular fever, had to be brought back over the July 4th weekend to film his harp solo.\nCensorship.\nBecause the film industry had adopted the Motion Picture Production Code in 1930, the producers of \"Animal Crackers\" had to submit their script for approval prior to filming. Although the code was not strictly enforced before 1934, censors' objections resulted in the removal or modification of several scenes and lines during pre-production. References to Arabella Rittenhouse's drinking were cut, including the line \"Don't worry, mother, I won't disgrace you. I can hold my liquor with any of them.\" The censors also removed references to Mussolini and required changes to Jamison's lyrics, transforming \"the women hot, the champagne cold\" to \"the women warm, the champagne cold.\"\nAfter filming was complete, censors suggested more cuts, but the studio largely ignored them. Proposed deletions included double entendres such as \"We took some pictures of the native girls but they weren't developed. We are going back in a couple of weeks\" and \"Signor Ravelli's first selection will be 'Somewhere My Love Lies Sleeping' with a male chorus.\" During \"Hooray for Captain Spaulding,\" Groucho's line \"I think I'll try and make her\"\u2014which followed Mrs. Rittenhouse's declaration \"He is the only white man to cover every acre\"\u2014was flagged for removal. This line survived the original 1930 release but was cut from the 1936 re-release.\nFor 85 years, the censored re-release print was the only one shown in the United States and most other countries. The 2016 restoration of the film, based on a complete print found in the British Film Institute, finally included all of the censored material, adding up to about two minutes. The restored content included the \"I think I'll try and make her\" line, a scene where Harpo pulls a female guest's slip out from under her dress with his teeth, and Groucho telling a joke about a \"shotgun wedding.\"\nMusic.\nMost of the music written by Kalmar and Ruby for the \"Animal Crackers\" musical was not used in the film. The romantic leads' shared song, \"Why Am I So Romantic\", was written specifically for the film. Songs present in the musical but removed from the film include \"Cool Off\" and \"The Long Island Low-Down\", sung by Grace Carpenter; \"News\", \"When Things Are Bright and Rosy\", \"Who's Been Listening to My Heart?\", and \"Watching the Clouds Roll By\", sung by the romantic leads; the ensemble piece \"Go Places and Do Things\"; and a Marx Brothers piece from the cut du Barry scene, \"We're Four of the Three Musketeers\". The opening number, led by Hives, was shortened; the original version contained several more verses, including parts sung by the maids and guests.\nThe film features the following musical numbers. All songs by Kalmar and Ruby, unless otherwise indicated.\nThemes.\nSocial satire.\n\"Animal Crackers\" has often been identified as social satire. Author Simon Louvish identifies the Marx Brothers as anti-establishment figures who challenge social hierarchies with their anarchic behavior, exposing the perceived absurdity and hollowness of high society's rituals and claims to sophistication. He believes that Captain Spaulding's explorer persona and the art theft plot satirize the upper class's obsession with cultural status symbols. Louvish states that \"the Brothers get to trash 'polite' society, stripping it of its pretensions and conceits. Abie the Fishpeddler is exposed, the police are confounded, and the sweet hopes of youth are realized.\"\nLouvish further reads the story as positing the idea that society, despite its absurdity, will triumph against revolutionaries, who will eventually join it on their own terms. He identifies Captain Spaulding as a social climber and notes Harpo's final act of anesthetizing himself alongside the party guests as evidence that the brothers ultimately seek acceptance within the establishment.\nIn a 1976 essay, writer and critic Gianni Celati saw an anti-establishment tendency in \"Animal Crackers\", exemplified by the Brothers' physical roughness and their behavior. In his reading, the Brothers choose to stage their acts in crowded places where spectators are dragged into the action. Within these spaces, they mock and degrade objects typically considered valuable or important, such as works of art, by treating them as ordinary items. He specifically notes the rough treatment given to the painting, which he sees as a symbol of the establishment, citing the scene in which Harpo uses the painting as a blanket.\nZeppo, who typically played the role of straight man, also contributes to the social satire. In one scene, Groucho dictates a ridiculously convoluted letter to Zeppo; when asked to read back the letter, Zeppo's response is \"Now, you said a lot of things here that I didn't think were important, so I just omitted them.\" Critic Joe Adamson observed that \"it takes a Marx Brother to pull something like that on a Marx Brother and get away with it.\"\nAnarchic humor and surrealism.\n\"Animal Crackers\" has generated critical debate over whether its comedic approach constitutes surrealism. Avant-garde writer Antonin Artaud argued that the film was an example of surrealism. He believed it achieved \"a liberation through the medium of the screen of a particular magic\" and that its humor freed viewers from reality through surrealist logic that conflicted with the familiar. He suggests the film's intent goes beyond mere humor; it constitutes a \"destruction of all reality in the mind.\"\nBy contrast, filmmaker Jim Jarmusch argues that Artaud misinterprets the Brothers because of his lack of proficiency in the English language. He characterizes the Brothers' work as anarchist, but disagrees that it is surrealist. Historian Keith Eggener noted a disconnect between the formal theories of surrealism as expressed by writers like Andr\u00e9 Breton and how surrealism was interpreted in the United States, which he characterized as stripping away the psychic and social revolutionary intent of surrealism, saying that \"when Americans at this time spoke of Surrealism's attachment to Marx, they were usually talking about Groucho or Harpo.\" Eggener posits that the movie may have had surrealist elements, but without intent and symbolic imagery, it could not be truly surrealist.\nThere is evidence to support the notion that the Marx Brothers prioritized commercial interests over art. Although painter Salvador Dal\u00ed described \"Animal Crackers\" as \"the summit of the evolution of comic cinema\", when he prepared an explicitly surrealist proposal for a Marx Brothers movie, it was rejected by Groucho and MGM as being too surrealist; Groucho's exact words were \"it won't play\"\u2014suggesting that their primary intent was to entertain.\nRelease.\n1930 release and 1936 re-release.\n\"Animal Crackers\" premiered on August 28, 1930, at the Rialto Theatre in New York and earned an estimated $30,000 on its opening weekend, placing first at the box office. By June 1932, the film had earned $1.5 million in worldwide theatrical rentals. The film was reissued in 1936 with several small cuts to accommodate the Production Code. This version ran about 96 minutes, which was two minutes shorter than the original.\nRights issues and 1974 re-release.\nDue to Paramount Pictures' failure to renegotiate the American film rights, \"Animal Crackers\" reverted in 1956 to its original authors, playwrights George S. Kaufman and Morrie Ryskind, and composers Harry Ruby and Bert Kalmar. Two years later, MCA Inc. acquired the film rights, but could not secure the stage play rights due to Kaufman's and Ryskind's financial demands.\nThese legal restrictions prevented \"Animal Crackers\" from being shown theatrically or broadcast on television in the United States, although it could still be shown in Canada, outside the restricted area. The last known domestic theatrical release was in 1949 (alongside \"Duck Soup\").\nBy the 1970s, Marx Brothers fans in the United States were no longer able to see \"Animal Crackers\" legally, although bootleg copies were shown at smaller theaters. After one such showing in 1973, Marx Brothers enthusiast Steve Stoliar contacted Groucho, seeking his support for a re-release campaign. On February 7, 1974, Groucho and his assistant Erin Fleming appeared with Stoliar's \"Committee for the Re-release of Animal Crackers\" (CRAC) at UCLA before approximately 200 students, generating over 2,000 petition signatures, attracting reporters, and drawing national media attention. Universal Pictures, who owned the film rights, subsequently announced an agreement with the authors and their estates. Test screenings with Groucho's personal appearances in Westwood (May 23, 1974) and New York's Sutton Theater (June 23) drew enthusiastic crowds: at the latter, a near-riot erupted and a police escort was required. The positive reaction prompted Universal to release \"Animal Crackers\" nationally. \"Animal Crackers\" remained unavailable for television viewing until a special broadcast of the film by CBS on July 21, 1979.\nThe complete, uncut version of \"Animal Crackers\"\u2014which had been available only in an edited form since its 1936 reissue\u2014was restored in 2016 from a 35mm duplicate negative held by the British Film Institute, and given a brief theatrical run.\nReception.\nReviews of \"Animal Crackers\" have been mostly positive. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 97% of 30 critics' reviews are positive. Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 77 out of 100, based on 9 critics, indicating .\nThe film was critically praised on its release. Critic Mordaunt Hall of \"The New York Times\" gave it a positive review, describing it as a \"further example of amusing nonsense ... This mad affair suits the principals and its absurdities brought forth gales of laughter yesterday afternoon.\" He added the caveat that \"It is, however, the sort of thing that will only appeal to those who revel in the work of these four brothers.\" The \"Brooklyn Daily Eagle\" of August 29, 1930 agreed, saying \"If the four Marx Brothers were funny in \"The Cocoanuts\" [...] they manage to reach the topmost heights of lunacy in their newest opus,\" and ending with \"It is just about the surest cure for the blues that could ever be prescribed.\"\nThe trade publications also gave \"Animal Crackers\" positive coverage. \"The Film Daily\" compared it favorably to \"The Cocoanuts\", saying \"The four Marx Brothers are back in the talkers, this time doing better than in their first. Their popular brand of comedy pervades the picture, so much in fact that there is little footage left for a love plot of any importance. While most of the repartee is nonsense, it gets the laughs and that's what counts.\" Given the film's financial success, the positive review in \"Variety\" remarked on the implications for the film industry in a successful translation of a stage comedy to the screen, writing, \"Perhaps a little trade stuff here might serve better than a waste of words to tell about a dough film that's already in\". They further predicted that the public would stop going to see touring shows, opting instead to wait for the release of the film: \"[G]iving Paramount extreme credit for reproducing \"Animal Crackers\" intact from the stage. [...] That is of such benefit it asks why \"Animal Crackers\" on stage at $5.50, when even the ruralites know they will see it later on the screen for 50 or 75c?\" The \"Film Spectator\" gave a negative review, writing, \"I am sorry I saw it.\"\nThe 1974 re-release of \"Animal Crackers\" prompted critics to reassess the film. In a review in \"The Los Angeles Free Press\", critic Dick Lochte offered a positive review, writing that, \"With a Marx Brothers movie, success becomes largely a matter of routines. And \"Animal Crackers\" provides some of their best.\" The \"Christian Science Monitor\", while noting that the film's production was dated, still praised the comedy: \"\"Animal Crackers\" is a peach.\" A \"New York Times\" review, written for the film's television broadcast on CBS in 1979, described \"Animal Crackers\" as \"uneven\", but still found it to be funny: \"at one point, Groucho turns toward the camera and explains, 'All the jokes can't be good \u2014 you got to expect that once in a while.' In \"Animal Crackers,\" however, the good ones are very, very good.\"\nLegacy.\n\"Animal Crackers\" has influenced comedy and cinema in the decades since its release, with several commentators expressing praise for it. French New Wave director Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut praised the Marx Brothers in his 1954 review of the film, calling them the \"greatest American comedians of the prewar decade\" and ranking it as their best work alongside \"A Night at the Opera\". Truffaut opined that the film had enduring appeal, writing that \"One laughs with this movie as much as one did twenty years ago.\" Filmmaker Jim Jarmusch listed the Marx Brothers in an article describing his \"guilty pleasures\", specifically citing \"Animal Crackers\". Actor and director Stanley Tucci selected \"Animal Crackers\" for his personal list of influential works that shaped his artistic development.\nAuthor Norton Juster, who would later write \"The Phantom Tollbooth\", cited the Marx Brothers as a childhood influence, and \"The Annotated Phantom Tollbooth\" calls out particular thematic similarities between that book and \"Animal Crackers\". Comedian and actor Keegan-Michael Key cited the Marx Brothers as an influence on his work, expressing his preference for \"Animal Crackers\" over \"Duck Soup\".\nCaptain Spaulding.\nCaptain Spaulding's influence extends beyond the film, most significantly in Groucho Marx's own career. \"Hooray for Captain Spaulding\" and \"Hello, I Must Be Going\" became a recurring theme for Groucho through the years. An instrumental version served as the theme music for most of the run of Groucho's quiz show \"You Bet Your Life\". Woody Allen incorporated both English and French performances of the song in a scene toward the end of his 1996 film \"Everyone Says I Love You\". The character's enduring humor is cemented by one of his most quoted lines, \"One morning I shot an elephant in my pajamas. How he got in my pajamas, I don't know,\" which is listed among the AFI's 100 Greatest Movie Quotes. Harold Arlen and Yip Harburg's lyrics to \"Lydia, the Tattooed Lady\", which Groucho performed in \"At the Circus\" (1939), specifically reference the character.\nThe TV series \"MASH\" featured a character named Captain Calvin Spalding, named in honor of Groucho's character. Groucho's performance inspired Alan Alda's lead performance of Hawkeye Pierce in that series, further cementing the connection between the Marx Brothers' comedic legacy and the show's style. Rob Zombie used \"Captain Spaulding\" as one of several Marx Brothers-inspired pseudonyms for Sid Haig's murderous clown character John Cutter in \"House of 1000 Corpses\" and \"The Devil's Rejects\". After Groucho's death, talk show host Dick Cavett remarked, \"We had lost Captain Spaulding.\"\nSoundtrack.\nThe film's songs have recurred in the Marx Brothers' later work and maintained a presence in works by other artists. \"Hello, I Must Be Going\" lent its name to a 1982 album by British musician Phil Collins and a 2012 movie by director Todd Louiso. The song has also featured in film soundtracks, accompanying the opening credits of Woody Allen's \"Whatever Works\" (2009) and serving as a thematic element in Oliver Stone's miniseries \"Wild Palms\", where it was sung by villain Senator Kreutzer (Robert Loggia) in an eponymous episode.\nChico's piano composition \"I'm Daffy over You\" became his signature song. It would be featured again in their next feature film, \"Monkey Business\", and he is heard playing it in his last recorded appearance, in the television pilot \"Deputy Seraph\".\nHome media.\n\"Animal Crackers\" was released in 1978 by MCA Home Video on DiscoVision, again on LaserDisc in 1985, and on VHS in 1986. Universal released \"Animal Crackers\" on DVD as part of \"The Marx Brothers Silver Screen Collection\" in 2004. A restored edition on Blu-ray, including previously censored content, was released in 2016 as part of \"The Marx Brothers Silver Screen Collection Restored Edition\". It features commentary by film historian Jeffrey Vance. Both collections include their first five films: \"The Cocoanuts\", \"Animal Crackers\", \"Monkey Business\", \"Horse Feathers\", and \"Duck Soup\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45225", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45225", "title": "Bleen", "text": ""}
{"id": "45226", "revid": "94900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45226", "title": "Snark", "text": "Snark may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45227", "revid": "46546583", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45227", "title": "The Hunting of the Snark", "text": "1876 nonsense poem by Lewis Carroll\nThe Hunting of the Snark, subtitled \"An Agony, in Eight Fits\", is a poem by the English writer Lewis Carroll. It is typically categorised as a nonsense poem. Written between 1874 and 1876, it borrows the setting, some creatures, and eight portmanteau words from Carroll's earlier poem \"Jabberwocky\" in his children's novel \"Through the Looking-Glass\" (1871).\nMacmillan published \"The Hunting of the Snark\" in the United Kingdom at the end of March 1876, with nine illustrations by Henry Holiday. It had mixed reviews from reviewers, who found it strange. The first printing of the poem consisted of 10,000 copies. There were two reprints by the conclusion of the year; in total, the poem was reprinted 17 times between 1876 and 1908. The poem also has been adapted for musicals, movies, opera, plays, and music.\nThe narrative follows a crew of ten trying to hunt the Snark, a creature which may turn out to be a highly dangerous \"Boojum\". The only crew member to find the Snark quietly vanishes, leading the narrator to explain that the Snark was a Boojum after all.\nCarroll dedicated the poem to young Gertrude Chataway, whom he met in the English seaside town Sandown on the Isle of Wight in 1875. Included with many copies of the first edition of the poem was Carroll's religious tract, \"An Easter Greeting to Every Child Who Loves \"Alice\"\".\nVarious meanings in the poem have been proposed, among them existential angst, an allegory for tuberculosis, and a mockery of the Tichborne case.\nWhile Carroll denied knowing the meaning behind the poem, he agreed in an 1897 reply to a reader's letter with an interpretation of the poem as an allegory for the pursuit of happiness. Henry Holiday, the illustrator of the poem, considered the poem a \"tragedy\".\nPlot.\nSetting.\n\"The Hunting of the Snark\" shares its fictional setting with Lewis Carroll's earlier poem \"Jabberwocky\" published in his 1871 children's novel \"Through the Looking-Glass\". Eight nonsense words from \"Jabberwocky\" appear in \"The Hunting of the Snark\": \"bandersnatch, beamish, frumious, galumphing, jubjub, mimsiest\" (which previously appeared as \"mimsy\" in \"Jabberwocky\"), \"outgrabe\", and \"uffish\". In a letter to the mother of his young friend Gertrude Chataway, Carroll described the domain of the Snark as \"an island frequented by the jubjub and the bandersnatch\u00a0\u2013 no doubt the very island where the jabberwock was slain.\"\nCharacters.\nThe crew consists of ten members, where all but one description of the members begin with the letter B: a Bellman, the leader; a Boots (the only member of the crew without an illustration); a maker of Bonnets and Hoods (the only description which does not begin with the letter B); a Barrister, who settles arguments among the crew; a Broker, who can appraise the goods of the crew; a Billiard-marker, who is greatly skilled; a Banker, who possesses all of the crew's money; a Beaver, who makes lace and has saved the crew from disaster several times; a Baker, who can only bake wedding cake, forgets his belongings and his name, but possesses courage; and a Butcher, who can only kill beavers.\nSummary.\nAfter crossing the sea guided by the Bellman's map of the Ocean (a blank sheet of paper) the hunting party arrives in a strange land, and the Bellman tells them the five signs by which a snark can be identified. The Bellman warns them that some snarks are highly dangerous boojums; on hearing this, the Baker faints. Once revived, the Baker recalls that his uncle warned him that if the Snark turns out to be a boojum, the hunter will \"softly and suddenly vanish away, and never be met with again\". The Baker confesses that this possibility terrifies him.\nThe hunt begins:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nThey sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;\nThey pursued it with forks and hope;\nThey threatened its life with a railway-share;\nThey charmed it with smiles and soap.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nAlong the way, the Butcher and Beaver, previously mutually wary, become fast friends after they hear the cry of a jubjub bird and the Butcher ends up giving the Beaver a lesson on maths and zoology. The Barrister, meanwhile, sleeps, and dreams of witnessing a court trial of a pig accused of deserting its sty, with a snark as its defence lawyer.\nDuring the hunt, the Banker is attacked by a bandersnatch, and loses his sanity after trying to bribe the creature.\nThe Baker rushes ahead of the party and calls out that he has found a snark, but when the others arrive, he has mysteriously disappeared.\n&lt;poem&gt;\nThey hunted till darkness came on, but they found\nNot a button, or feather, or mark,\nBy which they could tell that they stood on the ground\nWhere the Baker had met with the Snark.\nIn the midst of the word he was trying to say,\nIn the midst of his laughter and glee,\nHe had softly and suddenly vanished away\u2014\nFor the Snark was a Boojum, you see.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nDevelopment.\nTwo explanations of which event in Carroll's life gave rise to \"The Hunting of the Snark\" have been offered. Biographer Morton N. Cohen connects the creation of \"The Hunting of the Snark\" with the illness of Carroll's cousin and godson, the twenty-two-year-old Charlie Wilcox. On 17\u00a0July 1874, Carroll travelled to Guildford, Surrey, to care for him for six weeks, while the young man struggled with tuberculosis. The next day, while taking a walk in the morning after only a few hours of sleep, Carroll thought of the poem's final line: \"For the Snark \"was\" a Boojum, you see.\"\nE. Fuller Torrey and Judy Miller suggest that the event that inspired the poem was the sudden death of Carroll's beloved uncle, Robert Wilfred Skeffington Lutwidge, caused by a patient in 1873 during Lutwidge's time as an inspector of lunatic asylums. They support their analysis with parts of the poem, such as the Baker's uncle's advice to seek the snark with \"thimbles, forks, and soap\", which, according to Torrey and Miller, were all items the lunatic asylum inspectors checked during their visits.\nHoliday and Carroll had some disagreements on the artwork. Carroll initially objected to Holiday's personification of hope and care, but agreed to the change, when Holiday explained that he had only intended to add another layer of meaning to the word \"with\". However, Carroll refused his illustration of the boojum, preferring that the creature go without a depiction, and made him change his initial portrayal of the Broker, as it could have been perceived as antisemitic.\nWhen finally published, the poem comprised 141\u00a0stanzas of four lines each, with internal rhymes in the first and third lines of irregular stanzas appearing in the poem from the second fit onwards. Martin Gardner annotated to \"The Hunting of the Snark\" that Elizabeth Sewell pointed out in \"The Field of Nonsense\" (1973) that a line in Carroll's poem has a similarity to a line in a limerick (\"There was an old man of Port Grigor...\") by Edward Lear.\nIllustrations.\nTo illustrate the poem Carroll chose Henry Holiday, whom he had met in 1869 or 1870. At the time Carroll approached him to ask if he could create three illustrations for the poem, Carroll had completed three \"fits\", as he called the parts of his poem\u00a0\u2013 \"fit\" can mean either canto or convulsion\u00a0\u2013 \"The Landing\", \"The Hunting\", and \"The Vanishing\". He intended to title it \"The Boojum\" and include it in his fantasy novel \"Sylvie and Bruno\", which was unfinished at the time. However, in late October 1875, Carroll thought about having it published during Christmas; this proved impossible, as the wood engraving for the illustrations needed three months to be complete. By the time Holiday had completed the sketches and sent them to Carroll, Carroll had already created a new fit requiring an illustration. They worked this way until Holiday had created nine illustrations as well as the front cover and the back cover of the book. Thus, among the ten illustrations shown below, one illustration is not by Holiday. The \"Ocean Chart\" is typographic art whereas electrotypes made from Joseph Swain's woodblock engravings were used to print Holiday's illustrations.\nThere is no depiction of the Snark, nor of Boots. However, based on a draft by Carroll, the snark was allowed to show up in an illustration by Holiday, where it appeared in a dream of the Barrister.\nThe illustration to the chapter \"The Banker's Fate\" might contain pictorial allusions to the etching \"The Image Breakers\" by Marcus Gheeraerts the Elder, to William Sidney Mount's painting \"The Bone Player\" and to a photograph by Benjamin Duchenne used for a drawing in Charles Darwin's 1872 book \"The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals\".\nPublication history.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left: 4px; margin-bottom: -1.5em; margin-top: -0.5em\"&gt;\nGirt with a boyish garb for boyish task\nEager she wields her spade: yet loves as well\nRest on a friendly knee, intent to ask\nThe tale he loves to tell.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nRude spirits of the seething outer strife,\nUnmeet to read her pure and simple spright,\nDeem, if you list, such hours a waste of life\nEmpty of all delight!\nChat on, sweet Maid, and rescue from annoy\nHearts that by wiser talk are unbeguiled.\nAh, happy he who owns that tenderest joy,\nThe heart-love of a child!\nAway fond thoughts, and vex my soul no more!\nWork claims my wakeful nights, my busy days\u2014\nAlbeit bright memories of that sunlit short\nYet haunt my dreaming gaze! &lt;/poem&gt;\n\u2014Lewis Carroll, \"The Hunting of the Snark\"\nUpon the printing of the book on 29 March 1876, Carroll gave away eighty signed copies to his favourite young friends; in a typical fashion, he signed them with short poems, many of them acrostics of the child's name. He dedicated \"The Hunting of the Snark\" to Gertrude Chataway, whom he had befriended in summer 1875 at the English seaside town Sandown on the Isle of Wight. He finished the dedication a month after befriending her, a double acrostic poem that not only spelled out her name, but contained a syllable of her name in the first line of each stanza. The stanza of his first draft concluded \"Rest on a friendly knee, the tale to ask / That he delights to tell.\" The poem was printed in \"The Hunting of the Snark\" with permission from Chataway's mother.\nIncluded with many copies of the first edition of \"The Hunting of the Snark\" was Carroll's three-page, religious tract to his young readers, \"An Easter Greeting to Every Child Who Loves \"Alice\"\". Largely written on 5\u00a0February 1876, \"An Easter Greeting\" explores the concept of innocence and eternal life through biblical allusions and literary allusions to Romantic writers William Blake and William Wordsworth. Gardner suggests that Carroll included the tract as a way of balancing the dark tone of the poem. Scholar Selwyn Goodacre speculates that, as many copies of first-edition of the poem contain the tract, there is a possibility that all first editions originally had a copy of \"An Easter Greeting\".\nReception and legacy.\nThe first printing of \"The Hunting of the Snark\" consisted of 10,000 copies. By the conclusion of 1876, it had seen two reprints, with a total of 18,000 or 19,000\u00a0copies circulating. In total, the poem was reprinted seventeen times between 1876 and 1908.\n\"The Hunting of the Snark\" received largely mixed reviews from Carroll's contemporary reviewers. \"The Academy\"'s Andrew Lang criticised Carroll's decision to use poetry instead of prose and its too appealing title. \"The Athenaeum\" described it as \"the most bewildering of modern poetry\", wondering \"if he has merely been inspired to reduce to idiotcy as many readers and more especially reviewers, as possible\". According to \"Vanity Fair\", Carroll's work had progressively worsened after \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" (1865), with \"The Hunting of the Snark\" being the worst of his works and \"not worthy [of] the name of nonsense\". While \"The Spectator\" wrote that the poem's final line had the potential to become a proverb, it criticised the poem as \"a failure\" that might have succeeded with more work from the author. \"The Saturday Review\" wrote that the poem offered \"endless speculation\" as to the true identity of the Snark, although the unnamed reviewer felt that the familiar nature of Carroll's nonsense weakened its effect for the reader. Conversely, \"The Graphic\" praised the poem as a welcome departure from the \"Alice\" books, and called it \"a glorious piece of nonsense\", that could appeal to all \"Alice\" fans.\n\"The Hunting of the Snark\" has in common some elements with Carroll's other works. It shares its author's love of puns on the word \"fit\" with \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\", and mentions of \"candle-ends\" and \"toasted cheese\" with his supernatural poem \"Phantasmagoria\". Additionally all three works include the number \"42\". Another of Carroll's children's novels, \"Sylvie and Bruno Concluded\" (1893) makes a reference to the Boojum.\nOther illustrators of \"The Hunting of the Snark\" include Peter Newell (1903), Edward A. Wilson (1932), Mervyn Peake (1941), Aldren Watson (1952), Tove Jansson (1959), Helen Oxenbury (1970), Byron Sewell (1974), John Minnion (1974), Harold Jones (1975), Ralph Steadman (1975), Quentin Blake (1976), Frank Hinder (1989), Brian Puttock (1997) and Jeffrey Fisher (special edition Folio Society London 2010).\nCultural impact.\n\"The Hunting of the Snark\" has seen various adaptations into musicals, opera, theatre, plays, and music, including a piece for trombone by Norwegian composer Arne Nordheim (1975) a jazz rendition (2009), and (in French translation\u00a0\u2013 \"La chasse au Snark\") with music by Michel Puig for five actresses, eight actors and an instrumental ensemble of five players, premiered at the Festival d'Avignon in 1971. The poem was turned into a \u00a32\u00a0million budget West End musical \"The Hunting of the Snark\" by Mike Batt. In 2023 a film was released by Simon Davison.\nThe poem has inspired literature, such as Jack London's \"The Cruise of the Snark\" (1911), the science-fiction short story \"Chaos, Coordinated\" (1947) by John MacDougal, (collective pseudonym of James Blish and Robert A. W. Lowndes) Elspeth Huxley's \"With Forks and Hope\" (1964) and the title of Kate Wilhelm's novella \"With Thimbles, with Forks and Hope.\" American author Edith Wharton (1862\u20131937) was fond of the poem as a child. Australian brothers, composer Martin and librettist Peter Wesley-Smith based their 1986 opera/musical comedy \"Boojum!\" for the Adelaide Festival on the \"Snark\" and \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\".\nAdditionally, it has also been alluded to in\nAnalysis.\nVarious themes have been suggested by scholars. According to biographer Florence Becker Lennon, the poem's \"motif of loss of name or identity\" is typical of Carroll's work. Richard Kelly writes that the poem contains a \"theme of annihilation\". Martin Gardner writes that \"the inadequacy of language, meaning, and symbol is a recurring theme in \"The Hunting of the Snark\"\". Furthermore, Edward Guiliano feels that the \"Snark\" is within the nonsense tradition of Thomas Hood and, especially, W. S. Gilbert, the librettist of the famous Gilbert and Sullivan team. According to him, a case can be made for a direct influence of Gilbert's \"Bab Ballads\" on \"The Hunting of the Snark\", based on the fact that Carroll was well-acquainted with the comic writing and the theatre of his age.\nWidely varying interpretations of \"The Hunting of the Snark\" have been suggested: an allegory for tuberculosis, a mockery of the Tichborne case, a satire of the controversies between religion and science, the repression of Carroll's sexuality, and a piece against vivisection, among others. According to Cohen, the poem represents a \"voyage of life\", with the Baker's disappearance caused by his violation of the laws of nature, by hoping to unravel its mysteries. Lennon sees \"The Hunting of the Snark\" as \"a tragedy of frustration and bafflement\", comparable to British actor Charlie Chaplin's early comedies.\nAccording to Kelly, \"The Hunting of the Snark\" is \"Carroll's comic rendition of his fears of disorder and chaos, with the comedy serving as a psychological defense against the devastating idea of personal annihilation.\" Kelly writes that the Bellman's Rule of Three (\"What I tell you three times is true\") and starting each character's name with the letter\u00a0B are \"notable attempts to create a sense of order and meaning out of chaos\".\nF. C. S. Schiller, writing under the pseudonym \"Snarkophilus Snobbs\", interprets the poem as an allegory of Man's attempt to understand \"the Absolute\", and the members of the crew as representing different cultural approaches to the problem. His interpretation of the Sixth Fit, \"The Barrister's Dream\" is particularly notable: He reads the trial of the pig for deserting its sty as symbolizing the ethical debate about whether suicide should be condemned as an immoral or culpable action. The pig who deserts its sty represents the suicidal person who abandons life. (Like the pig, he's guilty \u2013 but being dead, is not punishable.)\nMartin Gardner sees the poem as dealing with existential angst, and states that the Baker may be Carroll's satire of himself, pointing to the fact that the Baker was named after a beloved uncle, as was Carroll, and that the two were around the same age at the time of the writing of the poem. Alternatively, Larry Shaw of the fan magazine \"Inside and Science Fiction Advertiser\" suggests that the Boots, being the Snark, actually murdered the Baker.\nDarien Graham-Smith suggests that \"The Hunting of the Snark\" stands for science (e.g. Charles Darwin's research), where the Boojum stands for religiously unsettling results of scientific research (e.g. Charles Darwin's findings).\nAlso allusions to religious issues had been suggested, like the Baker's 42\u00a0boxes being an allusion to Thomas Cranmer's \"Forty-Two Articles\" with a focus on the last article on eternal damnation, and Holiday's illustration to the last chapter containing a pictorial allusion to Cranmer's burning.\nAs for Henry Holiday's front cover illustration, it is suggested that it contains pictorial allusions to the \"Ditchley Portrait\" (c. 1592, by Marcus Gheeraerts the Younger, location: National Portrait Gallery, London, UK) and to an allegorical English School painting of \"Queen Elizabeth I at Old Age with an allegory of Death and Father Time\" (c. 1610, unknown artist, location: Corsham Court, Wiltshire, UK). The back cover illustration could be a pictorial allusion to that portrait of the aged Queen as well.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
